This paper presents a modeling framework to describe the driving mechanisms of cyclic failure in brittle and ductile materials, including cyclic plasticity and fatigue crack growth. A variational model is devised using the energetic formulation for rate-independent systems, coupling a phase-field description of fatigue fracture to a cyclic plasticity model that includes multi-surface kinematic hardening, gradient-enhanced isotropic hardening/softening and ratcheting. The coupled model embeds two distinctive fatigue effects. The first captures the characteristic features of low-cycle fatigue, driven by the accumulation of plastic strains, while the second accounts for high-cycle fatigue, driven by free energy accumulation. The interplay between these mechanisms allows to describe a wide range of cyclic responses under both force loading and displacement loading, as shown in several numerical simulations. Moreover, the phase-field approach to fracture accounts for the initiation and propagation of fatigue-induced cracks. Solids and structures subjected to cyclic loading exhibit a progressive reduction in load-carrying capacity due to material degradation. This phenomenon is important in several branches of engineering, accounting for (up to) 90% of all structural failures $$ Published version: J. Ulloa, J. Wambacq, R. Alessi, G. Degrande, and S. François. Phase-field modeling of fatigue coupled to cyclic plasticity in an energetic formulation. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 373:113473, 2021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma. Classical fatigue analyses are based on (semi-) empirical methods, which require extensive data from experimental tests. Fatigue life is commonly assessed using Wöhler curves, relating the applied stress amplitude to the number of cycles to failure in constant-amplitude cyclic loading. Statistical approaches such as the Basquin relation An alternative approach to fatigue consists of introducing fatigue effects in constitutive material models This study adopts the framework of constitutive models with non-local internal variables. To properly describe failure modes, such as brittle and quasi-brittle fractures, or shear bands in ductile materials, a suitable representation of highly localized strains is required. Strain localization is captured by models with softening behavior, which, however, render the mathematical problem ill-posed and result in pathological mesh-dependence in numerical simulations. To alleviate these issues, regularization can be introduced by means of non-local effects that are governed by internal length scales. Gradient-enhanced models, as outlined in the formulations of Maugin In relation to gradient-enhanced models, developments in the modeling of crack nucleation and propagation have taken place in the last two decades due to the variational approach to fracture This framework is able to naturally predict crack initiation and propagation in complex crack topologies, overcoming limitations of classical fracture mechanics and discrete-crack approaches, such as XFEM-based methods Two extensions of the phase-field approach to fracture are particularly relevant for the purposes of this work. The first is the extension to plasticity The governing equations of a large class of material models can be derived from the theory of generalized standard materials Pioneering works on this topic focused on rate-type variational principles for local elastoplasticity and have been extended to, e.g., gradient-enhanced models The energetic formulation An important limitation of the theory of generalized standard materials and its variational formulation is the restriction imposed by the principle of maximum dissipation. This condition implies the normality law for the evolution equations and thus, in principle, excludes non-associative models. Nevertheless, extensions to non-associativity can be made by considering certain state-dependent dissipation potentials. References in this line of work include In the framework of the energetic formulation, we propose a model that couples the phase-field approach to fatigue, as suggested by Alessi et al. The proposed model includes multi-surface kinematic hardening and a non-associative ratcheting variable We employ the following notations. A dot (•) and a colon (:) denote inner products with simple and double contraction, respectively. The Euclidean norm of is denoted as The deformation process is assumed to be quasi-static, occurring in a pseudo-time (loading) interval The displacement field is given by u : which is kinematically admissible, satisfying boundary conditions on Γ D . Assuming the small-strain hypothesis, the compatible strain tensor ε(x, t) ∈ R d×d sym := {e ∈ R d×d | e = e T } is obtained from The Cauchy stress tensor σ(x, t) ∈ R d×d sym is statically admissible, satisfying equilibrium for all t ∈ T: The dissipative mechanisms that lead to inelastic material behavior are characterized by a generic set of internal variables and their spatial gradients: We denote the set of primary fields by q := {u, a} and the constitutive state by c := {ε, a, ∇a}. Here, a is a vector arrangement of m components associated to both scalar-and tensor-valued internal variables. Let ψ := ψ(ε, a, ∇a) denote a Helmholtz-type internal energy density. To ensure physical soundness, the second law of thermodynamics is taken as an a priori restriction, given, for isothermal processes, by the Clausius-Planck inequality The constitutive stress-strain relation directly follows from equation ( The set s contains the thermodynamic forces, or generalized stresses, conjugate to a. A thermodynamically admissible dissipation potential is defined as φ := φ( ȧ, ∇ ȧ; c) ≥ 0, which is assumed to be convex with respect to { ȧ, ∇ ȧ} and to vanish for null rates. The dependence of the dissipation potential on the state c is a generality that accounts for a wide class of material models As a consequence, φ is not differentiable at null rates, and, from equation ( The evolution equation of a then takes the form which is often referred to as Biot's equation (cf. In this section, the governing equations of the evolution problem are recovered in a variational setting. To this end, the basic energy quantities are first introduced in global form. Then, the evolution problem is defined in terms of the energetic formulation for rate-independent systems To characterize how the system stores and dissipates energy in exchange with the external environment, the energetic formulation begins with the definition of global energy functionals. To this end, we denote a general function space of internal variables by A and the corresponding space of admissible variations that embeds evolution constraints (e.g., irreversibility conditions) by Ã . The specific form of these function spaces depends on the material model, as will be clear in section 3. The space of kinematically admissible displacement fields and the corresponding space of admissible variations are given by where the form of F also depends on the model and is specified in section 3. The space of primary fields then reads Q := U × A , such that q(t) ∈ Q is a process with admissible variations q ∈ Q := Ũ × Ã . The stored internal energy functional E : Q → R ∪ {+∞} is given by the state function while the work of external actions is defined as the time-integral of the external power, namely: where t r is the traction vector on Γ D . To formulate a stability condition, we introduce the external work distance T : T × U × U → R, that is, the work done by the external forces at a given time between two admissible states {u 0 , u 1 }: On the other hand, the dissipative power functional R : Ã × Q → [0, +∞] is defined as while the dissipation distance D : Q × Q → [0, +∞] between two states {q 0 , q 1 } reads as follows with Q ⊂ R d × R m . This quantity allows to measure the energy dissipated along arbitrary minimizing paths q(s) ∈ Q. For smooth evolutions, the total energy dissipated in [0, t] reads Diss D (q; [0, t]) := t 0 R ȧ(τ ); q(τ ) dτ. From the basic energy quantities, the evolution problem can be defined in variational form by means of the energetic formulation. This framework is based on a notion of energy balance and either a global or a local stability condition, and is directly related to the incremental energy minimization problem of section 2.4. Global formulation. A process q : T → Q is an energetic solution if for all t ∈ T: Equations ( Local formulation. To recover the local governing equations (1) and ( In the context of local stability, it seems reasonable to consider variations in a small neighborhood of the current state, and to restrict the test directions to monotonic radial (straight) paths Assuming that the functionals are Gâteaux-differentiable up to a certain order, a differential stability condition can be defined by replacing the right-hand side of the directional stability condition (15) by a Taylor expansion, and enforcing necessary and sufficient conditions of increasing order for inequality As in equation ( where the change of variable r = hs has been used. Using this result in equation ( where δE(q)(q) is the Gâteaux derivative of E in the direction q. Equation ( Dissipation inequality. To ensure physical soundness, a dissipation inequality is included in the formulation Governing equations. Using equations ( which holds for all q ∈ Q. Likewise, the power balance Equations ( encompassing the equilibrium equations ( An incremental minimization problem suitable for numerical implementation naturally follows from the global energetic formulation Using equation ( The goal is to evaluate the dissipated energy increment from t n to t n+1 , which follows from In some cases, the dissipation potential is such that the dissipated energy is a state function. For this to occur, it is necessary (but not sufficient) that D(q n , q n+1 ) ≡ D(a n , a n+1 ). In other words, the dissipation potential must not depend on the non-dissipative state variables. Then, the evaluation of ( is straightforward and equivalent to the direct computation of the dissipated energy In the model presented in section 3, we shall see that only part of the dissipated energy is a state function. In the more general case where the dissipated energy is not a state function, as is often the case for state-dependent dissipation potentials (e.g., in non-associative plasticity), an incremental approximation is required to evaluate the time integral in This expression represents an explicit approximation of the state-dependent dissipated energy, in agreement with the incremental framework of Miehe Given all states up to t n , the unknown state q n+1 is found from the variational principle where the dissipation inequality ( The incremental minimization problem Table Table Stored energy Incremental dissipated energy D(an+1, an; qn), from ( Energy balance (20) Incremental minimization (28) inf q n+1 ∈Q E(qn+1) -T (un, un+1) + D(an, an+1; qn) This section presents the proposed model that couples a phase-field approach to fatigue with cyclic plasticity, derived using the concepts presented in section 2. First, the modeling of cyclic plasticity is addressed, where a non-associative ratcheting variable is introduced in the variational framework. Then, the full model is elaborated by introducing the phase-field description of fatigue-induced fracture. To account for cyclic plasticity with ratcheting effects, we take the model of Houlsby et al. The original model is tightly linked to Armstrong and Frederick To present the model, we adopt the conventional setting of plasticity, where auxiliary internal variables are introduced to account for hardening effects We focus on a multi-surface representation of the plastic deformation process, with n y ≥ 1 yield surfaces of increasing yield strength. To this end, we introduce the internal variables The subscript s denotes the s th yield surface with a corresponding plastic strain tensor and an isotropic hardening/softening variable κ s : Ω×T → R + , and ε r : Ω × T → R d×d dev is a ratcheting strain tensor. As a modeling assumption, κ s evolves according to the hardening law The ratcheting strain tensor ε r evolves according to the ratcheting law where r := ∂ σ dev is the direction of the deviatoric stress In light of the internal variables defined above, we shall present the plasticity model in the multi-surface setting, in agreement with the ratcheting model of Houlsby et al. The free energy density is defined as where C is the fourth-order elastic tensor. H kin s and H iso s denote the kinematic and isotropic hardening moduli, respectively, for the s th yield surface. The last term in equation ( where σ p s is the s th plastic yield strength (cf. In view of equation The generalized stresses conjugate to These dual variables follow from equation ( Focusing on J 2 plasticity, the yield functions are defined in generalized-stress space as The set of admissible generalized stresses for each yield surface is the convex set such that the elastic domain is the intersection of all K s , and thus still a convex set: where Y := Z ∩ [1, n y ]. To obtain the primal representation of the dissipation power in the case of associative models, the dissipation potential is obtained as the support function of K for given rates { εp , κ, εr }: This optimization problem can be viewed as a particular statement of the principle of maximum dissipation. Equation ( where λ s ≥ 0, and ns := s p s dev / s p s dev is the direction of the plastic flow. However, the fact that ∂ s r f p s = 0 implies that εr ≡ 0. Therefore, the ratcheting law An approach to circumvent this issue and recover a variational structure in models with non-associative components is to let the set of admissible generalized stresses depend on the current state where g p s (s p s , h s , s r ) := f p s (s p s , h s ) + β s r dev . The dissipation potential then follows as the stress-dependent support function of L(s r ): Equation ( In equations ( A similar result follows in case of isotropic softening. Expression Coupling cyclic plasticity to a phase-field approach to fatigue The formulation is now extended, coupling the cyclic plasticity model to a phase-field description of fatigue fracture. For this purpose, the usual phase-field/damage variable is defined as with α = 0 and α = 1 corresponding to an undamaged and a fully degraded material state, respectively. Regularization is attained by the gradient of the phase field ∇α : Ω × T → R d . Then, along with the plastic variables introduced in the previous section, the constitutive state reads c := {ε, ε p , κ, ε r , α, ∇κ, ∇α}, with primary fields The damage variable is considered irreversible, thus excluding healing: Note that from the hardening law Material degradation is achieved by letting the free energy density decrease as a function of α: where g(α) is a damage degradation function endowed with the following properties: In this work, the widely used quadratic function is adopted: In equation This decomposition is introduced to consider asymmetric behavior in tension and compression, and can be performed in different ways. Herein, we consider the volumetric-deviatoric split , where K is the bulk modulus, μ is the shear modulus, and is the elastic strain tensor. From the decomposed energy density The definition of the dissipation potential should entail coupling of the plastic strains to damage evolution, for which we follow the approaches in references [13], fatigue effects are considered by means of a local fatigue variable, defined here as γ : Ω × T → R + , and . This function has the following properties: where γ 0 is a material threshold parameter. The different dissipative ingredients are introduced in the following dissipation potential: The coupling term g (α)κ s α was introduced by Alessi et al. However, due to the dependence on σ and γ, only part of the dissipated energy becomes a state function. The plastic dissipation corresponds to the damaged version of equation ( In this expression, we have enforced the constraints that are present in where η d is the damage internal length scale. The terms w (α) α + η 2 d ∇α • ∇ α constitute the standard phasefield dissipation power, whose time integral yields the regularized fracture energy density. This quantity is subject to degradation through d(γ), which introduces a path-dependent fatigue effect. The function w(α) represents the local dissipated energy due to damage, for which two models (labeled AT-1 and AT-2 after Ambrosio and Tortorelli With these definitions, the damage characteristic length d can be recovered from the relation While the AT-2 model is used in most studies, the AT-1 model has the advantage of including an initial elastic stage before damage is triggered, where w 0 is a threshold parameter where k is a material parameter that controls the rate of (logarithmic) decay of the fatigue degradation function. The fatigue variable γ is defined as While other definitions are possible for θ, e.g., an accumulated strain measure, using the strain energy density ensures mesh-objectivity Table Fatigue parameter γ History-dependent, irreversible With the previous definitions, the governing equations of the proposed model can be derived from the principles of the energetic formulation. For this purpose, we define the space of displacement fields in equation ( The admissible primary fields are then given by The space of admissible variations must ensure that φ( εp , κ, εr , α, ∇α; κ, α, σ, γ) < +∞. In this way, the global dissipative power entering the stability condition The governing equations directly follow from enforcing the first-order stability condition Likewise, using the plastic flow relations ( As in section 2.3.2, equations ( and the damage yield function as the evolution equations emerge from equations ( Equation ( In the damage yield function ( as the damage resisting force with fatigue effects. We denote the damage driving force by where D e and D p are, respectively, elastic and plastic contributions given by D e (ε e , α) := -g (α)ψ e+ and D p (ε p , κ, ∇κ, α) := -g (α) As in standard phase-field models, the notion of driving and resisting forces refers to the energetic competition between the damage energy release rate and the critical fracture energy We observe in equation ( 1. The accumulation of elastic free energy, which, in the absence of plastic strains, drives cracks in the high-cycle fatigue regime. This effect is attained by the multiplicative degradation of the damage resisting force through d(γ). 2. The accumulation of plastic energy (free and dissipated), which drives cracks in the low-cycle fatigue regime by additively increasing the damage driving force through D p . This mechanism entails, on its own, a low-cycle fatigue process, that is accelerated when d(γ) < 1, where the plastic strains also contribute to the degradation of the damage resisting force (equation ( As in section 2.4, consider the time discretization 0 , where all quantities are known up to t n , and the goal is to find the state at the current time step t n+1 . For convenience, we introduce the following notations. A quantity evaluated at any previous time step 0 ≤ i ≤ n is denoted as i , while a quantity evaluated at t n+1 is written without a subscript, i.e., := n+1 . Moreover, the operator ∆ :=n is used to denote an increment from t n to t n+1 . Recall that the dissipation potential (53) explicitly depends on the stress σ and the history variable γ. As a consequence, the dissipated energy is not a state function. In agreement with section 2.4, the dissipated energy increment is evaluated as Evaluating the path-independent part directly and using the incremental approximation In view of equation ( such that the incremental minimization problem (28) takes the form inf {u,ε p ,κ,ε r ,α}∈Q where we impose irreversibility and the incremental counterparts of the plastic flow relations The numerical solution of the variational problem ( Given q i for all i ∈ {0, . . . , n}, we solve, alternatively, the following coupled sub-problems. Minimization with respect to the displacement field. Given {ε p , κ, ε r , α}, find from the necessary condition Algorithm 1 Alternate minimization. Input: qi ∈ Q for all i = 0, . . . , n. Output: qn+1 ∈ Q. 1: Initialize iterations j = 0 and set {ε p(0) , κ (0) , ε r(0) , α (0) } := {ε p n , κn, ε r n , αn}. 2: repeat 3: Set j ← j + 1. Find u (j) := arg inf u∈U Π u, ε p(j-1) , κ (j-1) , ε r(j-1) , α (j-1) from equation ( Find {ε p(j) , κ (j) , ε r(j) } := arg inf Find from equation 7: until u ju j-1 , κ jκ j-1 and α j -α j-1 are sufficiently small. 8: Set qn+1 := q (j) . Given that u ∈ U , this problem constitutes the weak form of the equilibrium equations ( Minimization with respect to the plastic fields. Given {u, α}, find For admissible variations { εp s , κs , εr } ∈ B × K ( εp s ) × R( εp ), it can be shown that the functional derivative of ( This expression represents the incremental version of the plastic yield function in weak form, from which the continuous equation is recovered by letting the term 3/2β∆σ : rn vanish for small-enough time steps. To solve equation ( For the plastic strain tensor, we make use of standard arguments of J 2 plasticity to show that where, for the multi-surface ratcheting model, the trial deviatoric stress reads Note that the parametrizations ( Introducing these results in (81) yields the following non-linear PDE in terms of κ s : where the indicator function I + : R → R ∪ {+∞} is used to impose irreversibility. Equation ( Minimization with respect to the damage field. Given {u, ε p , κ, ε r }, find The indicator function is used to impose irreversibility, while the box constraint α(x) ∈ [0, 1] in Ω must also be enforced for α ∈ D to hold. Equation ( which recovers the damage loading/unloading conditions in equation Equations ( This section presents numerical simulations that highlight the main features of the model described in section 3. In order to highlight the various dissipative mechanisms and their interplay, the homogeneous 1D uniaxial response is first studied. Then, 2D finite element simulations are performed under plane strain conditions. As done for the 1D case, the first 2D simulation addresses the response of the cyclic plasticity model without damage. This example allows to describe a variety of plastic responses with cyclic effects. Then, examples involving fatigue crack growth coupled to cyclic plasticity are presented, capturing the initiation and propagation of ductile fatigue cracks. The aim of this example is to provide an interpretation of the failure mechanisms that result from coupling cyclic plasticity to damage with fatigue effects. For illustrative purposes, we study the response of a single 1D element under either force loading or displacement loading. To this end, consider a straightforward reformulation of the multidimensional model presented in section 3 to the 1D case, where all vector-and tensor-valued quantities are replaced by scalar quantities, and a homogeneous response is assumed. With an obvious change of notation, the plasticity and damage yield functions ( where, denoting the Young's modulus by E: To capture a smooth stress-strain response, the 1D element is modeled with multi-surface plasticity (n y > 1). The parameters shown in tables 3 and 4 are considered to trigger a variety of behaviors, combining the purely kinematic response (KH) with isotropic hardening (KH-IH); isotropic softening (KH-IS); ratcheting (KH-R); isotropic hardening and ratcheting (KH-IH-R); and isotropic softening and ratcheting (KH-IS-R). The loading consists of imposed stress cycles between -0.5 MPa and 1.5 MPa for force loading and imposed strain cycles between -1 and 4 for displacement loading. The KH response exhibits closed hysteresis loops, while including isotropic hardening (KH-IH) results in a progressive decrease in cyclic strain amplitude. The opposite occurs with isotropic softening (KH-IS), where the cyclic strain amplitude progressively increases as the size of the yield surface decreases. The combination of these responses with ratcheting effects results in more complex cyclic evolutions. KH-R exhibits mean cyclic strain increments at a constant rate, i.e., a purely ratcheting response. Combining ratcheting with isotropic hardening (KH-IH-R) results in a competition between both mechanisms, where the ratcheting effect tends to vanish as the equivalent plastic strains increase. As a result of the loading pattern, this response occurs asymmetrically, with more pronounced cyclic hardening during tensile loading. On the other hand, KH-IS-R leads to an asymmetric accelerated ratcheting response. Figure This interesting effect of the ratcheting model allows to capture stress relaxation, as shown in figure As previously discussed, the coupled plastic-damage model includes a fatigue mechanism that degrades the damage resisting force through d(γ) as a function of free energy accumulation. Thus, in the absence of plastic strains, damage is accelerated for the AT-2 model and triggered after an initial elastic response for the AT-1 model, leading to a high-cycle fatigue process. Responses of this type are thoroughly studied in references The fatigue mechanisms and their interplay are analyzed in figures 5 to 8 for KH-IS-R. Figure For the case of displacement loading (figures 7 and 8), we take the values from tables 3 and 4 as w 0 = 75 MPa, H iso 1 = -0.075 MPa and H iso ny = -0.0068 MPa, in order to accelerate the softening response for illustrative purposes. We then set, alternatively, γ 0 = ∞ and γ 0 = 1 MPa. Figure In this subsection, we present a series of 2D simulations under plane strain conditions that highlight the versatility of the proposed model. For simplicity, and to alleviate computational cost, we consider in all examples the case of single-surface plasticity, which is easily recovered from the model presented in section 3 by letting n y = 1. For notational simplicity, the subscripts are thus dropped from the plasticity parameters, such that the isotropic hardening modulus, the kinematic hardening modulus, the yield strength and the characteristic length read H iso , H kin , σ p and p (alternatively η p ), respectively. In all computations, bilinear quadrilateral elements are employed. The use of C 0 continuous elements is feasible in the present model due to the gradient regularization employed for both plasticity and damage. This example consists of a square specimen with a central hole under plane strain conditions and cyclic loading, alternatively subjected to force loading and displacement loading. Due to symmetry conditions, only the top-right quarter of the specimen is analyzed (figure and KH-IS leads to a progressive increase in cyclic displacements as the size of the yield surface decreases. Likewise, KH-R exhibits ratcheting at a constant rate; KH-IH-R results in a vanishing ratcheting response (i.e., a shakedown response) occurring asymmetrically in tension and compression; and KH-IS-R results in an asymmetric accelerated ratcheting response. The last two responses are further observed in figure Figure Figure From this study, we conclude that the plastic responses observed in figures 10 and 13 encompass a wide are the responses exhibiting ratcheting and stress relaxation, which are further enriched by including cyclic hardening or cyclic softening effects. This allows to recover complex cyclic behaviors often observed in experimental works This example aims to describe the initiation, growth and merging of ductile cracks in a low-cycle fatigue process, driven by the accumulation and localization of isochoric plastic deformations. For this purpose, we subject an asymmetrically notched specimen in plane strain conditions to displacement cycles, as schematically shown in figure In the context of the phase-field approach to ductile fracture, similar examples have been studied under monotonic loading An important feature of the proposed model is the non-local treatment of the localized responses for both plasticity and damage, governed by two length scale parameters p and d . As discussed by Miehe et al. This behavior is embedded in the present model, as shown in figure The final example considers a typical fatigue test consisting of a compact-tension specimen subjected to force loading. Figure Consider the parameters shown in table 7 and the AT-2 damage model (equation ( The resulting force-displacement curves are shown in figure Figure Figure Figure where plastic deformations are observed in biological tissues p = {ε p 1 , . . . , ε p s , . . . , ε p ny } Independent s vary linearly from s = 1 to s = ny. Other approximations involving implicit schemes are also possible; see Stainier