Point defects exist widely in engineering materials and are known to scatter vibrational modes to reduce thermal conductivity. The Klemens description of point defect scattering is the most prolific analytical model for this effect. This work reviews the essential physics of the model and compares its predictions to first principles results for isotope and alloy scattering, demonstrating the model as a useful materials design metric. A treatment of the scattering parameter (Γ) for a multiatomic lattice is recommended and compared to other treatments presented in literature, which have been at times misused to yield incomplete conclusions about the system's scattering mechanisms. Additionally, we demonstrate a reduced sensitivity of the model to the full phonon dispersion and discuss its origin. Finally, a simplified treatment of scattering in alloy systems with vacancies and interstitial defects is demonstrated to suitably describe the potent scattering strength of these off-stoichiometric defects. Modelling the lattice thermal conductivity, or the heat transported through atomic vibrations, has long been important to a wide range of science and engineering applications including thermoelectrics, thermal barrier coatings, and thermal management in electronic materials. All of these functional materials rely on doping and alloying to tune their properties, and so the impact of impurities and other point defects on the lattice thermal conductivity is important to understand Peierls presented one of the earliest solutions for lattice thermal conductivity in 1929 by evaluating the phonon Boltzmann transport equation, which was simplified by Callaway based on the relaxation time approximation. Later, Klemens established a theory for vibrational mode scattering due to static imperfections in a lattice, and provided closed-form expressions for thermal conductivity versus defect concentration still utilized today First-principles techniques have been developed recently to compute the impact of point defects on thermal transport. These simulations have shown very good quantitative agreement with experiments for a range of materials and have provided useful insights regarding the mechanisms of phonon-defect scattering The Klemens equations are defined within the ostensibly limiting approximation of a single atom unit cell and the Debye model, or linear phonon dispersion. However, by comparing to both first-principles results as well as experiment, the predictive quality of this model is demonstrated even for complex unit cell materials. This paper provides a functional guide for understanding the influence of point defects on phonon transport and applying the Klemens equations to model thermal conductivity data. In addition, it resolves discrepancies between popular representations of the mass difference model, which have led to consistent errors in model inputs that may yield large factor differences in the predicted lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ). This study also re-evaluates the limitation of these equations to the Debye model dispersion. A mechanism is demonstrated for how the model's sensitivity to dispersion relation is, in practice, lifted, justifying the use of the model in systems with arbitrary dispersion relations. The Klemens model predicts the ratio of the defective solid's lattice thermal conductivity to that of a reference pure solid (κ L /κ 0 ). The basic functional form of the ratio is tan -1 u/u, where the disorder scaling parameter u is related to the pure lattice thermal conductivity reference (κ 0 ), elastic properties of the host lattice through its speed of sound (v s ), the volume per atom Figure At each composition, the values of κ 0 , v s , and V 0 are linearly interpolated between the end-member properties. The perturbation caused by point defects in a lattice can be understood as a combination of a kinetic energy perturbation due to the mass difference on the defect site (∆M) and a potential energy distortion due to both the harmonic force constant difference (∆K) and a the structural distortion of nearest neighbors around the defect introduced by a site radius difference (∆R) (see Figure The Γ M parameter is the average mass variance in the system ( ∆M 2 ) normalized by the squared average atomic mass ( M 2 ) 7, In a compound, these averaged quantities are most easily calculated by treating each component of the compound separately. For example, a generic compound can be expressed with the formula unit: A1 c 1 A2 c 2 A3 c 3 ...An c n (e.g. CaZn 2 Sb 2 ), where An refers to the n th component (e.g. Ca, Zn, or Sb) and c n refers to the stoichiometry of that component (e.g. 1, 2, or 2). For each site n in the compound, Equation ∆M 2 n is defined by a sum over i of the species site fraction ( f i,n ) multiplied by the mass variance at each defect site, defined from the species mass M i,n and average atomic mass at that site M n b. The mass difference model captured in Equation 3 and 4 is a reformulation of the popular equation proposed in Yang et al. The mass difference model proposed by Tamura preserves the dependence of the phonon relaxation times on polarization vector and the spatial anisotropy of atomic sites within the primitive unit cell, and is frequently implemented in numerical Boltzmann transport equation solvers for thermal conductivity The eigenvectors are composed of the displacement vectors (u(k, s)) of each atomic site as it participates in a vibrational mode, weighted by the square root of the atomic mass (e k = [ ), and are finally normalized such that |e k | 2 = 1. These eigenvectors can be calculated from the DFT (Density Functional Theory) force constant matrix Point defect scattering has been studied with first principles techniques by applying DFT to compute the full vibrational spectrum, using T-matrix scattering theory and the Tamura model to compute point defect scattering rates, and finally solving the linearized Boltzmann transport equation to get κ L 11-14, 30, 31 . In several reported materials systems, an excellent correspondence in shown between the results attained from first principles methods described above and the analytical Klemens model (Figure In addition to the Tamura model with full structural and lattice dynamical dependence, a closed form expression is presented for the low frequency limit, which depends only on the atomic masses. The assumption made here is that the displacement (u) of each atom in a low-frequency mode is roughly equal in magnitude; therefore, one can assume the magnitude of an eigenvector element is simply proportional to the square root of the atomic mass (|e(k, s)| ∝ √ M s ). Following this assumption, Equation 4 can be derived, which is detailed in Supplemental Section 7.1. In an example 2-atom primitive unit cell (shown in dotted line), three possible microstates exist, containing 0,1, or 2 impurity atoms. In the unit cell basis, each microstate would contribute a term to the overall scattering parameter (Γ). Finally, several texts, including original descriptions by Klemens, suggest defining all values of the mass difference model on the basis of the primitive unit cell While most model inputs are well-defined, it is not immediately clear what the fraction of unit cells (P c ) should be. When there is a random distribution of defects in the lattice, the fraction or probability of finding a unit cell of mass M c can be determined from a binomial distribution function (described in more detail in Supplementary Section 7.4). A schematic of possible unit cells (microstates) for a 2-atom unit cell are shown in Figure The dual formalisms of the scattering parameter Γ based on either "per unit cell" or "per atom" quantities have led to inconsistencies in the calculation of κ L in Equation 1. Notably, the relevant scatterer volume for the primitive unit cell formalism is the volume of the primitive unit cell (V uc ) not the volume per atom (V 0 ), because this model treats one large mass per unit cell The following section reviews the full derivation of the Callaway/Klemens model to generalize beyond mass difference scattering alone, clarify assumptions made in the derivation, and discuss the model's dependence on phonon dispersion, a topic garnering recent interest Lattice waves, or phonons, carry a substantial amount of heat through the lattice, characterized by the lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ). The efficiency of a phonon with frequency ω at transporting heat is characterized by its heat capacity (C s ), group velocity (v g = dω/dk), and relaxation time (τ). The lattice thermal conductivity can then be expressed in terms of these values by integrating over phonon frequency up to a maximum frequency supported by the lattice (ω m ) The relaxation time of the phonons is limited by the scattering sources in the crystalline material. Each main source of scattering has an associated relaxation time, including: boundary scattering off of planar defects (τ b ), umklapp phonon-phonon scattering (τ U ), and point defect scattering (τ PD ). Their associated scattering rates are summed according to Matthiessen's rules (τ ), assuming that the scattering mechanisms are uncoupled. The model for alloy scattering typically used to describe thermal conductivity versus alloy composition trends neglects boundary scattering to yield the total relaxation time of τ = τ U τ PD /(τ U + τ PD ). The scattering rate from a static imperfection can be derived using Fermi's Golden Rule to define the transition probability (W k,k ) from an initial state (k) to a final state (k ). The transition probability is related to the square of the perturbation matrix element, a measure of the overlap between two phonon states induced by a perturbation to the lattice energy, and includes a lattice energy conservation criteria captured by δ (E -E ). This transition probability is then summed over all the possible final phonon states (k ), restricted by the conservation conditions of the phonon interaction. The three contributions to point defect scattering (Figure The scattering due to local, static strain (η) depends on the anharmonicity of the distorted bonds, as captured in the Grüneisen parameter (γ). Notably, both the ∆K and ∆R effects are captured in the changes to the DFT-calculated interatomic force constants, which change locally in response to both structural relaxation and an altered chemical environment The change in force constant (∆K) is not an intuitive value, but it is typically assumed that force constants change proportionally with atomic volumes. Therefore, the force constant difference and local strain terms are combined, and both are expressed through the average variance in atomic radius, defined analogously to the mass scattering parameter in Equation For the point defect scattering rate (τ PD -1 ), only two phonon states, an incident and final state, are involved in the interaction. Given the conservation of energy condition, the frequencies of the final and initial phonons are equal. Therefore, the sum over all final scattering states contributes a factor of the 3D density of states (g) at the phonon frequency ω 22 In umklapp scattering, phonons scatter other phonons by virtue of the lattice distortions they generate. The scattering strength is, then, also related to the anharmonicity of the distorted bonds via the Grüneisen parameter, γ, in addition to the phase velocity of the phonon producing the distortion (v p (ω) = ω/k) and the group velocity of the final phonon state (v g (ω )) The umklapp scattering rate appears to have the same motif present in the density of states: ω 2 /(v p 2 v g ). However, due to the increased complexity of the energy and momentum conservation in a 3-phonon process, the sum over final phonon states does not simply contribute a factor of the 1-phonon density of states g. Rather, the selection rule for 3-phonon processes is more accurately captured by a calculation of the joint density of states, representing allowed phonon transitions, weighted by the equilibrium occupation numbers of the phonon modes k and k At this point it is typical to make the Debye approximation, which suggests that the v g and v p are independent of frequency and equal to the classical speed of sound (v s = dω/dk| k→0 ). Equation The formalism above has shown wide applicability to thermoelectric materials, which often have complex, non-Debye dispersions. The examples depicted of Si isotope scattering and Mg 2 Si 1-x Sn x shown in Figure Previous studies have explicitly compared the κ L predictions of the Klemens model using various approximations of the phonon dispersion relation, ranging from the Debye model to polynomial or trigonometric fits of the dispersion The dispersion relation dependence enters into the Klemens model through the factors of density of states and the frequencydependent phonon velocities. In Equation At this point, the factor of v 2 g remains as a dispersion relation quantity in the model. Therefore, the dispersion dependence is not eliminated from the model, but softened. However, the partial cancellation in dispersion relation quantities, particularly stemming from the density of states dependence of several quantities in the model, helps justify this model's application to a wide range of complex, functional electronic materials. The Klemens/Callaway model is best defined for randomly dispersed substitutional defects. However, initial work on other off-stoichiometric defects, including vacancies and interstitials, have shown large phonon scattering effects and warrant further investigation. Vacancy scattering has been demonstrated to induce a large reduction in thermal conductivity in several thermoelectric compounds However, the large perturbation induced by vacancies is still well-described using Klemens theory This simple treatment of vacancy scattering performs well in many defective solids, some of which are reproduced in Figure The suitability of the vacancy model suggests, then, that interstitial atoms may be describable with an identical treatment. Interstitial or filler atoms represent the reverse situation, where an extra mass (M int ) is added onto a site and a new bond forms between the interstitial atom and a neighbor; therefore, a perturbation of T + 2U should apply, yielding essentially the same mass difference as before (M i,n -M n = M int + 2 M ). It should be noted that the interstitial atom sites have a stoichiometry corresponding to the ratio of interstitial to lattice sites. While interstitial scattering requires more detailed study across additional materials systems, the initial data represented in Figure Both vacancy and interstitial scattering data from literature (points) can be described using a treatment of broken (or added) bonds based on the virial theorem (line). Normalized thermal conductivity reductions for systems with (a) stoichiometric vacancies, where [] represents a vacancy The analytical point defect scattering model provides a simple route to identify scattering mechanisms in a system. In several systems, comparisons of alloy scattering models with different scattering terms excluded, such as strain scattering or broken bonds, provide a lens into the most potent scattering effects and a route to optimally tailor the thermal properties via defect engineering In addition, the suitability of the alloy model for arbitrary dispersion relations suggests that the ratio of alloy scattering to umklapp scattering predicted by the model is fairly dispersion relation independent. This reduced sensitivity to dispersion can be understood through a partial cancellation of the density of states in the phonon relaxation times and heat capacity. As a result, it is found that these equations are justifiable in describing the impact of point defects on the thermal properties of materials with complex atomic and phonon structures attracting attention in fields like thermoelectrics and microelectronics. This section details the derivations of the point defect and umklapp relaxation times from Fermi's Golden Rule to understand their dependence on phonon velocity and dispersion relation. Point defects act as a static perturbation, and therefore the scattering rate can be determined using Fermi's Golden Rule based on first order perturbation theory. Previous work has shown that higher order perturbation terms have a negligible effects on the lattice energy The perturbation matrix element includes a coefficient (C), which captures the physics of the perturbation induced by the point defect, while a(k) and a * (k ) are creation and annihilation operators to represent the change in occupation numbers of the k and k states as a result of the phonon-impurity interaction. Substituting in the full form of the creation and annihilation operators gives the expression below, where N refers to the number of phonons in a given state. It has been shown that the term in the square brackets reduces to 1 in the integral over the constant energy surface corresponding to final k states Here, the coefficient (C) will be calculated for the mass difference case, in which the perturbation stems from an atom with a mass of M = M 0 + ∆M sitting in the primitive unit cell located at R. The perturbation due to force constant fluctuation and strain are similar in form. The energy perturbation (E ) to the lattice due to mass difference comes in through the kinetic energy term, where u(R) signifies the time derivative of the unit cell displacement. The real space perturbation is written in terms of a reciprocal space vector (Q) by taking the Fourier transform. Here, S refers to the number of primitive unit cells in the lattice The expression for C 2 picks up a factor of ∆ M(Q)∆ M(Q ), which is equal to: If the approximation is made that the point defects are randomly distributed over the lattice, the sum over lattice sites can instead be written as an average squared mass difference (∆M 2 ) times the number of defect sites in the lattice (S i ) The velocity u is again written in terms of creation and annihilation operators, which contribute a frequency and polarization vector dependence to yield the full expression for C 238 . Equation 25 can then be substituted into Equation To get the scattering rate, one must then sum W k,k over all the possible final phonon states k . Given the conservation of momentum constraint (|k| = |k |), this constitutes an integral over a constant energy surface or sphere of radius k in k-space. In the conversion from a sum over discrete k states to an integral over k states, a volume factor of V tot /(2π) 3 is picked up, where V tot is the volume of the crystal. The spherical surface integral is evaluated noting that: (1) Finally, the relaxation time can be written in terms of the 3D phonon density of states (g(ω)) given in Equation As discussed before in relation to the Tamura model (Section 2.1), the scattering parameter Γ = f i (∆M/M) 2 |(e k (s)•e k (s))| 2 , which reproduces Equation 12 in the main text. The umklapp scattering rate follows a similar derivation, however, the conservation rule is more complicated since the process involves three phonon modes (k, k , k ) as well as momentum exchange with the lattice via the addition or subtraction of a reciprocal lattice vector (b). The derivation here is adopted from the derivation by Klemens for strain scattering off a point defect, however in this case, the strain is produced by another phonon rather than a point imperfection The umklapp perturbation matrix element is similar in form to that of point defect scattering, but now includes three creation or annihilation operators since the process involves the change in occupation number for three phonon modes. Additionally, the coefficient (C U ) is dependent on the anharmonicity of the lattice. In Klemens, the phonon mode k is treated as a Fourier strain component producing a perturbation to the lattice energy. If a uniform dilatational strain (∆) is assumed, the Fourier component can be written as iω /v p (ω ) √ S in the limit k → 0. The elastic strain impacts force constants, and therefore induces a frequency shift modeled using the Grüneisen model The coefficient C U then represents the lattice energy change associated with a uniform dilatational strain, defined using the Grüneisen model, and the form of the uniform dilatation as k approaches 0. The final component of the squared matrix element (shown in Equation Just as before, the scattering probability is defined using Fermi's Golden Rule (Equation It is assumed that k is restricted to spheres of radius 1 2 (k + b), which is suggested to be true as long as the dispersion relation is not modified by the zone structure Following the same integral simplifications discussed in the derivation of τ PD , the scattering rate due to umklapp processes is shown below. 