Molecular beam epitaxy allows for the monolithic integration of wavelength-flexible epitaxial infrared plasmonic materials with quantum-engineered infrared optoelectronic active regions. We experimentally demonstrate a six-fold enhancement in photoluminescence from ultra-thin (total thickness λ o /32) long wavelength infrared (LWIR) superlattices grown on highly doped semiconductor 'designer metal' virtual substrates when compared to the same superlattice grown on an undoped virtual substrate. Analytical and numerical models of the emission process via a Dyadic Green's function formalism are in agreement with experimental results and relate the observed enhancement of emission to a combination of Purcell enhancement due to surface plasmon modes as well as directionality enhancement due to cavitysubstrate-emitter interaction. The results presented provide a potential path towards efficient, ultra-subwavelength LWIR emitter devices, as well as a monolithic epitaxial architecture offering the opportunity to investigate the ultimate limits of light-matter interaction in coupled plasmonic/optoelectronic materials. The field of plasmonics centers around the generation and manipulation of hybrid electromagnetic/charge density waves supported at metal/dielectric interfaces While the noble metals (Au, Ag, etc) are the plasmonic materials of choice at visible and near-IR wavelengths, the large negative real permittivity of the noble metals at longer wavelengths results in optical properties more closely resembling those of perfect electrical conductors (PECs) than plasmonic materials Of these, MBE-grown semiconductor superlattices (SLs) offer significant design flexibility for engineering absorbers or emitters across the mid-IR. These SLs consist of alternating layers of semiconductor alloys, where the layers are thin enough to allow the overlap of electron (and hole) states in neighboring quantum wells, and thus the formation of mini-bands in the conduction (and valence) bands, resulting in an effective engineered band-gap for the SL system. When the band offsets of the constituent layers are type-II, either staggered or broken gap, the effective bandgap of the type-II SL (T2SL) can be lower in energy than either of the constituent materials' bulk bandgaps. Such T2SLs offer the opportunity to engineer absorbing layers with narrow effective band-gaps, and have been the subject of a large amount of interest for both their mid-wave IR (MWIR, 3-5 μm) and long-wave IR (LWIR, 8-12 μm) detection capabilities The sample and control layer structures grown for this work are shown in Fig. Figure with fitting parameters ω p , the plasma frequency, and γ, the free carrier scattering rate. From the fitting process, the highly doped layer's plasma wavelength (λ p = 2πc/ω p ) is estimated to be λ p = 6.7μm and the scattering rate γ = 10 13 Hz. X-ray diffraction spectra and further growth details for both samples are provided in the supplementary material (Figure The emitters are modelled using a Dyadic Green's function formalism, incorporated into our TMM. In this approach, the field of a point dipole is first expanded in the (polarizationdependent) plane wave spectrum, parameterized by the components of the wavenumber parallel to the interfaces k r . The TMM formalism is then used to calculate the effect of the reflections within the multi-layer stack Im( E • d) with E being the field generated by the point dipole d at the location of the dipole. The enhancement of the density of photonic states modifies the radiative decay rate for the dipole, in turn affecting its intrinsic quantum yield, where q i refers to the dipole's quantum yield (the ratio of the material's radiative recombination rate to total recombination rate) for the hypothetical isolated dipole in a vacuum. Figure light due to the multiple reflections in the optical stack (optical cavity) surrounding the dipole. The distribution of the Poynting flux density as a function of the emission frequency and the location of the dipole within our structures is illustrated in Figure The mid-IR, and in particular the LWIR, where efficient emitters are severely lacking, offers the opportunity for significant enhancement of emission by combining quantum engineered mid-IR emitters with designer semiconductor plasmonic metals. In this work we demonstrate monolithic integration of an ultra-thin LWIR emitter and epitaxial plasmonic material, as well as the commensurate, six-fold, emission enhancement of the SL emitter relative to the same SL grown on a non-plasmonic material. We use a theoretical model of the emission based on a Dyadic Green's function and TMM formalisms to provide a quantitative explanation of the emission enhancement phenomenon as an interplay between Purcell enhancement and emitter-cavity interaction. Assuming q i = 0.02 for our emitters, our model accurately reproduces the emission enhancement observed in experiments. Moreover, the model accurately predicts the increasing PLE for decreasing q i . The LWIR emitters demonstrated in this work open the door to an entirely novel approach to infrared emitter design, where plasmonic materials are implemented, and grown monolithically, with mid-IR active regions for a new class of ultra-thin mid-IR sources. In addition, the ability to engineer both the plasmonic materials' properties, the active regions' optical transitions, and (at atomic scale) the geometry of the coupled system, offers a powerful tool-box for the investigation of light-matter interaction with extreme spectral and spatial precision.