Accurately simulating photon transport is crucial for non-destructive testing and medical diagnostic applications using X-ray radiography and computed tomography (CT). Solving a discretized form of the linear Boltzmann equation is a computationally efficient technique for simulating photon transport. We have developed a software package, called "DOCTORS", which solves the linear Boltzmann equation using the discrete ordinates method. The computational framework and its GPU implementation are described in detail. The accuracy of DOCTORS simulations was verified by quantitative comparisons to Monte Carlo simulations. Photon fluence distributions, as calculated by DOCTORS, agreed well with Monte Carlo simulations, with near real-time computation speed. Low energy (E < 1 MeV) X-ray imaging, including radiography and CT, is an important non-destructive testing and evaluation technique in numerous industrial and medical applications. A complete description of the photon distribution and energy transfer is essential for estimating radiation doses and designing an optimized imaging system. Stochastic methods (e.g., Monte Carlo simulation) have been used extensively in the past, The photon transport process can be described by the steady-state linear Boltzmann transport equation. The steady-state linear Boltzmann transport equation is given by the following: )φ2r ⃑, E Analytical solutions of the Boltzmann transport equation can only be obtained for the simplest problems. Realistic, multidimensional, and energy-dependent problems must be solved numerically. The discrete ordinates method discretizes the continuous variables, , , and , onto a discrete phase space so that Equation (1) can be solved numerically. where, represents the discrete direction; , , and represent the 3D spatial discrete mesh grid; g represents the energy group. The angular fluence in equation ( where is the discrete ordinates order that are referred to as SN quadratures, which resulted in a total of directions; is the weight associated with each discrete direction. Discrete ordinates methods suffer from 'ray-effect' in a weakly scattered media. distribution as shown in equation (6). Using equation (5) to substitute in equation ( (4) (5) • Ω # 7 )φ @ (r ⃑, E For simulations of large systems, the computation costs are daunting due to a large number of discrete angles, energy groups, and voxels. To accelerate the computation process, GPU computing techniques were adopted in DOCTORS. The GPU parallelization of the ray-tracing algorithm to calculate uncollided photon fluence from a point source is straightforward. The computation-intensive portion of the discrete ordinates method is the sweep process that consumes 80-99% of the run time. In order to accelerate the discrete ordinates sweep process on a GPU, the concurrent tasks at any given moment must be known. In the single-threaded version, the solver sweeps through the voxels, one by one, in a pre-determined fashion based on the photon stream direction. At the very beginning, the input fluence to a single voxel is known from its boundary conditions. However, once that voxel's fluence is computed, all three of its outgoing fluence values enable three voxels to be computed independently of each other. After those three, six can be computed. Each layer of voxels whose fluence can be computed independently, is called a "sub-sweep." Figure In order to parallelize the sweep through the mesh, the global index of each voxel that can be computed in the S sub-sweep must be known. When those indices are known, each voxel in sub-sweep S can be solved independently by a GPU kernel. This task is greatly simplified by noticing that the x, y, and z indices of all voxels in the fourth sub-sweep (shown in Figure The constraints listed in equation ( where and are defined by equations ( ( (15) Each voxel in a sub-sweep can be computed in parallel. Mathematically, the ith subsweep from all directions can be computed in parallel. However, in practice, this results in a race condition on the GPU hardware as the value of photon fluence in a voxel could be accessed/modified by different sweeps at the same time. As such, parallelization in an angular domain is not implemented in the current version of DOCTORS. 2 DOCTORS was designed to be modular and its user interface was built using an opensource platform -Qt. Qt is a framework for developing cross-platform application software. The major components of DOCTORS are shown in Figure The next tab is the cross-section dialog, which allows users to select and explore precalculated multi-group photon cross-sections. DOCTORS does not generate multi-group cross sections in situ from the ENDF/B or similar data library. Instead, the multi-group cross sections must be pre-calculated using either NJOY The next two tabs identify the quadrature, anisotropy treatment, and whether GPU is used for the photon transport computation. The final tab, as shown in Figure A water cylinder phantom with a 35-cm diameter was used for verification of the DOCTORS code. The water phantom was located at the center of a rectangular space with dimensions of 50 cm x 50 cm x 12.5 cm in the x, y, and z directions, respectively. A simplified geometry of 64 x 64 x 16 meshes, with only 65,536 voxels (the voxel pitch is 7.81 mm), was used to speed up the Monte Carlo simulation. Theoretically, the mesh size should have had little impact on the accuracy of fluence calculation, as long as the mesh size was much smaller than the mean-free-path of photons. The mean-free-path of a photon, at 20 keV, was 13.9 mm in pure water, and monotonically increased to 60.6 mm at 100 keV. To benchmark DOCTORS' performance on a more realistic geometry, a finer mesh grid 256 x 256 x 64 with voxel pitch 1.95 mm of the same water phantom, was also used. In addition, to verify DOCTORS' performance on an inhomogeneous phantom, an abdomen phantom was used in the CT scan verification. The abdomen phantom had the same dimensions (50 cm x 50 cm x 12.5 cm) as the water phantom in the x, y, and z directions. The cross section view of the abdomen phantom is shown in Figure Figure In the current version of DOCTORS, two kernels including parallel ray-tracing and voxel sweeping algorithms were implemented on a single GPU architecture, using CUDA The GPU card used was NVidia GeForce GTX Titan-z, which actually had two GPUs on one card. Each GPU had 6 GB memory. Since one of the GPUs is mainly used for display purposes, only one GPU was used for computation in the current implementation of DOCTORS. The most commonly used global memory was adopted in the current GPU implementations. The performance of GPU acceleration was benchmarked for both X-ray single projections and CT scans of the water phantom. Single projections from an isotropic point source on top of the phantom were simulated Parallel ray-tracing and 3D voxel sweeping algorithms for X-ray single projections and CT scans were implemented on GPU architectures in DOCTORS. The GPU results were nearly identical to the results obtained from CPU. The maximum difference was between . Table As shown by the simulation results, both single projections and CT scans, the photon fluence distribution calculated by DOCTORS was in good agreement with MCNP simulations. The maximum RMSD value for uncollided photon estimation was below 10%, and the maximum RMSD value for collided photon estimation was below 20%. For collided photo fluence estimation, the RMSD value was below 10% if photon energy was less then 55 keV. The RMSD value is then increased as the photon energy increased. The uncollided photon fluence was calculated analytically in DOCTORS, so there were only very small discrepancies versus the MCNP simulations. Relatively large discrepancies were expected for collided photon estimations % 02 . 0 ± due to the fundamentally different treatment of scattered photons in DOCTORS and MCNP6. In medical diagnostic imaging using X-rays, the primary photon fluence (i.e., uncollided photon fluence) is dominant at higher X-ray energies, so the majority of photons are the uncollided photons in the total photon fluence, which were used in the calculation of absorbed dose. Therefore, any error in collided photon fluence had less impact on the final dose calculation. Nevertheless, the relatively large error in collided photon estimation is one of the limitations of DOCTORS. As shown on the difference maps in Figures As shown in Table However, for a larger problem (e.g., 256x256x64 mesh grid), the benefit using GPU maybe significant considering the number of cores available in a GPU (see Table As shown in figures 15~18, DOCTORS is capable of estimating photon fluence in CT scans of homogenous or inhomogeneous objects. However, it should be noted that the current version of DOCTORS does not simulate electron transport nor dose estimate photon generation from Bremsstrahlung radiation. Therefore, DOCTORS should be used with caution when the scanning object is made of heavy and thick materials. We have developed a computational framework for photon transport simulation in X-ray radiography and tomography using the discrete ordinates method. The accuracy of the discrete ordinates method was very close to that of a Monte Carlo simulation. Energy-resolved photon fluence from either a cone-beam single projection (i.e., radiography) or an axial scan (i.e., tomography) can be calculated within one minute.