We present the effects of spin-orbit coupling on the low-energy bands and Fermi surface of the recently discovered pressure-induced superconductor CrAs. We apply the Löwdin down-folding procedure to a tight-binding hamiltonian that includes the intrinsic spin-orbit interaction, originating from the Cr 3d electrons as well as from As 4p ones. Our results indicate that As contributions have negligible effects, whereas the modifications to the band structure and the Fermi surface can be mainly ascribed to the Cr contribution. We show that the inclusion of the spin-orbit interaction allows for a selective removal of the band degeneracy due to the crystal symmetries, along specific high symmetry lines. Such release of the band degeneracy naturally determines a reconstruction of the Fermi surface, including the possibility of changing the number of pockets. In the last years, materials that exhibit a superconducting phase in the vicinity of a quantum critical point have attracted great attention since the superconductivity in such compounds usually may be ascribed to an unconventional formation of Cooper pairs via some critical fluctuations The recently discovered chromium-based superconductor CrAs exhibits a dome-shaped phase diagram very similar to these compounds Concerning the transport properties, it has been reported a T 2 temperature dependence of resistivity, i. e. a Fermi-liquid behavior The superconductivity appears when the external pressure reaches a critical value P c ∼ 8 kbar, whereas the antiferromagnetic transition gets completely suppressed Considering the theoretical results, ab-initio calculations based on first-principles density functional theory give a good value for the magnetic moment, also suggesting that the CrAs is a weakly correlated material In this paper, we use the Löwdin down-folding procedure to study for the first time the effects of the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) term on the electronic properties of the CrAs, assuming that the SOC may originate from Cr 3d electrons as well as from As 4p ones. We show that, when the SOC is due to Cr electrons, one can get relevant modifications of the band structure and of the topology of the Fermi surface, along some high-symmetry lines of the BZ. On the other hand, no significant effects can be ascribed to the As electrons SOC. In the specific, we demonstrate that the inclusion of the SOC allows for a removal of the band degeneracy due to the crystal symmetries, which only occurs along the X -S and T -Z paths of the BZ. Such constraint release of the number of band crossings crucially determines a reconstruction of the Fermi surface along those high symmetry lines. For instance, it can reduce the number of electron pockets, by suppressing the small ones which are mostly affected by the SOC splitting. Moreover it acts by separating the residual pockets, which are no longer constrained by the crystal symmetry to be connected. The paper is organized as follows: in the next section we will outline the procedure adopted, emphasizing how the SOC can be introduced within the down-folding approach; in Sec. III we will present our results confining the analysis to the modification of energy spectra and the Fermi surface when the SOC is considered. Sec. IV is devoted to the discussion and the comments of the results. The generic tight-binding model for the CrAs reads as: where the first term describes the on-site energies of Cr and As orbitals, and the second one is related to the hoppings between the d and/or p orbitals of Cr and/or As atoms. The sites are indexed by i and j, the orbitals by α and β, while σ is the spin. As we have already said, in our model, the hopping parameters are the outcome of density functional theory calculations where H CrCr is a 20 × 20 matrix that contains the hoppings between the d orbitals of the Cr atoms, H AsAs is a 12 × 12 one related to the As p orbitals, while H CrAs and H AsCr describe the hopping terms between Cr and As atoms and vice-versa and are a 20 × 12 and a 12 × 20 sub-matrices, respectively. Starting from ab-initio outcomes -1 H AsCr . (3) The result of the diagonalization of this 20 × 20 matrix has been previously used to evaluate the energy spectrum and the resistivity where σ 0 is the unit matrix in the space of spins, σ x , σ y and σ z are the Pauli matrices, λ is the SOC constant and A=As, Cr depending on the origin for the SOC we want to analyze. In the next section, we will analyze the results of our calculations, considering first the effects on the bands of a SOC due to As and Cr atoms separately, and then simultaneously. In this section, we analyze the effect of the inclusion of the SOC on the electronic band structure of CrAs. We assume the SOC terms on the Cr and As ions are relevant for describing the electronic structure, due to the significant degree of covalency between the 3d and 4p orbitals. In the following, the present calculations are shown in comparison with the outcome of our previous tight-binding analysis, where the SOC has not been included In absence of SOC, the Hamiltonian possesses several symmetry properties, which are responsible for the characteristic features of the band structure We start by considering the effects of the SOC as due to the As electrons only. Ab-initio calculations give λ As =0.164 eV 50 ; however, since this coupling constant gives rise to negligible effects, we choose to emphasize the value of λ As by assuming λ As =0.3 eV, in order to highlight the regions of the energy spectrum that are more affected by the As SOC term. In Fig. Since the SOC is acting by splitting the 4-fold band degeneracy, it is plausible to expect that the Fermi surface topology will be strictly affected, by disconnecting the pockets that were constrained by the crystal symmetry to cross each other along those high-symmetry lines. In Fig. In absence of SOC, the Fermi surface consists of four sheets, and is characterized by the presence of four pockets along X -S, which are two at a time degenerate at four specific k y values. The energy splitting induced by the SOC along this path has two main effects. First of all, by lowering one of the bands below the Fermi level, it causes the removal of the small electron pockets located at (k x = π/a, k y 0.5) (blue pockets). Moreover, the residual pockets are no longer constrained by the crystal symmetry to be connected, so they get separated and cut the X -S path at eight different k y values. We would also like to point out that the modification to the Fermi surface is essentially due to the Cr part of the SOC, once again supporting the conjecture that the bands near the Fermi level are mainly due to the Cr orbitals. We have used a combined tight-binding-Löwdin downfolding procedure to get the low-energy band structure of CrAs, and to evaluate the role played by the SOC on the electronic properties of this material. The main effect of the inclusion of the SOC term in our model Hamiltonian is the removal of the band degeneracy along the X -S and T -Z lines of the orthorhombic Brillouin zone. The SOC splitting of the bands along these directions is of the order of 10 -2 eV. We demonstrate that, under the action of the SOC term, the topology of the Fermi Surface along those high symmetry lines is also modified. In particular, such energy splitting is substantial as it affects the small electron pockets located along X -S and T -Z paths, which get suppressed once the constraint of the band 4-fold degeneracy is released by the introduction of the SOC. We are able to ascribe to the 3d orbitals of the chromium this effect, further supporting the conjecture that the spectral weight of the d band near the Fermi level is larger than the p-band corresponding one. We stress that band crossings protected by non-symmorphic symmetry have attracted a lot of interest since they may give rise to interesting features involving unconventional dispersions, novel topological response phenomena and unusual transport in external magnetic field. A detailed study of the symmetries of the band spectrum of the CrAs when the SOC is included deserves a special attention; this job is currently underway. Finally, we underline the importance of this kind of exploration since it is well known that SOC may affect the superconducting properties, as it has been shown to induce an enhancement of the coupling constant, both softening the phonon spectrum and/or increasing the electronphonon coupling matrix elements 