The magnetoresistance (MR) of SrTiO 3 is theoretically investigated based on the Boltzmann equation by considering its detailed band structure. The formula for MR proposed by Mackey and Sybert is extended to be applicable to a system with an arbitrarily shaped Fermi surface. It is shown that the angular dependence of the diagonal component of the mass tensor causes transverse MR, whereas that of the offdiagonal component causes longitudinal MR with only a single closed Fermi surface, which overturns the textbook understanding of MR. The calculated MR (300% at 10 T) quantitatively agrees with the experimental results for SrTiO 3 including the behavior of the linear MR. The negative Gaussian curvature of the Fermi surface of SrTiO 3 and its resulting negative longitudinal and transverse MR are also discussed. Magnetoresistance (MR) has been the subject of many studies in solid state physics since its discovery by Thomson Strontium titanate (SrTiO 3 ) is one such material that exhibits non-saturated MR with a single closed Fermi surface The purpose of this paper is to clarify the origin of the MR of SrTiO 3 . Our main hypotheses are as follows. There are two possible origins of MR with a single closed Fermi surface: (i) a warped Fermi surface from a perfect sphere and/or (ii) thermally excited carriers. The common belief that a single closed Fermi surface does not generate MR is derived from models of perfect spheres and ellipsoids. However, for real metals, the Fermi surface is warped from a perfect sphere. In fact, the energy surface of SrTiO 3 deviates considerably from that of a perfect sphere, as shown in Fig. We first investigate these two questions separately, then merge them into a realistic model of SrTiO 3 . MR is calculated based on the Boltzmann equation under a magnetic field. We extend the formula for MR proposed by Mackey and Sybert We calculate MR using the formula derived by Mackey and Sybert The magnetic field tensor B corresponds to the standard electromagnetic tensor (i.e., the tensor itself is not novel). However, the formula for MR can be drastically simplified by using B. This simplified formula enables us to unravel the mechanisms of MR with a single closed Fermi surface, as shown later in this paper. Unfortunately, this original formula is not applicable to a system with a complex Fermi surface, such as SrTiO 3 (Fig. Here, • • • F = (dk/4π 3 )(• • • )(-∂f 0 /∂ǫ) expresses integration along the Fermi surface at low temperatures (f 0 is the equilibrium Fermi distribution function). The velocity v k and inverse mass tensor αk are defined in terms of the energy dispersion ε k as v k,μ = ∂ε k / ∂k μ and α k,μν = ∂ 2 ǫ k / 2 ∂k μ ∂k ν . These terms are independent of k in the original Mackey-Sybert formula. In Eq. ( First, we examine the effects of warp in Fermi surface. We assume that energy is described in terms of cubic harmonics as where k2 = k 2 /k 2 0 and K n (θ, φ) defines cubic harmonics of degree n, which are written as (ξ = sin θ cos φ, η = sin θ sin φ, ζ = cos θ) The obtained Fermi surfaces are depicted in the insets in Fig. The above properties of the cubic harmonics model can be interpreted as follows. In the case with the K 4 term, αk is diagonal, which is the same situation as the ellipsoidal model. Regardless, the K 4 warp generates ρ xx , while the ellipsoidal model does not. The difference between these models lies in the angular dependence of αk . The magnetoconductivities are written as for B = (0, 0, B). (σ yy and σ yx are obtained through the exchange of (x ↔ y) in σ xx and σ xy , respectively.) The transverse MR is written as In the case where α and v are constant along the Fermi surface (ellipsoidal model), we can drop • • • F . Then, the field dependence of the numerator in ρ xx is cancelled out by that of the denominator, resulting in a lack of field dependence in the transverse direction. In contrast, in the case with the K 4 term, such a cancellation does not occur because we cannot drop • • • F based on the angular dependence of αk . This is why the K 4 term generates ∆ρ xx . However, in the case with only the K 4 term, ∆ρ zz is independent of B because Therefore, ∆ρ zz cannot be generated with only the K 4 term. The inset shows the band structure of the model, where the Fermi energy is set to The K 6 term gives the off-diagonal elements in αk , meaning σ zz depends on B as When α is constant along the Fermi surface, the terms that include v z v x or v y v z will disappear during integration with respect to k because they are odd in k μ . The field dependencies are canceled between the numerator and denominator, resulting in σ zz = e 2 τ k 2 z F . However, when αk has an angular dependence, as in the case with K 6 , the v z v x and v y v z terms in Eq. ( We now examine the effects of thermally excited carriers. We consider a model where two free-electron bands are separated by an energy E g . The ratio of the effective mass for the upper band to that for the lower band is 0.6, which was set to be consistent with SrTiO 3 . The Fermi energy E F lies between the band edges, as shown in the inset in Fig. This ∆ρ xx is due to the thermally excited carries, which make the system a quasitwo-carrier system, even though there is only a single closed Fermi surface. It is known that multiple carrier systems, such as semimetals or multivalley systems, show ∆ρ xx , but do not show any ∆ρ zz We now calculate the MR of SrTiO 3 . We employ the k.p model proposed by Uwe et al. where k μ is normalized by π/a (a is the lattice constant along the a-axis). E -and E + correspond to the energy of the lowest and second-lowest bands, respectively. The origin of the energy is considered to be the bottom of E -. This k.p model considers the spinorbit splitting and tetragonal distortion at low temperatures caused by the tetragonal strain e and deformation potential b, respectively. Uwe The calculated MR values for this SrTiO 3 model are presented in Fig. It is revealed that ∆ρ xx of E -and ∆ρ zz of E + become negative, which cannot be explained based on the simple understanding of the cubic harmonics model. However, the negative MR values can be explained if one considers the fine structures of the Fermi surface, such as the Gaussian curvature. In the conductivity expression, a factor such as S 2 appears in the denominator, as shown in Eq. When the Gaussian curvature is negative, the effects of the magnetic field are reversed. Specifically, the magnetoconductivity is increased by the field, resulting in negative MR. In the case of SrTiO 3 , the dimples in the energy surface are a source of negative Gaussian curvature. In the inset in Fig. In a case with negative Gaussian curvature, S 2 can become zero at a certain strength of field, meaning the magnetoconductivities can diverge. However, this divergence is an artificial phenomenon. For example, divergence can be due to the approximation of the constant τ in Eq. (3). Divergence does not occur when we introduce an anisotropic τ . Many authors have highlighted the importance of the anisotropy of τ by introducing a relaxation time tensor τ Figure (m e is the bare electron mass.) These parameters were obtained to match the zero field values in previous experiments. A remarkable ∆ρ xx was obtained. The increase in ∆ρ xx is approximately 300% at 10 T and 1.5 K, which is comparable to the values obtained experimentally: ∼ 300% from Allen et al. at 0.41 K We observed negative longitudinal MR as is shown in Fig. The temperature dependences of ∆ρ xx and ∆ρ zz at B = 1 T are shown in Fig. Lastly, it would be worth mentioning the effect of the Zeeman splitting, which can increase the amplitude of MR as has been studied in various systems We studied both the transverse ∆ρ xx and longitudinal ∆ρ zz MR of SrTiO 3 , which has a single closed Fermi surface. We extended the Mackey-Sybert formula for MR to make it applicable to arbitrarily shaped energy surfaces. We examined two possible origins for MR: (i) warp in Fermi surfaces and (ii) thermally excited carriers. It was shown that the angular dependence of the diagonal components of the inverse mass tensor αk causes ∆ρ xx , but not ∆ρ zz . In contrast, the angular dependence of the off-diagonal components of αk causes ∆ρ zz . Although thermally excited carries enhance the magnitude of the MR, their contribution is reduced by decreasing temperature. We calculated MR using a k.p model for SrTiO 3 proposed by Uwe et al. and Allen et al. Clear ∆ρ xx and ∆ρ zz were obtained, even though there is only one closed Fermi surface for this material. The increase in ρ xx in our calculations was approximately 300 % at 10 T, which quantitatively agrees with experimental values. ∆ρ xx exhibits the apparent linear field-dependence even at 50 T (MR ∼ 1, 400%). The potential for negative MR as a result of negative Gaussian curvature was discussed. Our calculations indicate that negative longitudinal MR is possible for SrTiO 3 . This observation will be considered in future research.