This article provides an overview, primarily from an experimental perspective, of recent progress and future prospects in using helium to realize a range of quantum materials of generic interest, by "top-down" and "bottom-up" nanotechnology. We can grow model systems to realise new quantum states of matter, and explore key issues in condensed matter physics. In the language of cold atomic gases, two dimensional and confined 3 He and 4 He provide "quantum simulators", with the potential to uncover new emergent quantum states. These include: strictly 2D Fermi system with Mott-Hubbard transition; interacting coupled 2D fermion-boson system; heavy fermion quantum criticality; ideal 2D frustrated ferromagnetism; 2D quantum spin liquid; intertwined superfluid and density wave order with emergent large symmetry; topological mesoscopic superfluidity (new materials and emergent excitations). Helium is unique: for both isotopes the combination of relatively weak van der Waals atomic attractions and strong zero point motion, due to small mass, leads to the stability of the bulk liquid phases down to absolute zero. These model systems of strongly correlated bosons ( Liquid 3 He led to the development of Landau Fermi liquid theory-the standard model of strongly correlated fermions-with the striking prediction of collisionless zero sound, a collective-mode of the Fermi surface that can be driven and detected ultrasonically. The topic of this workshop is topological phase transitions and topological quantum matter. Topological quantum matter has been classified There is clear evidence of pairing by spin fluctuations The 2016 Nobel Prize reminds us of the power of 4 He to experimentally test theoretical concepts, in this case through the observation of the topological phase transition in superfluid the first detection of superfluid 4 He film flow graphically illustrates the power of interplay between theory and experiment). The 4 He film was grown on mylar, which is a heterogeneous substrate (the binding potential is non-uniform over the surface). The key features are that, beyond a 4 He so-called "dead-layer" of localised atoms a uniform mobile film is created, the density of which can be tuned continuously. The vortex interactions are precisely of the required logarithmic form (avoiding screening effects that plagued the observation in a 2D superconductor). And the experimental method of using a high Q torsional oscillator to observe the decoupling of the film from the substrate at the superfluid transition yield both the real and imaginary parts of the response function to validate the finite-frequency theory. This provides one topical template to highlight the power of helium to test key ideas in condensed matter physics. This article mainly discusses the work of our group, as reported at this symposium. It is not a comprehensive review. It is intended to provide a broadly accessible overview of our research on helium films. The approach is to use graphite as a substrate. Atoms are physisorbed onto this substrate in a controlled way. The resultant film is "self-assembled", driven by a combination of atomic interactions with graphite, helium interatomic interactions, and zero point energy. Graphite is atomically flat so that helium films grown on its surface are atomically layered. This is established both experimentally and theoretically. The binding energy of a 3 He atom to graphite is around 150 K, while that of 4 He is higher due to the larger mass and hence smaller zero point energy As the helium film is grown the complete first layer forms a compressed incommensurate solid on a triangular lattice. Atoms added to the second layer are subject to a periodic potential due to these first layer atoms. Typically films up to eight atomic layers have been studied. A key tool in the study of 2D 3 He is to pre-plate the graphite surface to effectively create a new substrate. This exploits the fact that 3 He is more weakly bound than any other species. Before growing a 3 He film, the substrate can be pre-plated, for example with: a solid monolayer of 4 He; a solid bilayer of 4 He; a solid HD bilayer. We find that each composite substrate allows us to use the subsequently grown 3 He film to model different physics. Thicker 4 He films consist of a number of solid layers next to the substrate with a superfluid 4 He overlayer. When 3 He is adsorbed onto this surface, the superfluid 4 He "substrate" plays an active role due to fermion-boson coupling. These atomically layered helium films have allowed the study of a wide variety of phenomena: • the study of 2D Fermi systems to test of the applicability of Landau Fermi liquid theory in 2D; • the density-tuned Mott transition of a 3 He monolayer; • Kondo-breakdown quantum criticality in a 3 He bi-layer; • frustrated magnetism in 2D; Heisenberg ferromagnet in 2D; • quantum spin liquid in a 3 He solid monolayer; • Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in 4 He films; • intertwined superfluid and density wave order in 4 He films -a 2D supersolid. In practice exfoliated graphite is used as the adsorbate, to provide sufficient total surface area for measuring the properties of the adsorbed helium film. Typical specific surface areas range from 1-20 m 2 /gm, depending on preparation. The potential influence of finite platelet size, interconnectivity and orientation of platelets, residual surface disorder are taken into account in the analysis. In particular, the detection of superfluidity of a 2D Fermi system, that is of a 3 He fluid monolayer, requires an adequately small level of surface disorder, to which p-wave superfluidity would be particularly sensitive. A monolayer of 3 He on graphite preplated by a bilayer of HD shows, from heat capacity and magnetization measurements, a clear density-tuned effective mass-diverging Mott transition, at which the Landau Fermi liquid parameter F a 0 saturates A related case is the second layer of 3 He on graphite (including the case where the first layer is replaced by 4 He) In both cases discussed above the Mott insulator is a strong candidate for the long-sought quantum spin liquid material, as discussed later. When, on the other hand, 3 He is grown on graphite plated by a bilayer of solid 4 He, yet new strongly correlated physics emerges. The fluid 3 He bi-layer behaves as a heavy fermion system Kondo interaction: in this case exchange of atoms between the two layers. This is tuned by the density of the upper layer. A density-tuned quantum critical point (QCP) is found at which the effective mass diverges. This appears to fall into the class of orbital-selective Mott transition If a 4 He film is grown on graphite, superfluidity is observed in the third and subsequent layers FIG. There is a further important feature of the growth of these atomically layered 4 He films. As each layer forms, it undergoes spinodal decomposition, at layer densities below around 4 nm -2 . In other words each 2D fluid layer will self-condense (liquid-gas instability in 2D) Nevertheless, the three layer film (superfluid 4 He monolayer sitting on a solid 4 He bilayer), and the four layer film (superfluid 4 He bilayer sitting on a solid 4 He) are relatively well understood. They appear to provide ideal "substrates" for the study 2D 3 He. The study of these, so-called, helium mixture films has been the the subject of extensive prior work using heterogeneous substrates As 3 He is added to the 4 He film, a 2D 3 He Fermi system of tuneable density is built on the single particle surface ground state for motion normal to the surface. We find that on the 3-layer 4 He film, the 3 He system shows a number of instabilities for coverages below 1 nm -2 , with possible evidence for 3 He dimer formation in a very low density component Over the coverage range at which the 3 He forms a single 2D Fermi system, the conditions are satisfied for the interactions in this 2D system to be strictly two dimensional. This is in contrast to 2D cold atom systems studied thus far, where interactions are 3D (eg. the system can be tuned through a Feshbach resonance, absent for 2D interactions). Thus 3 He provides an interesting model system to explore interactions in 2D, of significant interest theoretically • What is the nature of the interactions, in particular are there anomalies associated with interactions in 2D? [Here the ability to tune density over a wide range is important]. • Is there evidence of 3 He-3 He interactions mediated by the 4 He bosonic film? [These interactions, mediated by phonon/3rd sound-like excitations are expected to be (graphite) substrate enhanced. Fermion and boson modes should be hybridized • Can we enter a low density regime in which Fermi gas theory applies With regard to the last point, this is challenging because of the logarithimic dependence of the interaction parameter in 2D; • Under what conditions might the 2D superfluidity of a system of fermions in 2D be realised So far the experiments have been to measure heat capacity and nuclear magnetic susceptibility Fermi gas susceptibility, χ 0 , is independent of 3 He density in 2D. Thus the nuclear magnetic susceptibility provides a good measure of correlation effects to arbitrary low temperatures and for arbitrarily low surface density. The enhancement of the coefficient of the linear in T heat capacity is γ/γ 0 = (1 + 1 2 F s 1 )(m H /m 3 ). In this way F a 0 can be determined with precision. The relative density dependence of F a 0 and F s 1 found experimentally At somewhat higher density, with "multiple sub-band occupancy", we have two coupled 2D Fermi systems, of potential relevance to coupled 2D layers in cuprate superconductors. In this section we focus on to two quantum states: a 2D supersolid (realised in a 4 He atomic layer) and a quantum spin liquid (for which there is mounting evidence in a 3 He atomic layer), and we speculate on the potential relationship between them. As we shall see these two states are manifested at essentially the same helium coverage, occurring in the second atomic layer of helium on graphite, prior to the completion of that layer. All we do is replace bosons by fermions, with the same interactions, albeit different mass. We ask, might this fermion-boson "correspondence" be significant? The realization of supersolid in cold atomic gases is a matter of active research The realization of the quantum spin liquid in layered magnetic materials has been a longterm quest, with many "candidates" The 2D supersolid phase that we identify It is a new quantum state of matter. On the other hand the "classic" supersolid has a well-defined solid crystal structure with mobile vacancies constituting the superfluid component On the other hand, in the 4 He layer, we propose a 2D supersolid as a new quantum material which describes a quasi-condensate at both zero momentum and finite momenta G i , the set of reciprocal lattice vectors of triangular lattice. A quasi-condensate at q = 0, in the presence of density wave order, necessarily implies a quasi-condensate at the set of wavevectors G i . We hypothesize that the state vector freely explores the Bloch hyper-sphere, and hence varying relative occupation of condensates, as well as varying degrees of "solid" and "superfluid" order. In other words, the Hamiltonian commutes with rotations transferring particles between the quasi-condensates. This is not a fragmented condensate We briefly summarise the observations that lead to these proposals; a fully referenced discussion is provided elsewhere We can scale data to demonstrate quantum criticality. The quantum critical point, at which ∆(n) extrapolates to zero, is at layer completion. The normal density in the T → 0 limit has an unusual linear in T dependence. This is accounted for by an ansatz for the elementary excitation spectrum, in the spirit of Landau. The Landau prescription for calculating ρ n involves a momentum-weighted integral. The proposed spectrum has an extremely soft roton-like minimum, such that the roton gap is smaller than the minimum temperature explored so far experimentally (around 2 mK). Nozières refers to the roton as the "ghost of the Bragg spot". The small roton gap also implies a strong peak in the structure factor via the Feynman-Cohen relation E(q) = 2 q 2 /2mS(q). Thus the inferred excitation spectrum implies density wave order. The ansatz for the quasi-condensate wavefunction has both superfluid and density wave order. The fact that no Kosterlitz-Thouless transition is observed can be explained if the state is not such that the U(1) symmetries of both orders are separately broken. Rather the two orders are fully intertwined, the ground state has SU(N) symmetry, and vortices are not stable. This is a non-Abelian superfluid. It is important to note that these conclusions are drawn in the absence of knowledge of the system Hamiltonian. The starting point is not a model Hamiltonian that we simulate, but rather the emergent properties we experimentally observe. The fact that this supersolid is observed in the second layer of helium on graphite is a manifestation of the highly quantum nature of the system. In bulk quantum solid helium the atoms have high zero-point motion, the amplitude of which is a significant fraction of the lattice parameter. The overlap of neighbouring atomic wave-functions gives rise to atomic exchange, at a rate orders of magnitude smaller than the Debye frequency, and strongly dependent on lattice parameter (a function of pressure) We now turn to the potential realization of a quantum spin liquid phase in 2D solid 3 He. Here the magnetism arises from the 3 He nuclear spin, and is interrogated by NMR and heat capacity measurements The key feature of 2D solid 3 He is that it forms a triangular lattice, and is therefore geometrically frustrated. Furthermore, the spin interactions are highly frustrated by competing atomic ring exchange The effective Heisenberg Hamiltonian J = J 2 -2J 3 is FM because three particle exchange dominates two particle exchange. This is a consequence of the fact that helium atoms are "hard spheres". 3 He on a triangular lattice For simplicity, and the purposes of illustration, we truncate at 4 particle exchange. We refer to this two parameter model as the J -J 4 model. In principle these exchange parameters can be inferred from experiment, since the effective exchange parameters which enter the magnetic susceptibility, heat capacity, and spin wave velocity to leading order are different and take the form: These exchange parameters are tuned by the total film coverage, as shown in measurements of magnetization and heat capacity on the same samples Our recent results suggest that the solid second layer is driven to ferromagnetism by the indirect RKKY interactions mediated by the fluid overlayer FIG. We now turn to the three physical 3 He-on-graphite systems in which the quantum spin liquid (QSL) may manifest: (i) The second layer of 3 He on graphite, where the first layer is 3 He. In this case the first layer of 3 He is a compressed solid on a triangular lattice [confirmed by neutron scattering][88], paramagnetic, with very weak exchange interaction with the second layer. The coupled magnetism of the first and second layer is a complication. However the fact that the first layer is a weakly interacting "spectator" of the putative QSL in the second layer, may prove to be advantageous. (ii) A monolayer 3 He on graphite, preplated by a solid monolayer of 4 He. This system is very closely related to (i). However the paramagnetic 3 He first layer is replaced with non-magnetic 4 He. The density of the close packed 4 He first layer triangular lattice is about 5% higher than the 3 He first layer. Given this close correspondence we will refer to this system also as "the second layer of 3 He on graphite". (iii) A monolayer of 3 He on graphite, preplated by a solid bilayer of HD In all of the above cases, the putative QSL is a 2D solid on a triangular lattice, at the border of a density tuned Mott-Hubbard transition. This is a spin 1 2 system [ 3 He nuclear spin]. As well as the geometrical frustration of the triangular lattice, there is strong frustration due to competing atomic ring exchange interactions. The magnetization is directly, and selectively, measurable by NMR. The high temperature magnetism shows that the system has an antiferromagnetic character. Magnetization measurements on both system (ii) and system (iii) support a gapless spin liquid Our current belief is that system (ii) and (iii) reflect a different balance between the periodic potential of the solid underlayer (HD bilayer or 4 He) on a triangular lattice and intralayer 3 He interactions. The HD bilayer is of significantly lower density than the 4 He first layer. It shows a Mott-Hubbard transition into a 4/7 or 7/12 triangular superlattice phase. The results for system (ii) are more consistent with a density wave instability in the 3 He layer. In system (iii) we have shown that exchange in the Mott insulator is much stronger than in system (ii) We can also use the information on ring exchange processes from the frustrated magnetism of 3 He system (ii) to estimate the characteristic energy scale governing atomic mobility in the 4 He (supersolid) case. Now all ring exchange processes add to translate a 4 He atom between sites, so we have t = J 2 + 2J 3 + 4J 4 + . . . . Using the values calculated by PIMC we find t ∼ 200 mK, comparable to the temperature at which a superfluid response is detected. In contrast with the "self-assembled" films discussed in section 2, here we use nanofabrication methods to define a cavity. In the simplest case we have a thin slab geometry, into which helium is admitted through a fill line. This can be thought of as a film, of thickness precisely defined by the height of the cavity, with equivalent upper and lower surfaces. This strategy is particularly suitable for the study of superfluid 3 He, where the diameter of the Cooper pair ξ 0 at zero pressure is around 80 nm. [Stabilization of van der Waals films of such thickness is tricky in the face of competing effects of surface tension and gravity. Moreover it is not easy to precisely determine the film thickness of such a "bottom-up" thick film]. So far cavities of height D in the range 1000 to 100 nm have been studied, k -1 F ≪ D < 10ξ 0 . While this is far away from the strictly 2D limit k -1 F ∼ D ≪ ξ 0 , it should allow that limit to be approached in a controlled way in future experiments. In our approach, the thickness of the "film" formed by helium in the cavity is well defined by the confining geometry. Moreover for fixed cavity height the effective confinement ξ 0 /D is tuneable by pressure, since Our motivation is the study of topological superfluid 3 He under confinement, as a model system for topological superconductivity. The topological classification of condensed matter systems has now become established as a key general principle to understand, predict and design new states of matter. There are several candidate topological superconductors, discussed elsewhere in this volume. Here we exploit superfluid 3 He, where the topological classification is firm. Under confinement the goal is to use it as a model system for the investigation of emergent surface excitations. The gift of Nature is that the p-wave superfluid 3 He supports both a time reversal invariant (TRI) phase ( 3 He-B) and a chiral phase ( 3 He-A). The richness of the order parameter of superfluid 3 He also allows new potential phases (new "materials"), which should be stabilised by confinement. The most striking feature in topological quantum matter is the surface and edge excitations which emerge through bulk-surface/edge correspondence. In a topological superfluid these are (TRI superfluid) Majorana or (chiral superfluid) Weyl fermions. It is the understanding, detection, characterization and possible quantum control of these new particles, which is the key challenge. In our neutral topological "superconductor", the topological invariant is a property of the emergent superfluid order. Thus the "protection" of the surface/edge states is expected to be influenced by a subtle interplay between broken symmetry and topology This approach opens the way to the study of 3 He is studied in hybrid nano-structures, "topological mesoscopic superfluidity". 3 He allows a degree of control that is unprecedented. Confinement (for example in a cavity of height D) is the key new control parameter and is used to stabilise distinct superfluid phases or normal phase, and the interfaces between them, with exquisite control over interface quality, the elimination of disorder, and flexibility of geometry. The 3 He hybrid mesoscopic structure can built from a range of "materials", with 3 He tuned into a particular state by the scale and sculpture of confinement. Each superfluid phase has different symmetry, topology and surface/edge excitations, with further control over excitations at engineered intra-fluid interfaces. The helium-cavity surface interfaces are also of high quality: they are atomically flat and, as has been shown, the surface scattering is tuneable in situ, by a 4 He surface film The first experiments [100] required a number of technical breakthroughs: to confine 3 He in a nanofabricated rectangular cavity of thickness comparable to the coherence length, including a precise characterisation of the geometry and surfaces of cavity; to cool the sample to well below the superfluid transition temperature; to "fingerprint" the superfluid order parameter by developing an NMR spectrometer of unprecedented sensitivity The first generation of cells (fabricated by anodically bonding Hoya SD-2 glass and Silicon) While NMR thus provides, in principle, the method to directly determine the influence of confinement on the order parameter, including the stabilization of new phases, the experimental challenge is signal sensitivity of the NMR spectrometer. To address this question we developed a SQUID NMR method Unfortunately, this inevitably results in non-uniformity of confinement, which is undesirable since confinement is the key control parameter. The presence of significant signals from surrounding bulk liquid also can complicate the discrimination of the NMR response of the confined sample. The flexibility of nanofabrication allows the introduction of small volumes of "bulk" superfluid 3 He, both near the fill line entrance to the cavity and at the far end of the cavity. These "bulk-markers", with well defined geometry, can be resolved from the cavity NMR signal, by simple NMR imaging techniques ("zeugmatography" -involving the applications of magnetic field gradients for spatial resolution). The "bulk-markers"define the bulk-liquid superfluid transition temperature, and show that temperature gradients across the cavity are insignificant. The relative stability of the A and B phases is strongly influenced by confinement. This arises because all three components of the orbital triplet are present in the B-phase, and the component with l z = 0 is most strongly suppressed by surface scattering. On the other hand, in the A-phase, all pairs have the same orientation of their angular momentum, Under confinement the orbital angular momentum orients perpendicular to the wall. As a result the A-phase, which in bulk is only stable at high pressures in zero magnetic field, is favoured at low pressures, where the effective confinement parameter D/ξ 0 is smallest. In a 700 nm cavity the A phase is stabilised at T = 0 from zero up to around 2 bar. [100] Consistent results for the A-B transition line were found in NMR experiments on 700 nm and 1100 nm cavities [100, 107] and torsional oscillator experiments on a 1080 nm cavity The critical value D/ξ(T AB ) is pressure dependent and differs at all pressures from the prediction of weak coupling theory. The conclusion from these observations is that strong coupling corrections persist to zero pressure and are temperature dependent at each pressure. A-phase is stabilized at low pressure. Phase diagram shown is for diffusely scattering walls. In this case there is also a pressure dependent suppression of slab T c relative to bulk (solid black line). [Strong coupling refers to the dependence of the pairing interaction on the superfluid order parameter As the cavity height is reduced,the expectation is that the A-phase will be stable over a progressively wider range of pressure. We expect that a re-entrant bubble (in the p-T plane) of planar distorted B-phase will shrink and eventually disappear on reducing the cavity height: the details will depend on strong coupling effects and the influence of confinement. The superfluid phase under strong confinement D ∼ ξ 0 is of great interest. These require control over the surface scattering conditions, which we now discuss. Since the discovery of superconductivity in heavy fermion metals and oxide materials the majority of emerging superconducting materials exhibit unconventional, non-s-wave, pairing. In contrast to s-wave superconductors, they are extremely sensitive to non-magnetic defect, and surface scattering. Superfluid 3 He is naturally defect-free (although there is a significant body of work investigating the influence of introducing disorder by immersing the superfluid in silica-aerogels). In our experiments under confinement, the distinguishing feature is that we just have surface scattering, which is tuneable; the surface scattering depends strongly on the helium surface boundary layer. Theoretically the calculation of surface suppression of components of the gap is made using quasiclassical theory; surface scattering is introduced phenomenologically With diffusively scattering surfaces p-wave superfluidity is suppressed for D < ξ 0 . For perfectly specular surfaces both T c and gap suppression are eliminated for order parameters with only l z = ±1 components. These are the chiral A-phase and the TRI planar phase, which are degenerate in the weak coupling limit. Experiments are in progress, at the time of writing, to establish the phase diagram in 100 nm cavities. In part they rely on the ability, demonstrated in the experiments on a 200 nm cavity, to reproduce close to specular surface scattering conditions. In bulk the energy gap of the B-phase is isotropic. Under confinement the planar distorted a phase develops a strong gap anisotropy along o = ±z, where z is the surface normal of the cavity . This results in a strong susceptibility anisotropy along w, a vector rotated with respect to o by a rotation matrix R, which rotates the spin relative to the orbital coordinates of the pair, changing only the dipole interaction. The Zeeman interaction is minimised for w = ±H. This gives rise, in sufficiently strong magnetic fields, along z, to two orientations with different dipole energies and hence different NMR frequency shift. For o = z the dipole energy is minimised and the frequency shift is positive, while for o = -z the frequency shift is negative. This latter metastable state is formed stochastically into the planar distorted B-phase from A-phase. It can be eliminated by growing the B phase in zero magnetic field. Domain walls between these two orientations support surface states, including fermionic zero modes. We have proposed that they can be pinned at controlled sites on the surface and fused by manipulating the magnetic field Under confinement the gap is spatially-dependent, due to wall boundary conditions. By measuring the NMR frequency shift as a function of tipping angle it is possible to measure the following spatial averages of the gap across the cavity: These can be compared with with predictions of the gap distortion from microscopic theory There is widespread interest in superfluid/superconducting states in which the order parameter spontaneously acquires a spatial modulation. Such FFLO states Under confinement such a domain walls reduce surface pair breaking and can acquire negative surface energy. This is predicted to lead to their proliferation and the formation of the stripe phase, a spatially-modulated superfluid modulated superfluid state has also been predicted in topological superfluid 3 He-B confined in a thin cavity with slab geometry: the stripe phase The simplest possible structure is a periodic array of regularly spaced and linear domain walls, referred to as the stripe phase. Superfluid 3 He has the advantage that NMR directly probes the spin degrees of freedom of the Cooper pairs. A stripe phase has q = 0, which has a clear signature in the tipping angle dependence of the NMR response. Its stability is predicted to be favoured by weak coupling, so an experiment was performed at zero pressure where strong coupling effects should be minimised. We therefore chose a 1.1 μm cavity, which has an A-B transition at zero pressure In bulk the nucleation of the B phase from the A phase, a first order phase transition, has been widely discussed In our opinion, the quasi-2D regime requires a new theoretical approach on a number of grounds. Firstly the pairing interaction, and strong coupling effects, may be modified, possibly through a dependence of the spin-fluctuation spectrum on dimensionality. Secondly, quasi-classical theory as presently constituted is not adequate, under conditions of high confinement. This theory was developed to treat the influence of surfaces and interfaces within bulk superfluid 3 He. The notion of an arbitrary quasiparticle trajectory impinging on the confining surface clearly breaks down in quasi-2D. In this limit the quasi-2D minibands are subject to an effective disorder potential v(x, y) that is determined by the fluctuations in confining cavity height D + d(x, y), due to surface roughness or longer length scale variations in cavity height The ultimate objective is a 2D p-wave superfluid. Because of the different classes of the topological defects in a p-wave superfluid, the topological phase transitions into this system are particularly rich In hybrid metallic nanostructures, normal metals and s-wave superconductors are combined to create new devices. Here a new approach will be the creation and investigation of a range of superfluid 3 He hybrid nanostructures to reveal edge, surface and interface states in a model topological superfluid. This will serve as a model of such mesoscopic devices based on unconventional, p-wave, superconductors, including topological superconductors. 3 He allows a degree of control that is unprecedented. The 3 He order parameter is a 3 × 3 matrix with complex components encoding the spin state as a function of position over the Fermi surface, the gap anisotropy and the topology. As we have seen, confinement is the key new control parameter and is used to stabilise distinct superfluid phases or normal phase, and the interfaces between them, with exquisite control over interface quality, the elimination of disorder, and flexibility of geometry. The hybrid mesoscopic structure is built from a range of "materials", with 3 He tuned into a particular state by the scale and sculpture of confinement, or the creation of pwave superfluid meta-materials. For example consider a cavity with a square array of posts separated by ∼ 10ξ 0 , for which the phase diagram has been calculated FIG. On the other hand in narrow channels the following sequence of phases is predicted It is also possible to imagine the creation of superfluid 3 He meta-materials, such as a regular array of islands, each hosting a macroscopic quantum state, with interconnecting channels. Of interest is a periodic array of islands, which are not equivalent in terms of their superfluid phase (A, B, polar, spatially modulated etc). Furthermore, the interconnecting channels, "bonds", can be tuned. A higher level structure in which two or more metamaterials are coupled together is even possible. FIG. Topological superfluids/superconductors necessarily host surface and edge excitations. The spectrum of these emergent surface excitations is calculated self consistently with the gap suppression The time-reversal-invariant B-phase with specular scattering has linearly dispersing Majorana surface excitations Furthermore the new topological mesoscopic 3 He structures offer the prospect of further control over excitations at engineered intra-fluid interfaces. To give an example, we envisage a structure with a step in cavity height at which we can stabilize an interface, either between superfluid and normal liquid (SN) or between two topologically distinct superfluid phases (SS ′ ). Unlike an SN interface between a superconductor and normal metal this interface is within a single material (reminiscent of the high quality pn junction in silicon). By combining such ingredients we can create progressively more complex hybrid structures. The new feature of such junctions is that we are dealing with a p-wave superfluid. If B- phase, Majorana-like excitations will exist at each SN interface. The spectrum of Andreev bound states in the junction is controlled by the length of the junction L N , and we can exploit the fact that at T c the inelastic scattering length is of order 50 microns. Furthermore, the breaking of gauge and rotational symmetries in superfluid 3 He gives rise to gapped Anderson-Higgs modes, as well as gapless Nambu-Goldstone modes. These modes couple to longitudinal and transverse zero sound. Thus, uniquely, superfluid 3 He offers the prospect to study the coupling of bosonic collective modes of the superfluid order to fermionic degrees of freedom, in particular the predicted exotic surface states The cold atoms 3 He and 4 He can be grown in atomically layered thin films, on graphite with a variety of pre-platings, or confined in precisely engineered nanofluidic geometries. By manipulating helium in this way it is possible to effectively create new "materials" with interesting classes of quantum ground states, some anticipated, others emergent. These new materials can be well-characterized, while disorder and impurity effects are small and controllable. In this way important classes of quantum materials can be realized using helium as a model system, exploiting its relative simplicity, and providing a robust confrontation between theory and experiment. He films, as discussed elsewhere in this volume. (The fact that this was almost 40 years after