We describe the characterization of a pulsed supersonic rare gas beam which is intended to serve as an ultracold neutral atom target for the production of an ultrashort ion pulse via femtosecond photoionization. The velocity distribution of atoms entrained in the beam is measured and characterized by temperatures T and T ⊥ in directions along and perpendicular to the beam propagation, respectively. It is shown that T ⊥ values in the mK regime are achieved at distances of the order of 1000 mm from the nozzle. Moreover, the center beam density at this position is measured to be of the order of 10 11 atoms/cm 3 . Both findings are essential for the intended application and confirm the targeted beam specifications. Comparison with theoretical estimates reveals the well-known skimmer interference effect, which is found to reduce the beam density by more than one order of magnitude. Supersonic gas expansions A supersonic gas expansion is created by leading gas atoms or molecules from a reservoir with high pressure through a small nozzle exit against an evacuated chamber. This is frequently done in a pulsed manner, thus generating single gas pulses with a defined spatial extension along its expansion axis. A skimmer with a given diameter inserted into the beam line allows to collimate the beam to only the central part of the beam and mostly defines the spatial shape of the beam profile at a given plane perpendicular to the beam axis. While propagating alongside its center line, the temperature of a supersonic gas jet is rapidly decreasing with increasing distance from the nozzle. Typically, after a few nozzle diameters the trajectories of the atoms are considered to be "frozen out", i.e. the particles rarely interact with each other, resulting in a gas pulse with minimal relative movement of the particles. This movement is commonly described with a Boltzmann distribution for the velocities parallel ( || v ) and perpendicular ( v ⊥ ) to the propagation direction and associated with temperatures || T and T ⊥ , respectively Another important property of the beam is its center line density, which decreases with increasing distance from the nozzle and can be estimated theoretically from the initial nozzle parameters In an ongoing research project, we want to use a supersonic beam as an ultracold gas target in order to generate short rare gas ion pulses via femtosecond photoionization. For that application, we make use of the two unique characteristics of a supersonic expansion, namely the low perpendicular temperature and the high number density of the particles. The key factors limiting the achievable ion pulse duration are i) the randomly distributed thermal starting velocities of the generated photoions and ii) their repulsion in a propagating ion pulse due to Coulomb interaction. In order to reach an ion pulse duration of the order of one picosecond at ion energies in the keV range, the first limitation requires a temperature reduction of the gas target down to the 10 -3 K regime. Temperatures of that order can be reached in a supersonic beam, if the generated photoions are extracted perpendicular to the beam propagation. The trick is that T ⊥ can be effectively controlled by a geometrical cooling effect, where the perpendicular component of the particle velocity is restricted by collimating the beam at large distance x from its virtual source close the nozzle. Theoretical estimates reveal T ⊥ to scale inversely proportional with x 2 . The drawback, however, is that the beam density also rapidly falls with increasing distance, and it is therefore critical to determine the number density of gas particles at a given distance x and temperature T ⊥ . Simulations of the resulting ion pulses reveal that the density of neutral gas atoms must reside in the range of about 11 3 10 cm -in order to produce bunches consisting of 1-10 ions, which can then be accelerated and transported over distances of several millimeters without substantial space charge broadening. As a prerequisite to these planned experiments, it is crucial to obtain knowledge of the beam properties, in particular of the nature (gas atoms vs. clusters), temperature and number density of the particles in the beam. We therefore characterize the beam in a twofold way. First, we retrieve information about the number density by ionizing the neutral gas particles using a VUV excimer laser and detecting the resulting ions using a linear time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer. By comparison of the ions extracted from the supersonic beam to those generated in a homogenous background gas of the same species, we are able to calibrate the absolute number density of gas particles entrained in the beam. Second, we gather information about the beam density profile by scanning a skimmer in a plane perpendicular to the beam axis and measure the transmitted neutral particles via the signal of an ion gauge located behind the skimmer. Combining the results, we will compare them to theoretical predictions using the sudden freeze model (SFM) describing a supersonic expansion. The experimental setup consists of four differentially pumped vacuum chambers, separated by 2 or 3 skimmers respectively of varying diameter. The first chamber contains a pulsed piezoelectric gas valve (The Amsterdam Piezovalve diameter and 40° opening angle, providing Argon gas pulses with a nominal pulse length of 5-200 μs and a repetition rate of up to 5 kHz at stagnation pressures in the range of 5 to 15 bar. The nozzle is mounted on a tiltable xy manipulator for beam alignment, and the gas load entering the expansion chamber is pumped by a turbomolecular pump with a nominal pumping speed of 1000 l/s for argon. A first skimmer of 1.5 mm aperture diameter is located at a distance of 125 mm from the nozzle, separating the expansion chamber from an intermediate chamber differentially pumped with a 300 l/s turbomolecular pump. A second skimmer of 1 mm aperture diameter located 225 mm downstream from the nozzle introduces the beam into a third transfer chamber pumped with a 300 l/s turbomolecular pump. All three chambers are manufactured according to ultrahigh vacuum standards and feature a base pressure < 10 -9 mbar with the supersonic beam switched off. Upon beam operation at a stagnation pressure of 5 bar, the pressure in the three chambers rises as a function of the (set) valve opening time as shown in Figure It is seen that the valve apparently starts to open at a set pulse width of 20 μs, followed by a linear increase up to about 100 μs. In this range, we therefore assume the actual pulse width tp to scale with the set valve opening time minus 20 μs. From the measured pressures, it is in principle possible to estimate the gas load delivered into different parts of the vacuum system. For the expansion chamber, the effective pumping speed is geometrically reduced to about 500 l/s for argon. From the pressure measurement at 40μs p t = , this results in an average gas flow of about 1.810 16 argon atoms per pulse. Assuming a peaking factor of about 10 for the conical nozzle employed here (see below), this translates into 1.010 13 and 1.110 12 atoms going through the first and second skimmer, respectively. Analyzing the pressure measurement in chamber 3, however, we find a maximum possible beam-induced gas load of about 5.410 10 atoms entering this chamber, indicating that the combined transmission of the first and second skimmers must be less than 5%. A more detailed discussion of this observation will be given below. In any case, one can see that the three-stage differential pumping scheme employed here is suitable to ensure ultrahigh vacuum conditions during beam operation already in the third stage, a feature which is important in the context of the planned application of the generated supersonic beam. The differential pumping system is followed by a fourth "analysis" chamber pumped by a 80 l/s turbomolecular pump, which contains a linear time-of-flight (TOF) spectrometer set up in Wiley-McLaren configuration In some experiments, however, this skimmer was dismounted. All skimmers feature sharp edges of 10 μm wall thickness. A schematic of the experimental setup is depicted in Figure Ionization of neutral gas particles is performed using an excimer laser (Coherent ExciStar XS 200) operated with an F2/He gas mixture, thus providing pulsed VUV radiation with a wavelength of 157 nm (7.9 eV photon energy) at a maximum pulse energy of 3.0 mJ, a pulse length of 5-8 ns and a maximum repetition rate of 500 Hz. In principle, the laser radiation could be directly used to photoionize the neutral gas particles via non-resonant multiphoton absorption. For the case of argon as investigated here, simultaneous absorption of at least two photons is needed, which requires rather high photon flux densities in excess of 10 8 W/cm 2 in order to be efficient. First attempts to measure the beam profile using that strategy, which were performed by scanning the tightly focused laser beam across the supersonic beam and monitoring the signal of photoionized Ar atoms as a function of laser focus position, proved unsuccessful. As will be described in detail below, it was found that the measured ion signal does not originate from direct photoionization of gas particles but is instead generated via electron impact ionization utilizing photoelectrons created by stray light from the pulsed laser radiation. These electrons are accelerated towards the two electrodes E1 and E2 of the TOF setup, which are set to positive potentials in order to extract the ions onto the detector. In particular, electrons created at the surface of electrode E1 are drawn to the upper electrode E2, thereby gaining an energy of 300 eV which is suitable for efficient electron impact ionization. The argon ions as well as ionized residual gas atoms are then extracted along the direction perpendicular to both the supersonic and laser beam axes and detected by the MCP. A second electric field between the electrodes E1 and E0 (with ) allows to satisfy first order flight time focus conditions for the detected ions in order to increase the mass resolution. The synchronization between nozzle, laser and voltages is ensured by a Digital Delay Generator (Stanford Research Systems DG535) with two timing parameters: the laser delay and the nozzle delay. The former is the delay between the firing of the laser and the switching of the HV and is set to 60 ns, whereas the latter is the delay between firing the nozzle and laser pulses and lies in the order of hundreds of μs. The signal measured by the MCP detector is processed by an electric circuit sketched in Figure To calibrate the measured ion signal in terms of absolute number densities of the corresponding neutral particles, a gas inlet is mounted at the analysis chamber which allows to insert argon gas at a specific background pressure monitored by an ion gauge (Leybold IoniVac ITR 90) using a controlled leak valve. The comparison between the signals measured from the supersonic gas beam and the homogenous background gas then facilitates a quantitative determination of the number density in the beam, as described further in Section 3.D. Inspecting the time-of-flight mass spectrum shown in Figure The spread in parallel velocity of the particles entrained in the beam corresponds directly to its parallel temperature and is therefore a crucial characteristic of the beam itself. It can be described by the speed ratio S, a dimensionless number which denotes the ratio between the terminal parallel particle velocity ||, v  and the full width half maximum (FWHMv) of its distribution, multiplied by a factor ( ) In order to gain information on both quantities, the ionization laser was placed in the center of the TOF extraction region and the ion signal was recorded as a function of the delay between the firing of the nozzle valve and the laser pulse. Figure . Furthermore, to correct the FWHMt of (94 ± 4) μs of the fitting curve, we crudely approximate the gas pulse to be rectangularly shaped with the set nominal pulse width of 50 μs minus 20 μs. Then, a simple calculation yields a deconvoluted thermal spread of FWHMt,dec = (92 ± 4) μs, from which the speed ratio can be determined as . The large difference between experimental value and theoretical estimate is not unexpected and presumably arises from the fact that temporary cluster formation during the jet expansion as well as influences of the skimmers limit the achievable speed ratio. In fact, it was shown by Hillenkamp et al. which seems plausible as well in comparison to work from Even The question remains what causes the rather long tail in the signal for increasing nozzle delays, which is fitted in Figure In order to obtain an absolute calibration of the beam density, we compare the ion signal determined for the supersonic beam with that measured for a homogenous atom density. For that purpose, we backfill the analysis chamber with argon gas to a certain partial pressure. The laser focus is then positioned at the center of the TOF extraction volume and the argon ion signal resulting from the same photoelectron ionization process is measured as a function of the Argon partial pressure. As indicated by Meng et al. The electrodes E1 E0 each contain a grid (transmission: 0.9) with a diameter of 12.5 mm, limiting the ion extraction volume, i.e., the volume from which ions can be extracted and hit the detector, to a cylinder of the same diameter. Flight-time simulations performed with SIMION 8.0 show that this volume is further reduced to an effective diameter of Deff = 6 mm, which represents an average over all diameters along the extraction direction from which ions can hit the detector. Since the electric field between the electrodes breaks out for larger diameters, ions created outside of that cylinder are therefore accelerated onto the nontransmitting part of the electrodes. Considering the distance of 10 mm between the electrodes E2 and E1 as well, the ion extraction volume can be calculated as 280 mm 3 , resulting in a total number of detectable particles of The laser position was then varied along the z-axis and the signal was measured at each laser position for the beam and for the bulk, respectively. Figure In order to gain information about the beam profile, a third skimmer with a diameter of 1 mm is introduced into the beam line and mounted onto an xy-manipulator at a distance of about 800 mm from the nozzle (see Figure 1 zz cc += , as often used in the literature ( ) Projecting the opening diameter of the second skimmer to the position of the probing third skimmer geometrically, we estimate a width of about 4.18 mm, which is in fair agreement with the measured FWHM if we take the finite diameter of the third skimmer into account as well. A small deviation from the Gaussian fit at the peak top is likely caused by not perfectly aligned skimmers in the beam line, as described above in the experimental section. This effect is even more noticeable in the measurement along the y axis, resulting in a slightly smaller FWHMy of 4.6 mm, though with a more asymmetric peak form. Nevertheless, we take both measured standard deviations , yz  for further discussion, since they allow us to perform further calculations analytically. We can then give a simple estimation of the perpendicular temperature by associating the standard deviation of the profile function with the appropriate Boltzmann distribution for T ⊥ as We now evaluate the center line density 0  from the measurements depicted in Figure . This converts to , however, since we need to cover the long tail shown in Figure We can further compare the measured center line density with the theoretical value predicted by the sudden freeze model (SFM) developed by Beijerinck and Verster . This is clearly lower than the temperature estimated from the beam profile measurement by more than two orders of magnitude, however the theoretical temperature is calculated for an unskimmed expansion, neglecting the heating effect of the skimmers in the beam. Simulations show an increase in density shortly after each skimmer entrance, resulting in colliding gas atoms and thus heating of the beam perpendicular to its propagation axis by an order of magnitude at least The sudden freeze model further predicts the center line density of the beam to decrease according to 1060 mm 3.9 10 cm nx -= =  for a backing pressure of 5 bar, which lies one order of magnitude above the measured number density. However, one has to take into account that the calculations within the SFM are performed with a sonic nozzle, while the nozzle we use is conical with a full opening angle of 40°. As has been shown by Even Using laser induced photoelectron ionization of neutral gas atoms, we have measured the particle density within a pulsed supersonic argon beam. Obtaining knowledge regarding the shape of a single gas pulse allowed to determine the peak center line density by comparison to a known density of a bulk gas, yielding a value of ( ) 10 3 0 4.5 0.12 10 cm  -=   . This density was shown to be in accordance with other direct measurements as well as theoretical predictions and computer simulations, attributing the discrepancy between theoretical considerations and experimental data to the well-known skimmer interference effects. Furthermore, we were able to measure the parallel temperature to ( ) 1.1 0.1 K T  = and estimate the perpendicular temperature to be in the mK regime, which is a reasonable result compared to other measurements and theoretical predictions as well. With the opening time of the piezovalve and the backing pressure of the nozzle, we have two parameters which allow us to control the shape and density of the gas pulses even further. Therefore, we are quite encouraged to make use of the supersonic jet expansion described here with Argon gas to generate ultra-short ion pulses using the concept described in the introduction.