Laser ablation through liquid is an important process that have to be studied for applications which use laser ablation in liquid (LAL) and laser shock peening (LSP). LAL is employed for production of suspensions of nanoparticles, while LSP is applied to increase hardness and fatique/corrosion resistance properties of a surface layer. A bubble appears in liquid around the laser spot focused at a target surface after strong enough laser pulse. In the paper we connect the early quasi-plane heated layer created by a pulse in liquid and the bubble forming at much later stages. In the previous works these early stage from one side and the late stage from another side existed mainly as independent entities. At least, quantitative links between them were unknown. We consider how the quasi-plane heated layer of liquid forms thank to thermal conduction, how gradually conduction becomes weaker, and how the heated layer of liquid nearly adiabatically expands to few orders of magnitude in volume during the drop of pressure. Our molecular dynamics simulations show that the heated layer is filled by the diffusive atomic metal-liquid mixture. Metal atoms began to condense into nanoparticles (NP) when they meet cold liquid outside the edge of a mixing zone. This process limits Laser ablation in liquid (LAL) is important for many technological applications listed in the recent reviews LSP and LAL are two sides of the same process of laser interaction with target through transparent liquid. In LSP the people are interested in processes going inside a target -evolution of ejecta and production of nanoparticles (NP) are out of their area of interest. In femtosecond (fs) LAL Amplitude of compressive shock is independent on presence or absence of liquid in fs LSP (if absorbed fluences are equal); this is true namely for fs LAL; but for ns LAL the presence of liquid affects compressive shock inside a target amplifying it. In nanosecond (ns) LAL In experiments (devoted to LAL) using high-speed photoimaging, the formation, expansion, stopping of expansion, and the collapse of a bubble in a liquid around a laser spot are observed There are relatively recent papers devoted to theory and numerical modeling of LAL Here we describe the connection between the initial stage with the quasi-plane plasma flow on the one side and the final stage with the expanding bubble on the other side. The analysis given below in the paper is divided into three main parts. First, we present the data of calculating (by the hydrodynamic code 1D-2T-HD) the nanosecond laser action on gold through water up to the times at which the spherization of a shock wave front in water begins; spherization means transit from quasi-plane to quasi-spherical shape. Secondly, we construct families of water adiabats that cover our range of entropies and pressure drops during expansion. This range is from the order of 10 4 bar to pressures of 0.1-1 bar. Thirdly, we present the data of molecular dynamics (MD) modeling regarding the mutual diffusion of gold and water together with the following picture of the condensation of gold atoms from MD. Before describing these three parts of the work, we present data on the intermediate stage. At the intermediate stage, we will move from the description of the LAL flow using 1D-2T-HD code to the description using adiabatic curves. The 1D-2T-HD code is a Lagrangian For nanosecond (ns) laser pulse, the 2T effects are not significant The main advantage in using the hydrodynamic code 1D-2T-HD is the use of adequate equations of state (EoS) substances. For gold the EoS is taken according to classical papers A typical example is shown in the figure Figure The parameters of the laser pulse are shown in Figure Let us estimate the mass of evaporated gold and highly heated water. The calculation is carried out by the code 1D-2T-HD that works in Lagrangian coordinates. It is necessary to cover the extended calculation region with a sequence of Lagrangian knots. The extent of this region grows and grows as the shock wave propagates farther and farther into the water. To cope with this difficulty, it is necessary to roughen the Lagrangian grid over time. We keep the number of Lagrangian knots approximately equal to 10 4 . The enlargement of Lagrangian segments ∆ x 0 occurs several times during simulation; when we are counting up to great times. The enlargement or increase means that more mass enters the Lagrangian segment ∆ x 0 . The length ∆ x 0 corresponds to the length of the segment on the axis normal to the target surface before the start of the laser pulse. At the beginning of the simulation, the step ∆ x 0 along the Lagrangian grid was 1 nm in both gold and water. This means that the column mass (mass on the line of sight) ρ Au ∆ x 0 and ρ wt ∆ x 0 is concentrated in the Lagrangian segment ∆ x 0 for Figure Let's see how evaporation looks on the phase plane of gold. First, let's see how the phase planes are arranged. After that, Fig. The corridor in this figure looks narrow. This is due to the horizontal axis selected in this figure . we show the location of the hydrodynamic profile relative to the boundaries of the first-order phase transitions (see Section 4 below). Figure approximates dependence of saturation pressure on temperature which follows the wide-range equation of state (EoS) The approximation of the boiling curve has the form: where density ρ is in g/cm 3 , temperature in K. Excluding temperature T from the parametric dependencies ( This means that the condensation curve p cond (ρ) on the plane ρ, p weakly (only logarithmically) touches the horizontal Fig. Figure The compressibility factor p ideal /p cr for wide-range EoS is 3.3, where p ideal = (ρ cr /M)k B T cr ; critical parameters are presented in The thermodynamic description of gold was presented above (Section 3). Let us see in what thermodynamic states the portions of gold are in the case of the hydrodynamic profile shown in the figures 1-5. The combination of the profile and the phase diagram is shown in figures 8 and 9. The profile is represented by its Lagrangian nodes 7502-7507. The nodes with these numbers refer to evaporated gold and to the first few Lagrangian particles of gold melt, see figure From the analysis of figures 8 and 9 it follows that the distribution of quantities along the hydrodynamic profile strictly corresponds to the thermodynamic characteristics of substances. It is important that the method we used, together with the tabular equations of state, allows us to cross-cut through the fronts of first-order phase transitions. Through, i.e. without highlighting the front and dividing the flow into two parts -on one and the other side of the front. In this case, the coordination of heat fluxes to the left and to the right of the front and the front displacement velocity occurs automatically. Such coordination is necessary in order to provide the required heat flux to overcome the latent heat of fusion or evaporation. At the evaporation front, there are jumps in density and temperature, see figures 8 and 9. The temperature jump is associated with a sharp drop in the thermal conductivity of gold during the transition of gold to a low-density phase. At the moment of 27 ns, the density in the vapor layer of gold decreases by two orders of magnitude compared to the value of 19.3 g/cm 3 . Reducing of thermal conductivity plays an important role. As a result, the conductive cooling of gold steam slows sharply. The main cooling mechanism is adiabatic expansion. Basically, the expansion of the heated layers is supported by the pressure of saturated gold vapor together with pressure of hot water. At time 27 ns, shown in figures 8 and 9, the pressure in the vicinity of the contact is 360 bar. There are the contact layers of cold and hot water and evaporated and liquid gold under this pressure, see figures 2 and 3. In figure As was said, in figure At times of the order of 100-1000 ns, a hemispherical bubble 2 gradually forms from a quasi-flat hot layers of vaporized gold and gaseous water shown in figures 1-5. This process is depicted in figure The name "cavitation" bubble is widely used in the literature on LAL. In fact, the bubble does not form at all due to cavitation. It is directly inflated with evaporated water. In the early stages, water heated by contact with hot metal evaporates. Further, cold water recedes under the pressure of hot gaseous water. That is, the bubble is correctly called the boiling bubble. Moreover, the above applies to laser ablation in a fluid (LAL) using femtosecond (fs) laser action (fs LAL). In this case, in a early short time interval, there is indeed cavitation inside the target material. But still, inflation of the bubble occurs much later. This late stage expansion of the bubble in liquid is again due to the expansion of gaseous ablation products. Figure Below we estimate the maximum radius R max of expansion of the bubble, see figure From the solutions of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation, it is known that at the moment t max of inhibition of motion around the bubble the pressure inside the bubble p in (t max ) drops below external pressure p ext (t max ). This is due to the inertia of the expanding fluid that surrounds the bubble. In this case, the internal pressure p in (t max ) in the bubble is several times lower than the external pressure p ext (t max ); this is overexpansion beyond the point of equilibrium of forces, as in the case of a pendulum. For these reasons, the end point ρ in (t max ), p in (t max ) for calculating the expansion adiabat in Fig. The analysis of the question of the value of p ext (t max ) requires a separate discussion, which is beyond the scope of this article. A simplified version p ext (t max ) = p 0 is adopted here. Let us describe at a qualitative level what the complexity is. A shock wave propagates around the surrounding fluid, see Figure The pressure p ext (t) behind the shock wave can drop significantly below the pressure p 0 in front of the shock front; this is formation of a rarefaction cavity behind a strong shock wave. If this occurs at the stage of maximum expansion of the bubble, then pressure p ext (t max ) will be significantly lower than pressure p 0 ; because the bubble is inside the rarefaction cavity in this case. In this case, it will be necessary to extend the adiabatic curve in Figure What the situation is with function p ext (t) depends on the size of the vessel L ves and bubble R max ; of course, we consider the case R max ≪ L ves . If the vessel is small, then there is a reflection of the shock wave from the walls of the vessel, scattering of the reflected waves, and pressure drop in the vicinity of the bubble p ext (t) to p 0 ; weakly non-linear shock propagates in water with speed of sound 1.5 km/s and passes 15 cm during 100 μs. But if (a) the vessel is large L ves ≫ R SW (t max ) and (b) the excess pressure p SWp 0 in the shock wave does not become small p SWp 0 ≫ p 0 at the stage of maximum expansion t ∼ t max of the bubble, then pressure p ext (t) will drop below pressure p 0 . We conclude this discussion of the question of pressure p ext (t max ). We restrict ourselves to the approximation p ext (t max ) = p 0 . This approximation with p 0 = 1 bar corresponds to the endpoint of the adiabatic curve in figure Determine the size of R max = R(t max ) from the expansion degree along the adiabatic curve; here R(t) is radius of a bubble. We write the law of conservation of mass: here R L is defined in figure We take the values: ρ hot = 0.03 g/cm 3 , ρ in (t max ) = 7 • 10 -5 g/cm 3 (this is the end point in figure For the production of colloids of nanoparticles, rather large spots 2R L (for illustration see figure Even in our not extremely hot case the whole adiabatic curve corresponding to a hot layer passes above the twophase region of water during all stages of evolution, see figure 11. It is sometimes believed that water immediately enters the two-phase region as soon as the pressure drops below a critical water pressure of 220 bar. In our case, this is not so, see figure of expanding gaseous water is noticeably greater than unity; here p| S (ρ) is the function presented as the adiabatic curve in figure the adiabatic curve changes with an exponent γ that is only slightly greater than unity. The starting point of the adiabatic curve in figure The results related to the time of 27 ns were presented above, figures 1-5, 8, 9. At this point in time, the shock wave in the water travels to a distance of about 60 microns from the contact, see figure Here we are talking about the stage of spherical propagation of a shock wave; everywhere refers to the hemisphere. The transition to the stage of spherical expansion of the bubble occurs much later, since the speed of expansion of the bubble is much lower than the speed of sound in water (1.5 km/s). To describe the subsequent evolution, we use the adiabatic approximation, see figure - Fig. mal diffusivity of water in the hot layer becomes small, of the order of χ wt.hot ≈ (3 -4) • 10 -3 according to reference data becomes about 3 microseconds; here we use thickness of the hot layer d equal to 2 microns. Whereas the hydrodynamic expansion time t hd = d/u hd of the hot layer at the stage shown in the figures 1-5 is about 0.1 microseconds. Indeed, at a point in time of 27 ns, shown in figure So, the data at the time point of 27 ns were presented above, figures 1-5. This moment of time was used by us for the transition from the hydrodynamic code 1D-2T-HD to adiabatic evolution -the starting point on adiabatic curve in figure A laser pulse passes through transparent water and is absorbed at the edge of a gold target. Further, thermal conductivity distributes the absorbed energy into the thickness of gold. At the same time, water is heated from gold in a contact way. The thermal conductivity of dense gold is greater than the thermal conductivity of water. Therefore, much more heat is stored in gold. The temperature distribution at time 0.5 ns is shown in Figure Gold heating in the absorption zone is accompanied by a rise in pressure in this zone. Of course, under the influence of an ultrashort pulse, the pressure calculated for the same absorbed energy F abs is greater, than when exposed to a nanosecond pulse. However, the generation of significant pressures is also associated with a long pulse, see Figure The increased pressure leaves the heating zone at the speed of sound in the case of a long pulse. Two smooth pressure hillocks arise, the shape of which is associated with the profile of the laser pulse in time. In our case, we use a pulse whose shape in time is equal to the Gaussian function I ∝ exp(-t 2 /τ 2 L ), in our 1D-2T-HD simulation τ L = 0.5 ns, see figure Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation results are shown in figures 14 and 15. The molecular dynamics simulation technique is described in the article Density and pressure profiles are shown in figure Due to nucleation under action of tensile stress at time t ∼ t s and due to separation of the spall layer III, a foam layer IV is formed, see figure layer moves at a considerable speed. When propagating into a liquid, this layer is slowed down thanks the inertia of the liquid, which is displaced by the spallation layer. This leads to a gradual slowdown in the movement of the spall layer. As a result, two circumstances are formed that are absent when the spallation layer expands into vacuum. Firstly, the spall layer is in quasi-hydrostatic equilibrium. Therefore, we call it the "atmosphere," The second circumstance that distinguishes laser ablation in a liquid (LAL) is as follows. When flying into vacuum, the initial velocity distribution of the mass that has escaped is preserved over time. Therefore, the droplets formed during the decay of the foam fly behind fragments of the spall layer. Whereas when the spallation layer spreads into the liquid (LAL), the atmosphere is slowed down by the liquid. At the same time, the foam behind is protected from the liquid by the layer of the atmosphere and maintains its speed. As a result, membranes and droplets of foam fly into the atmosphere. There is an increase in mass concentrated in the atmosphere. In addition, the influx of momentum somewhat reduces the rate of deceleration of the atmosphere. In the end, most of the foam adheres to the atmosphere. Our gold layer used in the MD simulation has a finite thickness. On the left, this layer in figures 14 and 15 is bor- dered by vacuum (free boundary). At the time point 0.48 ns shown in figures 14 and 15, the shock wave in gold reflects from the free boundary. One can see how a rarefaction wave begins to propagate from the free boundary towards the triangular shock wave in gold. Dynamically, this is an insignificant detail if we are interested in the fate of the atmosphere, the diffusion layer, and shock-compressed water. Comparison of the 1D-2T-HD and MD profiles is presented in figure Figure Numbers 1-5 indicate the characteristic sections of the hydrodynamic profile in figures 12 and 13. These numbers are repeated in figure In figure Figure The Roman numerals I, II, III, IV in figure 10 Diffusion, condensation, and locking nanoparticles inside hot water Figure Thirdly, we see the development of the process of condensation of atomic gold in a mixture with gaseous water. It is with this process that sharp spikes appear on the gold concentration profile n Au (x,t = 10.8 rmns). Groups of these spikes are marked with the letters "NP" (NanoParticles) in figure The pressure at time 10.8 ns shown in Figure The most important effect is as follows. Diffusing gold atoms fill a layer of low-density hot water. This is due to increased values of the diffusion coefficient in low-density water. At the edge of a layer of hot water, gold atoms begin to escape into cold water. The temperature of gold vapor in water decreases in this particular place. As a result, active condensation of gold atoms into nanoparticles begins. The spikes on the left edge of the diffusion layer in figure So, on the edge that separates hot and cold water, the gold vapor condenses. Nanoparticles are involved in Brownian motion. Their mobility is small. The diffusion coefficient of nanoparticles is small compared with the diffusion coefficient of atoms; because they are much more massive and moves slowly. Consequently, the diffusion propagation of gold atoms into water is blocked at the interface between hot and cold water. The boundary between hot (high entropy) and cold water transforms into the boundary of the bubble when the water layer with high entropy expands. This process is shown in figures 10 and 11. As a result, the gold nanoparticles are locked inside the bubble. This is precisely the situation observed in the experiments The article is devoted to the analysis of processes that occur during laser ablation in a liquid. Two independent codes were used for analysis: the hydrodynamic code 1D-2T-HD and the molecular dynamics (MD) code. The complete evolution of the flow from the absorption of laser energy to the formation of a bubble in a liquid is considered. The main results are as follows. (A) At a sufficiently high absorbed energy of the order of Joules per square centimeter, the gold at the edge of the target appears for a rather long time in supercritical states, that is, in states above the critical point in temperature and pressure. Moreover, what has been said applies both to ultrashort pulses and to nanosecond pulses. (B) In supercritical states, capillary force disappears; this force separates substances at the contact boundary between them. (C) The disappearance of the dividing boundary sharply intensifies the diffusion interpenetration of substances. The situation becomes similar to that which occurs when two gases come into contact. (D) Water near the border with gold is heated mainly due to thermal conductivity. There is also a contribution related to the diffusion of hot gold vapors. Heating due to dissipation in the shock front is less significant. Shock heating is greater when exposed to an ultrashort pulse, since the shock wave is much more powerful compared to the nanosecond case. Thermal conductivity and diffusion create a thin layer of hot water in the contact area. (E) The boundary between cold and hot water gradually transforms into the boundary of the bubble. Moreover, the expanding hot water fills the inside of the bubble. (F) The diffusion of gold atoms is significant. Gold vapor fills a layer of hot water. (G) At the edge of hot and cold water, gold atoms condense into nanoparticles with sizes from a nanometer or more. The Brownian creep of the formed nanoparticles is slow. Their diffusion coefficient is small compared with the diffusion coefficient of atoms. Therefore, the nanoparticles are located inside the bubble. L = 0.5 ns F abs = 0.9 J/cm 2 Water in the near-contact layer has expanded 3040 times at a given time. The pressure at the indicated time 27 ns is still above the critical pressure for water, see next figure. Therefore, all water from the contact to the front of the shock wave is in a supercritical state. Thus, all water is in a homogeneous state, the opposite in this sense to gold. Position is reckoned from the initial (prior to laser action) contact between Au and water.