We demonstrate high-frequency (> 3 GHz), high quality factor radio frequency (RF) resonators in unreleased thin film gallium nitride (GaN) on sapphire and silicon carbide substrates by exploiting acoustic guided mode (Lamb wave) resonances. The associated energy trapping, due to mass loading from the gold electrodes, allows us to efficiently excite these resonances from a 50 Ω input. The higher phase velocity, combined with lower electrode damping, enables high quality factors with moderate electrode pitch, and provides a viable route towards high-frequency piezoelectric devices. The GaN platform, with its ability to guide and localize high-frequency sound on the surface of a chip with access to high-performance active devices, will serve as a key building block for monolithically integrated RF front-ends. A modern smartphone has ∼50 RF filters to enable seamless communication across a wide variety of frequency bands The prospect of building piezoelectric, primarily surface acoustic wave (SAW), resonators and filters in GaN was recognized from the beginning of GaN device research A representative device, shown in Fig. To convert the IDT from a SAW transducer to a SAW resonator, one needs to confine the acoustic energy, which can be achieved by employing acoustic reflectors on either side of the IDT. Traditionally, SAW resonators have relied on the weak finger reflectivity provided by shorted metallic gratings. But the weak reflectivity increases the number of finger pairs needed to achieve unity reflection, resulting in large device sizes (∼ mm). In contrast, we work in the regime of strong finger reflection (r f ≈ 0.06 -0.1) The higher r f is achieved by using gold (Au) electrodes for the IDT. For the same thickness, a Au electrode was measured to have a higher (≈ 50x) r f for SAW waves compared to aluminum (Al) electrodes If the r f exceeds a threshold value determined by the total number of fingers in the structure, the structure resembles a 1D acoustic Bragg stack with the IDT electrodes (GaN+Au) and the inter-electrode gaps (GaN) serving as the two effective acoustic materials comprising the stack. The strong finger reflection couples the forward and backward propagating Lamb waves, leading to a 1D phononic bandgap. Since the guided modes in the IDT region have a lower frequency (due to mass loading) compared to the bare GaN regions, the overall structure can be visualized as a 1D Bragg stack surrounded by two semi-infinite bare GaN regions that do not support propagating modes at the same frequency. Provided the frequency difference (∆ω) for the guided mode in the IDT and non-IDT regions exceeds the modal decay rate (κ), the mode is trapped in the IDT, and a guided mode resonance can be observed in an RF reflection (|S 11 |) measurement. We would like to note here that the trapped acoustic modes are analogous to the bound states observed in GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice structures and a similar transfer-matrix based tunneling resonance approach can be used to calculate them While the Q mech achieved by the device in Fig. To implement a high-Q mech single-mode response, we can borrow ideas from the photonic crystal community on Gaussian 1D confinement By apodising the duty cycle of the IDT to match the Gaussian mode-shape, we can both improve the Q mech and achieve single-mode operation. The improvement in Q mech occurs due to two effects: since the peak of the modal displacement occurs in the cavity centre, by reducing the duty cycle of the IDT, we are effectively reducing the overlap of the acoustic field with the metal, which is the major source of damping and scattering. By apodizing the grating, we also reduce the k-space overlap between the Lamb wave resonance and the substrate modes, reducing the overall out-of-plane leakage Apodising the IDT-period also ensures single mode operation as the local duty cycle chirp ensures that higher order modes (such as those shown in Fig. 