In ultra-pure materials electrons may exhibit a collective motion similar to the hydrodynamic flow of a viscous fluid, the phenomenon with far reaching consequences in a wide range of many body systems from black holes to high-temperature superconductivity. Yet the definitive detection of this intriguing behavior remains elusive. Until recently, experimental techniques for observing hydrodynamic behavior in solids were based on measuring macroscopic transport properties, such as the "nonlocal" (or "vicinity") resistance, which may allow alternative interpretation. Earlier this year two breakthrough experiments demonstrated two distinct imaging techniques making it possible to "observe" the electronic flow directly. We demonstrate that a hydrodynamic flow in a long Hall bar (in the absence of magnetic field) exhibits a nontrivial vortex structure accompanied by a sign-alternating nonlocal resistance. An experimental observation of such unique flow pattern could serve a definitive proof of electronic hydrodynamics. Traditional fluid mechanics 1 describes long-distance properties of conventional (e.g., water, oil, etc.) and quantum (e.g., The usual theory of the electron transport in solids also relies on the kinetic theory In contrast, should one manage to fabricate a sample, where the momentum-conserving electron-electron interaction were the dominant scattering process, the macroscopic flow of electrons would be hydrodynamic Recently two breakthrough experiments demonstrated two distinct imaging techniques allowing to "observe" the electronic flow directly Within linear response and in the case of stationary flow, the Navier-Stokes equation (A1) in graphene away from charge neutrality (i.e., the system considered in the imaging experiments of Refs. 7,11) takes the form 9,29,32 where η is the shear viscosity In the rest of the paper we analyze this equation numerically and establish the local flow patterns in experimentally relevant geometries. To verify our numerical methods (see Appendix B), we first consider the hydrodynamic equation ( Viscous flow in the same two-terminal geometry is expected to exhibit a Poiseuille-like velocity profile To describe the mutual effect of disorder and viscosity on the electronic flow we introduce a "Gurzhi number" where ν is the kinematic viscosity For small values of the Gurzhi number the electrons propagate ballistically with a flat velocity profile across the bulk of the sample, while large values of Gu correspond to a Poiseuille-like flow with a nonuniform velocity distribution. This behavior is illustrated in Fig. The nonlocal effects in the electronic flow in graphene are typically studied in a Hall bar geometry Viscous flow in the Hall bar geometry is accompanied by formation of vortices is to be expected. Earlier measurements aiming at detection hydrodynamic flows of electrons in graphene 20 used the nonlocal resistance R N L as the tool to uncover nontrivial flow patterns: a change of direction of the electronic flow may lead to a sign change in R N L . The negative nonlocal resistance observed in these experiments was then interpreted We have solved the hydrodynamic equation ( Given that the decay of the electronic flow (see Fig. To conclude, we have solved the hydrodynamic equations in doped graphene in experimentally relevant Hall bar geometry. We have mapped the nontrivial vortex pattern of the viscous electronic flow and calculated the corresponding sign-alternating nonlocal resistance. In contrast to Ref. 33, this behavior is not related to quasiparticle recombination (which is only important in close proximity to the Dirac point) and magnetic field (see also Ref 46). At charge neutrality, the electric current density in the absence of magnetic field is decoupled from the hydrodynamic velocity, see Eq. (A3). As a result, transport properties of neutral graphene are more complicated For our purposes, it was sufficient to choose a linear Lagrange polynomial for the carrier density and a quadratic one for the hydrodynamic velocity. This approach can be applied to any linear differential equation of form Lu(x) = g(x), which can be solved up to a predetermined accuracy by building its weak form This yields a linear system of equations with an invertable (N + 1) × (N + 1) matrix that allows one to find the N + 1 vector u i at every point. The Navier-Stokes equation (A1) in graphene should be supplemented by the appropriate boundary conditions. In the case of the source and drain contacts we apply the finite Dirichlet and zero flux boundary conditions. For the edges of the graphene Hall bar we apply the slip boundary condition 40 u t α ∂Ωζn • ∇u t α = 0, (B1) where n is the unit vector normal to the boundary. The boundary conditions have a profound effect on the resulting flow patterns The rectangular contacts shown in Fig. 