Generally, stacking two quantum spin Hall insulators gives rise to a trivial insulator. Here, based on first-principles electronic structure calculations, we confirm that monolayer TaIrTe4 is a quantum spin Hall insulator and remarkably find that bilayer TaIrTe4 is still a quantum spin Hall insulator. Theoretical analysis indicates that the covalent-like interlayer interaction in combination with the small bandgap at time-reversal invariant Γ point results in new band inversion in bilayer TaIrTe4, namely, the emergence of quantum spin Hall phase. Meanwhile, a topological phase transition can be observed by increasing the interlayer distance in bilayer TaIrTe4. Considering that bulk TaIrTe4 is a type-II Weyl semimetal, layered TaIrTe4 thus provides an ideal platform to realize different topological phases at different dimensions. Introduction: Topological properties of real materials have attracted much attention both experimentally and theoretically in recent years. Quantum spin Hall (QSH) insulator namely two-dimensional topological insulator has a bandgap in the bulk and the topologically protected metallic states at the edge Among various layered topological materials, tellurides have been intensively studied. Layered WTe 2 is a type-II Weyl semimetal in bulk form In this paper, based on first-principles electronic structure calculations, we confirm that monolayer TaIrTe 4 is a quantum spin Hall insulator. More interestingly, in contrast to general perception that stacking two quantum spin Hall insulator would give rise to a trivial insulator, we exceptionally find that bilayer TaIrTe 4 is still a quantum spin Hall insulator. We have further explored the underlying physical mechanism theoretically. M ethod: The electronic structures of ultrathin film TaIrTe 4 were studied with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Results: Similar to type-II Weyl semimetal WTe 2 , bulk TaIrTe 4 has a noncentrosymmetric crystal structure, adopting layered 1T ′ structure and AB stacking, as shown in Fig. To study the possible topological property of bilayer TaIrTe4, we need first clarify the electronic structure of monolayerTaIrTe4. In comparison with bulk TaIrTe 4 , the space group of monolayer TaIrTe 4 changes to P12 1 /m1 with additional inversion symmetry, but losing nonsymmorphic symmetry operation of the fractional translation along c axis. The corresponding surface Brillouin zone (SBZ) and the high-symmetry k points are shown in Fig. According to the bulk-boundary correspondence, the nontrivial topological property of bulk accompanies with the nontrivial edge or surface states at its boundaries. The edge states of monolayer TaIrTe In comparison with monolayer TaIrTe 4 , the space inversion symmetry is absent in bilayer TaIrTe 4 . Bilayer TaIrTe 4 has the P1m1 symmorphic space group symmetry. The corresponding point group symmetry operations contain invariant E and mirror reflection M x . Figure We further calculated the edge states of bilayer TaIrTe 4 with open boundary condition. The calculated helical edge states of left and right terminations along b axis are shown in Figs. Although stacking of two QSH insulators is usually considered to give rise to a trivial insulator, once there appear odd times of qualified band inversions, this may, again, make the bilayer non-trival. The calculations show that there are two bands near the Fermi level inverting once around the Γ point [Fig. The interlayer wavefunction overlap should gradually weaken as the interlayer distance d increases. Therefore the bilayer will undergo a topological phase transition with the increasing interlayer distance. This analysis is confirmed by our calculation that topological invariant Z 2 of the bilayer goes from 1 to 0 in between dd 0 = 0.5 Å and 1 Å (Fig. Discussion: As analyzed above, the covalent-like interlayer interaction and the small band gap at timereversal invariant point are key factors for the emergence of QSH phase in bilayer TaIrTe 4 . Considering that the covalent-like interlayer interaction exists quite popularly in real layered materials, our study suggests that other bilayers or van der Waals (vdW) heterostructrues may also realize interesting topological phases, for example, Dirac, Weyl, and node-line semimetals, besides QSH insulator. A very recent transport experiment found that bulk TaIrTe 4 becomes superconducting under pressure Summary: Based on first-principles electronic structure calculations, we confirm that monolayer TaIrTe 4 is a QSH insulator. The Dirac cone of its robust helical edge states located at the Γ point is very close to the Fermi level. Remarkably, due to the covalent-like interlayer interaction and the small bandgap at the time-reversal invariant Γ point, bilayer TaIrTe 4 is still a QSH insulator. Meanwhile, a topological phase transition is observed by increasing the interlayer distance in bilayer TaIrTe 4 .