Lanthanide-based single-ion magnetic molecules can have large magnetic hyperfine interactions as well as large magnetic anisotropy. Recent experimental studies reported tunability of these properties by changes of chemical environments or by application of external stimuli for device applications. In order to provide insight onto the origin and mechanism of such tunability, here we investigate the magnetic hyperfine and nuclear quadrupole interactions for 159 Tb nucleus in TbPc 2 (Pc=phthalocyanine) singlemolecule magnets using multireference ab-initio methods including spin-orbit interaction. Since the electronic ground and first-excited (quasi)doublets are well separated in energy, the microscopic Hamiltonian can be mapped onto an effective Hamiltonian with an electronic pseudo-spin S = 1/2. From the ab-initio-calculated parameters, we find that the magnetic hyperfine coupling is dominated by the interaction of the Tb nuclear spin with electronic orbital angular momentum. The asymmetric 4f -like electronic charge distribution leads to a strong nuclear quadrupole interaction with significant non-axial terms for the molecule with low symmetry. The ab-initio calculated 1 electronic-nuclear spectrum including the magnetic hyperfine and quadrupole interactions is in excellent agreement with experiment. We further find that the non-axial quadrupole interactions significantly influence the avoided level crossings in magnetization dynamics and that the molecular distortions affect mostly the Fermi contact terms as well as the non-axial quadrupole interactions. Lanthanide-based single-ion magnetic molecules In TbPc 2 SMMs, one Tb 3+ ion is sandwiched between two approximately planar Pc ligands (Fig. The 4f 8 electronic configuration of the Tb 3+ ion results in electron spin and orbital angular momentum of S = 3 and L = 3, respectively. When the strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI) is combined with the ligand crystal field (CF), the Tb ion with the total angular 20. Red, blue, orange, and gray spheres represent Tb, N, C, and H atoms, respectively. The coordinate system corresponds to magnetic axes obtained by diagonalization of the g matrix calculated for the ground (quasi)doublet for each molecule. momentum J = 6 acquires large magnetic anisotropy and magnetic easy axis approximately perpendicular to the Pc planes. For cationic or anionic TbPc 2 SMMs, the ground J = 6 multiplet is very well separated from excited multiplets. The lowest quasi-doublet (M J = ±6) in the ground J-multiplet is separated from the first-excited quasi-doublet by ∼300 cm -1 (Fig. Figure Here we investigate the magnetic hyperfine and nuclear quadrupole interactions for anionic and neutral TbPc 2 molecules using ab-initio multirefrence calculations including SOI. We evaluate the interaction parameters and analyze their physical and chemical origin. We then construct the effective pseudo-spin Hamiltonian from which the electronic-nuclear lowenergy spectrum is found. Our results unambiguously show the necessity of using multireference methods including SOI for the proposed study. Next, we calculate the Zeeman diagram and discuss the role of the magnetic hyperfine and nuclear quadrupole interactions in magnetization dynamics. Finally, we investigate the effect of molecular distortions on these interactions. In the following we use SI units. Quantum-mechanical operators are denoted by hats. Vectors, tensors and matrices are written in a bold font. Consider a non-relativistic electron with a mass m, a linear momentum p, and a spin ŝ in the presence of a vector potential ÂN induced by a nuclear spin moment Î where the nucleus is located at the origin. The microscopic Hamiltonian ĤMHf for such an electron can be written as where g e is the electronic g-factor, μ B is Bohr magneton, and ÂN = mN × r/r 3 . Here mN = g N μ N Î denotes the nuclear magnetic moment, where g N is the nuclear g-factor (that is 1.34267 for Tb), μ N is the nuclear magneton, and r is the position vector of the electron with respect to the nucleus. Keeping only the first-order terms in ÂN , this Hamiltonian can be decomposed into three contributions such as The first term in Eq. ( where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. The second term in Eq. ( Finally, ĤFC represents the Fermi contact (FC) interaction between the spin density at the nucleus position and the nuclear magnetic moment where δ(r) is a three-dimensional Dirac delta function. Note that for a Tb 3+ ion with large orbital angular momentum, the non-relativistic form of magnetic hyperfine operator, Eqs. (2-5), is a good approximation. where A is the magnetic hyperfine matrix. In order to understand degrees of mixing among |M S , M I levels, it is convenient to rewrite the above using the ladder operators where h.c. denotes Hermitian conjugated terms. Here, we introduce complex parameters that are combinations of elements of the A matrix For pseudo-spin S = 1/2, the eigenvalues of the effective pseudo-spin Hamiltonian, Eq. ( where α, β = x, y, z and ĥα MHf ≡ ∂ ĤMHf /∂ Îα . The summation runs over the ab initio electronic ground (quasi)doublet (i = 1, 2). A nucleus with I > 1/2 has a nonzero quadrupole moment which interacts with an electricfield gradient at the nucleus position. The electric-field gradient operator Vαβ is given by where P is the nuclear quadrupole tensor. The components of P are related to the expectation value of Vαβ over the ab-initio electronic states by the following: where Q is the quadrupole constant that for Tb nucleus is 1432.8 mbarn. where complex quadrupole parameters are The ab initio calculations are performed using the MOLCAS quantum chemistry code (version 8.2). by evaluating the matrix elements of PSO, SD, and FC contributions within the ground (quasi)doublet. In MOLCAS version 8.2, only FC and SD contributions are included. We consider two TbPc 2 molecules: (1) neutral TbPc 2 with experimental geometry from Ref. 19 (Fig. It is convenient to present the calculated A matrix and P tensor in the magnetic coordinate system (Fig. Table Overall, the calculated A zz value is about 6000 MHz. In order to understand the origin of such strong hyperfine coupling, we compare PSO, SD and FC contributions to A zz against its total value. See Figure On the other hand, for the anionic molecule, the FC contribution is ≈150 MHz. The fact that the FC is smaller than the PSO and SD contributions is not surprising, since the spin density is carried by 4f -like orbitals which have zero spin density at the Tb nucleus position. The FC contribution requires hybridization between 4f -like and s-like orbitals. Such hybridization would be stronger for the less symmetric anionic molecule, which likely explains a significantly larger FC term for this system. Note that the core-polarization effects are not included in our calculations, and therefore, the FC is expected to be somewhat underestimated. Nevertheless, for Tb 3+ ion, this effect is expected to be much smaller than the PSO and SD terms. Table Having calculated the elements of the A matrix and P tensor for the electronic ground doublet, we now calculate the low-energy electronic-nuclear spectrum of TbPc 2 . Figure Without the nuclear quadrupole term, the doublets are equidistant with level spacing ∼3000 MHz. In this case, the pseudo-spin (M S =↑, ↓) and nuclear (M I = ±3/2, ±1/2) magnetic quantum numbers represent the electronic-nuclear states (Fig. The spectrum of the anionic and the neutral molecules are similar even though the two molecules have significantly different off-diagonal P tensor elements. This indicates that the transverse quadrupole parameters do not have a large effect on the energy levels. These parameters, however, mix states with different M I . As a result, the electronic-nuclear states are not pure |M S , M I states and the notation in Fig. The mixing is significantly stronger for the asymmetric anionic molecule with larger offdiagonal P-tensor elements. The mixing plays an important role in magnetization dynamics (see below). In order to investigate the role of hyperfine and quadrupole interactions on magnetization dynamics we calculate Zeeman diagram that shows the evolution of electronic-nuclear energy levels as a function of external magnetic field along the z axis (B z ) for the anionic TbPc 2 molecule. The magnetic field is included by considering the Zeeman pseudo-spin Hamiltonian ĤZ = μ B B z g zz Ŝz . Since the anionic molecule is an even-electron system, the ground quasidoublet has a small tunnel splitting attributed to the transverse CF. This tunnel splitting is crucial for a description of magnetization dynamics because it mixes states with M S =↑, ↓ levels, and allows tunneling between different electronic-nuclear levels. For the pseudo-spin S = 1/2, the transverse CF can be described by ĤTS = ∆ TS Ŝx , Clearly, the tunneling probability is the largest for ALCs with the largest ∆E ALC that is In previous sections, we demonstrate that the transverse quadrupole parameters for the TbPc 2 molecule can vary significantly depending on differences in molecular structures. In order to investigate the effect of molecular distortion on hyperfine interactions in a more systematic manner we apply five types of ligand distortions to the anionic TbPc Table The diagonal quadrupole parameter P zz shows considerable variation under geometry distortions. This parameter is responsible for non-equidistant electronic nuclear spectrum which is crucial for an efficient readout of nuclear spin. Transverse quadrupole parameters are strongly affected by geometry distortions. In particular, for types I and II, |P 1 | increases by an order of magnitude. As a result, the gap of |∆M ALC | = 1 ALCs is significantly enhanced (Table We investigate magnetic hyperfine and nuclear quadrupole interactions for 159 Tb nucleus in TbPc 2 SMMs using multireference ab initio calculations including SOI and the effective pseudo-spin Hamiltonian method. The key findings are as follows: • The strong uniaxial magnetic hyperfine interaction (A zz ∼ 6000 MHz) is dominated by the PSO mechanism. • Different experimental geometries have similar PSO and SD contributions to the magnetic hyperfine interaction, whereas the FC term shows a strong dependence on details of molecular geometry and becomes significant for less symmetric molecules. • Asymmetric 4f charge distribution leads to a large diagonal quadrupole interaction (P zz ∼ 300 MHz). For less symmetric molecular geometries, the transverse quadrupole parameters become significant. • The electronic-nuclear spectrum obtained by diagonalization of the effective pseudospin Hamiltonian is in excellent agreement with experiment. • The analysis of the calculated Zeeman diagram for the asymmetric anionic TbPc 2 molecule reveals that transverse quadrupole parameters allow for magnetization tunneling processes that do not conserve nuclear spin. • We demonstrate that small distortions of molecular geometry can affect hyperfine parameters with strong sensitivity of transverse quadrupole parameters to details of the molecular structure. a 