Oscillator neural networks (ONN) are a promising hardware option for artificial intelligence. With an abundance of theoretical treatments of ONNs, few experimental implementations exist to date. In contrast to prior publications of only building block functionality, we report a practical experimental demonstration of neural computing using an ONN. The arrays contain 26 CMOS ring oscillators in the GHz range of frequencies tuned by image data and filters. Synchronization of oscillators results in an analog output voltage approximating convolution neural network operation. The demand for artificial intelligence and machine learning computing has experienced an explosive growth in recent years. While most of this computing is performed by traditional digital hardware, the share of specialized hardware based on neural networks (NN), is growing. An option for NN, the oscillator neural networks (ONNs) While a considerable amount of theoretical and simulation work on ONN has been previously published, the majority of prior work focuses on implementing associative memory using the phase shift keying (PSK) approach One of the ubiquitous algorithms in image recognition for neural processing is a convolutional neural network (CoNN). The most compute intensive operation in a CoNN is a convolution of an image with a set of filters/kernels. An example 'Lenna' image and its fragment, F, of 5x5 pixels is shown in Fig. ) which is equivalent to a dot product of corresponding realnumbered vectors. On the other hand, the dot product is related to their Euclidean distance and absolute values as: ( ) In Fig. The general features of oscillator synchronization can be studied using a model of non-linear oscillators similar to a complex-numbered van der Pol equation ( ) (3) Two coupled oscillators synchronize and lock their phases only if their initial detuning (difference of frequencies) are within the locking range determined by the strength of coupling. ω ω ω ε Δ = -< . (4) An array of oscillators, Fig. (5) The Degree of Match (DOM) is equal to the magnitude of the analog output envelope of the AC signal at the averager. The behavior varies depending on the amount of synchronization of the oscillators, i.e. value of the dot product. For a good match, Fig. The coupled CMOS oscillator array (COCOA) test chip was implemented following the design of The setup, Fig. The optimum value of Ccoup is chosen with the requirement that oscillator frequencies are within the locking range for a good match, while they are mostly outside the locking range for a bad match. The power per oscillator is approximately ~0.2 The measurements are consecutively run for each of the Gabor filters on a given fragment of the image. The peak detector output approximates the maximum envelope of the AC signal at the averager. The resulting output waveforms from the peak detector (for the 5-stage oscillators) are shown in Fig. The relationship between the dot product and the DOM is shown in Fig. The correlation between the dot product and DOM is close to a linear correlation. However the relationship is nonmonotonic due to non-monotonic evolution of frequencies under the influence of the rest of the oscillators and due to arbitrary initial phases of oscillators. Simulated and measured DOM are in good agreement. In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated that the calculation of convolution can be approximated by the analog output signal, DOM, for arrays of coupled oscillators. This demonstration of coupled oscillator synchronization behavior opens the possibility for other emerging nanoscale oscillator technologies to enable more energy efficient accelerators for artificial intelligence. 