The Pr-rich end of the alloy series Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 has been studied using muon spin rotation and relaxation. The end compound PrOs 4 Sb 12 is an unconventional heavy-fermion superconductor, which exhibits a spontaneous magnetic field in the superconducting phase associated with broken time-reversal symmetry. No spontaneous field is observed in the Nd-doped alloys for x 0.05. The superfluid density is insensitive to Nd concentration, and no Nd 3+ static magnetism is found down to the lowest temperatures of measurement. Together with the slow suppression of the superconducting transition temperature with Nd doping, these results suggest anomalously weak coupling between Nd spins and conduction-band states. FIG. 1. (a) T -x Phase diagram of superconducting transition temperature T c and ferromagnetic transition temperature T Curie vs Nd concentration x. μSR data from this paper (x = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, and 0.20), Ref. 20 (x = 0), and Ref. 18 (x = 0.25). Transition temperatures from electrical resistivity ρ, magnetic susceptibility χ, and specific heat C [17] and μSR (this work). (b) T = 0 upper critical field H c2 vs x for Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 . of the FM state for samples with higher concentrations of x [18, 19]. In this report, we focus on our μSR investigation of the evolution of broken TRS and other properties in Pr-rich PrOs 4 Sb 12 . The phase diagram of superconducting transition temperature T c and ferromagnetic transition temperature T Curie vs Nd concentration x is shown in Fig. 1(a). Figure 1(b) shows the Since the discovery of unconventional superconductivity (SC) in the filled skutterudite compound PrOs 4 Sb 12 (T c = 1.85 K) Other rare-earth filled-skutterudite compounds also have ordered states at quite low temperatures: spin-density-wave (SDW) type antiferromagnetism in CeOs 4 Sb 12 occurs below 1 K In order to investigate the influence of FM on the unconventional SC in PrOs 4 Sb 12 , we have have carried out a study of the Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 substitutional alloy system Previously we used the muon spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) technique to study the progress Nd concentration dependence of the upper critical field H c2 (T =0, x) for Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 . H c2 (x) is nonzero below a critical concentration x cr1 ≈ 0.58. An anomaly in H c2 appears at a second critical concentration x cr2 ≈ 0.33. Weak FM was detected for x cr2 ≤ x ≤ x cr1 within the SC state This article reports results of a study of Pr-rich Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 alloys, x = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25, using zero-field and transverse-field μSR (ZF-μSR and TF-μSR, respectively) Single crystals of Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 , x = 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, and 0.20, were prepared by the antimony self-flux growth method μSR experiments were carried out at the ISIS muon facility at the STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory over the temperature range 0.025-3 K, in zero magnetic field (ZF) and applied transverse magnetic fields (TF, i.e., perpendicular to the initial muon spin polarization) between 0 and 200 Oe. For the ZF-μSR experiments the field was zeroed to within ∼1 μT. Previously-reported data for x = 0 In a typical μSR experiment For each counter the positron count rate is given by where G(t) is the time evolution of the μ + ensemble spin polarization component in the direction of the counter (G = 1 for 100% polarization), N 0 is the initial count rate, and A is the count-rate asymmetry, spectrometer-dependent but usually ∼0.2-0.25 , the asymmetry spectrum contains the essential information conveyed by muons concerning local static and dynamic magnetic properties of the sample. In practice the two counters and their environments are seldom identical, but differences can be measured in calibration experiments and accounted for in data analysis A spurious signal is often present due to muons that miss the sample and stop in the sample holder. This signal has been determined from the fits and is subtracted to yield the signal from the sample. In ZF the relaxation function G(t) is extremely sensitive to the behavior of the local magnetic field B loc at μ + sites, since there is no competing applied field. If dynamic relaxation is negligible, μ + precession in B loc results in static relaxation of G(t) if the magnitude B loc is distributed. The spin component of each muon parallel to B loc does not precess, however, leading to a constant term in G(t) In the static Gaussian Kubo-Toyabe (KT) model This model is applicable when B loc is the sum of randomly-oriented quasistatic nuclear dipolar fields at μ + sites if, as is often the case, nuclear moment fluctuations are slow on the muon time scale In dilute spin glasses the local field distribution due to impurity spins is Lorentzian in certain limits where a/γ μ is the half-width of the Lorentzian distribution. More generally, local field distributions in disordered systems where there is more weight in the wings than for a Gaussian may often be approximated, fully or in part, by a Lorentzian. A convolution of Gaussian and Lorentzian distributions yields the ZF static Voigtian KT relaxation function Dynamic muon spin relaxation (the spin-lattice relaxation of NMR) is due to thermallyfluctuating components of B loc , which induce transitions between muon spin states and relax G(t) to its thermal equilibrium value (essentially zero in μSR). A damping factor exp(- is often used to model dynamic relaxation in the presence of static relaxation; thus where G stat (t) is the appropriate static relaxation function. The exponential form of the damping assumes that the fluctuating field at each μ + site results in the same dynamic relaxation rate, even though the static local fields are distributed, and that the fluctuation rate is rapid compared to the rms amplitude of the fluctuating field; this is the so-called motionally-narrowed limit. Exponentially-damped Voigtian relaxation [Eq. In TF-μSR G(t) is dominated by μ + precession in the applied field, which is damped by relaxation from both static and dynamic mechanisms. For both exponential and Gaussian contributions to the damping, a typical TF relaxation function is for TF field H T ≫ B loc , where ω = γ μ H T , σ/γ μ is the width of the Gaussian field distribution, and φ is the phase of the oscillation, determined by the geometry of the spectrometer. Whether the exponential TF rate λ in Eq. ( Observed ZF-μSR spin polarization functions in Pr asymptotic approach to 1/3 for static ZF relaxation and disagree with the experimental data. Furthermore, values of the static Lorentzian rate a from the exponentially-damped Voigtian KT fits are close to zero (Fig. Data have been previously reported for x = 0 For x = 0 the Gaussian static rate ∆ [Fig. In contrast, Figs. 4(b)-(f) show no increase of ∆ below T c , so that x = 0.05 is an upper bound on the critical concentration for suppression of the spontaneous field. For x = 0 the dynamic relaxation rate λ d is significant, and has been attributed to hyperfine-enhanced 141 Pr nuclear spin dynamics Indeed, for higher Nd concentrations ∆(T ) decreases at low temperatures. This might be expected: slowing of Nd 3+ fluctuations increases the dynamic relaxation rate of nuclear spins (mainly 121 Sb and 123 Sb), so that nuclear dipolar fields at μ + sites are no longer quasistatic. This in turn motionally narrows the μ + static relaxation, i.e., reduces the relaxation rate. Presumably the 141 Pr contribution to λ d (T ) is also reduced, but increased direct relaxation by Nd 3+ spins dominates. Examples of TF-μSR spin polarization functions above and below T c for transverse field H T greater than the lower critical field H c1 are shown in Fig. in the London limit Λ ≫ coherence length ξ, where Λ is the London penetration depth and Φ 0 is the flux quantum. In turn, from the London equations Λ is related to the superfluid Thus δB 2 1/2 ∝ 1/Λ 2 is a measure of the superfluid density. Figure For x = 0 the TF exponential damping rate λ(T ) is nearly constant (and approximately the same as the LF rate, cf. Fig. A peak at a magnetic transition is expected from critical slowing down of dynamic spin fluctuations. The data also resemble the "coherence peak" due to conduction-electron spinlattice (dynamic) relaxation in a fully-gapped superconductor We have carried out a study of Pr-rich Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 alloys, x = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25, using the μSR technique. The spontaneous internal field found in the end compound PrOs 4 Sb 12 is rapidly suppressed by Nd doping, and is not observed for x 0.05. This is a surprising result since the Nd 3+ ions possess 4f magnetic moments, for which any static magnetism would break time reversal symmetry. Broken TRS is possible without an associated internal magnetic field if there are no spontaneous defect-or surface-induced supercurrents At higher Nd concentrations the dynamic relaxation rate increases with decreasing temperature as T → 0, suggestive of critical slowing as a magnetic phase transition is ap-proached. There is, however, no sign of static magnetism, ordered or disordered, down to the lowest temperatures of measurement. This is surprising, since linear extrapolation of the ferromagnetic Curie temperature T Curie (Fig. The superfluid density from TF-μSR measurements is remarkably independent of x up to ∼0.2, i.e., for more than 20% suppression of T c (Fig. Fermi volumes We conclude that in Pr-rich Pr 1-x Nd x Os 4 Sb 12 the absence of static Nd 3+ magnetism, the slow suppression of superfluid density, and the slow change of T c with Nd doping all suggest an anomalously weak coupling between Nd 3+ spins and conduction-band states.