We examine the combined effects of interlayer exchange coupling (IEC) and the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI) on the structure of magnetic domain walls in fully compensated synthetic antiferromagnets (SAFs). Ir-based SAFs with ferromagnetic (FM) layers based on [Pt/(Co/Ni) M ] N were characterized by Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (LTEM). The multi-layer design of the individual ferromagnetic layers enables control of the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (via M) and, in turn, the structure and chirality of domain walls (DWs). We compare the Fresnel-mode LTEM images in SAF designs with only a change in the purported strength of the DMI. The existence of anti-ferromagnetically coupled Dzyaloshinskii domain walls (DWs) in a high DMI SAF is confirmed through application of in-situ perpendicular magnetic field and sample tilt. This conclusion is based on a unique set of conditions required to observe contrast in Fresnel-mode LTEM, which we outline in this document. Synthetic anti-ferromagnets (SAFs) have had a profound impact on magnetic storage technology over the course of the past several decades, particularly, for their role in magnetoresistive read heads. Here, we present a tunable SAF design that leverages the IEC of Co/Ir/Co, the interfacial DMI of Pt/Co, and the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) of Co/Ni. Our film design (as described in a subsequent section) allows us to independently tune the former two without compromising the latter. The structure of coupled DWs in our fully compensated SAF (see Figure The multi-layers examined in this work were deposited onto 10 nm thick amorphous Si 3 N 4 TEM membranes via dc magnetron sputtering in an Ar environment with working pressure fixed at 2.5 mTorr and base pressure of < 2.5 × 10 -7 Torr. The adhesion/seedlayer was always Ta(30)/Pt(30) to promote FCC(111) texture through the sample while a capping layer of Pt(30) was deposited for protection. All units in parentheses are Å. Multi-layers of [Co(2)/Ni( Fresnel-mode LTEM imaging was performed at room temperature on an aberration-corrected FEI Titan G2 80-300 with an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. A perpendicular magnetic field was applied in situ by weakly exciting the objective lens of the microscope. This method of magnetic imaging forms contrast out of the focus plane through the deflection of electrons via the Lorentz force. multilayers are shown in Figure Before proceeding, we note some important features of Fresnel-mode LTEM imaging as it pertains to SAFs with PMA. Perpendicular magnetic domains only contribute to the image contrast if the specimen is tilted as governed by the Lorentz force. For domain walls, only the Bloch component produces contrast. Consequently, the existence of Néel DWs is confirmed by the absence (presence) of contrast in the untilted (tilted) specimen. The situation becomes more complicated for the case of fully compensated SAFs as outlined in Table Figure ple with a single perpendicular magnetic layer ({[Co(2)/Ni( To examine the strong DMI SAF, we image the specimen in close proximity to a bend in the Si 3 N 4 membrane. Such bend contours (up to 15 • ) are common in these Si 3 N 4 TEM membranes, especially along the edges of the membrane window. We have examined the structure of DWs in fully compensated Ir-based SAFs with weak and strong DMI as controlled by the multi-layer design of the Pt/Co/Ni based ferromagnetic layers. We first demonstrate that Dzyaloshinskii DWs are stabilized in the single ferromagnetic layer, which confirms that a significant DMI results from the combination of Pt/Co and Ni/Pt interfaces in the superlattice. We then conclude that the strong DMI SAF adopts coupled Dzyaloshinskii DWs based on Fresnel-mode LTEM. This is based on the unique requirement that the specimen is both subject to a perpendicular field to drive the DWs apart and a specimen tilt to reveal contrast associated with the Néel configuration. With interest growing in chiral SAFs where unwanted stray fields and/or the Skyrmion Hall effect cancel, we are hopeful that the tunable material combinations and approach to LTEM imaging presented in this work will be adopted for future investigations.