Knowledge on structures and energetics of nanovoids is fundamental to understand defect evolution in metals. Yet there remain no reliable methods able to determine essential structural details or to provide accurate assessment of energetics for general nanovoids. Here, we performed systematic first-principles investigations to examine stable structures and energetics of nanovoids in bcc metals, explicitly demonstrated the stable structures can be precisely determined by minimizing their Wigner-Seitz area, and revealed a linear relationship between formation energy and Wigner-Seitz area of nanovoids. We further developed a new physics-based model to accurately predict stable structures and energetics for arbitrary-sized nanovoids. This model was well validated by first-principles calculations and recent nanovoid annealing experiments, and showed distinct advantages over the widely used spherical approximation. The present work offers mechanistic insights that crucial for understanding nanovoid formation and evolution, being a critical step towards predictive control and prevention of nanovoid related damage processes in structural metals. Nanometer-sized voids, or namely nanovoids, one of most common defect groups present in metals under deformation Despite decades of extensive research efforts, precise determination of stable structures and energetics of nanovoids remain a formidable challenge. The small-scale details of nanovoids are generally beyond the reach of experimentation and necessitate atomistic simulation techniques. First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations Besides the atomistic investigation, an alternative approach often used to characterize general nanovoids is to assume they have spherical geometry with formation energies in linear relation to their surface area (often referred to as capillary law) To address the afore-mentioned challenges, the present study aims to develop a reliable theoretical approach capable to provide accurate assessment of energetics and structures of general nanovoids. The focus is placed on bcc metals given their wide applications in nuclear industry where abundant nanovoids will be induced by irradiation during service. Starting with comprehensive DFT calculations, the stable structures of and energetics of nanovoids were systematically explored computationally. Based on the results, we explicitly demonstrated that stable structures of nanovoids can be precisely determined by minimizing their Wigner-Seitz areas, and revealed a linear relationship between the formation energy and Wigner-Seitz area for the nanovoids. We then established a physical model based on the structure-energy relationships found. This new model, validated by DFT calculations and recent nanovoid annealing experiments, provides a full-scale, accurate formation and binding energetics prediction for arbitrary-sized nanovoids, offering critical new knowledge and tools in understanding and analyzing nanovoid formation and evolution in structural metals. Stable structures and formation energies of nanovoids. We started by performing a comprehensive set of DFT calculations screening different structures of general nanovoids Vn with n spanning from 1 to 7, in the four representative metal systems W, Mo, Ta and α-Fe. Here the symbol Vn indicates that the nanovoid is a product of n vacancies coalescence. Multiple nanovoid structures were generated with the structure fulfilling the linkage constrain, i.e., each constituting vacancy maintain contact (1 st or 2 nd nearest neighbor) with at least one other vacancy in the nanovoid. For each structure generated, DFT calculations were performed to relax the structure and examine its formation energy: where E and E respectively represents the total energy of a supercell with and without the V nanovoid, and N is the number of metal atoms in the corresponding perfect supercell. It is generally believed that compact structures are more favorable than linear or planar ones for nanovoids containing up to thousands of vacancies where S is the Wigner-Seitz area of V nanovoid, and A and C are two material constants. Benchmark simulations show that this linear relation prevails with further increase in the nanovoid size up to V47, and the key parameter C (i.e., line slopes in Fig. In the above, E denotes the binding energy of a vacancy in a nanovoid Vn, effectively representing the energy required to strip a vacancy away from a Vn nanovoid. Based on the linear relationship conveyed by Eq. ( Since C is not sensitive to nanovoid size , it can be well estimated based on formation energies of two small nanovoids such as V and V , i.e., C = (E -E )/∆S . Therefore, we have: By employing Eq. ( The fluctuations in binding energy come from vacancy binding with different sites on nanovoid surface. In analogy to the classical terrace-ledge-kink model of crystal growth Such deficit in the spherical approximation is clearly evident when examining the average lifetime of nanovoids, i.e., the time required for a complete dissociation of nanovoids via vacancy thermal emission. The emission rate is sensitive to the emission barrier of vacancy, which approximately equals to the sum of nanovoid's vacancy binding energy and vacancy migration barrier in bulk (1.66 eV in W by Ref. To sum up, the stable structures and energetics of nanovoids in bcc metals have been investigated by comprehensive DFT calculations, and a new physics-based predictive model has been developed for arbitrary-sized nanovoids. We demonstrated that stable structures of nanovoid can be precisely determined by minimizing their Wigner-Seitz surface area, and revealed a linear relationship between the formation energy and Wigner-Seitz area for these nanovoids. The new physical model developed captures the structure-energy relationships found, capable to provide a full-scale formation and binding energetics prediction for nanovoids. The new model, generally applicable for arbitrary-sized nanovoids in bcc metals, exhibits superb advantages over the widely used spherical approximation of nanovoids, not only offering significantly more accurate predictions but also recognizing atomic-scale structural variation in nanovoid evolution. The accuracy and reliability of our model is well validated by excellent consistency with DFT results and agreement with recent nanovoid annealing experiments. The present study provides critical new knowledge in understanding nanovoid formation and evolution, and sets a key step towards predictive control and prevention of nanovoid related damage processes in structural metals. First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations. First-principles DFT calculations were performed employing the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Object kinetic Monte Carlo (OKMC) simulations. OKMC simulations (see Ref. Statics calculations in this work were performed using the LAMMPS package , i.e., S (normalized by a with a being the lattice constant) * Correspondence should be addressed to X.S.K. (email: xskong@sdu.edu.cn) or to J.S. (email: jun.song2@mcgill.ca)