Confining light in extreme subwavelength scales is a tantalizing task. In this work, we report a study of individual plasmonic film-coupled nanostar resonators where plasmonic optical modes are trapped in ultrasmall volumes. Individual gold nanostars, separated from a flat gold film by a thin dielectric spacer layer, exhibit a strong light confinement between the sub-10 nm volume of the nanostar's tips and the film. Through dark field scattering measurements of many individual nanostars, a statistical observation of the scattered spectra is obtained and compared with extensive simulation data to reveal the origins of the resonant peaks. We observe that an individual nanostar on a flat gold film can result in a resonant spectrum with single, double or multiple peaks. Further, these resonant peaks are strongly polarized under white light illumination. Our simulation data revealed that the resonant spectrum of an individual film-coupled nanostar resonator is related to the symmetry of the nanostar, as well as the orientation of the nanostar relative to its placement on the gold substrate. Our results demonstrate a simple method to create an ultrasmall mode volume plasmonic platform which could be useful for applications in sensing or enhanced light-matter interactions. Attempts to create ultrasmall hot spots to confine light at the nanoscale have led to various nanophotonic system designs realized via both lithographic and colloidal approaches Further, the resonant wavelength is also proportional to the size of the particle itself Recently, many works have devoted considerable attention to the optical properties of plasmonic nanostars Here, we demonstrate an alternative approach to confine plasmonic optical modes in ultrasmall volumes by using film-coupled nanostar resonators. Specifically, a Au nanostar is placed on top of a Au film, separated by a thin (5 nm) dielectric polymer layer. We show that the plasmon resonances of the nanostar's tips are significantly enhanced due to the resulted extreme subwavelength mode volume. Our results clearly indicate that the highly intense electromagnetic field enhancement in the tiny gaps formed between the nanostar's tips and the Au film can strongly confine light at a sub-10 nm volume. Moreover, the nanostars are clearly visible under a typical dark field microscope, despite the ultrasmall mode volume, allowing easy identification and measurement of single nanoparticles. Indeed, when illuminated by a white light source, the nanostars that are coupled to a Au film appear to be much brighter than the same particles that are deposited on a glass substrate. The strong light-matter interactions achieved by the proposed plasmonic film-coupled nanostar platform can be used for sensing The sample structure of this present study consists of colloidal synthesized iron oxide-gold coreshell nanostars with an approximate size of 75 nm placed over a Au film (50 nm thick, fabricated by electron beam evaporation method). The magnetic iron oxide core was about 35 nm and the Au shell layer was 40 nm. The iron oxide-gold core-shell nanostar's original purpose was to make use of its dual-functionality, namely magnetic and plasmonic properties, for biomedical applications In the experimental procedure, individual nanostars were identified and isolated by a set of lenses and pinholes to allow single particle measurements. Specifically, individual nanostars were illuminated by a white light source through a 100X Nikon objective lens operating in the dark field mode. The scattered light from particles was collected by the same objective, filtered by a pinhole aperture, refocused onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer (Horiba Jobin-Yvon iHR550) and analyzed by a CCD (Charged-Coupled Device) camera (Horiba Jobin-Yvon Synapse). For the TE (transverse electric) and TM (transverse magnetic) polarized light, our customized optical setup allowed for a rotatable linear polarizer to be placed in a microscope slider or on the optical path in free space. The final scattering spectrum of a particular particle was normalized as Scattering = as bright, red dots. For both cases, an identical 5 nm thin polymer layer was coated on the Au film or glass substrate prior to the nanostar deposition. Due to the random distribution of the nanostars on a given substrate (Au or glass), it is not simple to compare the resonant characteristics of individual nanostars with different polymer layer gap thicknesses. A previous computational study by Solis et al. The images presented in Figs. The dielectric function of Au used in the simulations was taken from experimental data These later configurations result in an excellent agreement with the measured data presented in Figs. We also compute and present in Table In conclusion, we have investigated a film-coupled nanostar resonator system that offers extreme sub-wavelength mode volumes. It is demonstrated that by placing a Au nanostar on a flat Au film, ultrasmall mode volumes are formed and strong light confinement is achieved in between the nanostar's tip and the film region. We have performed simulations to correlate the plasmonic resonant features with the geometry of the resonators by considering the asymmetric shape of the nanostar and how it may orient with respect to the underneath film. The film-coupled nanostar resonators provide a new approach to achieve strong light confinement within sub-10 nm mode volumes, which makes them an ideal platform for applications requiring enhanced light-matter interactions at low dimensions. For simplicity, we first simulate a symmetric nanostar, containing 12 equal-length sharp tips branching out from a central spherical core (Fig. We simulate the interaction of such nanostar with a planer Au surface when the nanostar is illuminated at 45 incidence angle under both TE and TM polarization. The separation between nanostar and Au film is due to a thin 5 nm polymer layer with refractive index n = 1.4, which is identical to the thin polymer layer used in the experiment. The associated field enhancement distributions are shown in Figs. S1(a1) and S1(a2). We find that the symmetric nanostar under TE polarization illumination will not exhibit a plasmonic gap mode inside the thin polymer dielectric layer. In order to produce stronger gap plasmonic mode enhancement, we further simulate several additional asymmetric nanostar designs, such as elongating one or two of the tips of the nanostars that will resemble the experimentally used nanostars (Fig. 