We present a detailed study of electrical and optical generated free carrier on the spectral characteristics of a silicon microring modulator. The spectral distortion generated due to thermal and free carriers is presented, and the mechanism for mitigation is also presented. We observed that two-photon induced nonlinearity could be addressed by operating the modulator at suitable bias points. Furthermore, by applying small-signal drive the spectral distortion can be restored. We also present the effect of optical power and drive signal limit on the spectral characteristics. The study allows one to identify suitable device performance and operating conditions to utilize silicon ring modulator for optical signal processing. High-Index contrast silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) allows tight confinement of light in a sub-micron cross-section that supports compact light guiding and manipulation. Besides, SOI provides a promising integration platform for CMOS electronics and photonics Ring resonators find application in modulation and dense wavelength filters In this article, we report a comprehensive experimental study and analysis of optical power and electrical signal dependent nonlinear effects in Si ring cavity. We also demonstrate mitigation of the undesirable spectral distortion of the ring modulator by using an external electric field across the waveguide. Using bias tunable AC signals, we study the effect of thermal and free-carrier impact on the transmission spectrum at various drive frequencies. The bandgap of silicon is 1.12 eV, which makes it transparent for wavelengths beyond 1100 nm. However, when illuminated with photon energy below the bandgap energy (> 1100 nm) and sufficient optical power could result in multi-photon absorption and associated nonlinear process as illustrated in Fig. The undesirable carriers could be swept by applying an electric field across the waveguide 3 Optical bistability in silicon ring modulator We use high-speed depletion-mode silicon ring modulator with an electro-optic bandwidth of 25 GHz The DC electrical characteristics of the ring cavity with PN junction is measured at various input optical powers. Fig. We analyze the spectral characteristics of the ring with various DC-bias voltages and optical powers. Fig. It can be observed from Fig. In addition to the spectral profile change, the resonance wavelength also shifts. Fig. The dynamic characteristics of the ring modulator are studied by applying a small-signal AC at various frequencies (< 40kHz). The small-signal assists in sweeping the generated optical carriers from the waveguide. A positive-bias voltage is chosen as it reduces the asymmetricity of the resonance. Fig. In addition to extinction and resonance wavelength shift, we also observe a change in resonance shape. The asymmetry of the cavity resonance can be evaluated using skewness factor given by, where μ is the mean of x, σ is the standard deviation of x, and E(t) represents the expected value of the quantity t. A negative or positive sign of the skewness indicates left skew and right skew, respectively. We investigate the effect of small-signal voltage and optical power on the skewness created by electrical and optical induced carriers. A small signal voltage of 0.5 V pp and 1 V pp is applied with a bias of +0.6 V. Fig. Finally, the effect of small-signal frequency at various optical power is investigated (Fig. In summary, we presented a comprehensive experimental study and analysis of the effect of electro-optic behaviour of a silicon ring modulator. The Q-factor of the ring cavity plays a significant role in the nonlinear threshold of optical power. For a high-Q cavity, the TPA and FCA induced absorption starts at low optical injection. The generated carriers can be swept by applying an electric field across the junction; however, the field is ineffective at high-optical injection. However, at moderate injection an alternating electric field could sweep the carries resulting in improved spectral response. We showed mitigation of spectral distortion of ring resonator with applied electric field across the waveguide using bias tunable AC signals. The study helps in understanding the operating point and limitation of optically generated carrier mitigation in a plasm-dispersion based silicon modulator. Funding. We acknowledge funding support from MHRD through NIEIN project, from MeitY and DST through NNetRA project. 