Mass of Abrikosov vortices defied experimental observation for more than four decades. We demonstrate a method of its detection in high-temperature superconductors. Similarly to electrons, fluxons circulate in the direction given by the magnetic field, causing circular dichroism. We report the magneto-transmittance of a nearly optimally doped thin YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ film, measured using circularly polarized submillimeter waves. The circular dichroism emerges in the superconducting state and increases with dropping temperature. Our results confirm the dominant role of quasiparticle states in the vortex core and yield the diagonal fluxon mass of 2.2 × 10 8 electron masses per centimeter at 45 K and zero-frequency limit and even larger off-diagonal mass of 4.9 × 10 8 me/cm. The limitations of today's digital technology will likely be overcome by ultra-fast superconductive electronics In contrast to the plethora of theoretical predictions of the effective vortex mass in type-II superconductors, we are aware of only two relevant experiments, both supporting rather large values. Fil et al. The extremely large spread in theoretically predicted values and scarce experimental data available motivated us to independently determine the mass of a fluxon. Here, we present relevant experiments leading to the evaluation of the vortex mass in nearly optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . Our approach is inspired by the cyclotron resonance measurement, a method commonly employed to obtain the effective mass of charge carriers in semiconductors. Exposed to an external magnetic field, charged particles move in circular orbits and, under certain conditions, resonantly absorb monochromatic radiation. In the case of fluxons, however, the cyclotron motion is induced by an interaction with circularly polarized far-infrared laser light. This interaction depends on the sense of circular polarization and manifests itself as a differential transmittance for clockwise and anti-clockwise polarized waves, known as magnetic circular dichroism. We show that the theory of Kopnin and coworkers reproduces our experimental data without any fitting parameter. Thus, our results support the theory of the fluxon mass developed by Kopnin and Vinokur We designed and developed a unique far-infrared (FIR) transmission experiment capable of probing the circular dichroism (see Fig. We measured the transmittance of the sample for several laser lines at wavelengths 119, 163, 312, 419, and 433 μm Our experimental protocol is as follows: in experimental runs, we apply a magnetic field at a temperature well above T c . As the temperature drops, vortices freeze into a regular Abrikosov lattice. The applied magnetic field B is kept constant since any change in B would result in inhomogeneous patterns of the vortex density. The temperature T is swept down and up at a steady sweep rate of 2.5 K/min, the instantaneous temperature of the sample being recorded together with the transmittance. Care is taken that the down and up sweeps do not show any hysteresis. Fig. We chose the most common high-T c material YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ in the form of a thin film with a thickness of L = 107 nm, and with CuO 2 planes parallel to the surface. The sample was prepared at National Chiao Tung University (Taiwan) using a pulsed laser deposition method from a stoichiometric target on a lanthanum aluminate substrate oriented in the (100) plane. The substrate dimensions are 10 × 10 × 0.5 mm 3 . Several measurements were performed to establish sample properties. Figure The critical temperature of the film, T c = 87.6 K, was determined from a dedicated measurement of dc resistivity ρ (Fig. To complete the sample characteristics, we assume pinning of vortices by layer imperfections, for example, the surface roughness. Figure Our aim is to compare experimental values of T + /T -with a theoretical model. Using the above sample parameters, we can evaluate the film conductivity σ ± from which the transmittance T ± results. The theoretical prediction shown in Fig. differs from the exact theory by less then 4% as shown in the Supplementary Information 30 . Kopnin and Vinokur 31 provided the theoretical conductivities σ ± derived under very general conditions. Our study allows for two simplifications. First, we focus on temperatures about 45 K, where we observe a large dichroic signal. At such low temperatures, extended quasiparticles are very dilute so that we can neglect their contribution to the electric current J as well as their effect on vortices. Second, the cyclotron frequency ω c = eB/m is small on the scale of the quasiparticle lifetime, ω c τ 1 for all experimental magnetic fields, which simplifies dynamics of quasiparticles in the vortex core. Under these conditions, the equation of motion for a fluxon of unitary length takes the form of Newton's law with the time derivative of momentum p and the force F from the interaction of the vortex core with the crystal lattice. Unlike Kopnin and Vinokur, we include the pinning force with the Labusch parameter κ and vortex displacement u related to its velocity as u = v. The Magnus force, given by the vector product of the magnetic field direction z = B/B and the vortex velocity related to the condensate current, covers a force by which the flowing condensate acts on the fluxon. In Kopnin's model, the fluxon momentum p is a total momentum of quasiparticles in the vortex core which rotate about the vortex axis at an angular frequency ω 0 . For our moderately clean sample, the fluxon momentum at the low-temperature limit depends on its velocity as The diagonal mass μ is complex at finite frequencies, which reflects a delay between a change of the vortex velocity and a change of the total momentum of quasiparticles in its core. The off-diagonal mass μ ⊥ describes a property common in anisotropic systems that the velocity of an excitation is not parallel with its momentum. Quasiparticles disturbed by the vortex motion and action of the FIR light eventually lose their momentum in collisions with impurities and phonons. Via these collisions, the crystal lattice acts on the fluxon by force F . With the collision integral approximated by a single relaxation time τ , the force and the momentum are simply related by F = -p/τ . The longitudinal force -(μ /τ )v is a vortex friction. The transversal force (μ ⊥ /τ )[v × z] reduces the Magnus force giving the Kopnin-Kravtsov force The electric field in the film 31-33 has a skin component J /σ 0 from the penetrating incident light, and an electric field -[v × B] generated by the vortex motion. At low frequencies, the London conductivity σ 0 diverges and the electric field achieves the dc form of the Josephson relation. In the absence of the magnetic field, Eq. ( needed for the theoretical prediction of the transmittance. With the full set of sample parameters established from the time-domain spectroscopy, the simplified Kopnin-Vinokur conductivity (4) furnishes us with the theoretical prediction of the circular dichroism. Figure With increasing wavelength and field strength, the transmittance ratio T + /T -gradually deviates from unity. The observed trends can be understood in terms of Eq. ( Figure While the sample parameters n, σ 0 , and τ are sound, κ and ω 0 are less clear. The Labusch parameter κ has a minor effect on the dichroism, therefore we kept the value κ = 2 × 10 5 N/m 2 . The angular frequency ω 0 was established by the least-square fit of T + /T -data. The best-fit value ω 0 = 4.3 × 10 12 rad/s was very close to 4.4 × 10 12 rad/s estimated above. We believe that such close agreement of observed and estimated frequency is fortuitous. At THz frequencies, where the circular dichroism was found, both diagonal and off-diagonal masses are complex. They become real in the low-frequency limit, as apparent from Eq. ( In summary, we have developed a reliable experimental method to measure the circular dichroism of superconducting films threaded by Abrikosov vortices. To interpret our data in terms of vortex dynamics, we have established all the essential material parameters from independent time-domain THz spectroscopy and dc-resistivity measurements. The observed dichroism is in good agreement with the theory of Kopnin and Vinokur based on the circular motion of quasiparticles in the vortex core. Their angular frequency was experimentally determined and used to extrapolate the vortex mass from THz frequencies to low-frequency motion. connects the incident electric field with the transmitted one via a sequence of dynamical and propagation matrices. The propagation matrices are diagonal. For the YBaCuO film, we have (P film ) ij = δ ij e ik j L with k 1,2 = ±n + ω/c and k 3,4 = ±n -ω/c, where c is the vacuum speed of light and is the complex refractive index related to the complex circular conductivity σ ± . Similarly, for the LAO substrate, (P subs ) ij = δ ij e iq j D with q 1,2 = ±n o ω/c and q 3,4 = ±n e ω/c. Matching of electromagnetic waves at segment interfaces is covered by dynamical matrices ) As already mentioned, we use the same helical basis for vacuum and YBaCuO, which leads to a similarity of D vac and D film . Since no light approaches the sample from its backside, (E tr ) 2 = 0 and (E tr ) 4 = 0, we obtain the transmittances of circularly polarized light in the form where S = |M 11 M 33 -M 13 M 31 | -2 is a submatrix determinant. The superposition of partial waves in the substrate leads to strong oscillations with the wavelength (see Fig. as documented in Fig. For purposes of discussion, we can use a free-film approximation which is obtained by sending the substrate thickness to zero, D → 0. A further simplification follows from the expansion in the film thickness according to Hooper and Sambles 5 , 1 adapted to our notation by substituting for permittivity ε = 1 + iσ/(ε 0 ω). This expansion is nearly exact but still too complicated. Numerical calculations reveal that the third term is dominant in our case We used the approximation (S9) in the main text to discuss the observed dichroism Its validity is demonstrated in Fig. arXiv:1911.12050v5 [cond-mat.supr-con] 10 Nov 2021