This paper presents the results of neutron flux measurements at two irradiation facilities of the TRIGA Mark II reactor at ENEA Casaccia Research Center, Italy. The goal of these measurements is to provide a complete characterization of neutron irradiation facilities for accurate and precise dose evaluation in radiation damage tests and, more generally, for all applications that need a good knowledge of neutron flux in terms of intensity, energy spectrum and spatial distribution. The neutron activation technique is used to measure the activation rates of several reactions, chosen so to cover the whole energy range of neutron flux spectrum. A multi-group neutron flux measurement is obtained through an unfolding algorithm based on a Bayesian statistical model. The obtained results prove that this experimental method allows to measure the total neutron flux within 2% statistical uncertainty, and to get at the same time a good description of its energy spectrum and spatial distribution. The prediction of electronic device degradation due to radiation allows one both the correct design of experiments in which high radiation dose will be released on instrumentation and the qualification of microelectronics for space missions. Irradiation tests of such devices allow to predict their end of life behavior and performance degradation. The use of fast neutrons, that induce a negligible total ionizing dose, permits to investigate damage effects due to atomic displacements, which are usually the most relevant for semiconductors. Irradiation facilities where tests are performed must be characterized to accurately determine the neutron spectral fluence and, thus, the imparted NIEL (Non-Ionizing Energy Loss) dose The TRIGA Mark II reactor located at ENEA Casaccia Research Center (TRIGA RC-1) is a research reactor moderated and cooled by light water, and is operated at a maximum thermal power of 1 MW Neutron activation is an experimental technique that can be flexibly adapted to characterize different neutron fields where t irr is the irradiation time and λ is the decay constant. Finally, the experimental measurements of R are used to extract information about the neutron flux φ(E), exploiting the following physics relation: where N is the number of target isotopes in the sample, and σ(E) is the activation cross section. To determine the neutron flux intensity and its energy spectrum, we apply the unfolding method described in Ref. To characterize the neutron flux in the Central Thimble and Lazy Susan facilities of the TRIGA-RC1 reactor, we prepared a set of samples containing several elements. We used liquid standards with certified concentration of trace elements (ranging from 10 to 10 4 μg/mL), high purity metal foils (0.13 mm or 0.25 mm thick), fragments of ZnSe and Ge crystals (1.8 mm and 0.35 mm thick, respectively), and Al-Co (Co 0.5% wt.) wires 1 mm in diameter (Fig. The neutron activation experimental campaign has been organized in three separate irradiations, carried out on consecutive days (Tab. 1). In the first one, we irradiated samples containing different elements to allow for the neutron spectrum unfolding analysis. The second irradiation served to characterize the neutron flux spatial profile with the technique outlined in Ref. All irradiations have been performed with the reactor at 100 kW nominal power. We recorded the power tracks (Fig. To measure the activity of the radioisotopes produced in the irradiated samples, we set up two High-Purity Germanium (HPGe) detectors (coaxial, p-type) at the ENEA-Casaccia laboratory. The first one is a Silena detector with 30% relative detection efficiency and 1.8 keV FWHM resolution at the 1.33 MeV gamma line of 60 Co (Fig. The radioisotope activity is measured from the number of counts in their γ-lines, with the method described in Refs. To validate the simulation models, we performed benchmark measurements with calibration sources containing isotopes of certified activity and emitting γ-rays in a wide energy range from 59 keV to 1408 keV ( 241 Am, 137 Cs, 60 Co, 133 Ba, 152 Eu). The activities reconstructed from the analysis and simulation of experimental measurements were compared to the certified ones, obtaining an agreement within 5% for all configurations with the sources put at different distances from the detector. After irradiations, we performed γ-spectroscopy measurements of activated samples for about one month, tuning the measurement and waiting times in order to observe the γ-lines of both short-lived and long-lived isotopes. Most samples were measured on both HPGe detectors, to achieve a better control of systematic uncertainty in activation rate evaluation. In this section we present at first the analysis of Al-Co activation monitors, then the characterization of the neutron flux spatial distribution, and finally the activation rate measurement of the different reactions which will then be used for neutron flux spectrum unfolding. To assess the repeatability of the activation measurements in the three different irradiations, we placed Al-Co monitor samples in the same positions at the bottom of Central Channel and Lazy Susan (channel #1) holders. In stable conditions, we expect that the activation rates of 59 Co(n, γ) 60 Co and 27 Al(n, α) 24 Na reactions are compatible among different irradiations. Particularly, we use the (n, γ) reaction on cobalt to monitor the neutron flux in the thermal and intermediate range, and the (n, α) reaction on aluminum to measure the flux of fast neutrons with energy > 5 MeV. All monitor samples, except one, were measured on both HPGe detectors (Silena and Canberra). By separately analyzing the Silena and Canberra data series shown in Fig. To map the spatial profile of the neutron flux intensity inside the reactor facilities, we activated several Al-Co samples in the annulus formed by the 40 channels of Lazy Susan specimen rack, and along the vertical axes of Central Channel and Lazy Susan irradiation holders. This technique, as mentioned above, allows to simultaneously probe the neutron flux in both the thermal-intermediate and in the fast regions. Therefore, the activation rate profiles shown in Figs. The non-uniformity of the flux in the different positions of the Lazy Susan circular rack is a known aspect, related to the asymmetric core loading. The experimental results of the thermal-intermediate neutron flux component exhibit maximum differ- ences of ±7% with respect to the central value, whereas the fast flux distribution is affected by higher variations, up to ±18% (Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The experimental results highlight that the neutron flux is not spatially homogeneous, especially in the Lazy Susan facility. In this case, we also observe that the ratio of thermal-intermediate versus fast flux component is not constant. This implies that the energy spectrum varies as function of both vertical and longitudinal coordinates in the Lazy Susan rack. If high accuracy is required in the evaluation of fluence as function of neutron energy in all channels of Lazy Susan facility, a further characterization analysis is needed, because the data collected in this experimental campaign allow for the spectrum unfolding in one Lazy Susan channel (namely channel #1, where the samples containing different elements have been irradiated). Monte Carlo (MC) simulations are a suitable tool for this purpose. Indeed, a MC model for neutronics simulations of the TRIGA RC-1 reactor could be developed and validated using the experimental data reported here as a benchmark, and subsequently exploited to estimate the neutron flux spectrum in all irradiation positions. To measure the activation rates of a large set of neutron-induced reactions (later used for flux spectrum unfolding), we organized the data analysis according to the following steps. 1. We analyze the lines in the γ-spectroscopy measurements to identify the activated isotopes. 2. For each activated isotope and measurement configuration (i.e. HPGe detector and sample position), we run a MC simulation to get the detection efficiency of each γ-line. 3. When an isotope produces more than one γline, we check that the relative intensity of the measured peaks is compatible with that predicted by simulations. This check allows to easily identify overlays of γ-lines produced by other activated isotopes in the same sample or natural background. 4. We calculate the isotope activity from the number of counts in each γ-line. In case of isotopes producing two or more γ-lines, we compute the weighted average to get the best estimate of the activity. 5. Finally, we use Eq. 1 to get the activation rate R, and we average the results from the measurements on the two HPGe detectors (Silena and Canberra) to get the best estimate of R for each observed reaction. As shown before in Fig. The uncertainties associated to SSA results listed in Tab. 2 include: the statistical (Poisson) uncertainty on γ-line counts in measured and simulated spectra, the vertical gradient correction factor uncertainty (Lazy Susan data only), the branching ratio uncertainty, the target nucleus isotopic abundance uncertainty, and the systematic uncertainty on absolute activity reconstruction by γspectroscopy analysis. Uncertainties on element mass and on the duration of irradiations and measurements are negligible. To assess the systematic uncertainty, we analyzed the results of 60 Co activity reconstruction in 8 Al-Co samples that have been measured in practically identical conditions on both HPGe detectors. For each couple of measurements (A i ), we calculated the two residuals (δ i ) from the weighted mean activity value (A): Then, we computed the mean value (μ i ) of each δ i data set, obtaining (-2.0±0.3)% and (+2.6±0.5)% for Canberra and Silena detectors, respectively. The difference of μ i provides an estimate of the systematic uncertainty affecting the absolute activ-ity reconstruction when a single HPGe detector is used. When a sample is measured on two detectors, the systematic uncertainty on the combined activity evaluation is reduced by a factor √ 2, thus in our case we propagate a ±3.2% systematic error. The neutron flux spectrum unfolding is performed by solving a system of linear equations derived from Eq. 2 after discretizing the energy spectrum into n groups: where j is an index to label the different reactions, φ i is the neutron flux intensity in the i-th group, and σ ij is the group effective cross section, which is defined as: and corresponds to the average cross section, weighted on neutron spectrum, in the i-th energy group. The system in Eq. 4 is solved with a Bayesian statistical approach that allows to propagate the experimental uncertainties affecting the parameters (R j /N j and σ ij ), and to select the physical solutions for φ i unknown variables, which are positive definite. Practically, we sample the joint posterior PDF (Probability Density Function) p(φ i |R j , σ ij ) exploiting the JAGS tool More details about the Bayesian analysis that we use to unfold the neutron spectrum can be found in Refs. The first one is that the choice of the binning used to discretize the energy spectrum into n groups must take into account the characteristics of the activation cross sections, and in particular their energy dependence. To avoid getting an indeterminate system of equations, the number of groups and their ranges must be chosen in such a way as to ensure that, for each group, there is at least one reaction induced in a non-negligible percentage by neutrons in that energy range. Moreover, we cannot split into more groups the energy ranges where neutron cross sections exhibit the same energy dependence. This is the case of the thermal range, in which the radiative capture cross section is proportional to 1/ √ E for all reactions. According to these criteria, in the intermediate region we define energy bins that include at least one of the main resonances of neutron capture cross sections, whereas in the fast region we set bin edges in correspondence with the energy thresholds of some measured reactions. For this analysis we use n = 10 energy groups. The second aspect to be recalled is that the unfolding procedure requires a guess spectrum to calculate effective cross sections σ ij in each energy group. In this regard, we point out that even if the unfolding results have some degree of dependence on the intra-group spectrum shape used for σ ij calculation, there is no constraint on φ i intensities. MCNP code To calculate the effective cross sections we use the data published in the ENDF/B-VII.1 libraries In order to evaluate the neutron flux spectrum in the TRIGA-RC1 irradiation facilities, we implemented the following iterative procedure: 1. we run the unfolding algorithm using a guess spectrum randomly selected from the set; 2. we identify, within the set of simulated spectra, the one that better fits the multi-group spectrum obtained after the unfolding; 3. we repeat the unfolding using the latter spectrum as guess, and we continue the iteration cycle starting from step 2. The iteration cycle ends when the spectrum that better fits the unfolding results coincides with the one used as guess. By applying this method to the experimental data collected at TRIGA-RC1 reactor, we find that convergence is quickly reached after one or two iterations and that the final result does not depend on the choice of the initial guess spectrum. The multi-group neutron flux measurement results are reported in Tabs. 3 and 4 for Lazy Susan and Central Channel, respectively. In both cases, we achieved a precision of ∼2% on total neutron flux measurement and 10% on single-group neutron flux evaluation for most energy ranges (with very few exceptions up to 24% at maximum). As a posteriori check, we have recalculated the SSA of each measured reaction using the resulting multi-group fluxes, finding a very good statistical agreement with the experimental SSA values. This check highlights that the experimental SSA data supplied as input to the unfolding algorithm are self-consistent and that the multi-group flux results allow to correctly reconstruct the activation rates of a numerous set of different reactions. In Figs. 9 and 11 we show the correlations among flux groups. Many couples of flux groups exhibit a negative correlation, which involves a more precise knowledge of their sum than each of them taken separately. It is worth noting that the groups of fast neutrons with E > 0.5 MeV, being constrained by the activation data from threshold reactions, are completely uncorrelated to the groups of thermal and intermediate neutrons measured through radiative capture. In Fig. In Fig. In this paper we described the experimental neutron flux characterization in the Central Channel and in the Lazy Susan irradiation facilities of the TRIGA RC-1 reactor at 100 kW power. The measurement of the activation rates of 41 reactions, which are neutron sensitive probes in different energy ranges, allowed for a spectrum unfolding that outputs a multi-group neutron flux measurement. In this work, we took special care in minimizing the experimental uncertainties (both statistical and systematic). Particularly, by exploiting Monte Carlo simulations to get accurate estimates of detection efficiencies in γ-spectroscopy measurements, and by using two different HPGe detectors to reduce systematic uncertainty in absolute activity evaluation, we determined the experimental activation rates within a few percent accuracy. The Bayesian statistical method at the basis of the unfolding algorithm has then ensured correct propagation of experimental uncertainties to the final results, which demonstrate the effectiveness of this technique in achieving high accuracy in neutron flux measurements. Finally, the experimental measurements performed with Al-Co monitor samples highlighted that the intensity and the energy spectrum of the neutron flux inside the Lazy Susan facility is not spatially homogeneous. This aspect must be taken into account when evaluating the neutron dose given to a non-point size sample irradiated in this facility. In this respect, the development of a fullcore Monte Carlo simulation of the TRIGA RC-1 reactor, to be validated with the experimental data collected in this work, will allow to accurately calculate the spectral fluence which crosses a sample interacting with the not homogeneous neutron field inside the irradiation facility. -10 8 -10 7 -10 6 -10 5 -10 4 -10 3 -10 2 -