Generative adversarial networks, which can generate metasurfaces based on a training set of high performance device layouts, have the potential to significantly reduce the computational cost of the metasurface design process. However, basic GAN architectures are unable to fully capture the detailed features of topologically complex metasurfaces, and generated devices therefore require additional computationally-expensive design refinement. In this Letter, we show that GANs can better learn spatially fine features from high-resolution training data by progressively growing its network architecture and training set. Our results indicate that with this training methodology, the best generated devices have performances that compare well with the best devices produced by gradient-based topology optimization, thereby eliminating the need for additional design refinement. We envision that this network training method can generalize to other physical systems where device performance is strongly correlated with fine geometric structuring. Metasurfaces are nanostructured electromagnetic media with responses tailored by structure geometry Various concepts based on machine learning have been proposed to mitigate the computational bottleneck of conventional optimization approaches There are at least two reasons why conventional GAN generators are not able to learn the detailed spatial features of the training set. One is because the design space of the training set is vast and the GAN generator is unable to learn detailed features during training In this Letter, we show that the performance of the GAN generator for metasurfaces can be dramatically enhanced through the progressive growth of the GAN architecture and training set during training. In addition to increasing the resolution of the GAN throughout the network training process, we progressively augment the training set by identifying highperformance GAN-generated metasurfaces using an electromagnetic simulator and adding them to the training set, while removing relatively lower performance devices. As a model system, we apply our progressive growth scheme to train a conditional metagrating PGGAN that can produce ensembles of devices operating across a range of wavelengths and deflection angles. While our network training scheme incurs a large one-time computational cost, the final PGGAN is capable of generating devices with efficiencies comparable to and sometimes better than the best devices in the training set, which FIG. eliminates the need for additional computationally-expensive device refinement. We focus on designing topologically complex metagratings that deflect normally incident TE-polarized light to the +1 diffraction order for a range of outgoing angles (35 degrees to 85 degrees) and operating wavelengths (500 nm to 1100 nm). A schematic of the device is summarized in Fig. Our PGGAN comprises two neural networks, a generator and discriminator. The inputs to the generator include the operating wavelength λ , deflection angle θ , and an 8dimensional uniformly distributed random noise vector z, and its output is an image of the device. Given a distribution of noise values as inputs, the outputs are a diverse distribution of devices. The discriminator is a classifier that attempts to distinguish whether a presented input image is from the gen-erator or the training set. Architecturally, the generator contains fully connected layers followed by deconvolution layers, while the discriminator contains convolution layers followed by fully connected layers. The training process can be described as a competition between the generator and discriminator. The discriminator aims to successfully distinguish between generated and training set devices, while the generator aims to fool the discriminator by generating devices mimicking the training set. The generator and discriminator train through an iterative process in alternating steps, and upon training completion, the final generator will have learned the underlying topological features from high-efficiency devices in the training set and be able to generate layouts with high-efficiency features. During training, both the generator and discriminator employ the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 256, learning rate of 0.001, β 1 of 0, and β 2 of 0.9. We employ Wasserstein loss with a gradient penalty with lambda of 10 for the discriminator loss To improve the stability of the training process and enhance the capabilities of both the generator and discriminator, we progressively grow the resolution of the PGGAN over the course of training Once the network has undergone sufficient training with these low-resolution devices, the network and device resolu- destabilize the network. These instabilities can arise because the convolution and deconvolution layers that are added to the PGGAN during these moments are untrained and possess random weights. To address this issue, the impact of the added convolution and deconvolution layers are gradually incorporated into the PGGAN in a manner illustrated in Fig. Over the course of 5000 iterations of network training, α linearly increases from zero to one. Initially, α is zero and the untrained deconvolution layer does not contribute to the generated device pattern. As training progresses and α increases, this layer begins to properly learn and capture spatially fine device features and contributes more to X new . After 5000 iterations, the generated device patterns are exclusively generated from the new deconvolution layer. 5000 additional training iterations are performed after α is set to one to further stabilize the network, after which the network resolution is increased again and the process is repeated. The PGGAN discriminator evolves in a similar way, except that convolutional layers are progressively added to the network instead of deconvolutional layers. The downsampling operation in the discriminator is performed using average pooling. In addition to progressively growing the network architecture, we progressively grow the training set by adding relatively high-performance PGGAN-generated data to the training set while removing relatively low-performance training data throughout the training process. The training set growth process is illustrated in Fig. The generation of high-performance GAN-based devices is stochastic and due to the use of random noise as an input to the generator, which enables a diverse distribution of designs in the high-dimensional design space to be produced. To identify high-performance devices suitable for training set augmentation, we simulate ensembles of generated devices using the RCWA EM solver and filter out the high-efficiency devices. Our ability to improve the PGGAN using PGGANgenerated devices leads to a positive feedback loop between network and training set augmentation: improvements to the training set leads to enhanced discriminator and generator performance, while improvements to the generator lead to enhanced generation of high efficiency metasurfaces that are added to the training set. By alternating these two processes, the network not only learns the desired features from the training set, it also explores and interpolates better topological features in the design space. We produce final device designs from our PGGAN by generating 2000 devices for a given wavelength-deflection angle pair, evaluating the efficiencies of these devices using the RCWA EM solver, and taking the highest efficiency device. The operating device parameter space includes wavelengths ranging from 500 nm to 1100 nm, in increments of 50 nm, and deflection angles ranging from 35 degrees to 85 degrees, in increments of 5 degrees. As benchmarks, we also design devices in the following two ways: we design a total of 8000 devices using gradient-based topology optimization A comparison between Figs. 4(a) and 4(c) shows that the best devices generated by the PGGAN have efficiencies similar to or even better than those produced from gradient-based topology optimization. Statistically, for 50% of the wavelength-deflection angle pairs, the best PGGANgenerated devices outperform those from gradient-based topology optimization. Furthermore, when averaging all of the efficiency values from the plots in Fig. A comparison between Figs. 4(b) and 4(c) shows that the PGGAN outperforms the basic GAN by a wide margin, further demonstrating the effectiveness of the progressive growth strategy. For 89% of the wavelength-deflection angle pairs, the best PGGAN-generated devices outperform those generated from the basic GAN. This performance disparity can be further visualized by tracking device efficiencies over the course of network training for the PGGAN and basic GAN, which is summarized in Fig. The ability for the PGGAN to generalize and accurately capture high resolution features from training data is due to the combination of progressive growth in both the training set and network architecture. As a means of comparison, we have trained two alternative GANs, one with only progressive network architecture growth and the other with only progressive training set growth. The results are summarized in Appendix B and indicate that progressive growth of either the network architecture or training set boosts the GAN performance beyond the basic GAN concept. However, the performance from both of these GAN variants is still definitively worse than that of the full PGGAN. An estimation of the computational cost for the differing optimization methods featured in Figs. In summary, we present PGGAN as an effective and computationally efficient metasurface design methodology. Compared to the basic GAN, PGGAN benefits from the progressive growth of its network architecture, which enables more robust learning of topological features from the training set, and from the progressive growth of the training set, which enables further exploration of high-efficiency topological features in the design space. Our training results indicate that PG-GAN can generate devices that outperform the original GAN by a wide margin and that compare well with those generated from gradient-based topology optimization, all while incurring less computational cost. Directions for future work include identifying methods to reduce the computational cost of the training set and further optimizing the PGGAN archi-tecture and a resolution transition scheme. We envision that PGGAN can be widely utilized in other fields that require the design of high-resolution, high-dimensional layouts with input parameters. We also anticipate that our training set update strategy can be applied to other domains if a simulator exists that can evaluate the performance of generated layouts. and their corresponding adjoint simulations. To create the initial training set for the basic GAN and PGGAN, we perform 350 iterations of adjoint-based topology optimization for 800 randomly generated devices and add the top 50% devices (in terms of efficiency) to the training set. In total, the preparation of the sparse training set requires 800 × 350 × 6 = 1, 680, 000 simulations. 1. For gradient-based topology optimization, 8000 devices are produced. Each device needs 350 iterations of adjointbased topology optimization, and it therefore takes 8, 000 × 350 × 6 = 16, 800, 000 simulations. 2. For the basic GAN, we generate 5000 devices for each wavelength and angle combination (13 wavelengths and 11 deflection angles), from which 50 best devices are chosen for 50 iteration of topology refinement. The computational cost for the basic GAN includes the preparation of the initial training set, the evaluation of the generated devices, and further generated device refinement. In total, the number of required EM simulations is 1, 680, 000 + 13 × 11 × 5, 000 + 13 × 11 × 50 × 6 × 50 = 4, 540, 000 simulations. Of these 4, 540, 000 simulations, 13 × 11 × 5, 000 + 13 × 11 × 50 × 6 × 50 = 2, 860, 000 simulations are performed after the GAN model is trained. 3. For PGGAN, we perform 15 training set updates during network training. For each training set update, we simulate the efficiencies of 500 devices at 13 × 11 combinations of wavelength and deflection angle. After training the PGGAN, we generate and evaluate 2000 devices for each wavelength and angle combination. The total computational cost includes the preparation of the initial training set, the training set updates, and the evaluation of the PGGAN-generated devices from a fully trained network. The total number of simulations is: 1, 680, 000 + 13 × 11 × 15 × 500 + 13 × 11 × 2, 000 = 3, 038, 500 simulations. Given a fully trained PGGAN, the number of simulations required to evaluate generated devices is 13 × 11 × 2000 = 286, 000 simulations.