Recent theoretical studies have extended the Berry phase framework to account for higher electric multipole moments, quadrupole and octupole topological phases have been proposed. Although the two-dimensional quantized quadrupole insulators have been demonstrated experimentally, octupole topological phases have not previously been observed experimentally. Here we report on the experimental realization of classical analog of octupole topological insulator in the electric circuit system. Three-dimensional topolectrical circuits for realizing such topological phases are constructed experimentally. We observe octupole topological states protected by the topology of the bulk, which are localized at the corners. Our results provide conclusive evidence of a form of robustness against disorder and deformation, which is characteristic of octupole topological insulators. Our study opens a new route toward higherorder topological phenomena in three-dimensions and paves the way for employing topolectrical circuitry to study complex topological phenomena. Topological phases exhibit some most striking phenomena in modern physics. A prominent feature of a topological phase is the emergence of topologically protected edge states, which are robust against local perturbations and play a crucial role in the topological functionality of the underlying system Recently, a new class of symmetry-protected topological insulators, higher-order topological insulator, has drawn research interest Here we report on the experimental realization of classical analog of octupole topological insulator using 3D topolectrical circuits. The circuits consist of some basic circuit elements: capacitors and inductors, which are constructed experimentally. The octupole topological phases, which are localized at the corners, are observed. The octupole topological insulators that depend only on the bulk topology are demonstrated experimentally. well suited to the implementation of tight-binding models, because it is possible to establish a correspondence between individual hopping terms in the tight-binding model and individual components in its circuit realization According to this condition, we build a classical analogue of the electric octupole insulator, which has three anti-commuting mirror symmetries ( x M , y M and z M ) for modes near a specific frequency 0  . We first consider an infinite periodic structure realized by the above circuit unit cell, and study the bulk properties of the system, before analyzing boundary modes. We then analyze the circuit with periodic boundary conditions in momentum space. In circuit systems, we can derive the circuit Laplacian by the Kirchhoff's current law ( ) where () where 21 /   , ( , , ) is the phase of Block wave vector propagating along the x, y and z directions, respectively. This circuit Laplacian satisfies where So that if 1 Now, we turn to a circuit with open boundary conditions as shown in Fig. Laplacian in each site including bulk, surface, edge and corner. So, we fix the circuit elements (capacitor and/or inductor) that connect each site to the ground to meet this condition With all of the conditions and theories discussed above, we finally construct a topolectrical-circuit octupole insulator shown in Fig. where is the circuit Green's function, and . We can see that the impedance can be determined by the smallest eigenvalue   n j  . From the spectrum of circuit Laplacian, we can find that there exist a gap and zero eigenvalue This phenomenon leads to a large impedance for the corner mode, but not for the other modes. The analysis is agreement with the simulation of the impedance for the circuit. The above discussions only focus on the case with a sample size. In fact, we have also calculated impedance responses for the samples of other sizes. With the increase of sample size, similar phenomena can be found. In addition, we have also studied the effect of random capacitors and inductors in bulk of the sample on the corner modes. Our calculated results show that strong corner modes always appear when the capacitors and inductors vary randomly within the sample or on the surface (except at the corner positions). The most important property of the topologically protected corner state is that it is robust against disorders. We note that the corner state always exist even the value of used capacitors and inductors on the different positions (except for corners) are randomly varied (the relationships of 2 1 / 1 LL  should be satisfied), which is similar to the case in Ref. For the convenience of experiment, we cut the total cube in Fig. [52]. The fabricated sample has exactly the same construction shown in Fig. As for the design of PCB, all PCB traces have a relatively large width (0.7mm) to reduce the parasitic inductance of the traces. The spacing between lines is large enough to avoid spurious inductive coupling. The parameters of circuit elements are taken as identical with the above theoretical calculations. The tolerance of the circuit elements is 1% which can avoid the experiment error. We set The excellent agreement between experimental results and the theoretical predictions have been observed. The theoretical impedance corner peak is normalized to unity, and the experimental impedance corner peak reaches 215Ω. The red line represents the corner mode, which is extremely high in the resonance frequency. The other lines, which are blue, yellow and green lines, have a small impedance in resonance frequency. The experimental results for the impedance distributions at the frequency 0  are also provided in Fig. where G is grounding part, ,, i q i x y z  represent the current direction. So we can write the currents that flow into each site as, According to the circuit Laplacian   J  , we can write Eqs.( So the circuit Laplacian matrix in the momentum space () J  can be expressed as In this section, we provide the detailed description of the grounding parts at each site of the circuit. Due to the fact that the inductivities and capacitances used in the circuit Laplacian possessing opposite signs (Eq.1), we should choose suitable grounding parts to make the circuit Laplacian matrix become consistent with the quantum Hamiltonian. In this case, the different values of grounded capacitors/inductances should be used to make the onsite potential on each lattice site become zero at the working frequency. Therefore, we let contribution coming from all inductivities at a given site be cancelled by connecting this site to the ground with a capacitor and vice versa. This scheme can make sure the circuit system works at a fixed frequency, and the diagonal elements of circuit Laplacian matrix could be the same 0 in the resonance frequency. In our experiment, as shown in Fig. In this section, we provide the detail for experimental construction of topolectrical-circuit octupole insulator. According to the theoretical design, the constructed model for the topolectrical-circuit octupole insulator in our experiment is shown in Fig. 