When heat transfers through interface between two different materials, it will encounter an interfacial thermal resistance (ITR) that makes the temperature discontinuous. This effect has been totally neglected so far in the research of thermal cloak, in particular when the thermal cloak is built with multilayer structures. In this paper, we investigate the effect of ITR on the performance of the thermal cloak by using both analytical and numerical method. Our results show that the existence of ITR will distort the external field, thus destroy the cloak. Moreover, we found that the effect of ITR can be quantified by a parameter called characteristic length. Management and control of heat transfer such as refrigerating/air-conditioning and converting into electricity, has always been one of the most important issues not only in our daily life but also in further technology development Thermal cloak is a structured material that any object concealed inside this material will not alter the temperature and heat flux distribution outside the cloak. Therefore, two criteria are important in evaluating the performance of a thermal cloak: (i) the heat flux in the cloaking region should be as small as possible; (ii) the temperature distribution outside the cloak should be the same as the pure background to realize invisibility. The general heat conduction equation is of the form where T represents the temperature distribution evolving with time, c(x) is the specific heat capacity, ρ(x) is the volumetric mass density, κ(x) is the thermal conductivity, and Q(x) is the internal heat source term. * Baowen.Li@Colorado.Edu Based on this equation, Guenneau et al derive a rigorous transformation formula to design a perfect thermal cloak by using inhomogeneous and continuous parameters, i.e., c(x)ρ(x) and κ(x) Mathematically, this equation is the same as the steady-state wave equation. This indeed has inspired Fan et al However, practically it is still nearly impossible to realize continuous thermal conductivity κ(x). As a good approximation, multilayer structures have been used to realize thermal cloaks In general, heat transfer through boundary between two different materials will encounter ITR and the effect is not negligible Currently, the boundary condition used in the design of multilayer thermal cloak is continuous condition, i.e., where T i , T i+1 is the temperature of the ith, (i+1)th layer respectively. ∂Ω represents the interface between the ith and (i + 1)th layers, n is the unit normal vector of the interface, and κ i , κ i+1 is the thermal conductivity of the ith, (i+1)th layer, respectively. When ITR is considered, the temperature continuity is broken while the continuity of heat flux is still true, there exists a temperature drop at the interface where R i,i+1 is the ITR between the ith and (i + 1)th layer . As the thermal cloak and some other thermal devices are coming to nanoscale, we should notice that ITR can become significant. Therefore, it is quite natural to understand the effect of ITR in thermal cloaking. In this paper, we investigate the effect of ITR, mainly the ITR of cloak/background interface and cloak/cloaked object interface, in the heat flux and temperature distribution, and further propose modifications to minimize and/or get rid of this effect. In particular, we focus on the two-dimensional (2D) cloak. The paper is organized as the following: in Section II, we discuss the effect on a 2D anisotropic single layer cloak; in Section III, we discuss the case for 2D bilayer cloak; and finally in the Section IV we give discussions. First, we consider a 2D single layer structure shown in Fig. The case of no ITR has been well studied by Han et al The physical picture is that when κ r κ θ , the heat flux tends to align along the tangential direction to bypass the cloaking region. In the case of considering ITR, the general solutions of temperature distribution in polar coordinate can still be expressed as where l = κ θ /κ r , T 1,2,3 denotes the temperature distribution is region I, II, II respectively, and A n , B n , C n , D n , E n are constants determined by boundary conditions. At infinity, the background thermal gradient field is not affected by the cloak, i.e., Combining Eq. ( (4) at the interface I/II and II/III, the solutions are where and all other A n 's, D n 's and E n 's are zero. R 12 (R 23 ) denotes the ITR of interface I/II (II/III). A 1 evaluates the heat flux in cloaking region and E 1 evaluates the field distortion outside the cloak. We are only interested in cloaking region (I) and external region (III), so we don't explicitly give the solutions in region II. Let's assume R 12 = R 23 = R I since the material of region I and III are of the same in current structure. If there is no ITR (R I = 0, F = 1, H = 0), these solutions are the same as those in Ref. In region I, the effect of ITR is introducing a scale factor 1/F . Since F ≥ 1, 1/F ≤ 1. The heat flux in region I becomes smaller when considering ITR, which means better thermal shielding. We can further investigate the change of scale factor 1/F with respect to l = κ θ /κ r and a, b. The ITR is usually in the range 10 -9 ∼ 10 -7 K•m 2 /W In region III, thermal cloak requires that there is no external-field distortion, which means E 1 should be zero. But from Eq. ( An interesting feature of the factor F and H is that they define a characteristic length which is the product of ITR and background thermal conductivity. When the characteristic length L c is comparable to, or even greater than, the cloak size a and b, both the reduction of heat flux in region I and externalfield distortion in region III will become significant. As shown in Fig. Fig. Next, we would like to know if we can eliminate the external-field distortion by modifying thermal conductivity. A direct generalization of the original idea is using κ r κ θ = t 2 κ 2 0 , where t is a constant to be determined, instead of κ r κ θ = κ 2 0 . The new solutions of heat conduction equation hold the same forms of Eq. ( and notice that l = κ θ /κ r = tκ 0 /κ r is also tdependent. To eliminate the external-field distortion, E 1 in Eq. ( and the root t 0 will satisfy t 0 > 1. As an example, we keep the geometry parameters a and b, thermal conductivity κ 0 and κ r , and ITR (R I ) unchanged, as those used in Fig. If we further increase κ θ , the external field is distorted again, as shown in Fig. where T i is the temperature of the ith layer, A i n , B i n (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are constants determined by the boundary conditions Eq. ( For simplicity, considering that the inner layer is perfect insulation material, i.e., κ 2 = 0 , this ensures that an external field does not penetrate inside the cloaking region and the only task is to eliminate the externalfield distortion. Combining boundary conditions Eq. ( and all other A 4 n 's and B 4 n 's are zero. R 34 denotes the ITR between layer 3 and 4. A 4 1 represents the background thermal gradient field and B 4 1 represents the distortion in region 4 induced by the cloak. To eliminate the externalfield distortion requires B 4 1 = 0, which means the numerator must be zero We notice that (c 2 -b 2 ) > 0, κ 3 > 0, and c(b 2 +c 2 )κ 4 > 0, so the existence of a solution requires Eq. ( To verify the results above, we simulate the temperature distribution and heat flux of the bilayer structure realized in Ref. In this paper, we have studied the effect of ITR in steady thermal cloak. In the two cloaks we investigate, ITR improves the performance of thermal shielding while destroys the invisibility of thermal cloak. We have introduced a characteristic length, which is the product of the ITR and background thermal conductivity, to quantify the effect of ITR. The effect becomes significant when the characteristic length is comparable to the cloak size. If the characteristic length is smaller than the cloak size, we can modify the thermal conductivity to restore the invisibility feature. Although the structures we have studied are simple, it is straightforward to generalize our analysis to more complex multilayer structures. We believe the improvement in thermal shielding is generic, and to restore the invisibility feature is still possible if the characteristic length is smaller than the cloak size. In non-steady thermal cloak, Sklan et al 