Recent realizations of intrinsic, long-range magnetic orders in two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials have ignited tremendous research interests. In this work, we employ the XXZ Heisenberg model and Monte Carlo simulations to study a fundamental property of these emerging 2D magnetic materials, the Curie temperature (Tc). By including both onsite and neighbor couplings extracted from first-principles simulations, we have calculated Tc of monolayer chromium trihalides and Cr2Ge2Te6, which are of broad interests currently, and the simulation results agree with available measurements. We also clarify the roles played by anisotropic and isotropic interactions in deciding Tc of magnetic orders. Particularly, we find a universal, linear dependence between Tc and magnetic interactions within the parameter space of realistic materials. With this linear dependence, we can predict Tc of general 2D lattice structures, omitting the Monte Carlo simulations. Compared with the widely used Ising model, mean-field theory, and spin-wave theory, this work provides a convenient and quantitative estimation of Tc, giving hope to speeding up the search for novel 2D materials with higher Curie temperatures. Long-range magnetic orders had been believed to hardly survive in two-dimensional (2D) systems due to the enhanced thermal fluctuations that make spontaneously symmetry-breaking orders unsustainable The recent discoveries of 2D magnetic crystals confirmed that magnetic anisotropy plays a crucial role in realizing 2D ferromagnetism The most important character of ferromagnetism is the phase-transition temperature, i.e., the Curie temperature (Tc), which not only decides applications but also reflects the intrinsic magnetic mechanism. To date, numerous theoretical calculations have focused on this important magnetic property In this work, we start from the XXZ Heisenberg model with the magnetic interaction parameters extracted from first-principles simulations. By using the MC simulation, we obtain the Tc of the widely studied monolayer chromium trihalides and CGT. Our result of monolayer CrI3 is around 42K that is in an excellent agreement with the measurement (45K). More interestingly, we find that there is a universal, linear dependence between Tc and magnetic interaction coefficients within a wide range of parameter space. As a result, we can conveniently predict Tc of 2D Heisenbergtype magnetic materials based on the magnetic interactions without time-consuming MC simulations. Using the MC-simulated magnetic phase diagram, we explain the origin of such a linear relation and show the crucial role of anisotropic magnetic interactions in creating and keeping 2D magnetism. This advance can be useful for quantitatively understanding the origin of 2D magnetism and speeding up the discovery of novel 2D magnetic materials. The article is organized in the following order. In section II, we present the atomic structures of our studied 2D magnetic materials and first-principles simulation setups. In Section III, we introduce the XXZ Heisenberg model and MC simulations. In section IV, the MC simulation results based on the XXZ Heisenberg model are presented and compared with measurements. In Section V, we reveal the linear dependence of the Tc on magnetic interactions. In section VI, we discuss the phase diagram of 2D magnetism according to the anisotropic onsite and exchange interactions to understand the linear dependence and the roles played by anisotropic magnetic interactions. In Section VII, we summarize the results. DFT calculations: The DFT calculations are performed within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The Heisenberg model is a widely employed approach to study 2D magnetism since the early works by Mermin and Wagner As indicated in Figure The magnetization is defined as (2), where N represents the total magnetic moments in the simulated system, and < S i α > indicates the time average of corresponding magnetic components after the simulation achieves thermal equilibrium. Finally, Tc can be estimated by fitting the typical phase transition formula: First, we must obtain the coefficients of magnetic interactions in the Hamiltonian of Eq (1) by calculating total energies of different magnetic configurations. Here we consider the FM and Néel antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations. The corresponding energy expressions of a unit cell are (5) , in which two magnetic orientations (in-plane and out-of-plane ones) are calculated in order to specify anisotropic couplings. Moreover, we can flip the magnetic moment of a Cr 3+ cation in a 2x2x1 supercell to obtain more energy configurations (normalized to one unit cell). As a result, we accumulate six equations that can solve the five magnetic interaction coefficients in Eq (1) and reference energy (E 0 ). The magnetic interaction coefficients, which are extracted from DFT calculations, of monolayer chromium trihalides are summarized in Table With these magnetic coupling coefficients, we can obtain the dependence of magnetization according to temperature by MC simulations in Figure It must be pointed out that, although the NNN coupling J 2 is significantly smaller than J 1 , its contribution to Tc is not small due to the larger coordinate number of the next NN in hexagonal lattices (N2 = 6). For chromium trihalides, we find that including the NNN coupling raises Tc by roughly 20%-30%. It is also worth to point out that the anisotropy of both onsite energy and exchange interaction in CrCl3 is quite weak. In such weakly anisotropic cases, the help of a small external field may be needed to observe the FM phase transition. This is similar to what has been discussed in the CGT experiment Although MC simulations provide a good solution to the XXZ Hamiltonian, it is time consuming and complicated for spreading out to specific materials that uses combinations of parameters. Since the magnetic energy and Tc are fundamentally decided by magnetic interactions, it will be interesting to explore if there is a direct relation between Tc and those interaction coefficients. For this purpose, we scan a much larger parameter space by MC simulations based on the XXZ Heisenberg model (Eq. 1). However, we have five parameters, i.e., A, J1, J2, λ 1 and λ 2 . It is impossible to cover such a five-dimensional parameter space, and we must simplify the scanning space. For most magnets, the NN isotropic coupling J1 is usually the dominant factor for the amplitude of Tc. Therefore, we carry out extensive MC simulations by varying J1 and one of other parameters from A, λ 1 , λ 2 and J2 while fixing the rests (e.g., at values of monolayer CrI3). The results are showing in Figure Tc can be expressed as which has the similar hexagonal structures as chromium trihalides. Using the published magnetic interaction coefficients Beyond hexagonal lattices, we also imitate the same processing of MC simulations on 2D square lattices by the XXZ Hamiltonian. As showing in Figure Therefore, this linearity is robust for different lattices, and the Tc expression (Eq. 8) could be universal for anisotropic 2D XXZ Heisenberg systems. In fact, a linear dependence of Tc according to the magnetic coupling coefficients has been proposed in other-level models. that the widely used mean-field approximation (MFA) gives the linear relation However, there are several obvious deficiencies in that MFA result. Firstly, the MFA cannot distinguish isotropic and anisotropic couplings due to that all operators are replaced by their thermodynamic mean values along the out-of-plane direction. As a result, the slops of the linear dependence are same for both isotropic J and anisotropic . This overestimated anisotropy is a main reason for the much larger Tc provided by the MFA. In other words, MFA shall be appropriate for very strongly anisotropic magnetic systems Second, Tc is proportional to S(S+1) in the MFA but our model shows that Tc is proportional to S 2 . This discrepancy origins from the different quantum and classic treatments of the spin operator. To verify this point, we change the magnetic moment in MC simulations. Meanwhile, we tune the coupling constants simultaneously to keep the value of the product of αS i (z) ⋅ S j (z) (α = A, λ, J). In Figure There is an obvious question about the linear expression of Eq. ( To address essential physics and avoid unnecessary complicity of scanning high-dimensional parameter space, we focus on two simplified XXZ Heisenberg models: The first one (Eq. 9) focuses on how the onsite anisotropy impacts magnetic phases, while the second one (Eq. 10) focuses on how the anisotropic coupling impacts magnetic phases. The MC results are presented in Figure The most striking part in the phase diagram of Figure shows that a minor anisotropy can dramatically, nonlinearly increase Tc. Our simulated behaviors around perfect isotropic point agree with previous scaling ~-0.001 (α = A, λ), our MC simulation still exhibits a none-zero Tc. On the other hand, this sharp nonlinear region is so narrow that it provides a good chance for estimating Tc by the first-order linear approximation within a reasonable region. More specifically, for most 2D magnetic materials, the amplitudes of anisotropic terms are substantially smaller than that of the isotropic NN coupling (J1), as shown in Table Finally, we must point out that the values of magnetic interactions, i.e., A, J, and λ, are crucial for deciding the value of Tc, as seen in Eq. 8. Unfortunately, it is known challenging to accurately calculate those magnetic interaction coefficients of correlated materials by ab initio approaches. Therefore, how to obtain reliable magnetic interactions is the fundamental challenge for studying these materials and MC simulations, and this is beyond the scope of this work. On the other hand, our proposed linear model survives in a wide range of parameter space (Figures In this work, we have calculated the Curie temperature Tc of the widely studied monolayer chromium trihalides and CGT by MC simulations based on the XXZ model with magnetic interactions extracted from first-principles calculations. Our calculated Tc of monolayer CrI3 agrees excellently with measurements. Moreover, we find a universal, linear dependence between Tc and magnetic interactions within the parameter space of realistic materials. With this linear dependence, we can predict Tc of 2D magnets without MC simulations once obtaining reliable magnetic interactions. This linear model provides insights to clarify understand the roles of isotropic and anisotropic magnetic interactions in deciding Tc: the anisotropic terms typically ensure the stability for the FM order in 2D magnets, and isotropic terms basically decide the magnitude of Tc. It also sheds light on searching for novel 2D materials with higher Curie temperatures by engineering the anisotropic and isotropic magnetic interactions. [6] 61K [39] -0.02 -0.016 -1.35 -0.001 -0.153 23.1 24.0 27K [42] 37K [51] -0.007 -0.002 -0.79 0 -0.071 12.1 13.1 17K(2L) [42,43] 17K [40] Cr2Ge2Te6* -0.01 --2.71 -0.0058 -34.5 30K(2L) [7] 68K [7] Table 