Unconventional superconductivity has been suggested to be present at the interface between bismuth and nickel in thin-film bilayers. In this work, we study the structural, magnetic and superconducting properties of sputter deposited Bi/Ni bilayers. As-grown, our films do not display a superconducting transition, however, when stored at room temperature, after about 14 days our bilayers develop a superconducting transition up to 3.8 K. To systematically study the effect of low temperature annealing on our bilayers, we perform structural characterization with X-ray diffraction and polarized neutron reflectometry, along with magnetometry and low temperature electrical transport measurements on samples annealed at 70 • C. We show that the onset of superconductivity in our samples is coincident with the formation of ordered NiBi3 intermetallic alloy, a known s-wave superconductor. We calculate that the annealing process has an activation energy of (0.86±0.06) eV. As a consequence, gentle heating of the bilayers will cause formation of the superconducting NiBi3 at the Ni/Bi interface, which poses a challenge to studying any distinct properties of Bi/Ni bilayers without degrading that interface. Superconductivity and ferromagnetism are normally considered incompatible phases as the strong exchange field of a ferromagnet will act to break superconducting Cooper pairs Bi/Ni bilayer superconductivity was initially discovered in Bi layers grown on a dusting of Ni in tunneling measurements, which showed that the superconductivity extends across the entire thickness of the Bi An alternative explanation for the origin of the superconductivity in the Bi/Ni bilayer is by the presence of the alloy NiBi 3 which is established to superconduct with a similar T c of 4 K In this work, we set out to determine at what timescales and temperatures intermixing from an initially distinct Bi/Ni interface becomes significant. Annealing at low temperatures, we use SQUID magnetometry, x-ray diffraction (XRD), and polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) to measure changes in Bi/Ni samples. X-ray reflectometry is not used as the x-ray scattering density for bulk Bi and NI are too similar for effective contrast at the interface. We observe the onset of a superconducting T c , evolution of the magnetic moment, and changing structure of the interface. Our results suggest that special handling of the Bi/Ni samples and refrigerated storage is necessary to prevent the formation of NiBi 3 , which otherwise occurs after a few days at room temperature, or a few minutes at temperatures typical of many cleanroom processing steps. Samples are grown by DC sputtering from pure metal targets of Bi (99.99%) and Ni (99.95%) at ambient temperature (21 • C) on to thermally oxidized Si substrates. To prevent oxidation, the samples are capped with 5 nm thick Ta layers. It is found that optimal layer thicknesses for maximum T c are 50 nm of Bi and 6 nm of Ni, consistent with previous work To prevent unintentional annealing, directly after removing from the deposition system, the samples are stored in a freezer at ≈ -20 • C and transported in a portable refrigerator at ≈ 4 • C. We either anneal our samples at room temperature (21 • C), or perform controlled annealing of our samples between 50 • C and 150 • C on a hotplate under a cover to maintain a uniform temperature. Polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) is performed on the PolRef beamline at the ISIS neutron and muon source. Polarized neutron reflectometry data are analyzed using the GenX software By measuring the neutron reflectivity as a function of the wavevector transfer and neutron spin eigenstate, PNR allows the scattering length density (SLD) to be obtained. Careful fitting to the two obtained reflectivity curves in PNR allows the extraction of depth dependent magnetization and structure. PNR is widely employed in the successful characterization of spintronic materials Figure shows the as-grown state, while (c) is after 3600 s annealing at 70 • C. The higher frequency oscillations arise from the thick SiO 2 layer on the substrate. The thinner, rougher, layers of the film modulate these oscillations. The spin asymmetry as calculated by u-d u+d is shown in Figure We employ a box model to fit the PNR data with the layers Ta 2 O 5 /Ta/Ni/NiBi 3 /Bi/SiO 2 /Si. Ta 2 O 5 is the most common oxide of Ta and the SiO 2 density is taken as amorphous. Each layer is assigned a thickness, roughness, magnetization, scattering length, and density. The scattering lengths are fixed from the known bulk values. Magnetism in the structure is limited to the Ni and NiBi 3 layers, NiBi 3 is not ferromagnetic and we do not find a significant moment inside this layer. All other parameters except the substrate density and thickness (the substrate is infinitely thick) are free fitting parameters with physically realistic bounds defined from either the known bulk or as-grown values. The results of fitting are shown in Figure The results of fitting are shown in Figure The main changes to the structure with annealing the sample are the diffusion of Ni atoms into the Bi layer. The stronger nuclear scattering of the Ni increases the SLD of the Bi layer where atoms have diffused, Figure As the Ni diffuses; less ferromagnetically ordered Ni is left, in turn decreasing the magnetic SLD profile and moment measured independently from SQUID. For the final two annealing steps, the fitting returns a very thin in the Supplemental Material To study the magnetic and structural properties of our Bi/Ni bilayer samples we employ SQUID magnetometry and Cu K α λ = 1.54 Å x-ray diffraction (XRD). We use a sample grown in the same vacuum cycle as the sample we study by PNR, which we dice into smaller (4x4 mm) cuttings. The individual cuttings are treated with the same annealing process at 70 • C as the PNR sample. After annealing, we first measure the magnetic hysteresis (moment vs field) of the cuttings at 10 K (the same temperature as the PNR), then check for superconducting transition by measuring moment vs temperature from the base temperature of the magnetometer at small applied field (2-10 K sweep at 5 mT), finally we transfer the cuttings to the x-ray diffractometer where XRD is measured at room temperature. To minimize annealing during the x-ray measurements, the total time to align and record a XRD scan is optimized to take about 30 minutes. Nevertheless, we find by re-measuring a cutting's magnetic response after the room temperature XRD scan has finished, that some annealing occurs during the x-ray measurement. We do not believe this to have an influence on the results presented in this section, however as a precaution do not measure the same cutting more than once and each annealing time for SQUID and XRD measurements are from a different cutting of the pristine sample. The magnetic characterization of our Bi/Ni bilayer samples are shown in Figure It is possible to compare the measured magnetic moment returned from the SQUID measurements and PNR fitting (Figure Fig. Low temperature 4-point probe transport measurements of a 70 • C fully annealed sample (3600 s) show a clear superconducting transition at 3.8 k, Figure where Φ 0 , ξ GL (0) and d SC stands for flux quantum, in-plane coherence length and effective thickness of the superconductivity respectively. Taking the values from both in-plane and out-of-plane H c2 (0) fits the coherence length ξ GL as 13.8 nm and the effective superconducting thickness d SC as 36.2 nm, similar to the thickness of the NiBi 3 layer as obtained from the PNR data. The GL-theory for thin superconductors assumes that the d SC < ξ GL which is not the case here and is visible in Figure Samples as-grown were not immediately observed to be superconducting, but after annealing or leaving at room temperature for several days the magnetization of the Ni layer was reduced although it is non vanishing and an increased coercivity (Fig. Extrapolating from the Arrhenius plot at 21 • C the time constant for the annealing rate will be 4 days which is comparable to the timescale measured at room temperature, the exponential has a doubling rate of ≈ 6 • C such that if kept at 3 • C the timescale extends to 12 days (Fig. When first measured in PNR, the as-grown sample has a thin layer at the interface with a density similar to NiBi 3 , although in the corresponding XRD the NiBi 3 peaks are at the limit of signal to noise and so the volume fraction of ordered NiBi 3 is very small. In comparison, in samples that have been intentionally annealed, the ratio for NiBi 3 XRD peak areas and the fitted layer thickness suggest that 2 nm of NiBi 3 should have a greater intensity of XRD peaks than is measured in the as-grown sample. This thin intermixed layer is not unexpected. The roughness of the Bi layer, implantation of Ni adatoms during growth and, probably most significantly, the time taken to get the samples from a room temperature vacuum chamber to the freezer all contribute to some intermixing of the interface. Liu et al perform pulsed laser deposition (PLD) of Bi/Ni bilayers where they report the NiBi 3 alloy forms during growth. Their interpretation is that PLD is a nonequilibrium process such that Ni atoms arrive at the Bi layer with enough energy to implant deep into the film. Ni implantation stops at the SiO 2 , where it accumulates forming a NiBi alloy and a NiBi 3 layer further from the SiO 2 . We find that ordered NiBi 3 does not exist in our samples at growth, but forms during annealing and is confined to the Bi/Ni interface. We do not find evidence for ordered NiBi alloy in our films, however in the final annealed state Bi may have contaminated any remaining Ni layer in the structure. We conclude that during growth the Ni implantation depth is confined to near the top surface of the Bi, as fitted by the 2 nm of NiBi 3 in the as-grown state. By measuring PNR below T c in an applied field, it is possible to observe Meissner screening under the right conditions (that the film thickness, roughness, and the superconducting penetration depth are balanced to allow for measurable screening to occur) Experimental results by other techniques suggest that superconductivity in bilayers of Bi/Ni may be spin-triplet (p-wave) in nature Our Bi/Ni samples contain all the necessary ingredients for such a state to occur; a source of s-wave superconductivity (NiBi 3 ), ferromagnetism (Ni) and strong spin-orbit coupling (Bi) In this work samples of Bi/Ni bilayers are observed initially to be non-superconducting until either left at room temperature for several days or a short period of heating as low as +50 • C. The superconductivity is attributed to intermixing of the Bi/Ni interface forming an alloy of NiBi 3 identified by XRD Bragg peaks. PNR data is consistent with initially distinct Bi/Ni layers with minimal NiBi 3 in the as-grown states that when annealed at 70 • C for 1 hour the diffusion across the interface increases the NiBi 3 thickness and reduces the pure Bi/Ni layers. From this it seems that to properly study clean and distinct interfaces that maintaining a low temperature for preparation and storage is important. Normal device fabrication recipes which use heating to bake resist or growth methods that allow the sample to heat up will fully anneal Bi/Ni bilayers. Although the superconductivity origins from a known bulk superconductor the existence is still interesting as it is in close proximity to a ferromagnetic layer, a strong spin-orbit coupling Bi layer and also the likely proximity effect in the Bi layer. The data associated with this paper are openly available from the University of Leeds and ISIS Neutron and Muon source data repositories We thank the ISIS neutron and muon source for allocating beamtime (RB:1920455). The work was supported financially through the EPSRC Doctoral Training Partnership and grant EP/M000923/1. This project has received funding from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 743791 (SUPERSPIN). Supplementary Material for: "On the Origin of Superconductivity at Nickel-Bismuth Interfaces" by Matthew Vaughan et al. Samples were grown by DC sputtering from pure metal targets of bismuth (99.99%) and nickel (99.95%) at 4.3 Ås -1 and 3 Ås -1 respectively. The substrate is thermally oxidized Si with 100 nm of SiO 2 cleaned using 5 mins of acetone and then isopropyl ultrasonic cleaning. We find that to maximize the T C an optimal of 50 nm of bismuth and 6 nm of nickel is used. 