Plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) hold tremendous promise for catalyzing light-driven chemical reactions. The conventionally assumed detrimental absorption loss from plasmon damping can now be harvested to drive chemical transformations of the NP adsorbent, through the excitation and transfer of energetic "hot" carriers. The rate and selectivity of plasmonic photocatalysis are dependent on the characteristics of the incident light. By engineering the strength and wavelength of the light harvesting of a NP, it is possible to achieve more efficient and predictive photocatalysts. We report a plasmonic-photonic resonance hybridization strategy to substantially enhance hot electron generation at tunable, narrow-band wavelengths. By coupling the plasmon resonance of silver NPs to the guided mode resonance in a photonic crystal (PC) slab, the reaction rate of a hotelectron-driven reduction conversion is greatly accelerated. The mechanism is broadly compatible with NPs with manifold materials and shapes optimized for the targeted chemistry. The novel enhancement platform sheds light on rational design of high-performance plasmonic photocatalysts. A new paradigm of plasmonic photocatalysis has emerged as a platform for triggering energetically intensive chemical reactions under mild temperature conditions and with potentially selective reaction pathways control. Manipulating the NPs' absorption characteristics would have deep impacts on the reaction kinetics. The supralinear illumination intensity dependence of photocatalytic reaction rate in multiple plasmon-driven reactions indicates higher quantum yield with increasing photon flux. Whereas the reactivity of a plasmonic NP can be optimized through material choice (for example using multiple metals which separately function as the antenna and reactor sites), We introduce a versatile platform capable of enhancing the hot carrier generation in plasmonic photocatalysts at a tunable, narrow spectral band. The structure (Fig The spectrally overlapped LSPR and PCGR can resonantly couple via evanescent fields to form a synergistic plasmonic-photonic hybrid mode. We synthesized AgNCs comprised of gold nanorod (AuNR) as cores and silver as shells, The AgNCs are surface-functionalized with 4-NTP molecules and uniformly deposited onto a PC surface without aggregation (Fig. The hybrid mode is activated when satisfying the phase matching condition of the PCGR mode, whereas the LSPR mode is generally angle insensitive. This incidence angle selection rule allows direct comparison of the absorption, near-field intensity, SERS intensity, and catalytic activity between the hybrid supermode and the solitary LSPR mode. A near-field picture is helpful for understanding the coupling behavior. The hybridization (θ = 3.5°) is characterized by a standing wave pattern in the PC slab and an intense optical hotspot concentrated on the AgNC (Fig. . The PCGR-coupled AgNC possesses a strongly enhanced electric field compared to the uncoupled case at a detuned angle (Fig Once the enhanced optical activity was confirmed, we performed hot-electron-driven surface chemistry as described in Fig The PC slab decorated by 4-NTP-modified AgNCs is immersed in 1.0 M HCl and excited at the resonance angle (θ = 3.5°). The laser was fixed at the same spot to investigate the molecular evolution over time, and the successive SERS spectra are depicted in Fig. We then investigated the effect of plasmonic-photonic hybridization on plasmon-assisted catalytic activity by driving the reaction at various incidence angles (but the same laser power). By properly selecting the illumination time, a divergence in the reaction rates is expected for different angles. We prepared multiple small polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) wells that contain 1.0 M HCl media on a hybrid photocatalyst surface, and we illuminated each well at a distinct θ for the same amount of time. Since AgNCs are uniformly distributed across the 1 × 1 cm 2 PC slab surface, it is fair to compare the reaction rates among different wells. The SERS spectra after 180 s illumination under each θ are measured and shown in Fig. The relative intensity of the SERS bands of 4-NTP and 4-ATP reflects their surface coverage rate, and we can use the ratio of 1599 and 1580 cm -1 band intensity to "quantify" the conversion efficiency. We note that the intensity ratio between their SERS signals does not directly translate into molecule counts because 1) the Raman cross-section (σ) for 4-NTP and 4-ATP are not the same (σNTP > σATP), . This result provides evidence that the increased plasmon-assisted catalytic activity stems from the electromagnetic enhancements through LSPR-PCGR hybridization. While hot electron excitation can be synergistic with the thermo-plasmonic effects in plasmonic photocatalysis, in this study the hybridization-induced catalysis activity enhancement has an electronic origin. We conducted thermal simulations (COMSOL) to estimate the temperature in the AgNC upon its hybridization with the PC slab, when the heat generation is the strongest. Briefly, the power adsorbed by the AgNC (obtained by the product of absorption cross section and illumination intensity) was input into a steady-state heat transfer model as a volumetric heat source. The increased rate of energetic carriers transferred to 4-NTP speeds up the reduction process. In summary, we have demonstrated a new mechanism to enhance the plasmon-assisted catalytic activity through coupling plasmonic NPs to a photonic microcavity. Through forming an intense optical hotspot at the NP, the LSPR-PCGR hybridization significantly enhances the hot carrier generation at selected narrowband wavelengths with broad spectral tunability. This platform will pave the way to high-performance plasmonic photocatalysis because (1) it is widely compatible with a variety of NPs, allowing its optical and chemical properties to be optimized individually for targeted reactions; (2) its enhanced light harvesting represents a critical step toward energy-efficient photocatalysts which can be driven by low power lasers, light emitting diodes, or even sunlight; (3) its high hot-carrier generation rate sheds light on the kinetically challenging multi-carrier reactions and holds promise for activation barrier reduction; and (4) its narrow, spectrally-tunable absorption enhancements allow for discrete excitement of defined electronic transitions in the metal, which offers a degree of freedom to manipulate the selectivity of the reactions.