We investigate low-temperature electronic states of the series of organic conductors β ′′ -(BEDT-TTF)4[(H3O)M(C2O4)3]G, where BEDT-TTF is bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene, and M and G represent trivalent metal ions and guest organic molecules, respectively. Our structural analyses reveal that the replacement of M and G give rise to systematic change in the cell parameters, especially in the b-axis length, which has positive correlation with the superconducting transition temperature Tc. Analyses of temperature and magnetic field dependences of the electrical resistance including the Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations elucidates that the variation of charge disproportionation, effective mass and the number of itinerant carriers, can be systematically explained by the change of the b-axis length. The changes of the transfer integrals induced by stretching/compressing the b-axis are confirmed by the band calculation. We discuss that electron correlations in quarter-filled electronic bands lead to charge disproportionation and the possibility of a novel pairing mechanism of superconductivity mediated by charge degrees of freedom. Superconductivity dominated by electron correlations often appears in nearly half-filled electronic bands, where an antiferromagnetic Mott insulating state is easily formed by on-site Coulomb repulsion U . In such cases, the superconductive regions are located in close proximity to the magnetic Mott phases in electronic phase diagrams Recently, β ′′ -type organic charge-transfer salts consisting of BEDT-TTF molecules with counter anions and guest solvent molecules have drawn extensive attention because they are expected to have a novel Cooper pairing mechanism related to charge degrees of freedom 3-and guest molecules G. The β ′′ -type salts are classified as nondimeric type organic compounds due to the absence of dimerization of the BEDT-TTF molecules. As the nondimeric feature and the valence (BEDT-TTF) 0.5+ make the energy band quarter filled, magnetic degrees of freedom are expected to be quenched in uniform CO states. Some earlier works Single crystals of the compounds displayed in Table I were synthesized by electrochemical oxidation methods. The crystal structures and axes of the salts are determined by X-ray diffraction at 298 K. The out-of-plane resistance was measured by a standard four-terminal AC method with current along c * -axis. Since the crystals harvested from the same batch do not have large sample dependences, each data point in the figures of this paper is obtained by the crystals from one batch for one composition. Four gold wires were attached by carbon paint on both plane surfaces of single crystals. The transport measurements were performed in a 3 He-refrigerator with a 15 T superconducting magnet and a 14 T Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design). As is shown in Fig. Additionally, the counter anions layer has a neutral solvent molecule, G, aligned along the b-axis with commensurate periodicities. The compounds have weak Figure In order to discuss the difference in T c , we now turn to the chemical pressure effect against the electronic system through cation and guest molecule substitution. Since the replacement of the trivalent metal ion M and the solvent molecules G does not modify the band filling, but induces local volume change, the substitution must work as the change of the energy dispersion and bandwidth of the π-electrons. It should also be mentioned that introduction of magnetic ions like Fe 3+ (S = 5/2) and Cr 3+ (S = 3/2) does not exert a strong influence on the πelectrons. Although the interaction between the insulating and conducting layers known as π-d interaction For the discussion of the itinerant carriers, magnetoresistance of some samples at 1.5 K in perpendicular magnetic fields is shown in Fig. In the magnetoresistance curves at lower temperatures, Shubnikovde Haas (SdH) oscillations are observed in all salts except for the M=Ru cases. The higher-T c salts do not have large oscillations as compared with those of lower-T c ones, but, tiny modulation of the resistivity certainly appears in higher-field region above 10 T. The smaller amplitude of the oscillation of the higher-T c salts may be caused by the enhanced scattering rate owing to the coexistence with the larger CD. Nonetheless, the observation of the SdH oscillations indicates the existence of the Fermi surface even in the CD state for the higher-T c salts. Although it is still an open question how the CD state coexists with the conducting part, the electrons in the Fermi surface allows to the semiconducting CD state to show the superconductivity. The oscillations of the magnetoresistance can be transformed into the Fourier transform spectrum, which shows peaks at the frequency of the SdH oscillations as seen in Fig. In order to confirm these experimental speculations, we perform the band calculation by extended-Hückel tight binding method In Fig. We reported the electrical transport properties of the organic conductors β ′′ -(BEDT-TTF) 4 [(H 3 O)M(C 2 O 4 ) 3 ]G with chemical substitution. From the results of the temperature and magnetic field dependences, we find that the semiconducting behavior and negative magnetoresistance observed in the higher-T c salts originate from the charge disproportionation caused by the stronger electron correlation. We also find that the superconducting transition temperatures are influenced mainly by the b-axis length depending on the length of the guest molecules because the b-axis corresponds to the direction of the orientation of the guest molecules in the counter layer. From the analyses of the Shubnikovde Haas oscillations, it was found that the effective mass and the number of carriers are influenced by the b-axis length. The band calculation also demonstrates the experimental results that the electron correlation reflects the transfer integrals along the b-axis direction. The increase of T c accompanied by the enhancement of the CD with lengthening the b-axis length suggests that the superconductivity should be mediated by the charge fluctuation evolved at the phase boundary of the charge ordered phase. Moreover, we find that the present discussion of the electronic state can be applied to the other β ′′ -type salts according to the electron correlation. The superconductivity of the β ′′ -type compounds is universally expected to be produced by the charge fluctuation enhanced near the charge ordered phase.