Integrated ferroelectric plasmonic modulators featuring large bandwidths, broad optical operation range, resilience to high temperature and ultracompact footprint are introduced. Measurements show a modulation bandwidth of 70 GHz and a temperature stability up to 250 °C. Mach-Zehnder interferometer modulators with 10-μm-long phase shifters were operated at 116 Gbit/s PAM-4 and 72 Gbit/s NRZ. Wide and open eye diagrams with extinction ratios beyond 15 dB were found. The fast and robust devices are apt to an employment in industrial environments. H IGH-SPEED, compact and power-efficient electro-optic (EO) modulators are currently in the spotlight of research as they are key components in high-capacity optical links. Many physical effects have already been exploited to perform electro-optic (EO) modulation. Among them are for example, the quantum-confined Stark effect State-of-the-art EO Pockels modulators commonly rely on the Pockels effect of lithium niobate (LiNbO 3 , LNB), a ferroelectric material. Transmission rates of 1.6 Tbit/s have already been demonstrated using a LNB IQ modulator The need of higher integration densities led to the emerging of the silicon (Si) photonics platform. Si photonics was proposed in 1985 A possible research direction towards this aim is the siliconorganic-hybrid (SOH) platform Another technology is the "lithium niobate on insulator" (LNOI) platform, which is based on a thin film of LNB on a thick insulating SiO 2 layer. Being proposed in 2010 The first opportunity to decrease the voltage length product arises from switching from LNB with a Pockels coefficient of only 30 pm/V The second opportunity to decrease the voltage-length product and simultaneously raise the EO bandwidth dramatically is to transit from photonics to plasmonics. A plasmonic modulator device can be built using a metal-insulator-metal slot waveguide geometry. Here, metal electrodes are used both as guiding structures for the optical mode and as radio frequency (RF) electrodes for the electrical signal. The slots can be filled with nonlinear functional materials introducing the Pockels effect. This leads to the so-called plasmonic-organic hybrid (POH) approach, which adopts nonlinear organic materials filled into a narrow, plasmonic metallic slot waveguide. The POH technology offers enhanced modulation efficiency and bandwidth In this paper, we report on the current progress in realizing ultra-compact and high-speed plasmonic ferroelectric modulators (PFMs) by effectively combining the epitaxially grown functional ferroelectric BTO material with a plasmonic device design. We present 72 Gbit/s non-return-to-zero (NRZ) data modulation and 116 Gbit/s 4-level pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM-4) experiments. Experiments are performed with modulators featuring an active section that is as short as 10 μm, a measured frequency response that exceeds 70 GHz (only limited by the experimental instruments) and a record low voltagelength product between 150 and 200 Vμm, depending on the modulation frequency. Furthermore, temperature stability up to 250 °C is shown. The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the device design and concept. Section III depicts the fabrication process of the device. Section IV discusses the influence of BTO's crystalline orientation on the device design. A derivation of the effective Pockels coefficients is given. Section V presents passive as well as EO characterization experiments. These results include the frequency response of PFMs and the temperature stability test. Section VI shows the data modulation experiments of 116 Gbit/s PAM-4 and 72 Gbit/s NRZ. Section VII concludes the work by summarizing the key results. This section presents the concept and design of the efficient, compact, and ultra-fast modulators. Two plasmonic ferroelectric phase shifters are integrated into a photonic Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI). Photonic elements are employed for fiberto-chip coupling and on-chip routing. photonic grating couplers Plasmonic ferroelectric phase modulators are the key components of our devices. They are based on an Au-BTO-Au plasmonic slot waveguides, a concept which has already been successfully demonstrated with organic EO materials PFMs feature efficient modulation, low drive voltages, a most compact footprint while offering broadband frequency response. The PFMs are efficient because they benefit from three distinct advantages over more conventional modulators. First, they benefit from BTO as an EO material, which provides one of the highest Pockels coefficients among all known materials Here, Δn BTO is BTO's refractive index change, which is proportional to its Pockels coefficient, and Γ is the field interaction factor Low drive voltages -accompanied by low power consumption -can as well be traced back to a few geometrical advantages of the concept. For instance the small wavelength of plasmons allows for the guiding in narrow slot waveguides. This then provides another advantage. Thanks to these narrow slots (width: d), one obtains a very strong electrical field E = V /d, which is the key stimulus for the Pockels effect, described by the Pockels coefficient r. Voltage requirements to operate a PFM are further relaxed by the PFM's open-circuit behavior and the push-pull configuration of the MZM. Because their parasitic impedance can be neglected with respect to 50 Ω driving electronics, the devices appear as open-circuit terminated, and reflect the incoming RF signal. This leads to a 6 dB voltage gain as compared to a terminated device with travelling wave electrodes. Drivers that withstand the reflected wave are commercially available and have been successfully used in our experiment. Another factor two enhancement in voltage is gained from joining two plasmonic phase shifters to a MZM. The nature of the linear EO effect allows for operating the MZM in a push-pull configuration: Phase modulations of opposite signs are generated in the two arms and added up at the output. While this halves the needed driving voltage, it also results in a pure, inherently chirp-free modulation. Thanks to this high efficiency, a single phase shifter is as short as 10 μm and does not require travelling wave electrodes. Its footprint can be as small as 20 μm 2 , although it is currently constrained by the size of the electric contact pads. Plasmonic modulators offer ultra-broad EO bandwidths: The compactness dramatically reduces the devices' parasitic capacitance C. Due to the metallic RF feeds, the devices also feature a very small parasitic resistance R. As a result, plasmonic slot modulators offer a uniquely small RC time constant, which enables EO bandwidths pushing to the THz regime The devices discussed here are fabricated on a Si/3 μm SiO 2 /20 nm Al 2 O 3 /80 nm BTO/220 nm Si wafer. To manufacture this layer stack, an 80-nm-thick BTO film was deposited epitaxially on a SrTiO 3 -coated SOI wafer by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The 4-nm-thin SrTiO 3 layer is necessary to enable an epitaxial relationship between Si (100) and BTO The crystalline structure of BTO determines the nonlinear EO response of the material. In this section, we first discuss the EO properties of the bulk single crystal and calculate the effective Pockels coefficient related to an optical wave. Second, we calculate the effective Pockels coefficient of the MBE-grown BTO thin-film considering its multi-domain nature and compare the extracted coefficients to the values reported in the literature. Fig. BTO's refractive index change due to its Pockels effect in response to an externally applied electrical field can be described The question arises if the EO response can be maximized by changing the angle φ between the waveguide and the c-axis, see Fig. We start by stating the index ellipsoid of BTO, which is equivalent to the tensorial notation of Eq. ( The x-, y-and z-axes correspond to crystal's a-, b-and c-axes, see Fig. The modulating field is applied transversely to the waveguide in x direction. Hence, the electrical fields E x and E z along the crystalline axes can be then be expressed by It is E y = E y = 0. We insert these transformations into the indicatrix, and only consider the term with the x 2 component, which determines how a modulating field in x direction acts on the refractive index of light polarized in the same direction. We find the term e + E x • cos 2 φsinφ (r 13 + 2r 42 ) + r 33 sin 3 φ (7) From this expression, we can derive the absolute refractive index n x x for light polarized along the x -axis, and the Pockels coefficient r 1 1 = r x x x for a modulating field along x and light polarized along the x axis r x x x (φ) = -cos 2 φsinφ (r 13 + 2r 42 )r 33 sin 3 φ (8) The results derived above hold for monocrystalline BTO. However, in epitaxial thin films on Si, such as grown by MBE, there are three possible orientations of a domain's c-axis (along the substrate's x-, y-, and z-axes), each of which can be polarized in anti-parallel directions Our interest lays in finding a waveguide orientation, see Fig. This expression is maximal for φ = 45 • and yields For the bulk Pockels coefficients presented in Table In-device measurements of the effective Pockels coefficient in epitaxial BTO thin films range between 100 and 360 pm/V The fabricated samples include plasmonic ferroelectric phase shifters and MZMs. The passive characterization reveals propagation losses of the plasmonic waveguides and the performance of the coupling and splitting elements. We further perform active characterization experiments on devices oriented in φ = 45 • with respect to the crystalline axes and assess the basic EO performance of the PFM. We then investigated the influence of the DC bias voltage, measured the device's EO frequency response and showed temperature resilience of the fabricated devices up to 250 °C. We relate the findings of each experiment to BTO's material properties, to its ferroelectricity and to the origin of its Pockels effect. Fig. It is worth mentioning that although our proof-of-principle devices have fairly high losses, the least part of them is fundamental. Experimental results and simulations indicate that a Fig. We have investigated the influence of the DC bias voltage, the RF signal, and the device operation temperature onto the modulation efficiency of the PFM. The measurement setup for the subsequent experiments is shown in Fig. proved device fabrication (BTO thickness and etch depth both 100 nm), we predict a V π L of below 20 Vμm, at 60 GHz and beyond. In this first experiment, we swept the DC bias voltage from -8 to +8 V. The RF signal was tuned at a frequency of 40 GHz and set to an output power of 10 dBm. The modulation amplitude is plotted in Fig. We have investigated the frequency response of the PFM from 10 MHz to 70 GHz. In the measurement configuration as described before. We kept the DC bias voltage (2.5 V) and the RF power (10 dBm at the source) constant, while sweeping the frequency of RF signal. The results are shown in Fig. Indeed, the measured frequency dependence of the PFM's modulation efficiency follows the frequency dependence of the BTO crystal. We observe a flat frequency response from 10 MHz to ∼1 GHz, which drops between 10 and 30 GHz. For higher frequencies up to 70 GHz, the response remains constant. The observed behavior is expected as reported in the literature The influence of the device temperature on the modulation efficiency has been investigated. To this end, we have subjected the device to temperatures up to 130 °C while measuring the modulation efficiency at 65 GHz. The result is shown in Fig. In a second part to this experiment, we subjected the device to temperatures up to 250 °C for five minutes each and tested the modulation efficiency after each exposure, see the triangular symbols in Fig. To get a first insight about the stability of the device, we subjected it to a continuous operation of 24 hours at 90 °C, a typical operating temperature required for practical applications. The device did not show any sign of degradation, see Fig. The experimental setup for the data modulation experiments are depicted in Fig. The signals were generated with a de-Bruijn bit sequence of order 18 and loaded on the memory of a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) with a sampling rate of 72 GSa/s and an electrical 6 dB bandwidth of <29 GHz. The DAC's differential output signals were electrically amplified before they were fed to the chip. The MZM was operated in a dual-drive, push-pull mode. The applied RF voltage peak was V p = 2.8 V, while a DC bias voltage of approximately 3 V was applied over each of the two arms. The applied DC bias ensured that the BTO was fully poled and could additionally be used to fine-tune the operating point of the PFM. Light from an external cavity laser (ECL) at 1.55 μm wavelength was amplified to 18 dBm by an erbium doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) before it was launched onto the chip via a photonic grating coupler. At the output, the optical signal was coupled off-chip to the fiber via another grating coupler and amplified by two cascaded EDFAs. For data modulation at 72 Gbit/s, the signal was detected by a 70 GHz pin-photodiode and recorded by a real-time oscilloscope (RTO) with a sampling rate of 160 GSa/s and an electrical 3 dB bandwidth of 63 GHz. The digitized signal was processed offline, including timing recovery, adaptive equalization, hard symbol decision and error counting. The adaptive equalizer is a T/2-spaced feed forward equalizer with LMS-based adaptive filter tap updates and 51 filter taps. Finally, we made a hard decision, evaluated 899 • 10 3 bits, counted the errors and calculated the bit error ratio (BER). A BER of 7.66 • 10 -4 was achieved without any pre-or post-equalization. With post-equalization, a BER of 5.7 • 10 -5 was achieved For data modulation at 116 Gbit/s, the signal was detected by an optical coherent receiver and recorded by the RTO. After timing and carrier recovery, the signal was equalized as described above. Furthermore, we pre-distorted the signal by a non-linear look-up table and compensated for imperfections of the driving electronics. After the hard decision and evaluation of 475 • 10 3 bits, we determined a BER of 9 • 10 -3 We have reported an ultra-compact and ultra-fast PFM. We have characterized the frequency response from 10 MHz to 70 GHz, which remains constant for frequency above ∼25 GHz. The EO response in the only 70-nm-wide structured BTO strip remains stable at operation temperatures up to 130 °C. Furthermore, the devices are resilient to temperature exposure up to 250 °C. Data modulation experiments with a MZM at 116 Gbit/s (PAM-4) and 72 Gbit/s (NRZ) have been demonstrated. With recent technology advancement, voltage-length products below 20 Vμm are likely in reach for the presented plasmonic ferroelectric modulator design. In this regime, a device operated with ∼1 V p and with less than 10 dB fiber-to-fiber loss can be realized. The demonstrated performance and robustness of the device, together with the prospective performance improvement, show the technology's great potential for future applications in practical industrial environments.