Magnetic skyrmion, topologically non-trivial spin texture, has been considered as promising information carrier in future electronic devices because of its nanoscale size, low depinning current density and high motion velocity. Despite the broad interests in skyrmion racetrack memory, researchers have been recently exploiting logic functions enabled by using the particle-like behaviors of skyrmions. These functions can be applied to unconventional computing, such as stochastic computing (SC), which treats data as probabilities and is superior to binary computing due to its simplicity of logic operation. In this work, we demonstrate SC implemented by skyrmionic logic devices. We propose a skyrmionic AND-OR logic device as a multiplier in the stochastic domain and two skyrmionic multiplexer (MUX) logic devices as stochastic adders. With the assist of voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA), the precise control of skyrmions collision is not required in the skyrmionic AND-OR logic device, thus improving the operation robustness. In the two MUX logic devices, skyrmions can be driven by Zhang-Li torque or spin orbit torque (SOT). Particularly, we can flexibly regulate the skyrmion motion by VCMA or voltage controlled Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (VCDMI) in the SOT case. Furthermore, 3-bit stochastic multiplier and adder are demonstrated by micromagnetic simulations. In addition, simulations in synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF) show that the performance of our skyrmionic logic gates can be optimized through advanced materials. Our work opens up perspective to implement SC using skyrmionic logic devices. Magnetic skyrmions are topologically stable chiral structures, which are generated at the B20-type bulk material or ultra-thin ferromagnetic (FM) layer favored by Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI) One of the most essential application of skyrmionic logic device is to support stochastic computing (SC) which can be realized by AND and MUX logic operations. SC is an unconventional computing method that treats data as probabilities In this letter, we propose a skyrmionic AND-OR logic device and two types of skyrmionic MUX logic devices regarding the skyrmion motion manner to implement SC. In the skyrmionic AND-OR logic device which acts as a stochastic multiplier Based on the proposed logic devices, 3-bit SN stochastic multiplier and stochastic adder are further confirmed by micromagnetic simulations. We also demonstrate that our proposed skyrmionic logic devices can work in the SAF, where no skyrmion Hall effect exists and small magnetic skyrmions can be stabilized at room temperature. The performances of the proposed skyrmionic logic devices in FM and SAF are analyzed, which shows broad prospects of the proposed skyrmionic logic devices on implementing SC. In the proposed structure shown in Fig. shows the profile of SOT current density (JSOT) and electrode voltages to achieve device function. A voltage of +2V is dynamically applied on Vg1 and Vg2 to guide skyrmion motion. Fig. Therefore, the OR and AND lane generate an output of "1" and "0", respectively. In the case with two skyrmion inputs, the first skyrmion (from In0) stops near Vg2, similar to the aforementioned behavior. The subsequent skyrmion (from In1) is then blocked because of the repulsion from the first skyrmion and the energy potential caused by Vg1. At t = 3 ns, the voltage on Vg1 is set to 0 and JSOT increases to 10 MA cm -2 .Thus the subsequent skyrmion will be driven to the AND lane by a combined effect of skyrmion Hall Effect Moreover, we designed a 3-bit (length of stochastic bit stream of 8) stochastic multiplier, using the proposed skyrmionic logic AND-OR device as the stochastic multiplier cell. Fig. operation. (b) Schematic of the proposed 3-bit skyrmionic stochastic multiplier. Notches are used to divide each lane into 8 regions and synchronize the motion of skyrmions. (c) Profile of driving current density (JSOT) and electrode voltages in an operation cycle. (d) Snapshots of magnetization configuration of the 3-bit stochastic multiplier at selected times. At t = 0 ns, the skyrmions distributed in the two input lanes represent probabilities P1 = 4/8 and P0 = 6/8, respectively. After 168 ns, AND lane will output the binary sequence of "0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0", i.e., probability Pout = 3/8, which denotes the multiplication result of two inputs. III. Skyrmionic MUX Logic Device SC addition operation can be performed by a multiplexer (MUX) However, this scheme has several shortcomings. First, the stability and power efficiency will be affected by the crush of skyrmions. Second, deflection toward -y direction at the interface can only be achieved when skyrmions are driven by Zhang-Li torque (see Appendix C for the simulation results of SOT driven case and Discussion for explanation), which consumes more energy and time than the SOT driven case. In addition, the skyrmion displacement in the y direction is inversely proportional to the damping shows the schematic of a skyrmionic MUX device using VCMA. Similar to Fig. simulations, we apply a +1 V voltage on the electrode gates to increase the local PMA energy density from 0.8 MJ m -3 to 0.848 MJ m -3 . In this case, the max current density is JSOT = 3.0 MA cm -2 , otherwise skyrmions will enter into wrong lanes. Materials with higher VCMA coefficient of higher voltages can be used to improve the device speed. Based on the MUX device using VCMA, we further design a 3-bit stochastic adder. ) in an operation cycle (d) Snapshots of magnetization configuration of the 3-bit stochastic multiplier at selected times. At t = 0 ns, the skyrmions distributed in the two input lanes represent probabilities P1 = 7/8 and P0 = 3/8, respectively. After 137 ns, the OUT lane will output the binary sequence of "1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1", i.e., probability Pout = 5/8, which denotes the half sum result of two inputs. To understand the skyrmion dynamics in the two proposed MUX logic devices, we investigate the trajectory of skyrmions driven by Zhang-Li torque and SOT based on Thiele equation which assumes that skyrmions are rigid during the steady motion. We first analyze the skyrmion dynamics driven by Zhang-Li torque. The Thiele equation for this case reads Here, G = (0, 0, G) is the gyromagnetic coupling vector, where G = 4πQ with saturation magnetization Ms , FM layer thickness tF, gyromagnetic ratio γ, and skyrmion number Q = -∫∫ m • ( m × m ) dS; v = (vx, vy, 0) is skyrmion motion velocity; u is a vector along the electron motion direction with amplitude u; α is the damping constant; D = ∫∫( m ) dS is the dissipative force; F i = -∇V(r) is the force induced by the interface where DMI changes with V(r) denoting the system energy when a skyrmion locates at position r. Assume that we apply an in-plane current along -x direction and the interface is exactly along y direction as shown in Fig. where Fi denotes the magnitude of the force F i . If D1 = D2 or skyrmions are far away enough from the interface, we can set Fi = 0 in Eq. ( In our simulations, we get Q = 1 because the magnetization of the background FM layer points along +z direction. Therefore, vy is negative, which agrees with the trajectories shown in Fig. In contrast, the Thiele equation for the SOT driven case reads where F SHE = F x is the force induced by SOT with magnitude FSHE, the sign of which depends on the spin polarization direction σ. Solving Eq. ( If D1 < D2, FSHE and Fi are both positive, thus the skyrmion Hall angle θ = atan = atan ( ), which means that skyrmions can only bend toward +y direction when approaching the interface from In0 or In1. According to the expression of θsk, the skyrmion Hall effect should be remarkable in the SOT driven case, agreeing well with the trajectories in Fig. If an oblique interface is introduced, as is the case in Fig. To guide skyrmions move along the interface, we have FSHE > 0, Fix < 0 and Fiy < 0, i.e., D1 > D2. Assume that the interface encloses angle δ with the -y direction, we have k = tan(δ) = -= . Subsequently, we can obtain: Therefore, we can guide skyrmion motion along a designed interface when a proper SOT current is applied. Since Fi can also be generated at the interface where PMA changes, VCMA effect can be used to realize similar function, as shown in Fig. Note that if the applied SOT current is too strong, Fi provided by the interface may fail to satisfy Eq. ( As shown above, we can implement SC by the skyrmionic logic devices. We then evaluate the performance of the skyrmionic logic devices. we utilize these skyrmions for storage in the meantime. The device performance can be further optimized via adopting advanced materials like ferrimagnets where skyrmion velocity can be much enhanced. For example, our simulations in SAF (see Appendix E) show that the energy consumption for the proposed skyrmionic logic devices can be reduced by about 2 times at nearly the same operation speed. It is also confirmed that the proposed skyrmionics logic gates can be achieved without skyrmion Hall effect, different from previous proposals. Regarding the area, the device area depends on the skyrmion size. Using the parameters in our simulations, which are used to mimic the Pt/Co system, the diameter of skyrmion is ~20 nm. Though skyrmions of this size may encounter thermal stability issue in ferromagnetic thin film, for example, researchers only identified skyrmions of ~100 nm in Pt/Co/MgO at room temperature indicates that smaller skyrmions can be anticipated and there is still much room/potential for the improvement in device area and power consumption. In addition, owing to the nonvolatile property of skyrmion, there is no static power consumption for skyrmionic logic devices while that for CMOS AND gate is ~0.9 nW In this work, we propose a skyrmionic AND-OR logic device and two types of skyrmionic MUX logic devices to implement SC. Thanks to the energy landscape designed by VCMA or VCDMI, precise control of skyrmion-skyrmion collision is not required in our devices, thus enabling high operation robustness. Based on these devices, we demonstrate the 3-bit stochastic multiplier and adder. Performance evaluation shows that our proposed skyrmionic logic devices are promising to execute SC in terms of energy consumption, time delay and area with advance in materials. Our work unfolds the great potential of skyrmionic logic devices to implement SC. Therefore, the energy consumption for the AND-OR and MUX logic gates (Fig. We also adopt trilayer SAF systems to improve the performance of our devices For the skyrmionic AND-OR logic device, we slightly extend the size along the x direction (200 nm to 240 nm) to get more space for skyrmion motion. The simulation results show that skyrmions in the SAF system can move about 2 times faster than the skyrmions in the FM system given the same energy consumption. Similarly, the performance of the MUX logic gate is optimized as well in the SAF system. Though the DMI strength used in our simulations, which is also adopted in Ref. which further indicates the feasibility of our method. Therefore, our simulations in SAF show that our scheme corresponds to a practical material system, i.e. Co-based synthetic antiferromagnets. It will also be interesting to demonstrate our schemes in ferrimagnets, another promising material system, where F. Büttner and L. Caretta et al. have done much pioneer work 