We report an optical homogeneous linewidth of 580 ± 20 Hz of Er 3+ :Y2O3 ceramics at millikelvin temperatures, narrowest so far in rare-earth doped ceramics. We show slow spectral diffusion of ∼2 kHz over a millisecond time scale. Temperature, field dependence of optical coherence and spectral diffusions reveal the remaining dephasing mechanism as elastic two-level systems in polycrystalline grain boundaries and superhyperfine interactions of Er 3+ with nuclear spins. In addition, we perform spectral holeburning and measure up to 5 s hole lifetimes. These spectroscopic results put Er 3+ :Y2O3 ceramics as a promising candidate for telecommunication quantum memories and light-matter interfaces. Quantum light-matter interfaces connecting optical and spin degrees of freedom are important building blocks for quantum interconnect technologies. Their potential applications include optical quantum memories In particular, erbium (Er 3+ ) is a paramagnetic ion with a half-integer spin (Kramers ion) with an optical transition in the low-loss telecommunication C-band around 1530-1540 nm. When doped into host matrices with low magnetic noise, exceptionally narrow optical homogeneous linewidth (Γ h ) of 73 Hz Compared to Er 3+ :Y 2 SiO 5 which has been well studied in the literature In this work, we measure optical coherence properties of the 4 I 13/2 (Y 1 ) → 4 I 15/2 (Z 1 ) telecom transition in transparent Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics in the <100 mK temperature regime and obtain the narrowest optical homogeneous linewidth measured so far in rare-earth doped ceramics of 580 Hz at an applied magnetic field of 0.7 T. The measured transition shows a slow spectral diffusion of ∼2 kHz over 1 ms. We systematically investigate field, temperature dependence of Γ h and spectral diffusions to determine the dephasing mechanisms, and quantify the remaining broadening due to coupling to elastic two-level systems (TLS) and nuclear spins. We also measure spectral hole lifetimes up to 5 s. Our results of subkilohertz optical linewidth with a slow spectral diffusion arXiv:1911.05058v2 [physics.app-ph] 6 Jan 2020 of Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 demonstrates a significant potential of this material for telecommunication quantum technologies. The material under study is transparent 20 parts per million (ppm) doped Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics, with dimensions of 9.5 mm x 3 mm x 1.7 mm. This material is made by sintering Er 3+ doped Y 2 O 3 nanoparticles (40 nm) in the following way. The nanoparticles are pressed into a pellet in a steel die at approximately 8 Klbs force. This pellet is isostatically pressed at 25 Kpsi in a latex iso-pressing sheath at room temperature, followed by sintering at 1500 °C in air for 2 hours. The pellet is then hot isostatically pressed at 1490 °C for 16 hours at 29 Kpsi under an argon atmosphere in a graphite furnace. The pellet is buried inside Y 2 O 3 powder during HIP to reduce carbon contamination which comes from the graphite furnace. The surface of the sample is polished with a roughness of about 5 nm. This resulted in polycrystals with an average cross-sectional grain size of 0.3 μm 2 . Further details of the sample and manufacturing process are outlined in A fiber-coupled telecom diode laser (Toptica CTL 1500) was used for optical measurements. Two cascaded fiber-based acousto-optic modulators (AOM) at 200 MHz each were used to modulate the frequency and intensity of the laser, giving a 100 dB extinction ratio. The light is sent through a fiber-based circulator, which separated the input and output light from the sample. The sample was mounted on the mixing chamber stage (MXC) of a dilution refrigerator, and a 3-axis nanopositioner was used for sample optical alignment. Two copper clips were used to secure the sample on a copper stage for increased thermal conductivity. The light exiting the fiber was focused onto the sample with an aspheric doublet, down to a spot size of 12 μm, and reflected off the gold-coated sample stage and back into the fiber. This created a double pass configuration through the sample. The percentage of the light exiting the fiber to the light collected back by the fiber was about 30 %. A superconducting 6-1-1 T vector magnet was mounted around the sample. Because the sample is ceramics and has no preferred crystallographic directions, the magnet was operated only along one (6 T) axis. For lifetime measurements, photoluminescence (PL) was detected by sending a 1.5 μs excitation pulse, gated by two AOMs, and the reflection detected by a superconducting nanowire single photon detector (SNSPD). The dark count rate of the SNSPD was measured to 50 ± 10 Hz, and the detector efficiency was about 80%. For absorption spectroscopy, the light was sent to the sample without AOMs, and the reflection was measured with a photodiode. For optical coherence spectroscopy, two pulse and three pulse photon echoes with heterodyne detection was used. The light before the AOM was split with a fiber-based 50:50 beamsplitter, and one path was sent through an AOM and to the sample, while the other path was used as the local oscillator (LO). The reflection from the sample and the LO was recombined with another 50:50 fiberbased beamsplitter, and the beating at 200 MHz was observed with a photodiode. A variable attenuator and polarization controller was used for the LO path to optimize the echo intensity. Figure The zero-field absorption spectrum for the Y 1 -Z 1 transition is shown in Fig. The oscillator strength f is given by where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, e is the electron charge, m e is the electron mass, c is the speed of light, n is the index of refraction, N is the number density of the dopant, and α is the absorption coefficient. Given α(ν) measured in Fig. which gives T spon = 34.2 ms. Figure We measure the optical coherence using two-pulse photon echoes width heterodyne detection. The π pulse was 500 ns long. The inset of Fig. where τ is the delay between the two pulses, x is the parameter describing spectral diffusion, and T M is the phase memory time. From the fit, we extract the effective homogeneous linewidth as Γ h,ef f = 1/(πT M ). The narrowest linewidth of 580 Hz was observed at 0.7 T. To determine the dephasing mechanisms, we break down the contributing factors to Γ h as: Γ pop is the contribution from the excited state radiative lifetime. This gives Γ pop = 1/(2π * T 1 ) = 21.8 Hz, a negligible contribution to the overall linewidth. Γ ion-ion includes contributions from two factors. One is instantaneous spectral diffusion (ISD) due to strong optical excitations that can abruptly change the local environment Γ T LS is the dephasing that arises from fluctuations in the local environment (e.g. magnetic, electric fields) due to tunneling between two configurations with similar energy, known as tunneling two-level systems (TLS) Γ h at increasing magnetic fields along the maximum absorption line are plotted in Fig. Between magnetic fields of 0.01 to 0.1 T, we observed periodic modulations in the echo amplitudes with τ . These oscillations decreased in amplitude and increased in frequency as the field was increased from 0.01 to 0.1 T. Two pulse echoes done on Er 3+ Y 2 SiO 5 show similar oscillations below 0.1 T To further investigate the dephasing mechanisms, we measured the temperature dependence of homogeneous linewidth at 0.1 T and 0.7 T, as shown in Fig. We perform a linear fit in Fig. where Γ 0 is the linewidth at 0 K. We obtain fit parameters of Γ 0 = 4.8 kHz and α T LS = 7.8 kHz/K at 0.1 T, and Γ 0 = 320 Hz and α T LS = 3.6 kHz/K at 0.7 T. We first note that the TLS coupling α T LS is half at the higher field. The reduction in α T LS is likely due to a reduction of magnetic TLS, which have been seen in similar systems To determine the temporal dependence of the linewidth, we investigate spectral diffusion using stimulated photon echoes (three pulse echoes). Three identical 300 ns pulses were sent, with a delay between the second and third pulse we denote as the wait time T w . The delay between the first and second pulse τ was varied to extract the coherence time for a given T w . Spectral diffusion caused by spin flips and TLS is described by where Γ 0 is the homogeneous linewidth in the absence of spectral diffusion, γ SD is the broadening due to magnetic spin flips, R is the Y spin flip rate, γ T LS is the TLS coupling strength, and t 0 is the minimum measurement timescale, which is 10μs. Here we take into account the contribution to spectral diffusion from the superhyperfine/hyperfine spin flips, indicated by the exponential term We use Eq.( Next, we consider the x parameter obtained from the Mims fit of the two pulse photon echo decays, which describes spectral diffusion. For all magnetic fields, x was approximately 1.2-1.3. Previous studies on Er 3+ -doped glasses that have shown decoherence dominated by TLS reveal x parameters equal to or less than 1 The spectral hole lifetime was measured using hole burning, as a function of applied magnetic field. A hole was burnt using a long burning pulse, shaped by an AOM. After some delay, a frequency sweeping probe pulse was sent to measure the amplitude of the hole. The decay of the hole was fitted to an exponential decay, and the decay constant was extracted to obtain hole lifetimes as shown in Fig. We see two distinct exponentials, one fast decay for wait times less than 8ms, and a slower decay for longer wait times. We attribute the faster decay to the optical T 1 . This slower decay is likely due to long-lived hyperfine levels in 167 Er isotopes and is plotted against magnetic field in Fig. A theoretical phonon density curve is overlaid in Fig. Here, we provide a summary of the dephasing mechanisms uncovered by the various experiments. At low magnetic fields, there is a combination of dephasing due to TLS, Er 3+ -Er 3+ interactions, and Er 3+ -Y 3+ interactions. The application of magnetic field above 0.7 T effectively suppressed the optical dephasing from Er 3+ -Er 3+ flip-flops, and magnetic TLS. For ceramics with such a narrow linewidth, it's plausible that charges on the boundaries between crystallite grains contributes some Stark broadening to the homogeneous linewidth. The Stark broadening was significant in Eu 3+ -doped nanoparticles in For the remaining linewidth of about 550 Hz above 0.7 T (after subtraction of T 1 contribution), from the results of Fig. The understanding of relevant dephasing mechanisms inform further works to extend the Er 3+ coherence lifetimes. With refined synthesis processes, Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics with larger grain sizes (e.g. on the order of a few microns) could yield much narrower linewidths as dephasing experienced by ions far from TLSs on the grain boundaries is reduced. An isotopically purified version of this sample with 167 Er 3+ would allow us to potentially attain long spin coherence lifetimes by performing spin initialization into a non-Boltzmann hyperfine state and suppressing noise due to nuclear spin cross-relaxations The sub-kilohertz Γ h , low spectral diffusion, and long spectral hole lifetime qualifies Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics materials for atomic frequency comb (AFC) memories We also consider this material for use in single ion quantum devices. Optically addressable single neodymium (Nd 3+ ) In this work, we measured spectroscopic properties of polycrystalline Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics for use as quantum light-matter interfaces. We achieved the narrowest optical homogeneous linewidth of 580 Hz of rare-earth doped ceramics, and measured a low spectral diffusion of 2.1 kHz over 1 ms. We further determine that the dominant decoherence mechanisms to be a combination of elastic TLS, superhyperfine interactions between Er 3+ and Y 3+ nuclear spins through investigations of field and temperature dependence of the optical homogeneous linewidths as well as spectral diffusions. Our study indicates that transparent Er 3+ :Y 2 O 3 ceramics is an excellent candidate for developing long-coherence quantum interfaces in the technologically important telecom C-band. FIG