Modern spectroscopic techniques for the investigation of magnetization dynamics in micro-and nanostructures or thin films use typically microwave antennas which are directly fabricated on top of the sample by means of electron-beam-lithography (EBL). Following this approach, every magnetic structure on the sample needs its own antenna, resulting in additional EBL steps and layer deposition processes. We demonstrate a new approach for magnetization excitation that is suitable for optical and non-optical spectroscopy techniques. By patterning the antenna on a separated flexible glass cantilever and insulating it electrically, we solved the before mentioned issues. Since we use flexible transparent glass as a substrate, optical spectroscopy techniques like Brillouin-light-scattering microscopy (μBLS), time resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect measurements (TRMOKE) or optical detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurements can be carried out at visible laser wavelengths. As the antenna is detached from the sample it can be freely positioned in all three dimensions to adress only the desired magnetic sample structures and to achieve effective excitation. We demonstrate the functionality of these antennas using μBLS and compare coherently and thermally excited magnon spectra to show the enhancement of the signal by a factor of about 400 due to the excitation by the antenna. Moreover, we succeed to characterize yttrium iron garnet thin films with spatial resolution using optical ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) experiments. We analyse the spatial excitation profile of the antenna by measuring the magnetization dynamics in two dimensions. The technique is furthermore applied to investigate injection-locking of spin Hall nano-oscillators. The investigation of magnetization dynamics for research on new computational techniques that could allow for a faster data processing with higher energy efficiency is of high interest. Magnonics and spintronics are promising fields in order to achieve this revolution in data processing by using spin wave-based computing In order to compete with todays computational schemes, the development of new techniques needs to be nanoscalable and makes thin film technology necessary. Therefore, new materials are mostly deposited as thin films firstly which allows for the characterization by standard techniques like FMR, MOKE On the other hand, to investigate spin wave propagation in materials and microstructures other techniques have to be used. They can be measured electrically by propagating spin wave spectroscopy Fig. An important property of the antenna is the possibility to change the distance between sample and antenna. Fig. The magneto-dynamic properties of newly developed materials can effectively be characterized by BLS in the case of sufficient cross section of the light with the material, which can therefore probe the dynamic magnetic modes. Usually the new materials are deposited as thin films or even as nanoparticles on flat substrates. The typical approach for first tests is the measurement of the thermally excited, incoherent spin waves in these samples, which can, depending on the material, become a very time-consuming and rather inefficient task. In some materials, which are even transparent for the used laser light, these measurements can take hours or the obtained signals are even hidden in the counting noise of the photo detector. In this section we demonstrate a much more efficient approach for the characterization of materials and the possibility to get an estimate for material parameters by carrying out optical FMR measurements. As a first proof of concept we show in Fig. Here the used microscope objective limits the detection to k-vectors below 20 rad/μm As an additional example, we show the ferromagnetic resonance curves measured on a 240 nm thick Co 40 Fe 40 B 20 sample. Fig. Normalized BLS intensity (arb. u.) Direct current (mA) Microwave frequency (GHz) publications After the demonstration of auto-oscillations in the SHNO, the antenna was positioned close to the constriction and connected to a signal generator. The microwave frequency through the antenna was swept between 3.5 and 5 GHz in 25 MHz steps at a nominal power of 16 dBm and a dynamic Oersted field was generated affecting the magnetic layer of the SHNO. A dc current of 3.5 mA was applied to the SHNO at an external magnetic field of 34.5 mT. In Figure We have demonstrated the potential of a suspended antenna by comparing the obtained signal of thermal spin wave measurements with the 400 times larger signal by additional excitation. We have shown how thin films can be investigated with high spatial resolution by doing optical FMR measurements. Due to the additional excitation the measurements on samples with very low signal such as YIG thin films become not only possible but also efficient. We have shown the excitation of propagating spin waves in 240 nm thick CoFeB films and explained the excitation characteristics by comparison to a simulation of the antenna field. Moreover, we were able to synchronize spin Hall nano-oscillators to the dynamic Oersted field generated by the antenna. Behind the scope of this work the application of localized microwave fields is also interesting for the investigation of magnetic nanoparticles and the excitation in optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) experiments, e.g. of SiC vacancy centers 