Tightly bound excitons in monolayer semiconductors represent a versatile platform to study two-dimensional propagation of neutral quasiparticles. Their intrinsic properties, however, can be severely obscured by spatial energy fluctuations due to a high sensitivity to the immediate environment. Here, we take advantage of the encapsulation of individual layers in hexagonal boron nitride to strongly suppress environmental disorder. Diffusion of excitons is then directly monitored using time-and spatially-resolved emission microscopy at ambient conditions. We consistently find very efficient propagation with linear diffusion coefficients up to 10 cm 2 /s, corresponding to room temperature effective mobilities as high as 400 cm 2 /Vs as well as a correlation between rapid diffusion and short population lifetime. At elevated densities we detect distinct signatures of many-particle interactions and consequences of strongly suppressed Auger-like exciton-exciton annihilation. A combination of analytical and numerical theoretical approaches is employed to provide pathways towards comprehensive understanding of the observed linear and non-linear propagation phenomena. We emphasize the role of dark exciton states and present a mechanism for diffusion facilitated by free electron hole plasma from entropy-ionized excitons. A key property of low-dimensional semiconductors with spatial degrees of freedom is their inherent capability to facilitate transport of photoexcitations . Prominent representatives of low-dimensional systems combining translational symmetry and efficient Coulomb coupling are semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) . More recently, an increasing amount of efforts was directed to explore spatial properties of photoexcitations in TMDC monolayers However, ultra-thin materials such as TMDCs are particularly susceptible to environmental disorder , Here, we present the results of a joint experimental and theoretical study of exciton diffusion in hBNencapsulated WS 2 monolayer samples. Using spatiallyand time-resolved micro-photoluminescence we directly monitor spatial propagation of photoexcited electronhole pairs after optical injection at ambient conditions. In the linear regime, we consistently find exceptionally rapid diffusion with coefficients up to 10 cm 2 /s, corresponding to room temperature effective mobilities as high as 400 cm 2 /Vs. At increased densities, we observe pronounced non-linearities in the propagation due to many-particle interactions, but also the consequences of strongly suppressed exciton-exciton annihilation. To provide comprehensive, quantitative understanding of our findings, we employ a combination of analytical and numerical theoretical approaches to address both linear and non-linear regimes of exciton diffusion. We discuss the influence of a complex exciton bandstructure and emphasize the role of both bright and dark states of the excitons that are important to understand the spatial properties of the studied system. In addition, we discuss the consequences of the entropy ionization of excitons that can lead to large fractions of free carrier populations and determine the diffusion in the low excitation density regime. For elevated densities we demonstrate the impact of reduced Auger-like recombination for the propagation of optical excitations considering both enhanced broadening of the spatial distribution and halolike phenomena. The manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we outline the details of the material fabrication and experimental procedures. Section III provides an overview of the main experimental observations with an illustration of the key properties of density-dependent exciton propagation in hBN-encapsulated TMDCs. The analysis of the low-density regime is given in Sec. IV, focused on the exciton diffusion in multi-component systems and the interplay with the non-radiative recombination dynamics, including quantitative theoretical description of the studied processes. Non-linear phenomena related to Auger-like recombination are then discussed in Sec. V, illustrating the consequences of suppressed exciton-exciton interaction through analytical and numerical models. The main findings and conclusions are summarized in Sec. VI. The studied samples were obtained by mechanical exfoliation of chemically synthesized bulk crystals (WS 2 from "HQgraphene", hBN from NIMS) onto polydimethylsiloxane films. Subsequently, individual flakes were stamped following the procedure from Ref. 40 onto 70 o C preheated SiO 2 /Si substrates starting with a thin hBN layer, followed by a WS 2 monolayer that is then capped by a thin hBN layer. The average thickness of the hBN flakes estimated from optical contrast and supported by atomic-force-microscopy was on the order of 5 to 15 nm. The fabrication method typically provided hBN/WS 2 /hBN heterostructures with an average area of several 100's of μm The samples were first analyzed by linear reflectance and continuous-wave photoluminescence mapping at cryogenic and room temperature. All measurements were performed on freshly-exfoliated samples that showed consistent emission at the fundamental neutral exciton resonance (Appendix C illustrates changes in the luminescence spectra detected one year after the initial measurements). For the subsequent experiments, sufficiently large regions in the range of 10's to 100 μm 2 with good interlayer contact between TMDC monolayers and the surrounding hBN flakes were identified. Key prerequisites were characteristically narrow spectral linewidths of the exciton ground and excited state resonances, limited to several meV at low temperatures . Typical spatial luminescence profiles of a hBNencapsulated WS 2 monolayer are presented in Fig. Figure Interestingly, as illustrated in Fig. Measured room temperature spectra from reflectance and continuous-wave PL shown in Fig. In this context we emphasize that the observed mitigation of the spatial fluctuations in the average potential, i.e., long-range disorder, does not generally imply complete absence of all imperfections. For example, the presence of deep trap states is not expected to strongly contribute to the linewidth broadening, that is dominated by intrinsic ultra-fast exciton-phonon scattering at elevated temperatures and by radiative recombination at liquid helium temperature, limiting the exciton polarization lifetime (dephasing time) . Interestingly the PL lifetime of the studied samples seems to consistently decrease upon hBN-encapsulation, from many 100's to a few 10's of picoseconds, as illustrated by representative transients in Fig. To study the influence of interactions between photoexcited electron-hole pairs, exciton diffusion experiments were performed across a broad range of pump densities, from a few nJ/cm 2 to 10's of μJ/cm 2 . Representative time-dependent squared widths ∆w 2 (t) of the spatial emission profiles are shown in Fig. In the following we focus on the individual aspects of these experimental observations in the exciton propagation, discuss the underlying mechanisms, and relate our findings to the properties of the interacting many-particle system of electron-hole states in the studied monolayers. In this section we discuss the exciton propagation in the low density regime, where non-linearities are unexpected, and for densities where the first transition towards a non-linear behavior occurs. These regions are marked by ( First, we address a basic question: What determines room-temperature exciton diffusion in the studied TMDC monolayers? Immediately, one could consider the total scattering time τ s of about 30 fs obtained from the spectral broadening of the bright exciton resonance on the order of 25 meV from exciton-phonon interaction . to estimate the diffusion coefficient, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the exciton temperature, and m X is the total mass of the exciton. Due to the fast cooling of excitons expected at elevated temperatures 46 compared to much longer population lifetimes, the exciton temperature should be close to that of the lattice. Depending on the choice of the mass parameter m X , e.g., between 0.5 and 1 of the free electron mass m 0 , the scattering time of 30 fs yields diffusion coefficients between 1 and 2 cm 2 /s. Notably, this simple relation severely underestimates measured values of the diffusion coefficient in the range of 5 to 10 cm 2 /s [c.f. Fig. The initial step is to accurately consider the role of the dark exciton states that are particularly important in tungsten-based TMDCs such as the studied WS 2 monolayers. Both the spin-splitting of the conduction band and the presence of the Λ valley (also labeled as Q in the literature) between Γ and K combined with influence of the Coulomb interaction results in a manifold of exciton states that are relevant at room temperature. These can be labeled by the respective electron transitions: intravalley K -K singlets and triplets, inter valley K -K and K-Λ singlets, and K-Λ triplets as well as the corresponding permutations for the electronic transitions from the K valley. The terms "singlet" and "triplet" relate to the conventional electron-hole picture and correspond to the total exciton spin of 0 (electron and hole spins are antiparallel) and 1 (electron and hole spins are parallel), respectively. The relevant parts of the exciton bandstructure for monolayer WS 2 are schematically illustrated in Fig. In the experiment, the detected luminescence arises from the bright exciton states at K -K and K -K with the center-of-mass momentum close to zero, i.e., those within the radiative cone. The majority of the population, however, that also determines the diffusion dynamics on the studied time-scale of several 10's of picoseconds resides in lower-lying states . As a limiting case, we also include the result for the exciton diffusion coefficient while neglecting K -Λ states for comparison. In addition, the approximate range of energy positions of the K -Λ exciton state based on different ab-initio values of the conduction band splitting of the Λ valley from single-particle bandstructures Here we emphasize again that we can largely exclude potential contributions from non-thermalized hot excitons, since the room temperature cooling should occur extremely fast, within the first few picoseconds In TMDC monolayers it is commonly understood that the excitons are stable under a broad range of density and temperature conditions due to their high binding energies . This phenomenon, known as "entropy ionization" from the literature , 68 can be qualitatively understood by considering the free energy F = U -ST of the system that is minimized at thermal equilibrium. The exciton contribution to the internal energy U is lower than that of the free carriers due to the finite binding energy, favoring their formation at lower temperatures T . On the other hand, the entropy S is higher for an unbound electronhole pair in contrast to the exciton due a larger number of micro-states available for uncorrelated charge carriers. At elevated temperatures and sufficiently low densities the entropy term becomes dominant, leading to the preferential occupation of free electron and hole states instead of the excitons. For TMDC monolayers at room temperature, it was predicted The free energy density can be then presented in the following form: where n p is the density of the p-th type of particle with the subscript p running through all relevant free electron and hole states at K, K and Λ valleys as well as the excitons, taking into account the respective degeneracies. E p denotes the relative energy of the state including band offsets and binding energies, and D p represents the density of states in two-dimensions, according to: with the center-of-mass m p and the degeneracy factor g p . In addition, we set conditions for the conservation of the total, photoinjected electron-hole pair density N tot in the system: 69 and for the charge neutrality: Here, the densities of the individual exciton (n X ), hole (n h ), and electron (n e ) states are enumerated by k, j, and i, respectively. The bar on top denotes the total density. These expressions are derived under the conditions of negligible doping in the system (see the discussion below and in the Appendix A). From the Eqs. (1). . . ( and the analytical solution for the exciton fraction α X : The derivation of the mass action law from Eq. ( Using the bandstructure parameters from the literature and evaluating the exciton energies of the studied hBN-encapsulated WS 2 monolayers, we obtain S=2.5 × 10 8 cm -2 . The corresponding exciton fraction is presented in Fig. To provide an example illustrating the sensitivity with respect to the key parameters we also show the result for slight adjustments of the fixed values (within 10% to 30%): ∆m X = +0.3 m 0 , ∆E bind = -20 meV, ∆T = +15 K, ∆E Λ = +23 meV. This yields S=13 × 10 8 cm -2 and the corresponding exciton fraction is shown by the solid line in Fig. For this purpose, we consider a set of two coupled diffusion equations for the total densities of excitons nX and electron-hole plasma neh , since free electrons and holes should diffuse together to conserve electro-neutrality: Here D X is the exciton diffusion coefficient and D eh is the electron-hole plasma diffusion coefficient, i.e., the average diffusion coefficient of the free electrons and holes. D X and D eh are the trans-diffusion coefficients related to the exciton current driven by the plasma gradient and viceversa. The recombination times of excitons and electronhole pairs in the plasma are denoted by τ x and τ eh , respectively. The exciton ionization rate is represented by eh is the ratio of the exciton density to the density of unbound pairs in thermal equilibrium. The Laplace operator is denoted by ∆ r , defined with respect to the radial in-plane coordinate r. In the following we assume that the ionization equilibrium is established sufficiently fast as compared to the population lifetime, i.e., τ i τ X , τ eh . On the other hand, τ i should be slower than the total momentum relaxation times of excitons and of plasma, since the later include both processes associated with τ i but also additional exciton-phonon and electron/hole-phonon scattering events that are very efficient in TMDCs at room temperature. For simplicity we further assume that the densities of excitons and of electron-hole pairs are suf-ficiently low so that plasma-driven exciton currents and exciton-driven plasma currents can be neglected. Hence we set D X =D eh =0 in the following and consider only the diffusion of the individual constituents D X and D eh . with Here, α eh =n eh /(n X + neh ) and α X =n X /(n X + neh ) denote the respective fractions of plasma and excitons. It follows that the combined diffusion coefficient of the electron-hole population is composed of the individual coefficients of plasma and excitons weighted by their relative densities. Here we emphasize that both fractions α eh = α eh [N tot (r, t), T ] and α X = α X [N tot (r, t), T ] are functions of temperature and local density, rendering the diffusion equation ( To describe the experimentally studied scenario we then combine the description of exciton-plasma equilibrium with that of the multi-component diffusion. The individual diffusion coefficients of excitons and plasma are fixed to the results of the microscopic calculation via Bloch-equations approach outlined further above and to the ab-initio calculations from Ref. 65 respectively, i.e. to D X =1 cm 2 /s and D eh =11 cm 2 /s (using literature parameters for the electron and hole properties as well as ∆ K-Λ = -26 meV). As an initial condition at time t = 0 we fix the total density distribution to the excitation spot profile and the estimated injected densities from the experiment. Subsequently, we solve Eq. ( Theoretically obtained density-dependence of the effective diffusion coefficient is presented in Fig. We note, however, that the proposed model is subject to an important limitation. Realistic TMDC materials, even after encapsulation in hBN, often exhibit a small residual amount of doping. It is usually relatively low, as in the case of the studied samples, where we can only estimate it to be of n-type and below 10 11 cm -2 from reflectance measurements at cryogenic temperatures. To analyze the implications of doping, the above analysis can be readily extended to allow for the presence of resident carriers (see Appendix A for details). Calculated exciton fractions for the doping densities between 10 8 and 10 11 cm -2 are presented in Fig. Importantly, such free-carrier densities can not be unambiguously excluded in the experiment, even if one might expect non-uniform distribution of dopants, localized in smaller puddles and leaving undoped areas inbetween governing the diffusion. In addition to that, bright and dark trion states should form and further affect the specific ratios of the electron-hole pair distributions in the equilibrium. Here, we note that the additional formation of trion states is omitted in the simplified analysis presented above and in Fig. To summarize, the following can be concluded with respect to the initial question regarding the mechanisms determining room-temperature linear diffusion in the studied hBN-encapsulated WS 2 monolayers. In general, it is necessary to consider the presence of dark states in tungsten-based materials for accurate description of the exciton propagation. Importantly, the resulting effective exciton diffusion coefficient can strongly vary depending on the relative valley alignment in the conduction band. The exciton diffusion alone, however, does not seem to fully account for the experimental findings, underestimating the measured values by a factor of at least 2 and up to 10. A promising hypothesis involves the presence of sizable plasma populations in the system due to the entropy ionization of excitons at low excitation densities, providing a reasonable quantitative description of the experiment. Photoexcited, thermally stabilized free electrons and holes are expected to diffuse much faster than the excitons. They can thus dominate the propagation of the total photoexcited population, even as the role of the residual doping remains an important consideration for the validity of this scenario. In the previous subsection we discussed possible origins of the observed efficient diffusion in hBN-encapsulated samples. Notably, in addition to determining the diffusion coefficients we also find a strong correlation between rapid propagation and carrier lifetime dynamics that we address in the following. As we demonstrate, the experimental findings are rather robust across many sample positions and individual flakes both in our data and in the literature . Considering the underlying mechanisms, roomtemperature recombination is typically limited by nonradiative processes associated with defects. This is further supported by measurements of the total PL intensity which decreases for the sample sets with shorter lifetimes on a similar scale as the lifetimes themselves, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. Since the excitons have to propagate and reach the regions of non-radiative traps to be captured, as schematically illustrated in Fig. Here we consider the case where the characteristic radius r 0 of the traps is large compared with the mean free path of the excitons, i.e., r 0 = v τ with τ being exciton momentum relaxation time and v being the exciton thermal velocity. We note that this approach works analogously both for excitons and plasma diffusion. In order to determine the capture rate we solve the diffusion equation for the steady state (setting ∂n X /∂t = 0) in the vicinity of the trap: with the boundary condition The condition (11) means that all excitons which reach the trap are captured and recombine non-radiatively. In the axially symmetric geometry the solution of Eqs. ( The total flux Φ of the excitons towards the trap is then readily found from the continuity equation obtaining the recombination rate from the flux according to: Here N tr represents the density of non-radiative recombination traps, so that 1/(D X N tr ) is associated with the typical time which takes for exciton to diffuse between the traps. Notably, Eq. ( x , see Fig. In this section we discuss the regime of high excitation densities, indicated by (3) in Fig. A key observation at high pump power conditions is a linear increase of the effective diffusion coefficient with the excitation density, presented in Fig. As demonstrated in previous studies , to the impact of non-radiative Auger-type scattering in TMDCs monolayers, commonly observed and often labeled as exciton-exciton annihilation in the literature . Altogether, we find strongly suppressed Auger recombination as a consequence of encapsulation, with R A being as low as 0.004 cm 2 /s in contrast to R A = 0.4 cm 2 /s for the as-exfoliated samples. At the current stage we can only speculate about the underlying reasons of such drastic changes of R A , since an accurate microscopic description of the Auger-recombination is extremely challenging. In principle one can suggest several possible origins. The overall reduction of the Coulomb interaction due to enhanced dielectric screening from the hBN encapsulation should already reduce Coulomb-mediated Auger scattering. The expected decrease should roughly scale with the inverse square of the effective dielectric constant and thus be on the order of 4. In addition, presence of disorder 33 in as-exfoliated samples may enhance the Auger rate either due to the relaxation of the momentum conservation rule leading to a larger phase-space for scattering or due to the funneling of the excitons towards smaller local regions with lower potentials. Alternatively, the shift in the bandstructure from the renormalization induced by additional dielectric screening from hBN would affect resonance conditions that may facilitate the efficiency of the exciton-exciton scattering, as it was discussed for WSe 2 monolayers . An important additional consequence of the Auger recombination is the accumulation of excess energy in the center of the excitation spot, as briefly mentioned in the previous section. For each non-radiative exciton-exciton scattering event, the remaining electron-hole pair gains the energy equivalent to that of the optical transition, that is about 2 eV in case of WS 2 . The energy is then subsequently released in a cascade of emitted phonons promoting carrier relaxation towards the respective band minima and exciton formation. For sufficiently high densities, efficient Auger scattering thus leads to a local heating of the non-equilibrium phonon and exciton systems. The associated processes are discussed in detail in recent reports . A direct comparison of spatially-and time-resolved streak images from hBN-encapsulated and as-exfoliated WS 2 samples is presented in Figs. For a quantitative support of the proposed interpretation of our findings we employ the theoretical model outlined in Ref. 27 for the two studied cases, fixing the Auger coefficients and exciton lifetimes to experimentally determined values to directly illustrate the associated consequences. This microscopic model is similar to the Bloch-equation approach briefly outlined in Section IV A and described in more detail in the corresponding references . The results of the calculations are presented in Figs. In this work we have explored linear and non-linear diffusion of excitons in hBN-encapsulated WS 2 monolayer materials at room temperature and ambient conditions. The encapsulation suppresses dielectric disorder that is otherwise inherent for typical as-exfoliated samples strongly affecting propagation of the photoexcitations . ii. Free electron-hole plasma can facilitate rapid diffusion at sufficiently low excitation densities due to entropy ionization of excitons in hBNencapsulated samples with binding energies on the order of 200 meV. We show that already at injection densities below 10 10 cm 2 we could expect sizable fractions of free charge carriers leading to faster effective diffusion of the total population (Sec. IV B). iii. Short population lifetime accompanies increased diffusion upon encapsulation, as we demonstrate through consistent observations based on a large number of individual measurements. We provide a pathway to understand these findings by illustrating a possible relationship between rapid propagation and fast capture into non-radiative trap regions (Sec. IV C). iv. Propagation phenomena driven by Augerrecombination are strongly suppressed in contrast to as-exfoliated samples. While we observe a linear increase of the effective diffusion coefficient at elevated excitation densities due to Auger processes in analogy to the behavior of as-exfoliated monolayers, the slope is lower by about two orders of magnitude (Sec. V A). It is directly proportional to the strongly reduced efficiency of the Auger scattering that influences measured effective diffusion coefficients . Overall, we find rich and non-trivial exciton propagation dynamics in monolayer samples with suppressed disorder and present pathways towards microscopic understanding of the experimental observations. Notably, the phenomena associated with complexities of the electronic and excitonic bandstructure, presence of both excitons and free charge carriers, as well as inter-excitonic interactions are shown to be of particular importance. In conclusion, a better understanding of the inherent properties of van der Waals monolayer semiconductors should strongly motivate fundamental investigation, manipulation, and control of interacting quasiparticles in ultrathin materials, stimulating future research. Here we present a more detailed discussion of the mass action law. It is followed by the application for a multiband scenario in thermodynamic equilibrium including a full set of equations for the studied case of WS 2 monolayer and their numerical solutions. Finally we show that an arbitrary multi-band scenario can be reduced to an effective two-component model when only the total electron, hole, and exciton densities are considered. The mass action law was originally proposed in the XIX century to describe ratios of chemical reaction components in the steady state. It was subsequently adopted for the description of exciton quasiparticles in semiconductors formed from free electrons and holes . First, we consider the free energy density of a twoband system consisting of free electrons, free holes, and excitons with the respective densities n e , n h , and n X . For elevated temperatures and moderate to low densities (k B T n/D, see below) we can use the classical gas approximation for exciton and free charge carrier statistics. For the typical parameters of TMDCs monolayers it should be valid up to the densities of several 10 12 cm -2 at room temperature. The free energy then reads: Here, T is the carrier temperature, D e,h,X are the respective densities of states (in two dimensions equal to gm/2π 2 with center-of-mass m and degeneracy g), and E b > 0 is the exciton binding energy. In order to determine the densities of the particles we need to minimize the free energy under the following conditions: ) The first condition means that the total density N tot of optically excited electron-hole pairs is redistributed between the excitons and plasma. The second condition implies that the total density of electrons in the system is equal to the density of photogenerated electrons (given by the density of free holes) plus the resident electrons n e provided by doping. Introducing the Lagrange mul-tipliers λ 1 and λ 2 and minimizing by using the conditions ∂L/∂n e = 0, ∂L/∂n h = 0, and ∂L/∂n X = 0 we obtain the following set of equations: Excluding λ 1 and λ 1 from the Eqs. (A5a)-(A5c) we obtain the mass action law, also known as the Saha-equation: Here, one can use the parameter S for the right hand side of Eq. (A6), that becomes a constant in units of density for a given set of material parameters and fixed temperature. Introducing the exciton fraction α X = n X /(n X + n h ), i.e., the ratio of exciton density to the total number of photoexcited electron-hole pairs (excluding residual electrons from doping), we obtain the analytical solution of the Eq. (A6): Exemplary cases are illustrated in Fig. We now consider a more complex multi-valley bandstructure of the studied WS 2 monolayers. Following the previous section we include all relevant electron, hole, and exciton states in the free energy density in analogy to Eq. (A1). The single-particle electron bandstructure is schematically illustrated in Fig. The exciton bandstructure is schematically presented in Fig. The relevant parameters of the electron, hole, and exciton states are summarized in Tables The resulting expression for the free energy density then reads: Here, E b and ∆ e with corresponding superscripts are the exciton binding energies, and conduction band energy offsets relative to the upper K valley state, respectively. Note that for the exciton contributions, one can alternatively also use the exciton energy offsets ∆ X relative to the K -K singlet state minus the exciton binding energy of the latter (E uK b ), c.f. The conservation of the total particle density N tot and charge neutrality condition read: h , respectively. In the following they are set to zero to illustrate the case of an undoped system. In analogy to the derivation of the mass action law for the two-band scenario discussed in the previous section, we combine Eqs. (A8),(A10), and (A11) using Lagrange The Eqs. (A12a)-(A12g) are numerically solved for the carrier temperature of T = 300 K. The resulting individual densities of electrons, holes, and excitons are presented in Fig. The total exciton fraction can be evaluated by computing the sum of the n uK X , n lK X , and n Λ X densities divided by the total density as shown in Fig. Following the above arguments we show that any multi-band scenario with an arbitrary number of electron (n e,i ), hole (n h,j ), and exciton (n X,k ) states can be reduced to a simple Saha equation for the total densities. The general form of the free energy density reads: + n e,i E e,i (A13) where D and E are the densities of states and energy differences of the corresponding states, respectively (the later include the binding energies for excitons with a negative sign). The total particle number N tot and the charge neutrality conservation conditions are: i n e,i = j n h,j . (A15) With the Lagrange multipliers λ 1 and λ 2 we thus obtain L(n e,i , . . . , n h,j , . . . , n X,k , . . . ; λ 1 , λ 2 ) = (A16) i n e,ij n h,j ). Minimizing L using conditions ∂L/∂n e = 0, ∂L/∂n h = 0, and ∂L/∂n X = 0 provides a set of equations with the same structure for each i, j, and k: + E e,i + λ 2 (A17a) In analogy to Eq. (A6) we thus obtain a Saha-type equilibrium equation for any combination of i, j, and k in the form of: n e,i n h,j n X,k = S(i, j; k), (A18) where we introduced the partial Saha-parameters: S(i, j; k) = D e,i D h,j D X,k k B T e (-Ee,i-E h,j +E X,k )/k B T . Our ultimate goal is to present a compact expression for the ratio ne nh /n X . To that end one can readily obtain . As a result, we arrive at an effective two-band Saha equation ne nh nX = S (A21)