The angular momentum compensation temperature TA of ferrimagnets has attracted much attention because of high-speed magnetic dynamics near TA. We show that NMR can be used to investigate domain wall dynamics near TA in ferrimagnets. We performed 57 Fe-NMR measurements on the ferrimagnet Ho3Fe5O12 with TA = 245 K. In a multi-domain state, the NMR signal is enhanced by domain wall motion. We found that the NMR signal enhancement shows a maximum at TA in the multi-domain state. The NMR signal enhancement occurs due to increasing domain-wall mobility toward TA. We develop the NMR signal enhancement model involves domain-wall mobility. Our study shows that NMR in multi-domain state is a powerful tool to determine TA, even from a powder sample and it expands the possibility of searching for angular momentum-compensated materials. The angular momentum compensation in ferrimagnets, where angular momenta on different sublattices cancel each other out, has attracted much attention because of its unique character Moreover, in GdFeCo alloy, the domain wall mobility is enhanced at T A The rare-earth iron garnet R 3 Fe 5 O 12 (RIG, where R is a rare-earth element) is a ferrimagnet accompanied by T A Although T A in RIG cannot be determined using FMR, the mobility of the bubble domains formed in the epitaxial thin film of the substituted RIG increases at a certain temperature, which is regarded as T A In this paper, we report results of an NMR study of HoIG under magnetic fields of up to 1.0 T. For a multidomain state below 0.3 T, the temperature dependence of the NMR intensity shows a maximum at T A . On the other hand, for a single-domain state above 0.5 T, the temperature dependence of the NMR intensity does not show any anomalies at T A . These results indicate the enhancement of the domain wall mobility at T A . Extending a simple conventional model for describing η out We synthesized HoIG by solid-state reaction for this study Figure The calibrated NMR intensity is retained to show a At T M , spin-rotation coupling is effective, but M Ω becomes zero due to the disappearance of bulk magnetization. In contrast, the higher temperature can be assigned to T A , where the bulk magnetization remains but the spin-rotation coupling is not effective due to the disappearance of the net angular momentum Unlike the temperature dependence of the NMR intensity, there are no anomalies in the temperature dependence of ν, 1/T 1 , and 1/T 2 as shown in Fig. To perform NMR experiments for the single-domain state, we characterized the magnetic field dependence of HoIG as shown in Fig. The optimized RF input power is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. Figure The temperature at which the NMR intensity shows a maximum at 0.3 T decrease slightly. It is speculated that T A decreases under magnetic fields in RIG, because the expectation value of the angular momentum of R 3+ decreases above T M in a magnetic field due to the decrease in molecular field at the R site First, we introduce the conventional model describing NMR enhancement due to domain-wall motion The net electron magnetic moment m is tilted by the effective field of H eff = mn m H n , where H n is the hyperfine field, and the tilt angle θ of m can be described by θ = πx/d, where d is the domainwall thickness. Then, the bulk magnetization induced by nuclear magnetization is expressed as where η out is the enhancement factor of the NMR signal for the output process and is defined as η out = RHn 2dm . This model assumes that the velocity of the domain-wall motion v is fast enough to move 4x max during one cycle of oscillating effective field, i.e. v = μH eff > 4x max ν, where μ is the domain wall mobility. The conventional derivation of NMR enhancement induced by domain wall motion does not include the mobility of the domain-wall. Herein, we consider that v is not fast enough to follow the oscillating effective field, i.e., v < 4x max ν. In this case, the displacement x is limited by μ. Then, x is expressed to be v/4ν. The enhancement factor η out is modified such that This formula indicates that η ′ out in the slow limit of domain wall motion is proportional to μ, and η ′ out in the fast limit of domain-wall motion is continually connected to the conventional η out . It is noted that η ′ out does not depend on the NMR frequency ν. The domain-wall mobility of HoIG has not been reported, but it can be estimated from the reported damping parameters 