There is a great interest in the scientific community to perform calorimetry on samples having mass in the nanogram range. A detailed knowledge of the energy (heat) exchange in the fast growing family of micro-and nano-systems could provide valuable information about the chemistry and physics at the nano-scale. The possibility to have an atomically flat thermal probe represents an added value, because it provides the unique opportunity to perform Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) together with calorimetry. Here we report the fabrication, characterization, and calibration of atomically flat, singlecrystalline gold film thermometers on mica substrate. Gold re-crystallization has been obtained, and successively the thermometer surface has been studied by Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED) and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM). The thermometer calibration demonstrates a heat exchange coefficient of 2.1 × 10 -7 W/K and a performance about 10 times better than previous sensors based on Si substrates. The experimental setup allows the simultaneous investigation of heat exchange and surface physics on the same sample. Calorimetry is a powerful tool to investigate the heat exchange between a sample and its environment. The technique is widely used and has allowed a systematic study of phase transitions, chemical reactions, and in general all processes which involve the modification of a sample's structure or its thermodynamic conditions. A detailed knowledge of the energy balance during the evolution of a system provides an invaluable insight on the properties of a sample and on the driving forces acting on it. In the last decade, a growing number of devices and sensors at the micro-and nano-scale were developed, pushing calorimetry to follow the trend. However, commercial calorimeters, up to now, can only deal with samples having masses in the mg range and have an energy sensitivity of about 1 mJ. Even if performance is improving with time, commercial calorimeters are still far from access to nano-scale samples. A calorimetric evaluation of tiny samples would represent a valuable source of information on molecules, for example, of pharmaceutical interest, as decreasing sample mass reduces considerably the development expenses of drugs. Recently, we have demonstrated an original calorimetric technique based on a gold film thermometer Thin metal films offer several advantages over metal single crystals for scanning probe microscopy experiments. Thin films can be directly prepared in vacuum, thereby avoiding the possibility of contamination from polishing or transfer through atmosphere, and the cost is usually a small fraction of the corresponding single crystal For this purpose, mica is often used as substrate. Its two-dimensional structure, transparency, elasticity, flexibility, and chemical inertness make mica suitable for applications. Mica is additionally inexpensive and abundant, lightweight and biocompatible A gold thin film thermometer on a mica substrate therefore offers the opportunity to fabricate an atomically flat thermometer, which besides calorimetry applications allows to utilize scanning probe microscopy in order to carry out more complex surface physics experiments. Another positive side effect of the use of mica as a substrate is represented by the fact that mica, depending on the direction, has a 40 to 300 times lower thermal conductivity than silicon Here, we report on the development of a sensitive, atomically flat gold film thermometer on mica substrate. We first describe the thermometer's surface characterization showing a reconstructed gold surface. We demonstrate resolution at the Ångstrom scale during STM imaging of the surface of the thermometer. Moreover, the performance of the Au/Mica thermometers reported in the present work is about one order of magnitude better than that obtained with Si substrates. Our work opens the possibility to simultaneously investigate energy (heat) exchange mechanisms and surface physics with the same physical support. Indeed, the possibility to obtain calorimetric information as well as surface characterization with atomic resolution on the same sample in a clean and controlled UHV environment opens a unique perspective in understanding physics and chemistry at the nano-scale. In the present investigation, two series of samples have been produced, in order to demonstrate the reproducibility of the fabrication process. Both series have been realized evaporating 20 nm of gold directly on an approximately 250 μm-thick, freshly cleaved mica substrate. Before gold deposition, the mica has been annealed at 200 • C overnight under high vacuum (3 × 10 -6 mbar). Then, the mica was cut into ∼ 5×5 mm 2 samples with scissors. More details on sample fabrication and structure are reported in the Supporting Information. All experiments on thermometer characterization and calibration have been performed in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment, inside a RHK Technology VT-STM chamber. Sample heating can be performed in two different ways: utilizing a silicon slab under the mica as heater (degassing and thermometer calibration) or illuminating the sensor with a white light source able to deliver a power of 13 mW to the sample (heat exchange coefficient measurements). Each sample has been degassed overnight at a temperature between 100 • C and 140 • C and successively annealed at 200 • C in UHV. The heating ramps were controlled via PC using a dedicated LabVIEW software. The resistance of the gold film thermometers is measured with a Wheatstone bridge cascaded to a high quality preamplifier, the output of which is recorded by a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830). For a complete analysis, we performed LEED measurements and took STM images of different areas of the gold layer of each sample. STM imaging was obtained at room temperature with a base pressure around 2 × 10 -11 mbar. Further details on the experimental setup are reported in the Supporting Information. After degassing the gold-on-mica samples, LEED shows a broad, diffuse diffraction pattern (inset to Fig. Figure This can be appreciated in Figs. Figure In order to quantify the performance of the device (thermometer plus readout) to detect a thermal signal, we have simulated the heating of the thermometer with a uniform energy release at the top of the device. In the model, we consider the sensor structure and the related characteristic times. The main contributions are connected to the thermalization time of the gold film, the thermal resistance at the interface between the gold film and mica, the thermalization time of the mica substrate, and the thermal resistance at the interface between mica and sample holder. While the thermalization times of gold film and mica substrate are easy to evaluate, the heat transfer rates at the interfaces (Au/mica and mica/sample holder) are more difficult to assess. Heat diffusion inside the gold film is very fast. The time scale for heat redistribution in a 20 nm gold layer is t Au ∼ d 2 /α ∼ 4 × 10 -12 s, with d the thickness of the gold film and α the gold thermal diffusivity We note that this characteristic time fits well the experiments for which we have optimized the thermometer. A chemical reaction occurring in UHV environment between a functionalized surface and molecules in the gas phase usually runs slowly. At a gas supply pressure p lower than 10 -7 mbar, the time necessary to have a monolayer of molecules on the surface ranges from several seconds to minutes (about 10 s at p = 10 -7 mbar, about 100 s at p = 10 -8 mbar) Thus, we have calculated the variation in thermometer temperature due to rectangular heating pulses of various durations, ranging from much shorter (10 -9 s) to much longer (10 s) than the characteristic time τ = 0.33 s. Details are provided in the Supporting Information. The results of the simulation are reported in Fig. In experiment, the resistance of the gold film thermometer is measured with a lock-in amplifier with an integration time τ i (typically τ i = 300 ms). This introduces another time scale in the problem which we have simulated with a boxcar averaging of the temperature data, with the boxcar width corresponding to the lock-in integration time. Fig. The analysis of such temperature profiles, measured or simulated, has been described in detail in Ref. with H r the total heat released, ∆T (t) the resulting temperature increase of the sensor, and C sensor the heat capacity of the sensor at constant pressure. We consider the temperature signal from the start of heating to the maximum of the temperature curve. Applying this procedure to the simulated signals shown in Fig. The simulations show a good agreement between the applied energy (the integral under the heating pulse) and the calculated energy using Eq. 1, and therefore validate the model. At first sight it might seem surprising that good agreement is obtained even for heating pulses much shorter than the characteristic times of the system. However, this can be understood as follows: the fast heating pulse leads to an almost immediate temperature increase in the gold film, on a time scale much faster than the integration time of the electronics. This energy is stored in the gold film and can be dispersed only within the characteristic time of the mica substrate (∼ 1 s), which is well within the accessible range of the electronics. In other words, while the dynamics of fast heating pulses cannot be resolved by the present electronics, the integral amount of the deposited energy can be measured with a high precision. We note that even fast processes could be followed dynamically with a fast electronics: commercially available lock-in amplifiers offer a lowest time constant of 30 ns for demodulation, seven orders of magnitude faster than the electronics employed for our experiments. A thermometer calibration protocol has been applied to two samples. We carried out the calibration measurements applying slow ramps from room temperature to 100 • C. The heating and cooling rates of the calibration ramps were about 2.8 • C/s. During the heating ramps we recorded the temperature of the gold sensor as measured by a thermocouple, the current and the voltage supplied to the heater, and the sample resistance. A plot of resistance R vs. temperature T is shown in Fig. As expected, there is a linear proportionality, and therefore we have performed a linear fit of the data using the relation The intercepts obtained from the fits correspond to R 0 ≡ R(T 0 ), while the slopes correspond to the product R 0 • α. The reference temperature T 0 is the temperature measured by the thermocouple just before the start of the calibration ramp. The parameters obtained for the two samples M5-4 and M6-1 are listed in Table In order to analyze calorimetric data using Eq. 1, we need to determine the sensor heat capacity C sensor and the heat exchange coefficient λ. In particular, for λ we can expect three different contributions: since the mica substrate acts as a thermal insulator, we expect a first and fast thermalization of the upper gold film with the underlying mica substrate, followed by a slower thermalization of the substrate with the sample holder, and finally a very slow thermalization of the sample holder with the environment (see Supporting Information for details). In order to disentangle the three contributions, we have applied a heating step (∼ 60 s duration) to the sample and measured the temperature decay, as shown in Fig. To determine the heat exchange coefficient λ from the decay time τ 1 , we need to evaluate the sample heat capacity. Since the gold film thermalizes very fast with respect to the mica, we can assume that the sensor heat capacity is due to the gold film only. From the gold film thickness and the area of the sensor, its heat capacity result to be with gold density ρ Au = 19.3 g/cm 3 , sample thickness t Au = 20 nm, sample dimensions 6.90 mm × 6.75 mm, and gold specific heat capacity c Au = 0.13 J/K•g. Next, we can calculate the sensor heat exchange coefficient If we compare this result with the λ measured for the sensors based on Si substrate which gives a value of 1.0 nW for the gold-on-mica sensor, to be compared to the value of 50 nW for the gold-on-Si sensor, i.e. an improvement by a factor of 50. To further compare the performance of the two sensors, based on Si and on mica substrate, each sensor has been subjected to identical heating pulses. In particular, the sensors were exposed to an illumination with a white light lamp for 60 s. The results are shown in Fig. 