Very recently, NiTe2 has been reported to be a type II Dirac semimetal with Dirac nodes near the Fermi surface. Furthermore, it is unveiled that NiTe2 presents the Hall Effect, which is ascribed to orbital magnetoresistance. The physical properties behavior of NiTe2 under high pressure attracts us. In this paper, we investigate the electrical properties of polycrystalline NiTe2 by application of pressure ranging from 3.4GPa to 54.45Gpa. Superconductivity emerges at critical pressure 12GPa with a transition temperature of 3.7K, and Tc reaches its maximum, 7.5 K, at the pressure of 52.8GPa. Comparing with the superconductivity in MoP, we purposed the possibility of topological superconductivity in NiTe2. In recent years, The transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) has been extensively investigated for their plentiful physic properties. As a special part of TMDs, MX2 (M=Mo, W, Zr, Pt, Pd, Ni; X=Te) attract growing attention in condensed-matter physics. Most of them can achieve superconductivity by doping or pressure. The intrinsic superconductivity under 0.1K In comparison, NiTe2 attract less attention until latest two years. Before that, major researches of NiTe2 are about crystal structure or band structure It is well accepted that pressure is an effective method to modify electronic structure of semiconducting materials thereby inducing superconductivity, especially for materials which undergo magnetic transition under ambient pressure or possess plentiful physic properties. For instance, pressure can facilitate the growing of superconducting state by suppressing the antiferromagnetic state in CrAs. In this case, superconductivity occurs at critical pressure where MR has been vanished. To this respect, it is of great possibility to achieve superconductivity in NiTe2 resorting to pressure method. In this paper, we investigate the pressure impression on resistant behavior of NiTe2. NiTe2 presents metal property at ambient pressure in temperature ranging from 2K-300K. Superconductivity advents at 12GPa, with transition temperature of 3.7K. The Tc is enhanced by applying exotic pressure, which reaches to 7.5K at 52.8GPa. Further increasing pressure leads a slight dwindling of Tc. Comparing with the pressure-induced superconductivity in MoP Polycrystalline sample of NiTe2 was synthesized by solid-state reaction method. Pure elements Ni (99.99%), Te (99.99%) were weighted with molar ratio of 1:2 in Ar2-filled glove box. Then the starting material was grounded and pelletized into pellets before sealed into an evacuated silica tube. The tube containing precursor was placed in furnace heated at 750°C for 48h followed by a second heat treatment in same condition after reground and pelletizing process. Eventually, the sample was quenched in cold water in order to gain a better crystallization of NiTe2. The obtained sample presents metallic gloss with monocrystal-like small size flakes forming inside. Power x-ray diffraction measurement under ambient pressure was carried out on Bruker D2 phaser with Cu κα radiation (λ=1.5418Å). The chemical composition was measured on scanning electron microscope SU5000 equipped with EDX. Diamond anvil cell (DAC) was employed to generate pressure on the power sample and pressure were determined by ruby power using ruby fluorescence method. Resistant measurement was performed on physics properties measurement system (PPMS 14) resorting four-probe method. Almost all the pattern peaks can be indexed by trigonal structure with P-3m1 space group. The obtained lattice parameters a, b, c are 3.85986 Å, 3.85986 Å, 5.28187 Å, respectively, which are similar to ones reported in Ref Back to the case of NiTe2, at higher pressure region the phenomenon of resistance dropping in low temperature becomes much more prominent with increasing pressure. The amplitude of drop enhances and Tc onset defined as the temperature point where resistance starts to drop simultaneously increases. At pressure of 52.8GPa, Tc onset grows to its maximum of 7.5K. We did second run of electric resistance measurement at two selected pressure point of 3.4GPa and 54.45GPa and the data is shown in Figure NiTe2 was reported to exhibit linear magnetoresistance, which can reach as high as 1250% at 2K and 9T. In order to investigate the pressure influence on MR, we preformed high field resistance measurement for 54.45GPa. As shown in Figure We investigate the pressure effect on electrical properties of polycrystalline NiTe2 and realize superconductivity starting from 12GPa with Tc of 3.7K. Tc grows with enlarging the pressure and eventually reached its maximum value of 7.5K at 52.8GPa. We observe no anomaly in the pressure dependence of normal state resistance(at 50K), indicating the absence of structure transition under pressure. This ensures the possibility of topological nature of superconductivity in NiTe2. Besides, the pressure-induced superconductivity maintains multiband feature similar to pure NiTe2 under ambient pressure suggested by the Hc2-T data. High field studies demonstrate that MR state of polycrystalline sample can be smeared out by application of pressure about 3GPa, which maybe differs in single crystalline one. Strikingly, there are so much common feature between the NiTe2 and MoP. They also contain the Dirac or Weyl nodes near the fermi surface, can present superconductivity under pressure and follow the similar resistance behavior upon pressure. The pressure-induced SC in NiTe2 and MoP also exhibit multiband feature and Tc-pressure phase diagram renders in the similar shape. Finally, we claim that we discovered the pressure-induced superconductivity in NiTe2. This work enriches the Ni-based superconductor family and this similarity with pressure-induced superconductivity in MoP providing more experimental evidence for further researches on topologic quantum materials which the Dirac or Weyl nodes is closed to the fermi surface. 