Recent success in synthesizing thermally stable nanofluids at low costs is a significant breakthrough in the evolution of volumetric absorption based solar thermal systems. However, we have yet not been able to clearly identify the range of operating and design parameters in which volumetric absorption could prove to be beneficial. One of the key reasons being that we have not been able to fully understand the heat transfer mechanisms involved in these novel systems. The present work takes a few steps further in this direction wherein we have developed a comprehensive and mechanistic theoretical framework which is robust enough to account for coupled transport phenomena and orders of magnitudes of operating parameters for host of receiver design configurations. Moreover, we have also modeled equivalent surface absorption based systems to provide a comparison between volumetric and surface absorption processes under similar operating conditions. Performance characteristics reveal that particularly at high solar concentration ratios, volumetric absorption-based receivers could have 35% -49% higher thermal efficiencies compared to their surface absorption-based counterparts. Finally, the present work serves to define optimal performance domains of these solar thermal systems, particularly in the laminar flow regime (200 < Re < 1600) and over a wide range of solar concentration ratios (5-100) and inlet fluid temperatures (293-593K). In present times, energy security has emerged as one of the major challenges to achieve sustainable development. As per IEA estimates approximately 82% of the total energy demand is met through fossils fuels (i.e. oil, natural gas, and coal) In solar energy harvesting, one of the most efficient practices is the use of the concentrated solar thermal technologies. In this, the surface (solar selective/black) absorbs the concentrated solar radiation, and subsequently transfers the absorbed energy to the fluid flowing underneath. While this mechanism is efficient at converting incident radiation to thermal energy; it does not as efficiently transfer this energy to the heat carrier fluid owing to thermal resistance between the surface and the fluid -limiting the transfer rate of energy. Moreover, since the temperature of the surface is the highest; large energy loss is incurred in the form of radiative losses. These limitations could be addressed by using volumetric absorption-based receivers (VARs); herein, sunlight is directly (and volumetrically) absorbed as well as transported by the working fluid itself without the need of any intervening surface. This results in efficient photo-thermal energy conversion of the incident sunlight into the thermal energy of the working fluid Finally, to get the 'big picture' we have tried to delineate distinct range of values of design and operational parameters for which the nanofluid based volumetric absorption solar thermal platforms could prove to be beneficial. Although, conventional heat transfer fluids (such as water, oil; termed as basefluids) are essentially transparent in the solar irradiance wavelength band; dispersing nanoparticles into these fluids has an enormous impact on their optical properties -allowing them to capture incident solar radiation which otherwise gets transmitted through these pristine basefluids As pointed out earlier, we can engineer solar absorbing nanoparticle dispersions through careful control of nanostructure morphology as well as the surrounding media (basefluid); however; given the fact that the nanoparticle dispersions are inherently good radiators of heat in the infrared region (due to intra-molecular vibrations), necessitates the use of enveloping surfaces to minimize thermal losses Figure Venn diagram detailing broad optical characteristics of constituent optical elements' viz., nanofluid, solar selective surface, black surface, basefluid, heat mirror, and glass is shown in Fig. Enveloping surfaces, whether for VARs or SARs should be highly transparent to the incident sunlight (short wavelength radiations) so that maximum amount of sunlight is able to reach the absorbing medium/surface [see Fig. One can see that both glass and heat mirror have high transmissivity values at short wavelengths. However, at wavelength beyond 1μm (the cut-off wavelength in the present case), the transmissivity of heat mirror falls rapidly. This leads to a considerably lesser solar weighted transmissivity (defined by Eq. 1) for heat mirrors (τ sw = 0.872) than for glass (τ sw = 0.978); allowing more solar radiation to pass through in systems with a glass cover. However, the reduction in transmissivity values results due to corresponding increase in reflectivity. Therefore, trade-offs need to be made at different receiver operating temperatures (by tuning the value of cut-off wavelength) to ensure optimum performance. where S λ is the spectral solar irradiance (AM 1.5) and τ λ is the corresponding spectral transmissivity value of the enveloping surface (glass/heat mirror) These are characterized by high values of extinction coefficients (calculation detailed in appendix A)/absorptivity in the short wavelength solar irradiance region to ensure efficient photo-thermal energy conversion. Additionally, solar selective surfaces in particular are engineered to have low emissivity in the long wavelength infrared wavelength band to ensure low radiative losses. However, both nanofluids and black surfaces have high emissivity in the infrared region; therefore require enveloping surfaces [particularly heat mirrors, see Fig. Once we know the spectral optical properties of various constituent elements, the next step is to model heat transfer mechanisms involved in these systems. Figure Following are the modeling assumptions which are common to both VARs and SARs: 1) The flow inside the channel is assumed to be fully developed with a parabolic velocity profile given by Eq. ( where Re. .( The y-component of velocity is assumed to be zero. 2) Heat transfer by conduction in the x-direction has been ignored as convection from the moving fluid is the predominant mode of heat transfer. 3) There is nearly vacuum between the two plates, i.e., no convective heat transfer between the bottom and the top plate. 4) Heat transfer coefficient between the casing and the atmosphere is assumed to be 10Wm The net heat lost by the top plate of the conduit (referred to as plate 1) and the heat gained by the cover plate (referred to as plate 2) where one or both are semitransparent is explained in this section. A system of two plates with known spectral optical properties is considered. As a result of multiple reflections taking place between the two plates, and the fact that the radiation is spectral in nature and two-way coupling exists between the optical behavior and plate temperatures; we need to define parameters such as effective emissivity, absorptivity, reflectivity, and transmissivity to quantitatively determine the overall optical characteristics of the interacting plates. Effective emissivity: Effective emissivity [mathematically defined by Eq. ( Fig. Effective absorptivity, reflectivity, and transmissivity: Parameters viz., effective absorptivity [defined by Eqs. ( where 'j' is the number of reflections. Also, Eq. ( ] Similarly, one can find the value of energy transmitted through to the nanofluid (Q trans→nf ) flowing underneath the lower plate by summing flux at points l 1 , m 1 , n 1 ....and s 2 , t 2 , u 2 , v 2 ....as given in Fig. On solving Eq. ( The algorithm in Fig Within the nanofluid, the sunlight interacts primarily with nanoparticles through absorption and scattering mechanisms. In these processes, both the radiative (manifested in the form of emission and scattering phenomena) as well as non-radiative (manifested in the form of absorption phenomena) decay of incident sunlight takes place. The RTE provides the value of radiation intensity along the line of sight by accounting for the aforementioned three processes viz., absorption, emission and scattering. A numerical method for solving the RTE has been used to calculate the value of intensity at various points in the positive and negative directions. Once the values of intensity in the positive and negative directions are known across the fluid depth, one can calculate the value of the net heat flux leaving a control volume (and hence the divergence of radiative flux). The details of the discretization strategy along with procedure for solving RTE are provided in appendices B and C respectively. Once RTE has been solved for initial temperature distribution and the value of divergence is known 'a priori', one can substitute this value of divergence into the energy equation as energy generation term and establish the values of temperature field at new time instant. Explicit form of finite difference formulation has been used to numerically solve the energy equation. With the solving of the energy equation, a new temperature distribution is obtained for the next time instant. Once again, radiation exchange between the plates (as detailed in subsection 3.2.2) and the RTE is solved and new values of divergence are calculated for input to the energy equation. This process gives a transient temperature distribution at different time intervals and it is repeated until steady state has been reached. Equations ( [] Fig. Herein, the sunlight first interacts with the outer cover plate (plate 2, glass/heat mirror) and is subsequently absorbed by the plate 1 which happens to be a solar selective/black surface. This absorbed energy is then transferred to the fluid through conduction and convection. Radiation exchange between the two cover plates (one semi-transparent and one opaque in case of SAR) could be handled in a manner similar to that for VAR. The governing equation (and initial and boundary conditions) pertinent to the heat transfer processes in plate 1 and 2 are given by Eqs. ( The temperature distribution across the conduit depth and also along the conduit length is found by solving the overall energy equation [Eq. ( , All the aforementioned differential equations have been solved numerically using explicit form of finite difference technique. The details of the grid independence test and validation of the developed numerical models has been presented in appendices B and D respectively Present work delves into several aspects related to the working of VARs and SARs. In particular; the impact of enveloping surfaces, volume fraction of nanoparticles (in case of VARs), solar concentration ratios, Reynolds number, and inlet fluid temperatures on the performance characteristics of these receivers. In order to clearly assess the performance characteristics in relation to scales of SCRs; we have categorized them into low (SCR ≤ 25) and medium-high (25 < SCR ≤ 100) SCR regimes. This shall help us to appreciate the fact that in each regime, there are different parameter combinations which influence the performance characteristics the most. In this regime we have analyzed the impact of nanoparticles volume fraction, receiver design, Reynolds number, and inlet fluid temperature on the performance characteristics of VARs and SARs Effect of nanoparticles volume fraction on efficiency of VARs: Figure (in the present case); subsequently, the efficiency steeply decreases (or remains constant) with further increase in nanoparticles volume fraction. This happens because at very low volume fractions, radiation remains un-captured by the absorbing medium and at very high volume fractions, most of the radiation is captured near the surface (emulating surface absorption) and does not percolate down to the lower fluid layers in the receiver -resulting in low average fluid temperatures and increased thermal losses. Thus, there exists an optimum nanoparticle volume fraction that ensures favorable energy distribution across the fluid thickness. Moreover, in case of glass-heat mirror design, the heat mirror reflects the emitted radiation back to the glass (and nanofluid) -resulting in lower thermal losses. Further, it may be noted that receiver efficiency is higher at higher Reynolds number due to decrease in the emission losses. Effect of Reynolds number has been dealt with in a greater detail in the next section. ). Optimum receiver efficiency values are achieved at higher Reynolds number and low solar concentration ratios. For any Reynolds number as the solar concentration ratio increases, the receiver efficiency decreases. However, there is very little variation in receiver efficiency for the case of glass-heat mirror design in this range of solar concentration ratios as is evident from the widely spaced contours. This is because at conditions of low Reynolds number and high concentration ratios, the temperatures at the top surface are high which exaggerate the emission losses. However, the design that includes a heat mirror reflects the emitted radiation back to the receiver thus reducing losses and therefore the receiver efficiency remains almost unaffected. Figure In this regime, we have analyzed the impact of inlet fluid temperature, receiver design, and Reynolds number on the performance characteristics of VARs and SARs. Effect of inlet fluid temperature and Reynolds number on receiver, Carnot and overall efficiency of VARs: Figure On the whole, the present work presents a comprehensive theoretical modeling framework that is generic enough to include intricate coupled heat transfer phenomena for both volumetric as well as surface absorption based solar thermal systems. We have been able to provide detailed guidelines for selecting a particular receiver design variant under given set of operating conditions in laminar flow regime. This shall serve as a refernce document for designing and further improving upon the performance of solar therrmal systems. As a part of future work, it is envisaged that a comprehensive modeling framework for turbulent flow regime is also developed. where, The spectral absorptivity for glass is then calculated from , , ) The values calculated were scaled such that the solar weighted transmissivity of glass is 97.8%. As radiation propagates through the nanofluid; its magnitude changes owing to absorption and scattering mechanisms. Attenuation of radiation due to scattering is negligibly small as the particles are much smaller than the wavelength of incident light which means that scattering occurs in the Rayleigh regime and absorption dominates where 'K a,λ ' is the spectral absorption coefficient, 'κ' is the spectral index of absorption, and 'λ' is the wavelength. The combined attenuation from absorption and scattering by nanoparticles is taken care of by extinction coefficient, given as, , ,, ) ) where, 'K e,λ ' is the spectral extinction coefficient, 'f v ' is the volume fraction, 'd' is the characteristic dimension (hydrodynamic diameter, d = 1nm), 'β' is the size parameter, 'm' is the normalized refractive index and 'Q e,λ ' is the extinction efficiency of the particles defined as follows The values of 'κ' for base-fluid were obtained from Ref. Once we have calculated the value of extinction coefficients for base-fluid and nanoparticles individually, we can find the value of extinction coefficient for the nanofluid simply by adding the two. . . The hemispherical flux at any location is obtained by integrating the intensity field. The spectral intensity of radiation emitted locally inside a medium is given by Eq. (C9)   , 'n' is the refractive index, 'λ' is wavelength and 'T' is for temperature (Howell). The divergence for any generic volume element is given by Eq. (C10) as , , , rad nf net out net in Q q q  (C10) The divergence thus calculated can be included in the energy equation to find the temperature distribution within the nanofluid. Two infinite black walls at a distance 'H' are considered. The known conditions are the temperatures (T 1 and T 2 ) and emissivities (ε ) of the two walls, and the absorption coefficients (K a ) of the intervening medium. The non-dimensional blackbody flux at any optical thickness 't' (where t = K a y, y being the distance from wall 1) is given by Eq. (D1) as (T 2 ) = 0. Figure English Symbols: c p specific heat [J kg - 