In order to realise the potential of graphene nanocomposites it is vital to control the degree of dispersion and achieve a strong graphene/polymer interface. Herein, we developed a facile 'grafting to' functionalisation approach for graphene nanoplatelets. NH2-terminated graphene nanoplatelets (NH2-GNPs) prepared by a diazonium coupling were used as a 'platform' to covalently graft PMMA chains to the surface of graphene through an amidation between the -NH2 groups and PMMA chains (PMMA-NH-GNPs). A degree of PMMA grafting of ~3.8 wt.% (one chain per ~40 carbon atoms) was found to both improve the dispersion of the GNPs in a PMMA matrix and give strong graphene/polymer interfaces compared to asprovided GNPs. Thus, 2 wt.% of PMMA-NH-GNPs in PMMA was found to increase the elastic modulus, strength and strain at break of PMMA, whereas the incorporation of unmodified GNPs showed poor levels of reinforcement at all loadings. Furthermore, Tg and Td of PMMA were increased by 15 °C and 29 °C, respectively, by adding 5 wt.% of PMMA-NH-GNPs, whereas incorporating unmodified GNPs led to smaller increases. This work offers the possibility of controlling the properties of graphene/polymer composites through Since its isolation, graphene has attracted strong interest for a range of applications, including composite materials, transistors, electronics, supercapacitors, hydrogen storage and solar cells However, to achieve this potential, good dispersions of the flakes in the polymer matrix and strong interfaces between both components are required. Gong et al. The grafting of aryl groups by reduction of the corresponding diazonium salts, previously used for carbon nanotubes (CNTs), pyrolytic graphite, glass carbon electrodes, etc. For example, the incorporation of polyetheramine-functionalized GO into an epoxy resin was reported to render significant enhancements of the mechanical properties of the epoxy (up to 63% in tensile strength and 90% in toughness for 0.5 wt.% filler loading), as well as of the thermal properties (the glass transition temperature, Tg, of the polymer was found to increase with the addition of this filler) Improving the compatibility and interface between carbon nanomaterials and thermoplastic polymers is challenging due to the polymers' low polarity and passive surface chemistry. However, an approach for preparing PMMA-functionalized-exfoliated graphene (GPMMA) via in situ free radical polymerization can be found in the literature We report here the first, highly scalable 'grafting to' method for the fabrication of covalently-bonded, polymer-functionalized commercially available graphene. This grafting is achieved by combining a diazonium addition reaction to give -NH2 terminated GNPs (-NH2-GNPs) with an amidation between the -NH2 terminated GNPs and PMMA chains, to give PMMA grafted GNPs (PMMA-NH-GNPs). This process is specifically designed to reinforce PMMA composites through enhanced interfaces between filler and polymer in which the 'grafted' polymer chains are acting as 'bridges', connecting strongly both components of the composite and creating a 'continuity' between filler and matrix. GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA composite systems at loadings from 0.5 wt.% to 5 wt.% were prepared using the solvent method. The microstructure, thermal, mechanical and electrical properties of these composites were evaluated and related to the different surface chemistry of the GNPs and, thus, to the different graphene/polymer interfaces. NH2 terminated graphene platelets (NH2-GNPs) were synthesized by a nucleophilic substitution reaction through a spontaneous diazonium coupling reaction. In a typical reaction, 150 mg of graphene nanoplatelets (GNP-M25 from XG Sciences, with lateral dimension and thickness of ~25 μm and ~6 nm, respectively, quoted by the manufacturer) was initially suspended in 125 ml of acetonitrile (CH3CN) together with 1.5 g of p-phenylene diamine and heated up to 60 °C under mechanical stirring. Once this temperature was reached, 2 mL of isoamylnitrite were added to the mixture and left to react under mechanical stirring for 24h. The resultant solid was then separated by vacuum filtration, rinsed first three times with CH3CN and then three times with EtOH and left to dry at room temperature. This material was labelled as NH2-GNPs. (Both reaction time and reactants ratio were previously optimized, details in Fig. NH2-GNPs and PMMA powders (50/85 mg) were dispersed together in chloroform (CHCl3) and the mixture was stirred at 70 °C for 24 h. After that time, the reaction mixture was cooled down to room temperature, filtered to collect the resultant powder, washed with 50 mL of CHCl3 and dried. This material was labelled as PMMA-NH-GNPs. The appropriate amount of filler (PMMA-NH-GNPs or GNPs) and 1 g of PMMA were dissolved in 15 mL of CHCl3 using mechanical stirring at room temperature for 30 minutes to prepare composite materials (PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA or GNPs/PMMA) at various loadings from 0.5 to 5 wt.%. Composite films were prepared by depositing these dispersions on a Teflon dish using the solvent-casting method, followed by complete removal of the solvent and peeling-off of the composite films. Specimens with the desired shapes and sizes were cut out of these composite films for characterization. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to characterize the microstructure of the composite materials using a Zeiss Ultra 55 FEG-SEM. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was employed for the determination of the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the neat PMMA and the composites using a TA Q2000 DSC. Samples with a mass of approximately 10 mg were heated to 200 °C at a rate of 10 °C /min and held there for 3 minutes, in order to erase any thermal history. Subsequently, the samples were cooled to 25 °C at a rate of 10 °C /min. The samples were then heated at 10 °C/min in order to clearly observe the Tg. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out using an Axis Ultra Hybrid spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, Manchester, United Kingdom), using monochromated Al Kα X-ray radiation at 1486 eV (10 mA emission at 15 kV, 150 W), under ultra-high vacuum at a base pressure of 1 x 10 -8 mbar. Samples were pressed onto conductive copper tape. A charge neutraliser was used to remove any differential charging at the sample surface. Calibration of the binding energy (BE) scale was performed using the C 1s photoelectron peak at ~ 284.5 eV for graphitic carbon. Spectral deconvolution was performed using CASAXPS (www.casaxps.com) with Shirley-type backgrounds. Graphitic carbon was fit with an asymmetric peak shape analogous to those used to fit metallic peaks, due to the high conductivity of this carbon species. Graphitic carbon also exhibits a signature broad spectral feature between approximately 290-295 eV (a BE region where no other carbon species are expected), associated with excitation of the π-π* transition, which was fitted with one broad peak. While the choice of asymmetry factors for graphitic carbon is not well prescribed, they were optimized to fit the C1s spectrum for unmodified GNPs (where the spectra showed a minimal amount of other carbon species), and this was then applied to all spectra and found to yield satisfactory fits for all the C1s spectra consistently. This self-consistency between the spectra allowed for the relative amounts of graphitic carbon compared to other carbon species between unmodified and modified GNPs to be obtained. Other carbon species required for adequate fitting of the spectra included hydrocarbon at ~ 284.8 eV (fixed at an offset in BE of 0.3 eV from graphitic carbon, given the close proximity of the peak positions), C-N at approximately 285.5 eV, C-O at approx. 286.5 eV, C=O at ~ 289 eV, and finally the broad shakeup feature above 290 eV. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed at a heating rate of 10 °C/min under nitrogen using a TGA Q500 (TA Instruments). Stress-strain curves were obtained from dogbone shaped specimens using an Instron 1122 machine, using a tensile rate of 0.05 mm/min and a load cell of 500 N. Micromechanical characterization was performed to follow interfacial stress-transfer in the nanocomposites. The shift of the Raman bands of graphene can be followed during deformation and it has been used to evaluate stress-transfer from the polymer matrix to the graphene reinforcement The impedances of the polymer and composites were tested on 6 mm x 6 mm x 0.2 mm films specimens using a PSM 1735 Frequency Response Analyzer from Newtons4th Ltd connected with Impedance Analysis Interface (IAI) at the range of frequencies from 1 to 10 6 Hz. The specific conductivities (σ) of the materials were calculated from the measured impedances using: where Y*(ω) is the complex admittance, Z* is the complex impedance, t and A are the thickness and cross section area of the sample, respectively. NH2-terminated graphene nanoplatelets (NH2-GNPs) prepared by a simple diazonium coupling were used here as 'platform' to graft the PMMA chains covalently to the nanoplatelets through an amidation between -NH2 groups and the PMMA chains to render PMMA-NH-GNPs (PMMA undergoes this hydrolysis reaction due to the presence of methacrylic acid comonomer, as shown in the supplier's FT-IR), as schematically represented in Figure The increased ID/IG values revealed by Raman spectroscopy for the NH2-GNPs relative to the starting GNPs (Fig. Both as received unmodified GNPs and the PMMA grafted GNPs (i.e. PMMA-NH-GNPs) were incorporated into a PMMA matrix using a solvent casting method at loadings from 0.5 to 5 wt.%. The microstructure, thermal, mechanical and electrical properties of the composites were evaluated and related to both the dispersion of the flakes in the host polymer matrix and the strength of the graphene-polymer interface. The microstructure of specimens of neat PMMA and of the two series of composites at different loadings were evaluated by SEM, and representative micrographs of the fracture sections are presented in Fig. In addition, high-resolution SEM micrographs (Fig. DSC analysis was performed on the two series of composites (GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA) and the results are shown in Fig. The mechanical properties for both series of composites were evaluated by tensile testing. The results show a glassy polymeric behaviour for the neat polymer and all the composites prepared here (Fig. where Ec is the Young's modulus of the composite, Ef, Em are the Young's modulus of the filler and matrix, respectively, and Vf and Vm are the volume fractions of the filler and the matrix, respectively, within the nanocomposite (with ). The rule of mixtures has been widely employed to determine the effective modulus of graphene materials, Eeff, in similar systems where η0 is the Krenchel orientation factor that depends on the average orientation of the particles Although the tensile testing results revealed good levels of reinforcement for the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA composites (considerably superior than those found for the non-modified GNPs based composites), the effective modulus found here for this filler was still much lower than the 350 GPa theoretically predicted for the mechanical modulus of GNPs Young et al. Interestingly, a progressive increase of both strain (~13%) and stress at break (~28%) with loading was also observed up to the optimal 2 wt.% loading of the PMMA-grafted-graphene, whereas no improvement on either the stress or the strain at break was found when the nonfunctionalized GNPs were incorporated into the matrix at all studied loadings (Fig. In general terms, the mechanical behaviour of both unmodified and PMMA-grafted GNPs were found similar to each other at low loadings (~0.5 wt.%), whereas at higher loadings the PMMA-grafted-GNPs system showed a superior mechanical performance, in agreement with our results from DSC (the values for Tg were higher for the grafted-GNPs/composites above 0.5 wt.% content). This observation suggested a relatively good dispersion of the unmodified GNPs at loadings below 0.5 wt.% (evidenced by SEM, Fig. In general, the composites based on PMMA-NH-GNPs presented here show better mechanical performance relative to previously reported works which use unfunctionalized GNPs, graphene oxide, CNTs or other inorganic nanofillers. The use of unmodified GNPs in PMMA was probed to lead to important increases in the Young's modulus of the polymer (78 %) up to high loadings (~20 wt.%) The results reported here are also superior to those typically observed when using CNTs as fillers in thermoplastics, mainly due to the difficulty to achieve good dispersions of CNTs in the polymer matrix at high loadings combined with a lower processability, relative to graphene related materials. In general, CNTs-based PMMA composites require higher loadings of filler (≥ 3 wt.%) to observe increased moduli and strengths, while elongation at break is not enhanced due to the brittle nature of these materials The nature of the interface between GNPs and the host polymer in the two composite systems studied was evaluated by Raman spectroscopy. In order to understand the observed mechanical behaviour and the mechanics of these reinforcements, we evaluated the stresstransfer at the graphene-polymer interface, using Raman spectroscopy. Fig. The electrical conductivity of both GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA series of composites at loadings from 0.5 to 10 wt.% were tested and the results are shown in Fig. PMMA grafted graphene nanoplatelets were successfully prepared using a simple diazonium coupling reaction to give NH2-terminated flakes followed by an amidation reaction between the NH2 groups and PMMA chains (PMMA-NH-GNPs) in order to improve the compatibility of graphene with a PMMA host matrix through stronger filler-polymer interactions. Raman spectroscopy, XPS and TGA analysis revealed successful covalent attachment, corresponding to 1 polymer chain per ~40 atoms of C. The polymer grafted graphene was found to render important improvements on the mechanical performance of PMMA composites (including improvements on the elastic modulus, stress and strain at break) up to the optimal 2 wt.% loading, whereas poor reinforcement was observed with the addition of unmodified GNPs at all studied loadings. In addition, enhanced thermal stabilities and increased Tg up to high loadings (5 wt.%) were found for the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA system relative to both pure polymer and the GNPs/PMMA system. We attribute this higher mechanical and thermal performance of the polymer-grafted-GNPs system relative to the unmodified graphene based one to improved dispersions of the flakes in the host polymer matrix and stronger graphene/polymer interfaces, as revealed by SEM and Raman spectroscopy, respectively, caused by the polymer chains grafted to the graphene acting as 'bridges' and strongly connecting graphene and host polymer in the composites. This work offers the possibility of improving and controlling the physical properties and functionality of graphene/polymer composites through chemically tuning the graphene/polymer interface, which will broaden considerably the range of applications in the field of graphene based nanocomposites. The method developed here shows great potential for industrial applications due to an easy fabrication procedure, high productivity (> 70 wt.%) and the use of commercially available GNPs as starting material. Further work and investigation is still required, however, to optimize the process, maximizing the yield and minimizing both the use of solvents and the generation of waste products.