Despite the growing interest in topological materials, the difficulty of experimentally synthesizing and integrating them with other materials has been one of the main barriers restricting access to their unique properties. Recent advances in synthesizing metastable phases of crystalline materials can help to overcome this barrier and offer new platforms to experimentally study and manipulate band topology. Because III-V semiconductors have a wide range of functional material applications (including optoelectronic devices, light-emitting diodes, and highly efficient solar cells), and because Bi-doped III-V materials can be synthesized by ion plantation and ion-cutoff methods, we revisit the effect of bismuth substitution in metastable III-V semiconductors. Through first-principles calculation methods, we show that in wurtzite structure III-V materials, Bi substitution can lead to band inversion phenomena and induce nontrivial topological properties. Specifically, we identify that GaBi and InBi are Dirac-Weyl semimetals, characterized by the coexistence of Dirac points and Weyl points, and GaAs0.5Bi0.5, GaSb0.5Bi0.5, InSb0.5Bi0.5 are triple-point semimetals, characterized by two sets of "near Dirac" triple points on the Fermi level. These experimentally-accessible bismuthbased topological semimetals can be integrated into the large family of functional III-V materials for experimental studies of heterostructures and future optoelectronic applications. The interplay between topology and solid-state materials has given rise to numerous novel properties. Topological semimetals In order to unlock the potential of these applications, it is necessary to find or synthesize robust and versatile material realizations of topological semimetals. These materials would ideally offer processing and manufacturing possibilities similar to hallmark III-V semiconductor materials such as GaAs or InSb. One promising strategy is to start with the class of III-V materials and search for topological semimetals within this class using compositional substitution or alloying techniques. A first step in this direction has been taken by theoretically considering the effect of bismuth substitution in zincblende III-V materials To further explore avenues for realizing topological phases in III-V materials, it is important to broaden the space of compounds and crystal structures, including metastable phases and alloys. In this regard, it is encouraging that various experimental approaches, such as ion-implantation methods and ion-exchange methods, provide the capability to synthesize several metastable wurtzite III-V nanostructures. Based on these motivations, in this work we revisit the effect of bismuth substitution by focusing on Bisubstituted III-V materials in the wurtzite phase. Previous studies on ternary LiGaGe-type materials, which crystallize in a stuffed wurtzite structure and the same space group as the wurtzite III-V materials, have shown that this general class of crystal structures can host various types of topological semimetals. For instance, SrHgPb Whereas minerals such as AgI, ZnO, AlN, GaN, and InN naturally occur in a wurtzite crystal structure, Given that the (metastable) wurtzite III-V materials are structurally similar to the zincblende materials, it is not surprising that they exhibit similar electronic properties. In particular, Bi substitution is expected to cause a band inversion in both cases, leading to topologically nontrivial electronic structure. In the case of zincblende materials this was pointed out in Ref. 19; here we report the topological properties of the wurtzite compounds. Despite qualitative similarities, such as the presence of a band inversion, the Bi-substituted zincblende and wurtzite materials exhibit important differences in their electronic structure, which are rooted in the distinct (point group) symmetry of the two structures. In par-ticular, the wurtzite structure is characterized by a principal six-fold screw axis (see Fig. To obtain the electronic structure of the Bi-substituted III-V materials in the wurtzite structure, we employ firstprinciples density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. Details of the computational methodology are presented in Appendix A. The energy band structures of GaBi and InBi (shown in Fig. Å-1 and k D = (0, 0, ±0.201) Å-1 , and with energies E -E F = -0.07 eV and E -E F = -0.05 eV, respectively. These band crossings realize band inversion-induced Dirac points of the kind first proposed for, and observed in, Na 3 Bi. Here we show that Bi-substituted III-V materials in the wurtzite structure are candidate materials for realizing Dirac-Weyl semimetals. To robustly prove the nontrivial topology of the Weyl points we determine the chiral charge by calculating the integral of Berry curvature over a sphere enclosing each Weyl point, with a radius of 0.005 Å. Specifically, we calculate where the sum is over all occupied bands labeled by n. The chirality of each Weyl point is shown in Fig. An important consequence of nontrivial bulk topology is the appearance of surface states. In the case of Weyl electrons, Fermi arc surface states must connect the projections of the Weyl points onto the surface Brillouin zone. In the present case, where the Weyl points are located in the k z = 0 plane, Fermi arc surface states are expected on the (001) surface. To verify this, we calculate the surface spectral function at the Weyl point energy E -E F = 0.156 eV and show the result in Fig. The main effect of alloying is to tune the strength of spin-orbit coupling, which directly affects the band inver- sion. A material which is still inverted but closer to the band inversion transition is likely to exhibit protected Dirac band crossings at the Fermi energy, without additional Fermi surface. We find that this is indeed the case for GaAs 0.5 Bi 0.5 , as shown in Fig. The electronic states in the vicinity of the triple points can be well-described by the low-energy k•p Hamiltonian derived in Ref. 21. Adapted to the present case, the Hamiltonian is given by where here k x and k y are interchanged with respect to Ref. 21, which is due to a different choice of coordinate system. We fit the parameters of (1) to the first- principles band structure calculations and show the result in Fig. To show the thermodynamic stability of GaAs 0.5 Bi 0.5 , we first calculate its phonon dispersion relation. The calculated phonon modes at Γ point have a small negative mode ω = -17.18 cm -1 without using acoustic sum rules. After applying the sum rules, the negative mode is eliminated and the phonon dispersion relation is everywhere positive, as shown in Figure In this work, we revisited the effect of bismuth substitution to lead to nontrivial topological properties in metastable wurtizte III-V materials. Based on firstprinciples calculations, full substitution of bismuth would lead to Dirac-Weyl semimetals GaBi and InBi, characterized by the coexistence of Dirac points and Weyl points in the Brillouin zone. By alloying them with normal insulators, the reduction of the spin-orbit coupling strength could remove the additional hole pockets near the Brillouin zone center, and the change of crystal symmetry splits the Dirac points into a set of triple points, making the thermodynamically metastable alloys GaAs 0.5 Bi 0.5 , GaSb 0.5 Bi 0.5 , and InSb 0.5 Bi 0.5 triple point semimetals. The integration of topological properties with conventional wurtzite III-V materials, along with the advanced experimental approaches to synthesizing them, could enrich the family of accessible topological materials and provide new platforms for people to experimentally study the various properties arising from topology. of these wurtzite materials; they were calculated with a 4 × 4 × 2 q-point grid and an energy cutoff of 100 Ry. In order to study the topological properties of the proposed materials, the Hamiltonian of each material was constructed based on maximally-localized Wannier functions, obtained in the software of Wannier90, . The energy band gap E gap and E soc of GaAs, GaSb, and InSb can be found in Table E -EF (eV) (a) (b) (c) (d) GaBi InBi Γ 1 Γ 7 Γ 8 Γ 7(2) Γ 7(1) 2 0 -2 K Γ A L Γ 1 Γ 1 Γ 7 Γ 8 Γ 7(2) Γ 7(1) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) E -E F (eV) GaAs GaSb InSb Γ 3 Γ 1 Γ 5 Γ 1 2 0 -2 -4 K Γ A L 2 0 -2 -4 Γ 3 Γ 1 Γ 5 Γ 1 2 0 -2 -4 Γ 3 Γ 1 Γ 5 Γ 1 Γ 8 Γ 7 Γ 9 Γ 7(2) Γ 7(1) Γ 8 Γ 7 Γ 9 Γ 7(2) Γ 7(1) E -E F (eV) 2 0 -2 -4 Γ 8 Γ 7