Hybrid integrated semiconductor laser sources offering extremely narrow spectral linewidth as well as compatibility for embedding into integrated photonic circuits are of high importance for a wide range of applications. We present an overview on our recently developed hybrid-integrated diode lasers with feedback from low-loss silicon nitride (Si3N4 in SiO2) circuits, to provide sub-100-Hz-level intrinsic linewidths, up to 120 nm spectral coverage around 1.55 μm wavelength, and an output power above 100 mW. We show dual-wavelength operation, dual-gain operation, laser frequency comb generation, and present work towards realizing a visible-light hybrid integrated diode laser. The extreme coherence of light generated with lasers has been the key to great progress in science, for instance in testing natures fundamental symmetries With these advantages, diode lasers are essential for photonics as key enabling technology. Narrow linewidth and wavelength tunable diode lasers can serve high-end and upcoming applications. Prominent examples are monitoring and sensing in fabrication With sufficient coherence, diode lasers can play a great role in precision metrology and timing, such as in portable atomic clocks Of widest relevance is the role of diode lasers in communication and information technology, for instance as key component of the global fiber network The absolutely central property in these applications is the lasers spectral linewidth, which is a measure for the degree of spectral purity, also called coherence. Narrowing the linewidth increases the amount of information and precision to be gained in sensing and metrology, and it increases the data rate through optical interconnects and in optical processing. As the frequency fluctuations of lasers are caused by a variety of different processes A key coherence property and signature of spectral quality is the Schawlow-Townes limit, also called quantum limit, fundamental linewidth, intrinsic linewidth or fast linewidth Depending on the application, also the slow linewidth can be of major importance, i.e., the linewidth obtained after longer averaging, often named full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) linewidth. This measure comprises also technical noise such as from thermal drift, or from noise in the pump current. The FWHM bandwidth can partly be reduced with optimizing the laser design for highest passive stability, such as provided by photonic integration. Long-term frequency stability requires that the laser is frequency tunable, such that an electronic servo control can minimize the detuning from a stable reference used as frequency discriminator The remainder of this manuscript is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the state of the art with respect to narrowing of the intrinsic linewidth of diode lasers. In section 3, we briefly discuss the physics of linewidth narrowing. In section 4, we describe a hybrid InP-Si3N4 laser based on two intracavity micro-ring resonators and a single gain section. In section 5, we show that be adding a second gain section that both the output power can be significantly increased and the intrinsic linewidth reduced. In section 6, we show that, by adding a third intracavity microring resonator, a record-low intrinsic linewidth can be realized. In section 7 we describe hybrid lasers producing a frequency comb or providing widely tunable dual wavelength operation, and discuss the possibility to extend the oscillating wavelength down into the visible. We conclude with a summary and outlook in section 8. The typical FWHM bandwidth of commercially available, integrated diode lasers has remained for long at relatively high levels around a MHz All hybrid and heterogeneously integrated diode lasers make use of additional waveguide circuits fabricated in a different, low-loss material platform, while light is generated and amplified in a semiconductor material gain section. A schematic view of hybrid integrated lasers based on frequency selection with two or three microring resonators is shown in Fig. Besides using Bragg waveguides from Si , where R f is the end mirror reflectance and T f (ω) is the single-pass transmittance of the Vernier filter having a spectral bandwidth ∆ν f . order of hundreds of kilohertz Using silicon waveguides as feedback circuits is beneficial for several reasons. The relatively high index contrast, ∆n ≈ 2 between the Si core and a SiO2 cladding, allows tight guiding that enables using sharply bent waveguides without much radiation loss. Furthermore, techniques have been developed that allow wafer-scale heterogeneous integration with InP gain elements based on molecular or adhesive bonding However, silicon also introduces a fundamental limitation. The lowest achievable linewidth becomes limited through nonlinear loss Dielectric materials, such as Si3N4 and silica (SiO2), provide much larger bandgaps than silicon (≈ 5 eV and 8 eV, respectively) which safely excludes two-photon absorption. The silica platform, having weakly doped silica as core material, offers extremely low loss and thus narrow linewidth, such as shown with feedback from a straight Bragg waveguide grating at 1.064 μm Ultimate linewidth narrowing of integrated semiconductor lasers is thus most promising with the Si3N4 platform Single-frequency oscillation of extended cavity diode lasers is readily obtained by narrowband spectral filtering within the cavity. This was first demonstrated with a free-space cavity extension and feedback from a bulk diffraction grating Precisely predicting the intrinsic linewidth of the laser linewidth of hybrid and heterogeneously integrated diode lasers is difficult for several reasons. The first is the relatively high complexity of the laser cavity with its feedback circuitry, as compared to simple Fabry-Perot lasers. Embedding microring resonators inside a laser cavity means that the temporal response of the cavity cannot be described with a simple exponential decay law. Another aspect is that the intensity in the gain section, and thus also the spatial distribution of the inversion density, varies notably with the propagation coordinate, which is due to a relatively high roundtrip loss. This means that standard simplifications, for instance, the mean field approximation for the gain section, are not well justified. Furthermore, the linewidth depends on a larger set of experimental parameters, many of which are not well known, such as the intrinsic losses in the amplifier waveguide, or the coupling loss between the different platforms realized after integration. Other parameters are difficult to determine because they depend on the laser's operating conditions. Examples are pump current induced temperature changes in the waveguide of the semiconductor amplifier causing thermally induced phase shifts, or the exact relation between heater currents and the optical roundtrip length of the microring resonator, both depending on details of the heat sink design and fabrication. The most realistic calculation of all laser properties, including the intrinsic laser linewidth is likely to require numerical methods, such as based on transmission line models In Eq. 1, vg = cng is the group velocity in the gain section, hν is the photon energy. nsp, assuming typical values around 2, is the spontaneous emission enhancement factor that takes into account the reduction in inversion due to reabsorption by valence band electrons. αH > 0 is Henry's linewidth enhancement factor. The factor describes the strength of gain-index coupling in the gain section The spatially averaged roundtrip loss coefficient, γm = -1/(2Lg) ln[(R b R0(ω))], is determined by the output coupling, where R b = |r b | 2 denotes an approximately frequency independent (broadband) power reflectance of the gain section back facet, and Lg is the length of the gain section. All optical properties of the feedback arm are lumped into a complex-valued reflectivity spectrum for the electric field, r0(ω). This spectrum contains the optical length of the feedback arm as a frequency-dependent phase shift, r0(ω) = |r0(ω)|e iφ(ω) , and also the overall power reflectance, R0(ω) = |r0(ω)| 2 , to include highly frequency selective filtering or output coupling. The feedback arm reflectance, R0(ω) = T f (ω) 2 R f , is given by the end mirror reflectance, R f , and the transmission spectrum of the intracavity spectral filter, T f (ω). The loss coefficient γtot = -1/(2Lg) ln[(RiR0(ω))] is the spatial average of all loss per roundtrip. Here Ri = R b T 2 g T 2 c lumps all loss of the remaining roundtrip, i.e., all imperfect transmission and reflection, into an intrinsic reflectance. The power transmission in a single pass through the gain section is Tg = e (-γg Lg ) < 1, with γg the intrinsic passive loss constant of the gain waveguide. Tc < 1 specifies the mode coupling loss per transmission through the interface between platforms. P b is the output power from the back diode facet. The factor in brackets next to P b is bigger than 1 and accounts for additional output power emitted at other ports of the laser cavity, for instance P f in Fig. 1) where and In Eqs. 3 and 4, τg = 2ngLg/c denotes the roundtrip time in the gain section, and φ0(ω) the additional optical phase accumulated by light when travelling forth and back through the feedback arm. Term A can be interpreted as the ratio between the optical length of the laser cavity extension and the optical length of the gain section. Physically, the term describes the factor by which the photon lifetime of the laser is increased by the additional travel time through the extended cavity, with regard to the roundtrip time through the solitary diode gain element. It should be noted that the presence of resonators in a Vernier filter increases the optical length of the feedback arm by a factor that grows linearly with the number of roundtrips through each resonator. To give an example, we consider a resonator of geometrical length Lr and effective group index n ef f . For simplicity we assume that the ad and drop ports are separated by half a roundtrip, Lr/2, and that losses are much smaller than the power coupling coefficient at the add and drop ports, κ 2 . Then, at resonance, the optical length of the resonator becomes multiplied with a roundtrip factor of M = 1/2 + (1 -κ 2 )/κ 2 , i.e., the effective optical length of the resonator becomes n ef f Lr • M . As a consequence, A is biggest, and the length-related linewidth reduction via F in Eq. 1 is strongest, if the laser frequency is resonant with the Vernier filter frequency. The term B describes the presence of an additional linewidth reduction mechanism based on gain-index coupling as expressed by Henry's factor. However, we note that, due the factor αH in Eq. 4, the B-term based linewidth reduction can only be present, if αH is nonzero, i.e., if the laser linewidth is already broadened by gain-index coupling [term (1 + α 2 H ) in the numerator of Eq. 1]. B is biggest at the rising edge of the Vernier filters reflection peak, where d ln |r0(ω)|/dω is positive. The effect can be described as a negative optical feedback mechanism, where making the resonator loss steeply frequency dependent compensates for spontaneous emission-induced index and frequency changes To make an optimum choice of parameters when considering the effects that determine the laser linewidth, there are two main routes to reduce the linewidth. The first and most effective one is to increase the photon lifetime and thus the phase memory time of the resonator. However, as the intrinsic loss in diode laser amplifiers is high, often higher than 90% in double pass due to the typically very large values of γg ≈ 10 3 /m, the light in an extended cavity diode laser essentially performs only a single roundtrip before it is lost. Increasing the photon lifetime can thus not be achieved with increasing the reflectance of the feedback circuit, R0. Instead, an optically long feedback arm, L f Lg, is required. Via a large value of dφ0(ω)/dω, the feedback essentially works as a double-pass optical delay line, similar to a delay line in an optoelectronic oscillator To give a quantitative estimate on what intrinsic linewidth values can be expected with low-loss waveguide feedback circuits, such as with using Si3N4 circuits, Fig. In the following we present a set of recent examples of hybrid integrated InP-Si3N4 diode lasers that we have fabricated and characterized, in order to give an overview on current and future options for versatile on-chip light sources. A schematic view of a InP-Si3N4 hybrid laser comprising a single gain section and a Vernier filter consisting of two microring resonators is shown in Fig 4 . For stable operation, such hybrid lasers are usually assembled in a butterfly package as shown in Fig. In Fig. To obtain a continuously increasing output power, we use an automatic readjustment of the optical cavity length Optical Power (mW) Figure by adjusting the phase section for maximize output power. With the automatic phase tuning turned on, the laser output is seen to increase approximately continuously with pump current (red crosses). With the investigated laser we measure a maximum fiber-coupled optical power of 24 mW, which is more than the previous reported values of 1.7 mW To demonstrate that the laser can cover a broad spectral bandwidth with single-frequency output, Fig. For determining the intrinsic linewidth, we measured the power spectral density (PSD) of frequency noise with a high-finesse resonator that is slowly locked to the average laser wavelength (HighFinesse LWA-1k-1550). Frequency noise spectra display the squared and averaged frequency excursions with regard to the average frequency versus the radio frequency, f , at which they occur. Slow frequency excursions are usually largest, and become smaller with increasing frequency, often with approximately a 1/f -law Figure Basically all applications of integrated lasers would benefit from increasing the available output power. An obvious advantage lies in easier overcoming the pump threshold of integrated nonlinear oscillators, e.g., parametric oscillators such as Kerr comb generators, or Brillouin lasers. Another advantage of higher laser power is that the signal-to-Figure In addition to the named fundamental noise, of which the influence can be reduced via increased power, lasers often show excess noise, i.e., power fluctuations caused by technical perturbations. A standard measure to quantify the total noise is the so-called relative intensity noise, RIN, which entails measuring the average power fluctuation divided by the average power. The importance of reducing RIN is given by the circumstance that all optical measurements, e.g. also of wavelength or linewidth, are finally based on photodetection where RIN forms a limiting factor Hybrid and heterogeneous integrated diode laser are very attractive for integration in photonic circuits. However, even if offering ultra-narrow linewidth, such lasers have so far been limited to an output in the order of 25 mW, and also the RIN-levels should be reduced. Here, we present, a hybrid integrated diode laser with so far the highest output power, and with a RIN-level close to the shot-noise (quantum) limit. The functional design of the waveguide circuit of the laser is shown in Fig. For characterizing the noise properties of the laser we measured frequency noise and intensity noise. Amplitude spectra of frequency noise are measured at frequencies of up to 30 MHz (HighFinesse LWA-1k-1550). We note that beyond 10 to 20 MHz, the spectra are dominated by electronic noise and thus cannot be reliably addressed to laser noise. Relative intensity noise spectra are recorded by sending the laser output power to a fast photodiode and recording the signal with a 25-GHz-RF spectrum analyzer. Fig. Compared to the linewidth of a laser with a single gain section described above, we address the 7-times lower linewidth to two main differences. The first is that the laser power is about 4-times higher, which should yield an 4-times narrower linewidth. The second difference is that the Vernier filter is not used as end mirror but as intracavity filter. In this case, with each laser cavity roundtrip, the light has to pass twice through the Vernier filter, which doubles the effect of cavity length extension. From the resonator-based part of length extension, given that the resonators have the same lengths and coupling coefficients (10%) as in the single-gain laser, we estimate that the dual-gain laser possesses a factor of 1.3 longer optical roundtrip length. In Eq. 3 this corresponds to a factor 1.3 larger frequency dependence of the phase shift, which yields a factor of 1.8 linewidth reduction in Eq. 2, giving a total linewidth reduction by a factor of 6.4 in Eq. 1, which is in reasonable agreement with the experimental linewidth ratio. A dependence of the linewidth upon fine-tuning via the B-term in Eq. 4, as seen in si-InP lasers The measured RIN spectrum is shown as the blue trace in the right panel of Fig. In the previous sections, intrinsic linewidths below 2.2 kHz and 320 Hz are reported with single and dual-gain lasers, respectively. Further line narrowing should be possible with further increasing the laser intracavity power. However, this would require to integrate even more or stronger gain sections while, according to Eq. 1, one expects line narrowing only inversely proportional with power. A somewhat more attractive option is to extend the cavity length because of two reasons. First, making use of a given power, it can solely be based on extending the passive part of the laser cavity, i.e., the effective length of the Si3N4 circuitry. Second, the linewidth narrowing follows a steeper law, i.e., a quadratic decrease of linewidth with increasing cavity length, via the F 2 -factor in the denominator in Eq. 1. Obtaining a quadratic decrease requires, however, that the active and passive roundtrip loss, expressed by γm and γtot, do not increase too much with increasing cavity length. The regime of quadratic reduction of linewidth with cavity length can also be noticed in Fig. In pursuing this strategy we follow up an earlier version with a prototype gain element and 290 Hz linewidth Regarding the coarse operation parameters, the laser shows similar properties as the lasers with two microring resonators. The threshold pump current is about 42 mA and a maximum fiber coupled output power from the Sagnac output port is 23 mW at a pump current of 320 mA. The spectral coverage of the laser with more than 1 mW single-frequency output is wider than 70 nm, with a side mode suppression higher than 60 dB. Thermo-optic tuning by acting on the heater of the ring resonators can be done via longitudinal mode hops in steps of 2 nm and 0.15 nm, which are the FSRs of the small and big microring resonators. Fine tuning can be achieved either with small changes of the diode pump current, by acting on the heaters of the Mach-Zehnder coupler for the Sagnac loop mirror, or with a phase section between the microring resonators and the gain section. Figure The upper panel of Fig. An important observation in Fig. The absence of noticeable nonlinear loss opens the interesting potential for power based linewidth narrowing to an extent that is not possible with hybrid or heterogeneous integration of silicon-photonic circuits, or with fully monolithic semiconductor lasers. Summarizing this section, the intrinsic linewidth of 40 Hz, as is also plotted in Fig. 7 Dual-wavelength, multi-wavelength and visible wavelength lasers So far we have described work on hybrid integrated lasers that provide a continuous-wave output in the form of a spectrally narrowband, single optical frequency with constant power. However, there is highest interest also in multi-frequency sources, so-called optical frequency combs or mode-locked light sources, specifically, for dual-comb sensing For exploiting the full potential in applications, there are two central requirements regarding the coherence of comb sources. The first is a highly equidistant spacing of the comb lines with fixed mutual phasing. This is usually fulfilled without additional effort, because mutual phase locking via injection locking through nonlinear sideband generation is what underlies all mode-locking mechanisms. The second requirement is that the spectral linewidth of the individual comb lines has to be extremely narrow, preferably in the kHz range or below. This corresponds to a low jitter in time-resolved detection, and is also what enables coherent multi-heterodyne (e.g., dual-comb) measurements with phase sensitivity and maximum signal-to-noise ratio Most attractive candidates for applications are chip-based diode laser frequency combs high optical roundtrip loss, and strong gain-index coupling. With monolithically integrated diode lasers, even with an extended cavity length, the linewidths typically remain in the MHz-range In terms of cavity lifetime and thus the intrinsic linewidth, Kerr combs form a highly promising alternative to diode laser combs, especially since their recent hybrid integration with diode pump lasers In order to provide narrower linewidth in diode laser combs we have investigated comb generation with a hybrid integrated InP-Si3N4 laser as shown in Fig. It is important to note in Fig. Fig. Figure frequency comb is mode-locked (phase-locked). At this point one may wonder why laser oscillation off the center of the cold cavity modes is possible here. The reason is the high laser cavity roundtrip loss, which imposes a wide band width on the cold cavity mode. As described in Sect. 3, and to more detail in Ref. Having demonstrated frequency comb generation, the central point and main motivation of the investigation was to narrow the intrinsic linewidth of single comb lines via an extended photon lifetime gained by hybrid integration with a low-loss Si3N4 circuit. To measure the linewidth of single comb lines, we performed beat measurements between the hybrid laser and an independent reference laser. As reference laser we used an extended cavity laser (SANTEC TSL-210) with an intrinsic linewidth of 6 kHz. This value was determined with delayed self-heterodyne measurements as described in Sect. 6. The beat measurements with the hybrid laser yielded very narrow intrinsic linewidths of the individual comb lines, with an average value as small as 34 kHz. This values is a factor 7 lower than the previously smallest linewidth for any chip integrated frequency comb diode laser We note that the observed linewidth already approaches similar values as Kerr combs pumped by narrowlinewidth diode lasers In order to investigate such scenarios we are currently investigating hybrid lasers with two separately adjustable Vernier filters to provide, in a first step, dual-wavelength sources for generation of microwave and THz signals. Dualwavelength sources have been investigated extensively using a large variety of different approaches. This includes rare-earth-doped bulk solid state lasers In order to synchronize the frequency fluctuations at the two output wavelengths for providing a narrow linewidth of the beat, there was early work on DBR lasers with gratings containing two spatial periods, operated with a single gain section. There was, however, no report on the linewidth of the individual laser wavelengths or the beat frequency output In our work in progress, we realized a dual-wavelength laser based on dual Vernier feedback with a single gain section as shown in Fig. Fig. Using this laser, ongoing and future measurements aim to measure also the linewidth of the beat frequency and compare it with the intrinsic linewidth of the two individual laser output frequencies. We expect to observe widely and arbitrary tunable microwave and THz-generation with linewidths in the tens of kHz range or below. Such experiments might provide one of the lowest RF linewidths generated by integrated diode lasers in chip-sized One of the great promises of Si3N4 waveguide circuits is their excellent transparency also in the near-infrared and visible range. The transmission window coarsely spans from 400 nm to 2.3 μm, while the Si3N4 core on its own provides transparency even up to 8 μm. In particular, its transparency in the visible, where silicon is strongly absorbing, is expected to secure a central function for Si3N4 circuits as well as for hybrid lasers in the visible based on Si3N4 feedback circuits. For applications such as named at the beginning of Sect. 7 visible hybrid Si3N4 diode lasers are of great potential. Outside the 1.5 μm range, to our knowledge, Si3N4-based hybrid integrated diode lasers have only been demonstrated in the near-infrared, near 1 μm wavelength We aim on realizing a visible hybrid laser with narrow linewidth and tunable near 690 nm, and here we report on the preparation and characterization of appropriate Si3N4 feedback circuits. Currently under investigation is realizing appropriate waveguide and circuit design parameters, i.e., the waveguide cross section, resonator radii and coupling constants. Obtaining appropriate parameters is much more challenging than near 1.5 μm in the infrared, mainly due to the much smaller wavelength. For instance, a proper mode field needs to be designed that counteracts potentially increased Rayleigh scattering while allowing curvatures that extends the Vernier free spectral range for matching a typical gain bandwidth of about 15 nm. Furthermore, proper waveguide tapers have to be designed for efficient coupling to an anti-reflection coated optical gain chip that operates in the visible. Fig. The next set of experiments will concentrate on characterization of losses in the circuit and losses caused by coupling to the circuit. Thereafter, first feedback experiments aim on demonstrating laser oscillation. To summarize, we have investigated a variety of hybrid integrated diode lasers in the 1.55 μm wavelength range based on InP semiconductor optical amplifiers, using low-loss dielectric feedback circuits fabricated with the Si3N4 waveguide platform. The fundamental key properties of the latter are lowest propagation loss, including lowest nonlinear loss due to a wide bandgap, transparency that reaches also across the visible range, and a high index contrast with the SiO2 cladding. The importance of these properties is that they are central to introducing a long photon lifetime into otherwise lossy laser resonators, that well-defined and tunable spectral properties can be implemented in laser resonators, such as high-Q filters and interferometers, and that these functionalities can be carried over from their main current use in the infrared to other spectral ranges, specifically also the visible. The overall impact is a record increase of coherence properties, i.e., of spectral quality, of spectral controllability, of spectral coverage, and of output power with low intensity noise with on-chip light generation using diode lasers. With this approach, the investigated hybrid lasers make optimum use of the best of two integrated photonic platforms: i) semiconductor amplifiers provide all the active optical functions, specifically, light amplification with wide spectral coverage, highest speed and electrical-to-optical efficiency, and nonlinear mixing to generate sidebands and optical comb spectra; ii) Si3N4 provides maximally passive optical functionalities that enable to propagate, interfere, spectrally shape and store light without losing it. The investigated lasers, based on amplification in InP semiconductor gain sections, were selected to cover and optimize a range of different operational modes of lasers. Specifically, these are single-frequency operation with ultranarrow intrinsic linewidth, wide spectral coverage, high-power output, low intensity noise, dual-wavelength and frequency comb operation. State-of-the-art output properties were presented, such as a record-low intrinsic linewidth of 40 Hz, a record-high output power above 100 mW, and a record-wide spectral coverage of more than 120 nm. A lowest level of relative intensity noise (RIN) of -170 dBc/Hz was demonstrated, which is close to the fundamental shot noise (quantum) limit. A great benefit of the Si3N4 platform is its compatibility with CMOS fabrication equipment, which has led to an impressive maturity enabling to reproducible fabricate complex and thus highly functional circuits. Examples are coherent optical receivers and transmitters The excellent compatibility with seamless integration in complex photonic circuits, paired with highest performance point to a great potential of hybrid integrated lasers in applications.