Dielectric microstructures have been reported to have negative influences on perm-selective ion transportation because ions do not migrate in areas where the structures are located. However, the structure can promote the transportation if the membrane is confined to a microscopical scale. In such scale where the area to volume ratio is significantly large, the primary driving mechanisms of the ion transportation are transited from electro-convective instability (EOI) to surface conduction (SC) and electroosmotic flow (EOF). Here we provide rigorous evidence on how SC and EOF around the dielectric microstructures can accelerate the ion transportation by multi-physics simulations and experimental visualizations. The microstructures further polarize the ion distribution by SC and EOF so that ion carriers can travel to the membrane more efficiently. Furthermore, we verified, for the first time, that the arrangements of microstructures have a critical impact on the ion transportation. While convective flows are isolated in crystal pillar configuration, the flows show elongated pattern and create an additional path for ion current in the aligned pillar configuration. Therefore, the fundamental findings of the electrokinetic effects on the dielectric microstructures suggest an innovative application in an energy-efficient micro/nanofluidic devices. Perm-selective ion transportation through the nanoporous membrane has gained significant attention for studying fundamental electrokinetics and developing innovative engineering applications based on the fundamentals. Traditional electrodialysis Instead, here we suggest avoiding the current shadow effect by reducing the characteristic length scale of the system, while the dielectric spacers remain used. It has been reported that the length scale is a critical factor to distinguish the driving mechanisms of perm-selective ion transportation First of all, SC caused by the EDL around the dielectric pillar results in an additional local ion concentration polarization (ICP) phenomenon around each pillar as shown in Figure Note that conventional ICP can be described as the formation of polarized electrolyte concentration at both sides of a nanoporous membrane under an external electric field; low concentration zone (i.e. an ion depletion zone (IDZ)) at an anodic side and high concentration zone (i.e. an ion enrichment zone (IEZ)) at a cathodic side of cation-selective membrane When the pillars are installed inside IDZ, additional ion depletion zone (AIDZ), which decreases the electrical conductance, forms at the back of each pillar (i.e. the location facing the bulk) as shown in Figure The dominance of SC and EOF are reported to vary with (i) surface charge of a substrate and (ii) Debye length around the substrate (i.e. bulk concentration) The microfluidic confinement membrane system with micro dielectric pillars can be represented as a schematic domain as shown in Figure We used general form PDE module of COMSOL to directly input our dimensionless governing equations and boundary conditions. Other predefined modules (e.g. electrostatics, transport of diluted species, etc) are inconvenient to implement the non-dimensional problem. Using the general form PDE module, any type of governing equations and boundary conditions can be implemented and solved on COMSOL. Figure In order to simultaneously calculate ICP and surface conduction/electroosmotic slip on dielectric pillars, we employed local electroneutral model established by Rubinstein and Zaltzman Referring to their work, this section briefly introduced the model. The dimensionless Poisson equation describes the conservation of ionic charge. where 0, , c+ and c-are the Debye length, electrical potential, cation concentration and anion concentration, respectively. We chose normalizing scales as follows; (i) distance from cationselective surface to stationary bulk as a length scale, (ii) thermal voltage as an electrical potential scale, (iii) bulk concentration as a concentration scale. As 0 → 0, the Poisson In other words, we can assume an electroneutral domain. Thus, cation and anion concentrations can be denoted as Using above electroneutral relation, the dimensionless Nernst-Planck equation to describe the transport phenomena of ionic species were for a cationic species, and for an anionic species. The velocity scale ( ~0 U )was set to be where tilde symbol (~) means dimensional variable, This implied mass conservation. Substituting equation( This equation implied electrical current conservation. The flow field, u and pressure, p was governed by following dimensionless Stokes equations and continuity equation of 2 p    0 u (10) and 0   u (11) Since the electroneutral domain was assumed by 0 → 0, the volumetric body force term in the Stokes equations was omitted. The boundary conditions on stationary bulk were where V is the applied voltage. On cation-selective surface, ln 0 and  u 0. ( Above conditions, the first one refers that electrochemical potential set to be zero. The second is zero-anion flux through cation-selective surface and third one is no-slip boundary condition. On the dielectric micropillar surfaces, the surface conduction was described by the fluxmatching condition between normal and tangential flux referred to Schnitzer and Yariv's analysis where r and  are normal and tangential components of which origin is at each center of micropillar. Du is the Dukhin number of micropillar defined as where 0 is the dimensionless Debye length normalized by pillar radius and qs is the dimensionless surface charge density of pillar. By the aid of above matching boundary condition (equation ( In addition, this approach is helpful to reduce computational cost significantly because the ion transport within electrical double layer is treated as simple boundary condition rather than coupled differential equation of Poisson and Nernst-Planck equations. Due to highly charged micropillar surface, the surface flux of anion was zero. This zero surface flux led to The electroosmotic slip on micropillar surfaces was described by following slip condition The first and second terms are electroosmosis and diffusioosmosis, respectively. The zeta potential (z) can be evaluated by following Grahame equation, Equations ( We performed additional simulation at Pe 0 = 0 as shown in Figure To investigate the effect of the dielectric pillar, the design of the microchannel is shown as in Figure On the main microchannel, we added side microchannels on both sides of the main-and buffermicrochannel for the easiness of the experiment For concentration visualization of the experiments, we only used fluorescent dye without any background electrolyte. Pure solid type of Alexa Flour 488 (Sigma Aldrich, m.w. 643.41 g/mol) of 1 mg was mixed with DI water of 1.55 mL to obtain 1mM solution. Due to the absence of background electrolyte, fluorescent molecules virtually acted like a major carrier in this experiment. For flow field tracking experiment, KCl solution (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 1 mM with ultra-sonicated canola-oil droplets. We have employed sonicated canola oil droplet whose zeta potential is below -10 mV. Thus, electroosmotic mobility / electrophoretic mobility < 10 because zeta potential of PDMS wall is approximately -100 mV. The low zeta potential allowed the droplet to enter the ion depletion zone. Highly charged tracers such as fluorescent particles can not enter the ion depletion zone. There is an electro-neutral particle, but its size is too big to be inserted into a microchannel. To prepare the oil droplet, a bottle of canola oil was purchased (Lotte Food, Korea) and the oil was ultra-sonicated for 15 minutes at 40 kHz condition. Then the oil was broken into the micro droplets whose diameter is less than 2 m. The oil droplets are bigger than conventional small tracers, but we must use the oil droplet because of the low surface charge. For I-V measurement, 1 mM of KCl solution without dye and oil droplet was used. In the microfluidic experiment, the concentration profile inside the ICP layer and the tracers near the pillar array were imaged by an inverted fluorescent microscope (IX53, Olympus) and the CellSens program. Using Ag/AgCl electrodes, external electric field was applied by a source measure unit (Keithley 236, USA). Current-voltage response were cyclically measured in the range from 0 V to 10 V (0V → 10V → 0V) at 0.2 V/30 sec. The current values were automatically recorded at every step by customized LabView program. In order to investigate the effect of dielectric pillars inside IDZ, one should determine the number of columns of the pillar in the device. An electric potential is applied to the main microchannel and the buffer microchannel is grounded so that IDZ is formed at the main microchannel where the pillars are installed. Detailed experimental methods were described in Methods section. Overlimiting conductance increases and saturates as the number of dielectric pillar array increases (See supporting information). This is attributed to the AIEZ and electroosmotic flow can enhance overlimiting conductance, but the dielectric pillars outside IDZ would merely affect to overlimiting conductance. Thus, we set the number of dielectric pillar array (9 rows and 12 columns) to let the IDZ remain inside the dielectric pillar arrays. The first test configuration is a crystal configuration; i.e. pillars with a radius of 15 μm are alternatively positioned as shown in Figure In the numerical contour plot (Figure The second test type is an aligned configuration. As demonstrated in the previous section, the computed and visualized concentration profiles are shown in Figure We are expecting significant enhancement of the ion transport by the microstructures if the scale of the device becomes submillimeter scale as mentioned. As shown in Figure Microstructure such as dielectric spacers used in conventional macroscale electrodialysis desalination systems have a negative impact on the perm-selective ion transport through nanoporous membrane due to the current shadow effect 