The magnetic properties of a novel cobalt based hydrogen vanadate, Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6, are reported. This new magnetic material was synthesized in single crystals form using a conventional hydrothermal method. Its crystal structure was determined from single crystal X-ray diffraction data and was also characterized by scanning electron microscopy. Its crystal framework belongs to dumortieritelike structure which consists of large hexagonal channels and triangular ones; the large hexagonal channels contains 1D chains of face-sharing CoO6 octahedra linked to the framework by rings of VO4 tetrahedra, while the triangular channels are occupied by chains of V2O5 pyramidal groups. The magnetic properties of this material were investigated by DC magnetic measurements and it shows the occurrence of antiferromagnetic interactions. Magnetic materials with geometrical frustration In this context, cobalt-based materials have attracted considerable attention due to their interesting magnetic properties such as geometrical frustration In the framework of exploring novel cobalt-based materials with new structural features, we report here for the first time the synthesis via hydrothermal method of a new cobalt hydrogen vanadate Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6, with dumortierite-like structure and its magnetic properties. The morphology and semi-qu-anti-tative analysis of the synthesized single crystals were performed by JEOL JSM-IT100 InTouchScopeTM scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analyzer (EDS). Single crystal with appropriate size was selected for the X-ray data collection at room temperature on a Bruker D8 VENTURE diffractometer equipped with a PHOTON II CPAD detector and IS 3.0 microfocus X-ray source (Mo K radiation,  = 0.71073 Å). The software APEX3 was used for data collection and SAINT for cell refinement and data reduction. A total number of 32344 reflections were measured in the range of min = 3.2 ° and max = 35 °, of which 1184 were independent and 1155 reflections with I > 2(I). The crystal structure was solved using direct method with SHELXS Magnetic measurements were performed by a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) DynaCool magnetometer on selected crystals (7 mg) sealed in a gelatin capsule. The temperature dependence magnetization measurements was recorded between 300 and 1.9 K in both zero field cooled (ZFC) and filed cooled (FC) modes with an applied field ranging from 100 Oe to 40 kOe. The ZFC mode was performed by cooling the sample from 300 down to 2K in the absence of a magnetic field. Afterward, the desired magnetic field was applied and the data were collected on heating the sample up to 300 K. After reaching 300 K, the data were then recorded with the same strength of the field on cooling the sample down to 2 K, i.e., FC. The isothermal magnetization curves were measured up to 90 kOe. Single crystals of this cobalt hydrogen vanadate were grown by hydro-thermal method during the investigation of Na2O-CoO-V2O5 ternary system. A mixture of NaNO3 (  99% , Sigma-Aldrich), Co(NO3)2.6H2O (  98.0 %, Scharlau) and NH4VO3 (  98.0 %, Acros Organics), in a molar ratio of Na : Co : V = 7 : 1: 4, were placed in Teflon lined autoclave with 12 ml of distilled water, then transferred to an oven and heated under autogenous pressure at 473 K for 12 days. After cooling-down the autoclave to room temperature, the mixture was washed with distilled water and dried at room temperature. Black hexagonal prismatic crystals were obtained with suitable sizes for X-ray diffraction measurements. Crystal data, data collection and structure refinement details of Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6 are summarized in Table In the refinement procedure, the vanadium sites V2A and V2B which both occupy the special position 2b are constrained to have the same anisotropic displacement parameters, also the occupancy of these sites was refined and restrained to be equal to the occupancy of one site. On the other hand, the atom O5, attached to V2A and V2B atoms, showed high atomic displacement parameter, consequently, we have allowed the refinement of its occupancy which drops to half occupancy of the site and then fixed, accordingly the occupancy of its riding hydrogen H5 was fixed to half occupancy of the site. The morphology and elemental analysis of the obtained single crystals were characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). As shown in Figure The novel cobalt hydrogen vanadate, Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6 is isostructural to Mg13.4(OH)6(HVO4)2(H0.2VO4)6 In this new vanadate, each cobalt atoms is surrounded by six oxygen atoms forming an octahedral environment. The Co1O6 exhibits hydrogen atom attached to O6 forming Co1O5(OH) octahedra. Two of these octahedra share a common face to form dimers Co(1)2O8(OH). The connection of these dimers by sharing edges leads to tetra-mers Co(1)4O14(OH)2 giving a quadruply bridging hydroxide groups O6H6 (Fig. (1) Å and in the edge-sharing one is 3.040 (1) Å. Each of these tetrameric units is surrounded by four other same units via corner-sharing leading to a layer parallel to (110) plane (Fig. The magnetic susceptibility ( = M/H) and the inverse magnetic susceptibility  -1 for Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6, measured at 10 Oe in ZFC mode within the temperature range of 1.9-300 K are presented in Fig. Figure The origin of this weak ferromagnetic correlation might be related to site disorder and geometrical frustration which both leads to frustrated magnetic interactions In this work we have successfully synthesized the single crystals of a new geometrically frustrated cobalt hydrogen vanadate displaying dumortierite-like structure, i.e., Co13.5(OH)6(H0.5VO3.5)2(VO4)6. The single crystals of this new magnetic material were characterized by single crystal X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. The structure of this new material is built-up by the succession of CoO6 octahedra and VO4 tetrahedra, which yields to 3D framework comprising two type of channels, i.e., hexagonal channels containing 1D cobalt-chains and triangular channels. The magnetic investigation revealed antiferromagnetic behavior with the existence of weak ferromagnetic correlation. However, deep magnetic investigations are needed to shed light on the magnetic behavior of this vanadate Absolute structure parameter 0.020 Hydrogen-bond geometry (Å, o) for (shelx) Symmetry codes: (i) x, y, z+1; (ii) -x+1, -y+1, z+1/2; (iii) -x+1, -y+1, z-1/2. Hydrogen site location: mixed Absolute structure parameter: 0.020 ( Geometry. All esds (except the esd in the dihedral angle between two l.s. planes) are estimated using the full covariance matrix. The cell esds are taken into account individually in the estimation of esds in distances, angles and torsion angles; correlations between esds in cell parameters are only used when they are defined by crystal symmetry. An approximate (isotropic) treatment of cell esds is used for estimating esds involving l.s. planes. Fractional atomic coordinates and isotropic or equivalent isotropic displacement parameters (Å 2 ) for (shelx) )]/[(I+)+(I-)] (Parsons and Flack (2013).