The high kinetic inductance offered by granular aluminum (grAl) has recently been employed for linear inductors in superconducting high-impedance qubits and kinetic inductance detectors. Due to its large critical current density compared to typical Josephson junctions, its resilience to external magnetic fields, and its low dissipation, grAl may also provide a robust source of non-linearity for strongly driven quantum circuits, topological superconductivity, and hybrid systems. Having said that, can the grAl non-linearity be sufficient to build a qubit? Here we show that a small grAl volume (10×200×500 nm 3 ) shunted by a thin film aluminum capacitor results in a microwave oscillator with anharmonicity α two orders of magnitude larger than its spectral linewidth Γ01, effectively forming a transmon qubit. With increasing drive power, we observe several multi-photon transitions starting from the ground state, from which we extract α = 2π×4.48 MHz. Resonance fluorescence measurements of the |0⟩ → |1⟩ transition yield an intrinsic qubit linewidth γ = 2π× 10 kHz, corresponding to a lifetime of 16 μs, as confirmed by pulsed time-domain measurements. This linewidth remains below 2π×150 kHz for in-plane magnetic fields up to ∼ 70 mT. Superconducting circuits are part of a growing group of hardware platforms which successfully demonstrated quantum information processing, from quantum error correction to quantum limited amplification Granular aluminum, similarly to other materials such as NbN Similar to JJ arrays, the non-linearity of the grAl kinetic inductance stems from the Josephson coupling between neighboring grains, and it is inversely proportional to the critical current density j c and the volume of the film V grAl jcV grAl , where C is a numerical factor close to unity that depends on the current distribution, e is the electron charge, and a is the grain size By reducing the grAl volume and the critical current density, one can potentially increase K(1) to a value much larger than the transition linewidth Γ 01 , allowing to map a qubit to the first two levels |0⟩ and |1⟩, similar to a transmon qubit Figure The sample is fabricated on a sapphire wafer in a single-step lithography by performing a three-angle shadow evaporation. First, a 10 nm thick grAl layer with room temperature resistivity ρ n = 1800±200 μΩ cm and corresponding critical temperature T c = 1.9 K is deposited at zero-angle, followed by two 40 nm thick Al layers evaporated at ±35 • (cf. App. J). Thanks to this procedure, only a small grAl volume, highlighted in blue in Fig. inductance L K = 2.9 nH, constituting 87 % of the total inductance. We characterize the grAl transmon by performing a single-port measurement of the complex reflection coefficient S 11 as a function of probe frequency f , in the vicinity of the resonant frequency f 1 (cf. Fig. where, ∆ = ω 0 -ω is the frequency detuning between the drive and the qubit frequency, and i is the unit imaginary number. In contrast to a harmonic oscillator, the reflection coefficient of a qubit deviates from a circle in the quadrature plane and becomes increasingly elliptic with drive power (cf. App. C). Figure For drive powers P in > -138 dBm, we observe additional features in the reflection coefficient S 11 emerging at frequencies f n below the qubit frequency f 1 (cf. Fig. Generally, for a JJ transmon the anharmonicity is given by the charging energy E c,s = e 2 /2C s associated with the shunt capacitance From the measured multi-photon transition frequencies f n , we calculate the non-linear frequency shift As shown in the right hand panel of Fig. In the top panel of Fig. -101 dBm. At any drive power in this range several multi-photon peaks are visible. The linewidth of each transition broadens with power, as illustrated in the bottom panel of Fig. The time evolution of the qubit can also be measured using resonance fluorescence The energy relaxation time T 1 = 1/Γ 01 , shown in the top panel of Fig. In Fig. -6 μs, consistent with the γ -1 values extracted from spectroscopy (see Fig. By applying a magnetic field B y , aligned in-plane with the sample, we observe a continuous decrease of the qubit frequency f 1 (B y ), as plotted in Fig. Figure In summary, we have shown that using small volumes of grAl can provide enough non-linearity to implement magnetic field resilient superconducting qubits. We have implemented a transmon qubit Following this proof of principle demonstration, future developments will focus on replacing all pure Al components with more field resilient materials, such as low resistivity grAl We are grateful to H. Rotzinger, U. We acknowledge qKit From both coil geometries, we calculate the relation between the applied bias current I coil and the magnetic flux density ⃗ B at position ⃗ r using the Biot-Savart law. For simplicity, we approximate the coils with n L ×n w single loops. The loop radius depends on the layer number and the position along the coils symmetry axis depends on the winding number, both gradually increasing by the wire diameter d = 140 μm. Following the approach of Caparelli et al. The Cu shield was used in both measurements presented in Fig. Using Eq. C2 and Eq. C3, Inserting Eq. C5 into Eq. C1, the reflection coefficient writes The relation between the Rabi frequency Ω R and the drive amplitude Using Eq. C7 and in the limit of negligible pure dephasing Γ φ ≪ Γ 01 , Eq. C6 simplifies to which is Eq. 1 in the main text. The factor in front of the second term of Eq. C8 is the coupling efficiency κ/Γ 01 , with Γ 01 = κ+γ. It is a measure of the relative size of the internal loss rate γ compared to the external coupling rate κ. Figure Since our transmon qubit has a relatively small anharmonicty α (cf. Fig. In analogy to Eq. C1 in the case of a two-level system, the reflection coefficient of an (anharmonic) oscillator is We calculate the expectation values ⟨a⟩ as a function of detuning ∆ and drive amplitude Ω by solving the corresponding master equation numerically using Qutip Here, ρ s is the system density matrix, H Kerr is the driven Kerr Hamiltonian given in Eq. D1 and D[a](ρ) is the Lindblad superoperator introducing single-photon dissipation For our numerical calculations, we use internal and external decay rates γ = 2π×10 kHz and κ = 2π×40 kHz, respectively, and a total energy relaxation rate Γ 01 = κ+γ = 2π×50 kHz. The dimension of the considered Hilbert space is N level = 30. The drive amplitudes Ω = 2 √ κα in are chosen to coincide with the values used in the experiment, with α in = P in /(ħw 0 ). Figure We reproduce the experimental results presented in the main text in Fig. For comparison to Fig. We would like to add that multi-photon transitions have been measured in flux qubits Appendix E: Two-tone spectroscopy Figure For small drive powers, only a single response at the qubit frequency is visible in the phase of the reflection coefficient arg(S 11 ) shown in Fig. Both the |0⟩ → |1⟩ and |1⟩ → |2⟩ transitions split into two distinct transitions with increasing P drive . This observation is in quantitative agreement with the theoretical modelling of a driven three-level system (qutrit) The expectation value of the photon number operator ⟨a † a⟩ is shown in Fig. Figure The measurement shown in Fig. Appendix G: Qubit response to in-plane magnetic fields The in-plane magnetic field dependence of the qubit transition frequency f 1 (B) is calculated by mapping the qubit onto a linearized, lumped-element circuit model consisting of three inductive contributions in series, which are shunted by a capacitance C s = 137 fF. The inductive contributions arise from a field-independenent geometric inductance L s = 0.45 nH, and two fielddependent kinetic inductances associated with the pure Al and grAl thin films, L k,Al (B) and L k,grAL (B), respectively. The lumped-element model transition frequency is The field dependence of the kinetic contributions is derived from Mattis-Bardeen theory for superconductors in the dirty limit where R n is the normal state resistance and ∆(B, T ) is the magnetic field and temperature dependent gap parameter. The dependence of the gap parameter on magnetic fields applied in-plane is derived from a two-fluid where ∆ 00 is the gap parameter at zero temperature and zero magnetic field, and B c is the critical magnetic flux density above which the pair correlation is zero. Due to the fact that the critical magnetic flux density of grAl where L k,Al is the kinetic inductance in zero field. Using Eq. G1 we fit the data presented in Fig. We calculate the kinetic inductance of the grAl film L k,grAl = 2.7 nH by substracting L k,Al = 200 pH (fitted, cf. Eq. G4) and L s = 450 pH (FEM simulations, cf. App. B) from the total inductance L = 3.35 nH, which we obtained from the measured resonance frequency f 1 = 7.4887 GHz (cf. Fig. As discussed in the main text, the grAl non-linearity α is consistent with a number N ≈ 6 of effective JJs, yielding a critical current density where A grAl = 10×200 nm 2 is the grAl cross section area. This value for j c is in agreement with switching current measurements of similar grAl films In Fig. Unwanted interactions between superconducting qubits and other mesoscopic systems are commonly b) Frequency difference ∆f1 between the measured transition frequency f1,meas and the fit result f 1,fit (see Eq. G1) in three different field ranges. On this scale, discrete jumps in the qubit frequency become visible for the data taken in run #5. The jumps remain qualitatively unchanged over a 150 MHz span covered by the qubit frequency versus By, and in neither of the runs did we observe signatures of avoided level crossings. observed We can tune the grAl transmon qubit transition frequency by more than 150 MHz by applying an external magnetic field in-plane. Figure In Tab. II we summarize the circuit parameters measured in each of the four cooldowns. The time intervals between subsequent runs, during which the sample is at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, therefore subjected to aging, are the following: run #1 to #2 -20 days, run #2 to #3 -50 days, run #3 to #4 -20 days, run #4 to #5 -176 days, run #5 to #6 -3 days, run #6 to #7 -102 days. 