Monoclinic scheelite bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) is a promising photoanode for water splitting yet the PEC performance is limited due to its relatively higher (2.4 eV) band gap. Here, we successfully decreased its the band gap to 1.72 eV by controlled antimony alloying. Low bandgap antimony alloyed bismuth vanadium oxide (Sb:BiVO4) thin film was prepared by RF sputtering of high purity homemade target, fabricated by solid-state reaction using a mixture of Sb2O3, Bi2O3, and V2O5 powders with desired stoichiometric ratios. Several growth parameters, powder crystallography, post-deposition effects, and surface treatments, thickness dependence, effect of electrolytes on photocorrosion were studied along with its optical and electrochemical characterization. We discovered that Sb:BiVO4 is a direct band gap material in the visible light range (1.72 eV) and a valence band position suitable for driving water oxidation reaction under illumination. Furthermore, hole diffusion length is increased with antimony alloying and achieved optimum thickness of 400 nm for higher photocurrent. The controllably prepared Sb:BiVO4 particles are having the sizes of 10-15 nm in room temperature deposition and can be grown up to 0.5 microns under air annealing. The increasing global awareness concerning carbon emissions and the exploitation of fossil fuel reserves motivates the development of technology based on alternative energy sources Hydrogen has the potential to be a sustainable carbon-free fuel, but it is not available as a primary source in nature Bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) semiconductor materials have been extensively studied as a promising photoanodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting due to its relatively narrow band gap of 2.4 eV, favorable band structure, earth abundance, low toxicity, chemical stability, long hole diffusion length, and substantial visible light absorption Bulk and surface recombination losses of photogenerated charged carriers play a vital role in determining the efficiency of oxide photoanodes such as BiVO4. Low mobility and short minority charge carrier lifetime lead to poor collection of holes from the bulk of the material to the surface of the material Precursor powder was synthesized by a high-temperature solid-state reaction method by mixing bismuth oxide (Bi2O3), Vanadium oxide (V2O5) keeping the metals ration Bi:V = 1:1 and added Sb2O3 such that ratio of Vanadium and Antimony becomes Sb:V =1:10. The mixture was homogenized using a rolling mixer and as-obtained yellowish precursor powder was transferred to a fused-silica crucible which was placed into an air-ambient electric muffle furnace at 840 o C for 140 hrs. A fused-silica plate was placed over the crucible to mitigate the loss of any volatile components (particularly Bi vapor) without creating a gas-tight seal, thus allowing excess oxygen to be present during the annealing process. The assembly was brought up to approximately 840 o C over a period of 4 hours and then held at this temperature for another 140 hours. The furnace was then deactivated and allowed to cool naturally in the closed state. The resulting powder was strong solid chunk and was mild yellow in appearance. This solid material was then crushed and grinded thoroughly using agate mortar and pestle until it became a fine microparticle. Approximately 20 g of the annealed powder was used to fabricate a target which could be used for RF sputtering depositions. The powder was loaded into a stainless-steel target cup with a 2ʺ diameter cavity and pressed at room temperature using hydraulic press with an applied force of 12 tons for 20 minutes to get the high purity target ready for installation. The high-purity homemade target was loaded into a custom-built sputtering chamber. Depositions were performed on Fluorine-doped tin oxide coated glass substrates (FTO-Tec 15 Pilkington). Substrates were cleaned ultrasonically with DI water, acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol before loading into the RF sputtering chamber. The substrate was covered by a strip on one side to prevent film deposition underneath so that electrical contacts could be made for the electrical and photoelectrochemical measurements. The Sb:BiVO4 thin films were prepared by Radio Frequency sputtering in Argon/Oxygen plasma environment. RF sputtering powers typically ranging from 40 -70 W, and chamber pressures of 10 mTorr sustained by supplying argon gases with the flow rate of 30 sccm. The thickness of the obtained film was varied from 80 nm to 1 micron. The atomic ratios of metals in the precursor powder were determined using energy dispersive xray spectroscopy with Rigaku Cu Kα radiation. The surface morphology and bulk elemental composition of the thin films were characterized using a Hitachi scanning electron microscope (SEM) with in-built energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) attachment. EDS measurements for elemental analysis were taken of regions approximately 500 μm x 500 μm in area. Film thicknesses were measured using a DEKTAK profilometer to determine the step height at two locations namely at a tape-masked center and holder frame-masked edges to observe the thickness variation across the film. Bulk crystalline structure of the thin films was characterized using a Rigaku X-ray diffractometer using coupled 2θ Bragg-Brentano mode and a copper X-ray source (Kα Cu =1.54 Å). Phase assignments were made based on the Joint Committee on Power Diffraction Standards (JCPDS) database. The optical absorbance spectrum was measured by a PerkinElmer lambda 1050 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The transmittance and reflectance of the samples were measured by optical spectrometer using 300 nm -1500 nm wavelength and the band gaps were calculated using the following relation. Where α is the absorption coefficient, t is thickness, and R and T are reflection and transmission respectively. Now, if we plot (αhν) n vs. hν, the we can get a straight line, the intercept of which gives us the band-gap value. n= 2 for direct; n=1/2 for indirect transition. Photoelectrochemical measurements of this oxide photoanodes were conducted using a threeelectrode cell configuration in various electrolytes with Ag/AgCl reference electrode and a platinum coil as a counter electrode. The major advantage of integrated PEC is that solar energy capture, conversion, and storage are combined in a single integrated system. Films were tested in various electrolyte solutions such as 1M KOH, 1 M NaOH, NaSO3 + KH2PO4, and H2SO4 to observe the photocatalytic performance and resulted chemical corrosion. H2O2 was also added as a sacrificial agent to improve oxygen evolution reactions in certain cases. Voltammetry experiments were performed using a computer-controlled potentiostat. For PEC measurements, the electrode was illuminated from the front side (through the electrode) and back-side (from the glass side) as well using 15 W xenon lamp with AM 1.5. The light intensity was calibrated using a silicon diode. The illumination area was typically around 1 cm 2 or less. The photoelectrochemical properties were investigated in three electrode configurations using Sb:BiVO4 films as working electrode. Sb:BiVO4 electrodes were prepared by cutting large 3ʺ×3ʺ thin films deposited on Tec-15 substrates into smaller 0.75ʺ×1.5ʺ rectangular shapes. Thin film was then covered by a non-conducting epoxy resin leaving behind a smaller area (typically less than 1 cm 2 ) for light exposure. The film on one side of these electrodes was then etched away by gentle mechanical scratch exposing underlying conducting layer of the substrate and coated with thin indium metal layer for better electrical contact. The PEC characterization was carried out using Voltalab potentiostat, in a three-electrode configuration in a quartz-windowed cell partially filled with electrolyte solution. The recorded potential versus Ag/AgCl (EAg/AgCl) in this work was converted into potential against reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using the Nernst equation ( The system was purged with nitrogen for 30 mins in order to remove possible oxygen dissolved in the electrolyte. Photoelectrochemical response was recorded on both the forward bias and reverse bias potential under illumination. The illumination source was 300 W Xe lamp calibrated and equipped with AM 1.5 filter. The light intensity of 100 mW/cm 2 was adjusted and calibrated using silicon photodiode. The XRD patterns of annealed BiVO4 films with different elemental doping concentrations have been studied. X-ray diffraction patterns in Figure The tauc plot for direct band gap estimation of 10% antimony alloyed BiVO4 (Sb:BiVO4) thin films is shown in Figure The photocurrent-voltage characteristic of a photoelectrochemical cell for solar hydrogen production via water splitting, using 10 % antimony alloyed BiVO4 as photoanode, was obtained. Photoelectrochemical characteristics of the cell were investigated by three electrode system. Radio Frequency sputtered Sb:BiVO4 thin films displayed significantly improve on its photochemical activities under forward bias compared to RF sputtered pristine BiVO4 (not shown here). The photocurrent obtained for rf sputtered Sb:BiVO4 electrodes mostly depends on its thickness. In general, photo absorption increases with thickness of the absorber layer up to an optimized limiting thickness. Thinner films suffer from large dark current at higher bias region, thicker films show smaller photocurrent at higher bias. Roughly 400 nm thick Sb:BiVO4 exhibits higher photocurrent, which is evident that hole transport length increases with antimony alloying compared to 200 nm thick pristine bismuth vanadate It can be seen form Error! Reference source not found.(supplementary information) that the cathodic shift of photocurrent onset potential to -0.35 V for 10% antimony alloyed bismuth vanadate. There are several possible reasons for this behavior, including widening of the space charge and/or reduction in surface recombination as well as the kinetics of the multi-electron transfer process. The PEC performance of antimony alloyed bismuth vanadate was tested under lower pH buffer solution to study surface kinetics without suffering from electrode corrosion. Even though the overall photocurrent is low in neutral electrolyte as compared to higher pH solution, we found that with the addition of H2O2 hole scavenger, the photocurrent increases significantly as shown in Figure More recently, the effects of the electrolyte and its pH on the PEC performance and photocatalytic activities of pristine BiVO4 have been investigated We synthesized high quality Sb:BiVO4 thin films by reactive RF sputtering for the first time and explored the influence of the V/Sb ratio on structure, morphology, and PEC performances. Antimony alloying resulted in significant band gap reduction especially for 0.1:1 Sb:V ratio. Controlled antimony alloying changes valence band position thereby narrowing down the fundamental band gap of the material. 10% Sb alloyed BiVO4 thin film showed significantly smaller band gap of 1.72 eV and relatively higher photocurrent density without any surface modification. Nonetheless, Sb:BiVO4 displayed its applicability in commercial water splitting materials by modifying its surface to resist chemical corrosion. We also discussed the influence of front illumination versus back illumination, finding that the influence of illumination side was film thickness dependent and might be limited by hole transport. In addition, we improved the resistance against photocorrosion by depositing thin layer of Nickel on the top of Sb:BiVO4 thin film but at the expense of photocurrent. In the future, we will work on the further improvement of Sb:BiVO4 thin films for PEC application such as improving the resistance against chemical corrosion and improving hole transfer by loading OER catalysts for the fundamental studies of bismuth based semiconducting materials.