A time of flight MIEZE spectrometer study is presented. The instrument uses solenoid radio frequency (RF) spin flippers with square pole shoes and a magnetic yoke. These flippers can achieve higher static fields than conventional resonant RF spin flippers, which employ an air core. High fields are crucial for the construction of a high resolution and compact MIEZE spectrometer. Using both types of flippers two MIEZE spectrometer configurations are constructed and compared on the same beam line. It was demonstrated that the pole shoe/solenoid coil RF flippers can achieve a MIEZE signal, which is similar in quality to the conventional reference setup. The highest obtained modulation frequency was 100 kHz. Modulated IntEnsity by Zero Effort (MIEZE) is a polarised neutron spin echo technique, used to measure quasi-elastic scattering The core of every MIEZE setup to date is a set of two (or more) spin flippers. This study focuses on a type of flipper that utilizes square pole shoes to generate the static magnetic field. The main advantage of these pole shoes is they allow the generation of high homogeneous magnetic fields in combination with relatively low RF coil current without having material in the beam. The static magnetic field is orientated perpendicular to the neutron flight path, while the RF field is parallel to the flight path. Therefore the total field is given by B ⃗ = B i ẑ+ B rf cos(γB i t + φ) y ̂ Where the index i denotes the RF flipper (one or two). The linearly oscillating RF field can be split into two rotating fields, which rotate in opposite directions. If B i is large compared to B rf one can ignore the field which rotates in the direction opposite to the Larmor precession The Schrödinger equation has been solved for a neutron in this magnetic field in with v the neutron velocity and d the flipper length, the flipper induces a maximal energy difference between the spin up and spin down states of the neutron. For a pulsed beam v = v(t), thus equation (3) can be written as followed: with S the distance between the flipper and the pulsed source π 2 Analyser Sample To prevent depolarisation of the beam the neutrons must either traverse a zero field chamber or a guide field. Traditional MIEZE spectrometers opt for a zero field chamber; however the poleshoe magnets, due to their larger dimensions, are placed inside of a guide field. The guide field prevents depolarisation of the beam, however it also introduces additional precession, which must be accounted for when determining the MIEZE focus. In the case of a zero field chamber the MIEZE focus is given by here D is the distance between the two flippers, d the length of a flipper and ω i = γB i the frequency of the i-th flipper. If a guide field around both flippers is introduced the focusing condition becomes: with Δω = ω 2 -ω 1 , ω g the Larmor frequency of the guide field and 1 and 2 are given in figure When this condition is satisfied the expectation value for the spin in the x-direction is given by But if the detector is out of focus by a small amount Δ , the expectation value becomes: this would be acceptable for a perfectly monochromatic beam, however for a small wavelength spread, Δλ, averaging over the bandwidth is required. Assuming a Gaussian wavelength distribution the out of focus MIEZE signal is given by: For a pulsed beam λ 0 is time dependent, meaning the MIEZE frequency will shift if the detector is out of focus. This frequency shift is a useful tool for finding the exact MIEZE focus experimentally. In addition placing the detector out of focus, or using a detector of non-zero thickness will result in an amplitude drop The goal is to demonstrate that the solenoid coil RF flippers, figure 2 (b), are competitive with conventional resonant flippers figure The reference setup (figure detector. As was demonstrated in section 2.2, the focal spot size is very small in this setup. To remedy this, an improvised PSD consisting out of 16 1cm diameter He tubes placed behind each other is used. The PSD is placed into the beam under a slight angle (~3°), so that each tube is able to "see" a piece of the beam as illustrated in figure The experimental MIEZE setup (figure tube. To increase the focal spot size the two chopper disks were moved closer together. Three different flipper frequencies were used, in increasing order, to determine the focal point, as at lower modulation frequencies the focal spot is broader. Again, the current through the RF coils was modulated by a 1/t function. The experimental parameters are shown below in table 1. Note that the ratio between the two flipper frequencies remains constant as they are increased. At a 100 kHz modulation frequency the calculated focal point was found to be 4.507 m from the last flipper. f 1 f 2 2Δf During these experiments the polarisation was 93% at 2 Å, 86% at 3 Å and 78% at 4 Å in non-precessing mode. Furthermore the flipping efficiency of the bootstrapped flippers in the reference setup was 94%, while the flipping efficiency of the poleshoe flippers was 95%. In figure In figure With the results shown in figure The aim of this study is to pre-commission a MIEZE mode on the Larmor instrument at the ISIS pulsed neutron and muon source. The flippers at Larmor are capable of reaching frequencies of up to 3 MHz, due to the poleshoe design. Spin echo times of up to 20 ns (for 10 Å neutrons) at a modulation frequency of 1 MHz could be reached. The MIEZE mode on Larmor could be useful for studying dynamics of magnetic systems, quasi-elastic neutron scattering and possibly MISANS We have demonstrated that poleshoe/solenoid coil flippers are capable of producing MIEZE signals of similar quality compared to the reference MIEZE setup, with modulation frequencies of up to 100 kHz. Hence a MIEZE setup on the Larmor instrument at the ISIS pulsed neutron and muon source can be implemented, reaching spin echo times of up to 20 ns. However due to the high modulation frequency a thin detector, such as the CASCADE type with high time resolution is required.