Trehalose diesters exhibiting α,ω-unsaturation are glycolipids which can be easily polymerized by ADMET (acyclic diene metathesis) polymerization. In this paper, enzymatic esterification was performed to selectively esterify primary hydroxyl groups of trehalose (6 and 6'-positions) with vinyl undecenoate. The vinyl ester was beforehand obtained by palladiumcatalyzed transesterification of undecenoic acid with vinyl acetate. The resulting trehalose diundecenoate was homopolymerized and copolymerized with undecenyl undecenoate in order to obtain random copolymers with different compositions. The synthesis of such copolymers was confirmed by 1 H NMR spectroscopy and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Their solid-state phase separation were investigated by DSC and X-ray scattering as function of temperature and their solution self-assembly was investigated by dynamic light scattering (DLS) in water. Glycopolymers have been the subject of a large number of studies over the last decades. Potassium hydroxide (KOH, pellet), 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (99%), vinyl acetate (99%), Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation metathesis catalyst, 1,5,7-triazabicyclodec-5-ene (TBD, 98%), 2-methyl-tetrahydrofuran (mTHF, 99%), Lipase B from Candida antarctica (CALB) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 10undecen-1-ol (99%), 10-undecenoic acid were supplied from Alfa Aeser. Methyl 10-undecenoate (99%), palladium acetate (98%), were purchased from TCI. Anhydrous trehalose (99%) was purchased from Fisher. Flash chromatography was performed on a Grace Reveleris apparatus, employing cartridges from Grace equipped with ELSD and UV detectors at 254 and 280 nm. Elution solvents are dependent on the sample and are mentioned in the experimental parts. All NMR spectra were recorded at 298 K on a Bruker Avance 400 spectrometer operating at 400MHz. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) measurements were conducted on a PL GPC50 integrated system with RI detectors with a series of three columns from Polymer Laboratories. DMF with LiBr (1 g.L -1 ) was used as eluent at 25°C at an elution rate of 1mL/min. Polystyrene was used as the standard. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed on DSC Q100 (TA Instruments). The sample was heated from -150°C to 170°C at a rate of 10°C.min -1 . Consecutive cooling and second heating runs were also performed at 10°C.min -1 . Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) were performed on TA Instruments Q50 from room temperature to 600°C at a heating rate of 10°C.min -1 . The analyses were investigated under nitrogen atmosphere with platinum pans. ESI-MS was performed on a QStar Elite mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems) and MALDI-TOF spectra were performed on a Voyager mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems) both by the Centre d'Etude Stucturale et d'Analyse des Molécules Organiques (CESAMO). The ESI-MS instrument is equipped with an ESI source and spectra were recorded in the negative/positive mode. The electrospray needle was maintained at 4500 V and operated at room temperature. Samples were introduced by injection through a 20 μL sample loop into a 400 μL/min flow of methanol from the LC pump. Samples were dissolved in THF at 1 mg/ml, and then 10 μl of this solution was diluted in 1 ml of methanol. The MALDI-TOF instrument is equipped with a pulsed N2 laser (337 nm) and a time-delayed extracted ion source. Spectra were recorded in the positive-ion mode using the reflectron and with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Samples were dissolved in DMF at 10 mg/mL. DHB (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid) was employed as the matrix for ionization. Transmission Electron Microscopy images were recorded at the Bordeaux Imaging Center (BIC) on a Hitachi H7650 microscope working at 80 kV in high resolution mode. Samples were prepared by spraying a 0.5 mg/mL aqueous solution of polymer nanoparticles onto a copper grid (200 mesh coated with carbon) using a homemade spray tool. No stained were applied in this case. Dynamic light scattering measurements were performed at 25°C with a Malvern Instrument Nano-ZS equipped with a He-Ne laser (l 1⁄4 632.8 nm). Samples were introduced into cells (pathway: 10 mm) after filtration through 0.45 μm cellulose micro-filters. The measurements were performed at a scattering angle of 90°. Undecenoic acid (1 eq.) and a 15 eq. excess of vinyl acetate (VAc) was poured in a CEM Discover SP microwave reactor vial. Then, the palladium acetate (0.05 eq.), and the potassium hydroxide (0.10 eq.) were added and the resulting reaction mixture was stirred under microwave at 60 °C for 2 h. The reaction mixture was diluted in DCM and then filtrated over celite to remove the palladium acetate, before removing the solvent with a rotary evaporator. The resulting residue was purified by silica gel flash chromatography using an elution gradient of 2-5% MeOH in DCM to give the vinyl undecenoate. Yield: 95 %. The lipase (2.8 g) was added to a mixture of trehalose (3 g, 9 mmol), vinyl ester (6.8 g, 22 mmol, 2.5 eq) in dry mTHF (40 mL). The reaction mixture was stirred at 45 °C for 72 hr. After the reaction time, mTHF was added to well dissolve the diesters of trehalose, then the reaction mixture was filtered and solvent was removed in rotary evaporator. The obtained crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography using an elution gradient of 5-25% methanol in EtOAc-DCM (1:1) to give pure trehalose diesters as white solids. Yield: 50 %. Homopolymers (P0 and P100): Into a flame-dried Schlenk flask equipped with bubbler, undecenyl undecenoate (P0) (0.1 g, 0.3 mmol.) or trehalose diundecenoate (P100) (0.2 g, 0.3 mmol.) dried over-night under vacuum was dissolved in 2 mL of dry THF. Hoveyda-Grubbs 2 nd generation metathesis catalyst (4 mol.%) was added and the reaction mixture was stirred under nitrogen atmosphere for 24 h at 45 °C. Then, 3 ml of ethyl vinyl ether were introduced into the flask to quench the reaction. The final glycopolyester (P100) or fatty acid-based polyester (P0) was purified by precipitation in cold methanol. Copolymers (P33, P50 and P67): Into a flame-dried round Schlenk flask, trehalose diundecenoate (0.2 g, 0.3 mmol.) and the corresponding amount of undecenyl undecenoate (see Table Nanoparticles were prepared using solvent displacement method by dialysis. (Co)polymers were solubilized in DMF and polymer solutions were then introduced into dialysis membranes with molecular weight cutoff of 1 kD. The membranes were beforehand soaked for 15 min and rinsed with deionized water. The membranes were then submerged in 2 L of deionized water and dialyzed under gentle magnetic stirring for 12 h. After 2 h and 4 h, the dialysis solution was replaced by fresh deionized water. At the end of the dialysis, milky solutions present inside the dialysis membranes were recovered. The high selectivity of enzymes and their high activity in mild conditions have raised interest from lot of research groups. In this context, the enzymatic esterification of sugar esters and particularly trehalose esters have been already reported. ADMET polymerization is performed on α,ω-diene monomers to produce unsaturated polymers. It is a step-growth polymerization driven by the release of ethylene. When the melting points of the monomers are not too high (<100°C), the polymerization can be conducted in bulk and under vacuum to remove the ethylene from the reaction medium. Thus, the equilibrium of the reaction is driven towards the polymer formation. In our case, the melting point of the trehalose diundecenoate is around 145°C, value incompatible with the catalyst stability to perform the polymerization in bulk. ADMET homopolymerization of trehalose diundecenoate and its copolymerization with undecenyl undecenoate (see The thermal stability of the homopolymers and copolymers was evaluated by thermogravimetry (TGA) under nitrogen at a heating rate of 10 °C.min -1 . Two thermal decompositions can be observed, the first one corresponding to the saccharide segment around 330°C and the second one corresponding to the lipid part around 420°C (Fig. A schematic representation of the packing model is represented in Fig. However, a double melting point was observed on the DSC curves. The too small amount of trehalose units incorporated in the polymer backbone cannot induce a lamellar organization allowing its observation by X-ray scattering. With 50 % of glycolipid in the copolymer (P50), the two types of organizations are observed. There are enough saccharide and lipid segments to allow the observation of the two crystallizations. When 67 % of glycolipid is incorporated in the copolymer structure (P67), the lamellar organization of trehalose is only observed. The large amount of saccharide present in the backbone probably prevents the crystallization of the lipidic phase, as it is the case for the homopolymer synthesis with 100% of glycolipid (P100). The self-assembly behavior in water of the (co)polymers were studied using a solvent-displacement (or nanoprecipitation) method. To induce self-assembly, solutions of polymers in DMF (a good solvent for both the lipid and saccharide moieties) were dialyzed against water, which is a non-solvent for the lipidic part, thus inducing spontaneously their assembly. Milky solutions were obtained after dialysis. The concentration of the polymer dispersion in water was adjusted to 0.5 mg.mL -1 by dilution. The resulting assemblies were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS). The hydrodynamic diameters and polydispersity indices (PDIs) of the polymer assemblies were determined and are summarized in As shown in Fig. A series of random copolymers were synthesized from ADMET polymerization of trehalose diundecenoate and undecenyl undecenoate. These novel glycolipid-polyesters exhibit unique structural organization due to the lipidic and carbohydrate part that induce crystallization and ordered packing within the materials of the saccharide and the lipid moieties. In bulk, the resulting polymers exhibit two distinct melting points around 30°C and 130°C. Moreover, these amphiphilic copolymers could self-assemble in nano-scale particles in water. It was observed that the morphology and the size of the particles were independent on the glyco-to-lipid percentage in the copolymers, thus allowing modulating their average ), 2.37 (t, 4H, 2.04 (m, 4H, -CH2-CH=CH-), 1.67 (m, 4H, -CH2-CH2-COO-), 1.30 (m, 20H, aliphatic -CH2-). The lipase (2.8 g) was added to a mixture of trehalose (3 g, 9 mmol), vinyl ester (6.8 g, 22 mmol, 2.5 eq) in dry acetone (40 mL). The reaction mixture was stirred at 45 °C for 72 hr. After the reaction time, THF was added to well dissolve the diesters of trehalose, then the reaction mixture was filtered and solvent was removed in rotary evaporator. The obtained crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography using an elution gradient of 5-25% methanol in EtOAc-DCM (1:1) to give pure trehalose diesters as white solids. Yield: 50 %. Homopolymers (P0 and P100): Into a flame-dried Schlenk flask equipped with bubbler, undecenyl undecenoate (P0) (0.1 g, 0.3 mmol.) or trehalose diundecenoate (P100) (0.2 g, 0.3 dried over-night under vacuum was dissolved in 2 mL of dry THF. Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation metathesis catalyst (4 mol.%) was added and the reaction mixture was stirred under nitrogen atmosphere for 24 h at 45 °C. Then, 3 ml of ethyl vinyl ether were introduced into the flask to quench the reaction. The final glyco-polyester or was purified by precipitation in cold methanol. Into a flame-dried round Schlenk flask, trehalose diundecenoate (0.2 g, 0.3 mmol.) and the corresponding amount of undecenyl undecenoate (see Erreur ! Source du renvoi introuvable.) were mixed and dried over-night under vacuum. Then, the diene monomers were dissolved in 2 mL of dry THF and Hoveyda-Grubbs 2nd generation (4 mol.%) was added. The reaction mixture was stirred at 45 °C under nitrogen atmosphere for 24 h. Then, 3 mL of ethyl vinyl ether and 4 mL of THF were introduced to the flask. The final copolymers were purified by precipitation in cold methanol. The nano-particles were prepared using solvent displacement method by dialysis. (Co)polymers were solubilized in DMF and polymer solutions were then poured into dialysis membranes with molecular weight cutoff of 1kD. The membranes were beforehand soaked for 15 min and rinsed with deionized water. The membranes were then submerged in 2 L of deionized water and dialyzed under gentle magnetic stirring for 12 h. After 2 h and 4 h, the dialysis solution was replaced by fresh deionized water. At the end of the dialysis, milky solutions present inside the dialysis membranes were recover. a = 3 cyclic units (undecenyl undecenoate) + Na +