Scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) Susceptometry simultaneously images the local magnetic fields and susceptibilities above a sample with sub-micron spatial resolution. Further development of this technique requires a thorough understanding of the current, voltage, and flux (IVΦ) characteristics of scanning SQUID susceptometers. These sensors often have striking anomalies in their current-voltage characteristics, which we believe to be due to electromagnetic resonances. The effect of these resonances on the performance of these SQUIDs is unknown. To explore the origin and impact of the resonances, we develop a model that qualitatively reproduces the experimentally-determined IVΦ characteristics of our scanning SQUID susceptometers. We use this model to calculate the noise characteristics of SQUIDs of different designs. We find that the calculated ultimate flux noise is better in susceptometers with damping resistors that diminish the resonances than in susceptometers without damping resistors. Such calculations will enable the optimization of the signal-to-noise characteristics of scanning SQUID susceptometers. Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs) are superconducting loops interrupted by one or more Josephson weak links Scanning SQUID susceptometers also measure magnetic susceptibility by applying a localized magnetic field to the sample through the field coils. SQUID susceptometers are laid out in a gradiometric configuration so that they are insensitive to both uniform magnetic fields and currents that pass through both field coils (Figure To optimize the performance of scanning SQUID sensors, it is important to understand their IVΦ characteristics in the presence of noise. Although the noise properties of ideal SQUIDs are well understood To explore the origin and impact of resonances on the IVΦ characteristics of SQUID susceptometers, we perform an analysis of two-junction, direct current (d.c.) SQUID susceptometers that seeks the answers to two queries: 1) What causes the resonances? and 2) Do the resonances enhance or diminish the sensitivity of SQUID susceptometers? To address the first query, we develop models of susceptometers that reproduce the resonances in simulations of their IVΦ characteristics. We hypothesize that the resonances occur due to parasitic capacitances and inductances that arise from complex features of the SQUIDs, such as the field coils, the gradiometric layout, and pickup loops that are integrated into the bodies of the SQUIDs through superconducting coaxial leads (Figure Our hypothesis is supported by basic estimates of the voltage steps. The resonances in our susceptometers have a characteristic voltage of roughly 10 μV (see Figure where I s is the supercurrent through the junction, I 0 is the junction critical current, V is the voltage, and φ is the quantum mechanical phase drop across the junction, with the resonance frequency for an LC circuit, we expect voltage steps to occur at where L p,eq and C p,eq are the equivalent lumped parasitic inductance and capacitance of the circuit, respectively. To estimate L p,eq and C p,eq , we use the FASTCAP, FASTHENRY, and INDUCT software packages from the Whiteley Research web site In what follows, we first demonstrate in Section 2.1 that the addition of a parasitic capacitance to the standard model for a SQUID produces peaks in the IRΦ characteristics similar to those observed experimentally (see Figure We use commercial software to model our devices: XIC, a layout tool, and WRSPICE, a simulation tool, both developed by Whiteley Research The nodes, devices, and constitutive equations are combined by WRSPICE into a matrix equation of the form AX = B, where the elements of the vector X are the device responses and the elements of B are the excitations (e.g., voltage and current sources). In general, the matrix equation is non-linear and is solved by LU (lower, upper) decomposition iteratively with Newton's method. In our case, we do a transient analysis that produces the time dependence of the circuit response in the presence of d.c. biases, magnetic flux, and noise. We assume that the pairs of critical currents I 0 and shunt resistances R J for the two Josephson junctions are identical for each SQUID. To calculate the IV characteristics at each flux Φ, we ramp the current through the SQUID at a rate of 1 μA/nsec and average the resulting voltage time trace (which has large Josephson oscillations) in bin widths of 1 μA. Figure The more complicated schematic of Figure where N is the total number of calculated points in the IΦ plane. The model results displayed in Figure The characteristic time step for the transient analysis in JSPICE is a fraction of the inverse Josephson frequency-typically several GHz. Since we are interested in the noise at frequencies of several hundred Hz or below, such calculations can be very time consuming (see the discussion in Ref. V /(dV/dΦ). We repeat this procedure ten times. Following Tesche and Clarke We first verify that we can reproduce previous work. Figure A summary of the noise analysis described in Section 2.2 is reported in Figure 