While soliton microcombs offer the potential for integration of powerful frequency metrology and precision spectroscopy systems, their operation requires complex startup and feedback protocols that necessitate difficult-to-integrate optical and electrical components. Moreover, CMOS-rate microcombs, required in nearly all comb systems, have resisted integration because of their power requirements. Here, a regime for turnkey operation of soliton microcombs co-integrated with a pump laser is demonstrated and theoretically explained. Significantly, a new operating point is shown to appear from which solitons are generated through binary turn-on and turn-off of the pump laser, thereby eliminating all photonic/electronic control circuitry. These features are combined with high-Q Si3N4 resonators to fully integrate into a butterfly package microcombs with CMOS frequencies as low as 15 GHz, offering compelling advantages for high-volume production. Optical frequency combs have found a remarkably wide range of applications in science and technology First, complex tuning schemes and feedback loops are required for generation and stabilization of solitons A second issue impacting microcomb integration is the realization of repetition frequencies that are both detectable and that can be readily processed by CMOS circuits. These features are essential to realize the process of comb self-referencing that underlies many comb applications In the experiment, integrated soliton microcombs whose fabrication and repetition rate (40 GHz down to 15 GHz) are compatible with CMOS circuits In conventional pumping of microcombs, the laser is optically-isolated from the downstream optical path so as to prevent feedback-induced interference (Fig. where κ is the power decay rate of the resonance and P th is the parametric oscillation threshold for intracavity power. This dependence of detuning on intracavity power gives rise to a single operating point at the intersection of Eq. ( In the Supplement [27] it is shown that the system converges to this equilibrium once the laser frequency is within a locking bandwidth (estimated to be 5 GHz in the present case). As verified both numerically (Fig. Figure To demonstrate repeatable turnkey operation, the laser current is modulated to a preset current by a square wave to simulate the turn-on process. Soliton microcomb operation is reliably achieved as confirmed by monitoring soliton power and the single-tone beating signal (Fig. Besides the physical significance and practical impact of the new operating point, our demonstration of a turnkey operating regime is an important simplification of soliton microcomb systems. Moreover, the application of this method in an integrated CMOS-compatible system represents a milestone towards mass production of optical frequency combs. The microwave-rate soliton microcombs generated in these butterfly packaged devices will benefit several comb applications including miniaturized frequency synthesizers Author contributions: B.S., L.C., Q.-F.Y., J.L., J.B. and K.V. conceived the experiment. D.K., L.C., B.S. and Q.-F.Y. packaged the chip. J.L., R.N.W., J.H. and T.L. designed, fabricated and tested the Si 3 N 4 chip devices. H.W. constructed the theoretical model. Measurements were performed by B.S., L.C., Q.-F.Y. with assistance from H.W., C.X., W.Q.X., J.G., L.W. and Q.-X.J. All authors analyzed the data and contributed to writing the manuscript. J.B., K.V. and T.J.K. supervise the project and the collaboration. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests. ∂A where the field amplitudes are normalized so that 2π 0 |A S | 2 dθ/(2π), |A B | 2 and |A L | 2 are the optical energies of their respective modes, t is the evolution time, θ is the resonator angular coordinate, κ is the resonator mode loss rate (assumed to be equal for A S and A B ), δω is the detuning of the cold-cavity resonance compared to injection-locked laser (δω > 0 indicates red detuning of the pump frequency relative to the cavity frequency), D 2 is the secondorder dispersion parameter, E th is the parametric oscillation threshold for intracavity energy, β is the dimensionless backscattering coefficient (normalized to κ/2), φ B is the propagation phase delay between the resonator and the laser, κ R and κ L are the external coupling rates for the resonator and laser respectively, ω L is the detuning of the cold-cavity resonance relative to the free-running laser frequency, g is the net intensity-dependent gain, and α g is the amplitude-phase coupling factor. The average soliton field amplitude A S = 2π 0 A S dθ/(2π) is also the amplitude on the pumped mode, and by using A S in the equation for A B we have assumed that only the mode being pumped contributes significantly in the locking process, which can be justified if a single-frequency laser is used. We will introduce some dimensionless quantities to facilitate the discussion. Define: normalized soliton field amplitude as ψ = A S / √ E th , normalized amplitude on the pumped mode as ρ = A S / √ E th , normalized total intracavity power as P = 2π 0 |A S | 2 dθ/(2πE th ), normalized detuning as α = 2δω/κ, normalized evolution time as τ = κt/2 and normalized pump as The equation for A S can then be put into the dimensionless form To simplify the equations we also consider the following approximations. We assume that backscattering is weak (β 1) so that nonlinearities caused by |A B | 2 are negligible. Also, the coupled amplitude from A B to A S is small and can be neglected. The propagation phase φ B depends on the precise frequency of the locked laser and material dispersion, but we assume that the feedback length is short (L c/(nκ), where c is the speed of light in vacuum and n is the refractive index of the material) so that φ B can be treated as constant. Finally, we assume that gain saturation is strong enough (∂g/∂|A 2 L | βγ/|A 2 L |, where γ is the laser mode loss rate) so that the laser operates at constant power (|A L | is constant) and is not affected by the feedback. the background falls below the MI threshold, and such dynamics explain the tendency of the turnkey soliton state to consist of multiple solitons. By carefully tuning the phase and controlling the MI gain, it is still possible to obtain a turnkey single soliton state, as shown in the third case (Fig. Appendix E: Additional measurements There are several interesting solutions other than stable solitons that can be derived from the regular Lugiato-Lefever equation (LLE) It is also possible to operate our system in different types of microcomb states under certain feedback phase and laser driving frequency. Fig. 