Intelligent reflecting surfaces can improve the communication between a source and a destination. The surface contains metamaterial that is configured to "reflect" the incident wave from the source towards the destination. Two incompatible pathloss models have been used in prior work. In this letter, we derive the far-field pathloss using physical optics techniques and explain why the surface consists of many elements that individually act as diffuse scatterers but can jointly beamform the signal in a desired direction with a certain beamwidth. We disprove one of the previously conjectured pathloss models. Conventional wireless communication systems consist of a transmitter sending information-bearing electromagnetic waves to a receiver via an uncontrollable propagation environment. When searching for beyond 5G network architectures, there is a growing interest in creating real-time reconfigurable propagation environments While the design of reconfigurable surfaces has a long history in the electromagnetic literature In this section, we review preliminaries on the field strength and beamwidth of the waveform scattered by a "passive" metallic (perfectly conducting) plate of finite size. The results will later be used to explain the ideal operation of an IRS. We consider a rectangular, perfectly conducting plate of size a × b, and negligible thickness, located in the horizontal plane (spanned by e x , e y ). A point source far away, at distance d i , is radiating a linearly polarized electromagnetic wave with wave number k = 2π λ where λ is the wavelength. We assume, for the sake of argument, that the polarization of the source is such that the E-field is parallel to e x and the H-field lies in the plane spanned by e y and e z . Let θ i ∈ [0, π 2 ] denote the angle of incidence, that is, the angle between the Poynting vector of the wave and e z . This setup is illustrated in Fig. We further assume that d i is sufficiently large relative to a and b (i.e., the source is in the far-field) that the curvature of the wavefront, over the dimensions of the plate, can be neglected. Hence, the impinging wavefield is approximated as a plane wave with some magnitude E i . To determine when this approximation holds, we compute the phase differential between a spherical wave and its plane-wave approximation between the center and the edges of the plate. For the sake of argument, suppose the plate is oriented such that the Poynting vector enters with θ i = 0 at the plate center; however the analysis can be generalized to arbitrary incidence angles. With the plane-wave approximation, the wave from the source travels a distance of d i to any point on the plate, but the wave is actually spherical and at the edges of the plate it has traveled the distance d 2 i + b 2 4 . The phase discrepancy is With e.g., b = 1 m, d i = 100 m, λ = 0.1 m, this is less than five degrees and should have a minor impact. The incident plane wave has the electric and magnetic field distributions where η is the characteristic impedance of the medium. The E-field will induce motion of electrons in the plate. The electrons will move in the direction of e x , but not in e y (since the E-field is orthogonal to e y ) and also not in the e z -direction since the plate is assumed thin. The moving electrons induce electromagnetic radiation, resulting in a scattered wave. Lemma 1. The squared magnitude of the scattered field, in the e y , e z plane and at an arbitrary observation angle θ s ∈ [0, π 2 ] (measured against e z ) is at a far-field observation distance r ≥ Proof: This result follows from standard physical optics techniques (which neglect edge effects) as in The expression in (4) for the magnitude of the scattered field in the far-field has several intuitive properties; for example, it is proportional to the area (ab) 2 of the plate and to i , since the impinging wave from a point source in lineof-sight (LoS) has a field strength inversely proportional to d 2 i . As expected from Snell's law, for the polarization that we consider, S(r, θ s ) attains its maximum for the observation angle θ s = θ i , which is the specular direction, for which the last parenthesis in ( The expression S(r, θ s ) reveals that the scattered field looks like a beam that tapers off as θ s is moved away from θ i . The 3-dB beamwidth equals twice the deviation |θ s -θ i | required to make the square of the second parenthesis in (4) equal to 1/2. Using the Taylor expansion cos(x) = 1 + O(x 2 ) and standard trigonometric identities, we have (5) From ( ), we obtain the following second-order approximation of (4): Hence, the 3-dB beamwidth is approximately twice the devi- This inequality shows that the 3-dB beamwidth is inversely proportional to the plate width b. The beamwidth is also proportional to the wavelength λ, thus a fixed-size plate can provide an extremely narrow beamwidth in the visible spectrum (i.e., an almost perfect specular reflection), but 4-5 orders-of-magnitude wider beamwidths in the typical radio spectrum bands. 2 The plate acts as a mirror in the sense that the diffusely reflected or, more accurately, the scattered field has a 3-dB beamwidth inversely proportional to b. Hence, it becomes very small if b is large relative to λ. This scaling is no surprise: if we think of the plate as an antenna, it is just the usual relation that beamwidth is inversely proportional to antenna aperture. Fig. Proof: The antenna will see the plate through an angular window of λ vr radians. As long as λ vr λ b cos(θi) , i.e., approximately, r b/v, the field strength will be approximately constant over the antenna and ( Since E 2 i ∝ 1/d 2 i in LoS, Corollary 1 proves that the received power is proportional to (ab) 2 /(d i r) 2 , where the proportionality constant depends on the wavelength and angles. If θ s = θ i , the received power increases monotonically with a and b, because more energy is induced into the plate and then radiated in a gradually narrower beam. Even when the beamwidth is small in absolute terms, it can be large relative to λ/r and, thus, most of the energy of the scattered field anyway misses the receiver antenna aperture. This is why the received power in ( Since the plate has a finite size, we can deploy multiple adjacent plates. If the gaps in between are sufficiently large then coupling effects can be neglected and superposition applies. When the scattered fields from these plates are received at a given location, the relative phase shifts will lead to constructive or destructive interference. Under ideal constructive interference, the squared field strength from N plates will be The variables N , a, and b only appear in (9) as a joint term (N ab) 2 , where N ab is the total area of the N plates. Hence, it does not matter if the total area is made up by many small or a few large plates, the maximum received power is the same. If the incident angle θ i from the transmitter to the surface equals the observation angle θ s leading to the receiver, then the passive surface considered in Section II represents the ideal case. Since the angles are generally different when one of the devices is mobile, the main purpose of an IRS is to achieve "anomalous reflection" We now consider an IRS consisting of a metasurface of the same dimensions as in Fig. H r = -E r η (sin(θ r )e z -cos(θ r )e y ) e -jk(sin(θr)y+cos(θr)z) . ( A widely used approach in the literature that designs reflective metasurfaces is based on the generalized Snell's law of reflection Then, the desired phase of the desired reflection coefficient is φ r (y) = ∠ E r e -jk sin(θr)y E i e -jk sin(θi)y = -k sin(θ r )y + k sin(θ i )y, and differentiating it with respect to y gives the gradient of the reflection coefficient in the generalized Snell's law: which gives the relation between θ i , θ r and the local surface phase φ r (y). By altering the surface impedance, φ r (y) is obtained at each point of the surface and the output wave's desired phase -k sin(θ i )y + φ r (y) = -k sin(θ r )y is achieved. Fig. Small high-precision elements require sophisticated design and expensive hardware, and also lead to coupling issues. On the other hand, if the elements are too large (relative to λ) then the required local phase will be coarsely quantized. This will lead to a mismatch between the desired reflection angle and the surface response. In this paper, we neglect the errors due to quantization. In contrast to a metallic surface, for which it does not matter if it consists of one or multiple plates (see Section II-B), an IRS must consist of many small elements to reconfigure the local phases with high resolution and thereby achieves a main beam with the desired angle θ r . This has no negative impact on the maximum magnitude of the scattered field and the beamwidth will not be narrower than in the ideal case of a passive metallic surface. As discussed in Section II, the incoming wave's E-field in (2) induces an electric surface current in the direction of e x . This current is adjusted in the IRS by tuning the surface impedance in each element to obtain a surface phase profile that approximates that required by the generalized Snell's law. This operation results in a scattered wave with maximum amplitude towards θ r instead of θ i . Lemma 2. When using an IRS to reflect a signal in the direction θ r , the squared magnitude of the scattered field at an arbitrary observation angle at a far-field distance r ≥ 2 max(a 2 ,b Proof: The negligible thickness of the surface allows us to write the electric current density on the surface (z = 0, y = y ) approximately as J x = 2Ei η cos(θ i )e -jk sin(θr)y [11, Eq. (7-54)] assuming the surface is lossless, i.e., E 2 i cos(θ i ) = E 2 r r ). Then, we use the same steps as in Lemma 1. The intercepted power by the IRS is the same as for the perfectly conducting plate in Section II, but the maximum of S IRS (r, θ s , E 2 i ) is achieved at θ s = θ r instead of θ s = θ i . Suppose the transmit power is P t and the transmitter has antenna gain G t . Then the relation between E i and P t is where E i has unit Volt/m and η ≈ 377 Ohm. Furthermore, assume that the effective area of the receiver antenna is λ 2 4π G r , where G r is the antenna gain. Then, the received signal power P r for a receiver at far-field distance r in direction θ s is Corollary 2. When using an IRS to reflect a signal in the direction θ r , the pathloss at the far-field distance r is and in the ideal case when the receiver has θ s = θ r , the pathloss expression simplifies to Remark 1. The derivations have assumed the incoming wave and the desired scattered wave have E-fields that are both parallel to e x , but the analysis can be generalized. The end result will still become the pathloss expression β IRS (r, d i , θ r ) that only depends on the total effective area ab cos(θ i ) of the IRS as seen from the transmitter. Fig. As noted above, an IRS of size a × b consists of many subλ-sized surface elements. Suppose the IRS consists of N a ×N b elements, each having the size a Na × b N b , where a Na , b N b ≤ λ. The pathloss between the transmitter and receiver through the n th surface element (assuming the others are removed) is since the last term in ( Hence, we can interpret an IRS as an array of diffuse scatterers (each sub-λ-sized) that phase-align their reflected signals at the receiver and thereby achieve "anomalous" reflection. To exemplify how one can derive a physically correct system model for IRS-supported communication, we consider an LoS setup where √ β sd e jφ sd is the direct channel between the single-antenna source and destination. When including the reflected path from the IRS, we get the received signal where h sr = [e jψ sr 1 , . . . , e jψ sr n , . . . , e jψ sr N ] T and h rd = [e jψ rd 1 , . . . , e jψ rd n , . . . , e jψ rd N ] T are the normalized LoS channels between the source and IRS and the IRS and receiver, respectively. The signal x has power P t , w ∼ N C (0, σ 2 ) is additive noise, and the surface phases of each surface element are stacked in Φ = diag e jφ1 , . . . , e jφn , . . . , e jφ N , which is a diagonal matrix. An equivalent way to write ( where the second equality follows from (21). Hence, the considered phase-shifts coincide with those achieved by the discretized generalized Snell's law, with the extra condition that not only the N terms in the sum in (23) are phase-aligned, but that they are also phase-aligned with the LoS path. If an IRS is used for "anomalous" reflection, there is no need to take the detour via ( β IRS e jφIRS x+ √ β sd e jφ sd x+w, where the phases of the IRS elements have already been aligned. It then only remains to select the common phase φ IRS of all IRS elements to equal φ sd . However, there are other scenarios (e.g., with multiple antennas) where one can start from a system model as (22). We have used physical optics techniques to derive the pathloss expression in (19) for an IRS that is configured to reflect an incoming wave from a far-field source towards a receiver in the far-field. Even if the incoming signal is a plane wave, the reflected signal is a beam with beamwidth inversely proportional to the size of the IRS. Importantly, the received signal power is proportional to the square of the IRS area and to 1/(d i r) 2 , where d i is the distance between the transmitter and IRS, and r is the distance between the IRS and receiver. This disproves the conjecture in A practical IRS consists of N sub-wavelength-sized elements that scatter the incoming signals with unique phaseshifts to achieve coherent beamforming in a direction of interest. This is rather similar to a phased array, except that the signal power comes from another place. The ideal phaseshifts that create a single beam are given by the generalized Snell's law, but if a superposition of multiple beams should be created, the phase-shifts must be explicitly optimized. For other incident wave polarizations, this is true only approximately. However, the observation angle that maximizes S(r, θs) approaches θ i as the size of the plate increases. Comparing radio signals at 6 GHz with green visible light at 600 THz, the former has a 10 5 larger wavelength and thus needs a 10 5 wider plate to give a reflection with the same beamwidth as for green light. More specifically, [5, Sec. II.D] states that "a metasurface that is capable of shaping the angle and the phase of the reflected signal has a size of the order of 10λ × 10λ. This size allows, in general, a metasurface to be viewed as a specular reflector according to geometrical optics." On the contrary, as shown in Fig.2herein, the beamwidth of the scattered wave from such a surface is ≈ 10 • , hence it is far from a specular reflector, irrespective of λ, when the source and destination are in the far-field.