We present the design, fabrication, and experimental characterization of a two-dimensional, dynamically tuned, metasurface aperture, emphasizing its potential performance in computational imaging applications. The dynamic metasurface aperture (DMA) consists of an irregular, planar cavity that feeds a multitude of tunable metamaterial elements, all fabricated in a compact, multilayer printed circuit board process. The design considerations for the metamaterial element as a tunable radiator, the associated biasing circuitry, as well as cavity parameters are examined and discussed. A sensing matrix can be constructed from the measured transmit patterns, the singular value spectrum of which provides insight into the information capacity of the apertures. We investigate the singular value spectra of the sensing matrix over a variety of operating parameters, such as the number of metamaterial elements, number of masks, and number of radiating elements. After optimizing over these key parameters, we demonstrate computational microwave imaging of simple test objects. M ICROWAVE imaging is at the center of a wide swath of applications such as security screening, throughwall imaging, and terrestrial and space observation Computational imaging can be described as a paradigm in which the hardware and software of an imaging system are co-designed with the aim to increase imaging speed, reduce system complexity, or promote novel functionality. Computational imaging emerged as early as the introduction of digital processing techniques in optical imaging In microwave imaging systems, metasurface antennas have been demonstrated as useful components for implementing computational imaging schemes. Waveguide-fed metasurface apertures consist of a waveguide exciting an array of metamaterial radiators, each of which has a resonance frequency determined by its geometry and local environment. In one implementation of a metasurface aperture, the resonant frequencies of the metamaterial elements are selected to be randomly distributed across a band of operation The design of a two-dimensional (2D) DMA-consisting of a planar, printed cavity loaded with tunable metamaterial elements-was recently proposed and studied in ple is then experimentally characterized and important factors governing its imaging performance are identified. We provide a thorough characterization of the fabricated sample's reflection coefficient and its relationship to the cavity parameters. From experimental near-field scans of the aperture, we are able to determine the far-field radiation patterns generated by the aperture both as a function of frequency as well as tuning state. Knowledge of these radiation patterns can be used to form the sensing matrix, which connects the measured return signal to the conductivity distribution of the scene. By studying the singular value spectra of the sensing matrix for different operating conditions-such as the number of metamaterial elements; the number of radiating versus non-radiating elements; and the potential grouping of elements-we can assess the information content and optimize the overall imaging system. After completing this analysis, we demonstrate a small-scale imaging system with the 2D DMA as the transmitter and four open-ended waveguide probes as receivers. The printed-cavity-backed 2D DMA developed in this paper is be designed to operate at K-band The first step in our design process is to design metamaterial elements. One advantage of using a metamaterial resonator as a tunable radiator is that its resonant response provides a simple means for switching it on or off by pushing its resonance frequency out of the operating band. For a metasurface aperture operating at K-band frequencies, each of the metamaterial elements must thus be resonant within the Kband. In addition to being a resonant radiator, the metamaterial element should couple strongly to the feed wave when in the on state, since relatively few elements will be included in the final design (to ensure low cost), of which only a subset are radiating (turned on) at any given time. An element with high coupling efficiency guarantees that ample energy is radiated into the scene. Given the above constraints, we chose the rounded cELC (complementary electric resonator) introduced in To arrive at the desired resonance frequency, we need to include all parasitic components affecting the metamaterial element response. The diode is placed across the capacitive gap of the cELC. The central patch of the cELC serves as one contact of the diode, with the top part of the parallel plate waveguide serving as the other. The cELC is connected to a biasing line, which lies below the ground plane, using a via that connects to the central patch. The via is a strong scatterer in the waveguide, but this is not problematic since it serves to further scatter the guided wave (making the cavity modes Fig. On the layer where the via connects to the bias line (below the bottom plate of the waveguide) we insert a radial stub that acts as a low impedance node. This reflects any RF signal traveling on the via back up into the waveguide so that RF energy is not leaked into the biasing circuitry The PIN diode is modeled in the full wave simulation as a series inductor-resistor circuit in its conducting state (when the element is not radiating) and as an inductor in series with a parallel capacitor-resistor in its non-conducting state (when the element is radiating) With all potential parasitic effects and the capacitance of the diode included, we simulated the element in the setup shown in Fig. of frequency are shown in Fig. The biasing circuitry that exist on layer L4 consists of 8bit shift registers (to distribute the control), buffers (to ensure enough current is sourced), decoupling capacitors (to stabilize the digital signals), and current-limiting resistors. Each PIN diode draws < 5 mA when it is forward biased, and negligible current otherwise. This current is supplied by an Arduino microcontroller, which is also responsible for transmitting the digital control signals. All of the diodes (among all of the elements) are connected to the top plate of the waveguide, making it the DC ground. All elements are biased using aforementioned vias. The last key component of the printed cavity DMA is the via fence that renders the waveguide a reverberating structure. Metallic vias are placed along a perimeter and reflect the outgoing cylindrical wave originating at the coax feed. The result is a standing wave (as shown in Fig. The dimensions of the via fence, and therefore the active area of the aperture, is selected to be around 15×15 cm 2 . This size is selected based on a trade-off between dielectric losses, fabrication constraints, and imaging performance (larger aperture size results in higher resolution). The placement of the cELCs is chosen pseudo-randomly within the via fence, with the condition that the elements are not closer than a certain proximity threshold (to ensure tuning circuitry of different elements do not interfere with each other). The random element placement provides fairly uniform coverage in the spatial frequency domain. In other words, for any point in the scene these randomly-placed elements will illuminate the objects with a large collection of effective plane waves. As discussed in Figure With the printed cavity-backed 2D DMA conceptualized and fabricated, we can now investigate the merits of the proposed structure experimentally. We begin by looking at the structure's reflection coefficient to assess the insertion loss of the device. Near-field scans are then used to experimentally characterization the field patterns generated by the DMA as a function of tuning state and frequency. These scans can be propagated throughout the imaging domain, where we can calculate valuable statistics to help analyze the DMA's performance. The first experimental characterization of the 2D DMA involves measuring the reflected signal, or return loss, at the input port. The measured reflected signal is plotted in Fig. When plotted in the time domain, the reflected signal can also be used to calculate the quality factor of the structure. This is done by examining the decay of the time-domain impulse response Reduction from this value is likely caused by losses in the diodes, ohmic losses, and leakage through the elements. With more of the elements placed in their radiating state, we expect the energy to be leaked from the cavity more quickly, and thus lower loaded quality factor. To test this, we measured the time-domain reflection coefficient and Q factor for a large collection of masks and for different on/off ratios. For each on/off ratio we computed the mean and standard deviation over 20 different masks, as plotted in Fig. Though the results from the reflection coefficient study provide insight into the fields in the cavity, illuminating details about the radiation patterns generated by this device can be extracted from its near field scans (NFSs) The red shift in resonance frequencies of the elements suggests that we should operate in the lower portions of K band if high SNR is desired. However, it does not confirm how our collection of elements are tuning since it is completely devoid of spatial information. It is therefore helpful to backpropagate the measured NFS data to the aperture plane to see the field at the aperture of the 2D DMA. We have shown the result of this process for three different masks, with different N on , in Fig. where E is the electric field of the DMA at the scene, f 1 and f 2 are the frequencies of two radiation patterns, T 1 and T 2 are their tuning states, and * denotes complex conjugation. This equation gives the correlation as a function of frequency/masks over a region of space. As such, the integral is taken over a surface S which we define as a hemispherical shell in the far field spanning ±50 • . We can take a subset of this 4D space by looking at the correlation in frequency where we have selected a specific frequency (the center frequency f c ) and a fixed mask m. So that we are not misdirected by a pathological mask, we can average this over an ensemble M , m ∈ M , to get ρ f M , where • denotes averaging, as shown in Fig. Turning our attention to the dynamic case we can consider another subset of this 4D space where the masks are tuned (see Fig. We then calculate an average over an ensemble of m, n ∈ M to obtain ρ mn M = 0.342. Calculating ρ mn M for f const. =f c returns a similar result across the entire bandwidth. Since the fields in the cavity may not change dramatically when a single frequency is used, we would expect some correlation in the radiation pattern to exist. To decrease the correlation even further, we can change both the mask and frequency simultaneously. As a last correlation calculation, we can therefore define Again, averaging over numerous instances of m and n, we can obtain an ensemble average ρ f m M , which is plotted in Fig. Calculating correlations is useful for determining the overlap among a collection of masks, but for imaging purposes, it is more helpful to look at the corresponding sensing matrix H. We can then take the singular value decomposition of this matrix to examine the the amount of distinct information the DMA can retrieve from the scene where σ is the P × 1 reflectivity map of the scene (P is the number of voxels in the scene), and the sensing matrix is given by In the above, E m T ( r p ) and E m R ( r p ) are respectively the fields due to the transmitter and receiver, corresponding to mth measurement, at the scene location r p . Equation 1) Frequency-diverse vs. dynamic metasurface: The fabricated sample provide a unique opportunity to directly compare the expected performance of a broadband, frequency-diverse metasurface aperture with that of a narrow band, dynamic one. To focus on the role of different parameters in retrieving cross range information (and to avoid calculating the SVD of large matrices) we will complete this process on a hemispherical shell in the far field, creating H farfield (similar to the studies in The results in Fig. 2) Maximum number of masks: Before assessing how different tuning mechanisms perform in an imaging setting, it is important to understand the theoretical limitations on the useful number of masks, N m . For a given frequency, we can continually increase the number of masks until the SVS reaches a drop off. This is shown in Fig. 3) Number of on elements: In the above analyses we have turned on 50% of the elements at a time. When more elements are radiating, the radiated power and consequently SNR will be higher, but the cavity's energy will also be depleted faster (reducing the contributions of elements further from the feed). Additionally, between a collection of masks, the patterns are more likely to have high correlation if many elements are on since it is more likely that the masks will share a certain subset of N radiating elements. To assess the interplay between these factors, we vary N radiating (equivalently changing the on/off ratio) and plot the SVS. As can be seen in Fig. 4) Role of non-tunable elements: In the above analyses we came to the conclusion that the number of elements, N e , acts as a limit on the number of useful measurements because the radiated patterns are a superposition of the contributions from the independent elements. However, this raises an interesting question: if we include additional elements that radiate but are not tunable, would we expect this relationship to change? In other words, since tunable elements are more costly to implement, can we increase the number of useful measurements by simply including non-tunable elements? To answer this question, we have emulated a similar scenario using our fabricated DMA. Obviously we cannot include new static elements to probe this question, but we can take a subset of our existing elements, N e,s , and lock them into an on or off state to effectively render them static. We therefore consider a case where the number of tunable elements is set to N e,t = 48 with 50% of the elements on, and the remaining N e,s are locked into either the radiating or non-radiating state. When the elements are locked into a non-radiating state it is as if the DMA only contains 48 tunable elements, so we expect the SVS to fall off at 48. For the static radiating case, the question is whether these elements add new information. From Fig. This study answers a fundamental question about the intricate interplay between the cavity and the metamaterial elements, as discussed in 5) Number of cELC elements: As described in To deduce this trend, we start by examining the variation in the performance as we change the number of elements N e . This can be accomplished, in effect, by locking a subset of the elements into a static off state, and only tuning the remaining N e,t elements. In Fig. For an additional comparison, there is also the limit imposed by the space-bandwidth product, which is based purely on the aperture size and the wavelength 6) Grouping of the elements: We were able to conduct the studies above in part because we have independent control over each metamaterial element. Generally speaking, most dynamic metasurfaces tie a large collection of their elements together in parallel and tune them as a group We have investigated this tuning scheme and the results are plotted in Fig. Previous sections presented an in-depth investigation into the multiplexing capabilities of the printed cavity DMA. We experimentally established the roles of different parameters on the 2D DMA performance. Since the ultimate promise of this work is computational imaging, we now utilize the 2D DMA in a simple imaging configuration and verify its ability to retrieve images of simple scene. As shown in Fig. Next, we keep the number of frequency points fixed at N f = 81, and increase the number of tuning masks, similar to the case study of Fig. A more fair comparison of frequency-diverse versus dynamic aperture imaging performance can be conducted by using similar setting as in Fig. V. CONCLUSION This paper described a fabricated 2D dynamic aperture and used that in simple experiments to obtain a detailed perspective into its operation and physics. Our focus was examining this device's ability to generate complex patterns that can multiplex a scene information, and identify factors that impact this capability. We then used the 2D DMA in a simple imaging system to validate the predictions about its performance in imaging context. The promising results presented in this paper suggest that a 2D DMA can operate as the central hardware of a computational microwave imaging system. To extend the present results, a larger imaging system with multiple DMAs can be used. Such a system could involve multiplexing both on the transmitting and receiving aperture, promising much higher quality imaging than those demonstrated to date at microwave frequencies 