Energy states below the bandgap of a semiconductor, such as trap states or charge transfer states in organic donor-acceptor blends, can contribute to light absorption. Due to their low number density or ultra-small absorption cross-section, the absorption coefficient of these states is challenging to measure using conventional transmission/reflection spectrophotometry. As an alternative, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of photovoltaic devices is often used as a representative of the absorption coefficient, where the spectral line shape of the EQE is considered to follow the absorption coefficient of the active layer material. In this work, it is shown that the sub-bandgap EQE is subject to thickness dependent low finesse cavity interference effects within the device -making this assumption questionable. A better estimate for the absorption coefficient is obtained when EQE spectra corresponding to different active layer thicknesses are fitted simultaneously for one attenuation coefficient using an iterative transfer matrix method. The principle is demonstrated for two model acceptor-donor systems (PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM) and accurate sub-gap absorption coefficients are determined. This approach has particular relevance for both understanding sub-gap states and their utilization in organic optoelectronic devices. Electro-optical modelling has been extensively used to design and optimise the performance of optoelectronic devices such as solar cells As a consequence of equation ( The latter assumption has been proven in technologically relevant high efficiency systems such as efficient bulk heterojunction recently. In the case of an optically thin layer with αt ≪ 1 (layer thickness tt) and in the limit of negligible cavity effects (such as a semiconductor film deposited on a transparent substrate), it is often assumed that AA ≈ ααtt for hv < Eg. It is a relatively straightforward task to model a thin film solar cell when all optical constants are known but challenging when the sub-bandgap optical constants are unknown. In this work, we determined absorption coefficients as low as 10 -2 cm -1 in the sub-gap spectral range of two exemplary acceptor-donor blends often used in high efficiency organic solar cells. The full molecular structures of these model systems, PBTTT-PC71BM and PCE12-ITIC are provided in the Supporting Information (SI). Solar cells with active layer thicknesses between 60 -375 nm were fabricated to study the effect of thickness on the shape of the EQE spectra in the subgap spectral range. The absorption coefficients were obtained by numerically fitting for multiple EQE spectra and including thickness-dependent optical field simulations via an iterative transfer matrix method. We validated the modelled coefficients by simulating EQE spectra of devices with different thicknesses where we find a good agreement between the simulated and experimental results. It becomes clear that the EQE lineshape is strongly dependent on the active layer thickness and hence assuming that AA ≈ ααtt can only be true for a small range of thicknesses. In the PCE12-ITIC system, the interference-induced thickness dependence of EQE in the sub-gap regime is more pronounced due to the large refractive index of this material system. These results indicate that one cannot directly relate the sub-gap EQE spectra to the sub-gap absorption coefficient without performing appropriate optical simulations. This is particularly important in systems with larger refractive index such as the recently introduced non-fullerene donor/acceptor blends. PBTTT-PC71BM (1:4) and PCE12-ITIC (1:1) were chosen as model material systems for investigations of sub-gap ultra-low attenuation coefficients. PBTTT-PC71BM is known for its extended sub-gap EQE shoulder due to charge transfer state (CT) absorption The EQE spectra are used in the procedure depicted in the process flowchart of Figure Nevertheless, the IQE spectra remains approximately flat within these unavoidable errors. IQE Once the optimized thicknesses and IQE mean for all devices are obtained, the absorption spectra below the bandgap can be estimated by AA′′= EQE × IQEmean -1 using the experimental EQE over the full spectral range. Importantly, AA′′ is now a matrix containing the estimated absorptance of all devices. Figure A computer code for this method is provided in the supporting information with exemplar data. The presented method is applicable to a single or more devices of a different active layer thickness. However, inaccuracies in the determined thickness and small deviations from the flat IQE assumption will have a large impact on the numerically obtained attenuation coefficient if only one device is considered. Therefore, it will be more accurate to numerically fit devices with different thicknesses. From the globally obtained attenuation coefficient, the active layer absorptance can be simulated and then scaled by IQEmean to obtain the EQE. It is important to consider that electronic effects, such as the charge collection imbalance of thick junctions, are not considered in the optical model. From a Gaussian fit to the absorption coefficient of PBTTT-PC71BM, a charge transfer energy (ECT) of 1.16 eV and a reorganization energy λ of the donor-acceptor complex of 163 meV were determined as shown in Figure For PBTTT-PC71BM, A ≈ αt can give a better estimate for the numerical α over a wide range of thicknesses. At the same time, the change in thickness between 60 -150 nm also affects the spectral lineshape of the simulated absorptance. From these two examples, it becomes clear that active layer thickness plays a significant role in the observed spectral lineshape of the EQE and care must be taken to not mistake material properties with device properties. ITIC is expected to be around 1.5 eV. This has been experimentally shown Using the presented method, the sensitivity to the absorption coefficient depends solely on the ability to measure small photocurrents in the weakly absorbing spectral region. Figure In summary, we have presented a numerical and experimental approach to determine ultrasmall absorption coefficients of sub-gap states from external quantum efficiency spectra and applied it to organic semiconductors-based solar cells. Due to non-negligible cavity effects, the spectral shape of the sub-bandgap EQE is influenced by interference fringes that are greater when the refractive index is more dispersive as exemplified with the PCE12-ITIC system. The thickness-dependent EQE spectra of PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM devices were accurately predicted when modelling the device using the as-obtained absorption coefficients. While the charge transfer energy of the PBTTT-PC71BM was determined as previously reported, sub-bandgap states were observed for the PCE12-ITIC blend, which are most likely linked to photocurrent generating trap states. The method presented here refines how to obtain the absorption coefficient from EQE spectra while offering a novel way to study sub-bandgap absorption with relatively low experimental overhead. Device preparation: On a pre-cleaned glass substrate with a pre-structured layer of 105 nm ITO, a 35 nm thin layer of ZnO was deposited via a sol-gel spin coating at 4000 rpm from a 0.5 M solution of zinc acetate dihydrate in ethanolamine and 2-methoxy ethanol (volume ratio 3:97). The as-spun layer was annealed at 150 °C for 10 min in air. The ZnO hole-transporting layer was followed by the active layer comprising either PBTTT-PC71BM or PCE12-ITIC. For PBTTT-PC71BM as the active layer, PBTTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Mw > 50 000 g mol -1 , PDI < 3)) and [6,6]-Phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) was mixed in a weight ratio of 1:4 and dissolved in chloroform:1,2-dichlorobenzene (6:4 volume ratio). The solution was stirred overnight, filtered through a 0.2 μm PTFE filter in the cold and spin-coated at 65 °C for 60 s. For film thicknesses between 100 -200 nm, the concentration of the solution was chosen to be 32 mg mL -1 and the spin-speed is varied between 1000 -3000 rpm. For layer thicknesses below 100 nm, the same solution was diluted to 20 mg mL -1 and the spin-speed varied between 1000 -1500 rpm. For PCE12-ITIC as the active layer, the polymer PCE12 (PBDB-T) and the acceptor ITIC were mixed in a weight ratio of 1:1 and dissolved in chlorobenzene at 50 °C overnight to form a 20 mg mL -1 solution. 0.5 vol% diiodooctane was added prior to spincoating, while keeping the solution at 50 °C throughout the deposition process. Film thicknesses between 60 -375 nm were obtained by varying the spin-speed between 400 -2700 rpm and subsequent thermal annealing at 160 °C for 10 min. The active layer was followed by 7 nm of MoO3 and 130 nm of silver thermally evaporated under high vacuum. All devices were defined by the geometrical overlap of the bottom and the top contact that equals 15 mm 2 . To avoid exposure to ambient conditions, the organic part of the device was covered by a small glass substrate glued on top. The optical constants of spin-coated films were determined experimentally by spectroscopic ellipsometry (instrument: J.A. Woollam M-2000; software: CompleteEASE 5.23). Samples comprised a single layer of material spin-coated from the same solution as utilized for device fabrication on either quartz glass or silicon substrates. Sensitive EQE measurements: A Spectrophotometer (LAMBDA 950, PerkinElmer) with an integrated monochromator was used as a light source spanning 400 -1800 nm. The output light from the spectrometer was chopped at 273 Hz and focused onto a photodiode. The short-circuit current was derived from the device was fed to a current preamplifier (Femto DHCPA-100) before being analyzed with a lock-in amplifier (SR860 Stanford Research Systems). To resolve low photocurrents, the preamplifier was set to high amplification, while the time-constant of the lock-in amplifier was chosen to be 1 s in the strongly absorbing and 30 s in the weakly absorbing spectral range. For the calibration process, a NIST-calibrated silicon photodiode (for wavelength between 400 nm and 1100 nm) and a germanium photodiode (for wavelength between 780 nm and 1800 nm) from Newport were used. Table ECT in eV λ in meV 