A series of oxytetrahalides WOX4 (X: a halogen element) that form quasi-one-dimensional chains is investigated using first-principles calculations. The crystal structures, electronic structures, as well as ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties are discussed in detail. Group theory analysis shows that the ferroelectricity in this family originates from an unstable polar phonon mode Γ - 1 induced by the W's d 0 orbital configuration. Their polarization magnitudes are found to be comparable to widely used ferroelectric perovskites. Because of its quasi-one-dimensional characteristics, the inter-chain domain wall energy density is low, leading to loosely-coupled ferroelectric chains. This is potentially beneficial for high density ferroelectric memories: we estimate that the upper-limit of memory density in these compounds could reach hundreds of terabytes per square inch. Introduction.-Ferroelectrics with electric polarization (P ) that can be switched in direction using weak external fields defines one of the most important branches of condensed matter physics and functional materials In recent years, two dimensional (2D) FE monolayers (or few layers) exfoliated from van der Waals (vdW) layered materials As a consequence, it is natural to expect more exotic and better properties for applications in lower dimensional FE materials than in their 3D counterparts. In fact, the one-dimensional (1D) Poly (vinylidene fluoride-ran-trifluoroethylene) (PVDF-TrFE) FE nanowires can be easily fabricated, and they are predicted to have the potential for integration in devices with memory densities up to 33 Gbits/inch 2 In this publication, a series of quasi-1D FE oxytetrahalides with the chemical formula WOX 4 (X denoting a halide element: F, Cl, or Br) are theoretically investigated using Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. Among these materials, WOCl 4 and WOBr 4 have already been experimentally synthesized and their bulk crystal structures are shown in Fig. DFT Methods.-In this work, first-principles DFT calculations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code To better describe the inter-chain interaction, the vdW ) and with previous DFT studies. Data include: the lattice constants a = b and c (in units of Å); volume V (in units of Å3 ); characteristic bond length W-O1 (shorter one), W-O2 (longer one), and W-X (all in units of Å); bond angles ∠O-W-X and ∠X-W-X (in units of • ); band gap Eg (in units of eV); P (in units of μC/cm 2 ); and energy barriers E b1 , E b2 , and E bias (in units of meV). SG:87 stands for Space Group 87. correction for potential energy was implemented by using the zero damping DFT-D3 method of Grimme The Berry phase method was adopted to calculate P In addition, the density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Lattice properties.-As shown in Fig. For the paraelectric (PE) structure [Fig. The d 0 configuration of W 6+ is FE active, as revealed in our recent studies of the 2D WO 2 X 2 family of halogens As shown in Fig. The optimized lattice structures of WOX 4 are summarized in Table Increasing the ionic size of X -, the in-plane lattice constant (a=b), volume V , and bond length W-X increase drastically. More specifically, the in-plane lattice constants increase by 31% and 40%, and the volumes increase by 68% and 89% for X=Cl and Br, respectively, when compared with X=F. This huge in-plane expansion also reflects the softness induced by the vdW interactions. Note, for example that the lattice constants increase by 22% and 29% from NaF to NaCl and NaBr. By contrast, the lengths of the W-O bonds and the lattice constant along the c-axis are nearly unchanged, or even slightly shorten, by increasing the ionic size of X -. Moreover, the octahedra become increasingly flat, which represents a disadvantage for the FE mode (pseudo Jahn-Teller distortion). As a net result, the FE P steadily decreases when the ionic size of X -increases, as discussed in the next subsection. Electronic properties & ferroelectricity.-The electronic structures of WOX 4 are shown in Figs. These electronic structures may be advantageous for optoelectronic applications due to the following characteristics. First, the valence bands originating in the X's 2p orbitals are quite flat due to their isolated edge positions, which may be beneficial for optical absorption despite their indirect band gaps. Second, although the W's d xy band is narrow, their d xz /d yz bands are much broader and they are only slightly higher in energy. For WOCl 4 and WOBr 4 , photons above 1.8 and 1.0 eV can excite electrons to W's d xz /d yz bands which have high mobilities along the c-axis, while the residual hole in the edge X's 2p orbitals are much more localized. This aspect will be of interest for further investigations of optoelectronic currents using the materials proposed here. Due to the drawbacks of DFT calculations when treating band gaps The values of P are estimated using the Berry phase method The heights of the switching energy barriers are also important for potential applications of FE materials. Considering the weak vdW interaction between FE chains, here two simple and ideal paths are computed: (a) switching all chains together and (b) switching only half the chains, indicated as A→B and A→C in Fig. Comparing to the path A→B, the energy barriers for path A→C do not change much (they are only slightly higher), as indicated in Figs. In real situations, the switching process through domain wall motion can generally reduce the barrier. In fact, the A-C switching process can be thought as a domain-related one, because it involves the domain struc-ture between chains and indeed changes the barriers. Due to the limitations of DFT, here only small size cells, already consisting of dozens of atoms, can be handled. This is not sufficient to include a real domain wall within chains, especially considering the fact that the innerchain domain walls are charged (head-to-head or tail-totail) and thus quite high in energy. So the aforementioned energy barriers, calculated without the consideration of inner-chain domain walls, should be considered as upper limit values. The switching process including inner-chain domain wall deserves further computational (e.g. using the phase field model) and experimental studies. Different from the simple A-B switching processes (reversing polarization of all chains simultaneously) which can be realized by applying a uniform electric field, it is a challenge to realize the A-C switching process in experiments due to the spatial resolution of those electric fields. Maybe it is possible to manipulate a single chain by using the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope. Here the A-C process is proposed as the minimum limit of ferroelectric switching. In real experiments, FE switching could be realized between the A-B and A-C limits, and gradually approach the A-C limit with advances in experimental techniques. The double-well potential curves shown in Figs. Here, energy contributions up to the sixth order are necessary to describe the anharmonic double-well potential. The values of the energy coefficients in Eq. 1 are extracted from the DFT calculations, as listed in Table Piezoelectricity.-In addition to the switchable polarization, there are important functional applications related to the piezoelectricity properties As stated before, WOX 4 belongs to the noncentrosymmetric I4 space group where the elastic matrix has seven independent constants C ij where S kj is the elastic compliance coefficients (S kj =C -1 kj ). Here, all piezoelectric coefficients are sum- marized in Table Spin-orbit coupling & temperature effects.-Note that all results above were obtained without the consideration of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). For the heavy element W, the SOC coefficient for its 5d orbitals can be considerable, which can cause a delicate Rashba splitting of conducting bands around the Γ point in this polar system, as shown in Fig. In addition, ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been employed to confirm if the ferroelectricity of WOX 4 persists to room temperature. Our MD results indicate that the ferroelectric order of WOX 4 chains indeed remains quite stable at 300 K and even 400 K (Figs. S2 and S3 in SM [47]), despite the existence of thermal fluctuations. Conclusion.-In summary, using ab initio techniques in this work the WOX 4 family is predicted to be a novel series of ferroelectric materials displaying unusual quasione-dimensional characteristics. The robust ferroelectric distortion within each chain and weak vdW coupling between chains make them candidates for applications as high-density non-volatile memories at room temperature. Their electronic structures and piezoelectricity are also of potential value for optoelectronics and nanogenerators. Our predictions will hopefully stimulate more theoretical and experimental works on transition metal oxyhalides, as well as other low-dimensional polar materials. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11834002 and 11674055). A.M. and E.D. were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), Materials Science and Engineering Division. L.F.L. and Y.Z. were also supported by the China Scholarship Council.