It is well known that water inside hydrophobic nano-channels diffuses faster than bulk water. Recent theoretical studies have shown that this enhancement depends on the size of the hydrophobic nanochannels. However, experimental evidence of this dependence is lacking. Here, by combining two-dimensional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) diffusion-relaxation (D -T 2ef f ) spectroscopy in the stray field of a superconducting magnet, and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations, we analyze the size dependence of water dynamics inside carbon nanotubes (CNTs) of different diameters (1.1 nm to 6.0 nm), in the temperature range of 265 K to 305 K. Depending on the CNTs diameter, the nanotube water is shown to resolve in two or more tubular components acquiring different self-diffusion coefficients. Most notable, a favourable CNTs diameter range (3.0 -4.5 nm) is experimentally verified for the first time, in which water molecule dynamics at the centre of the CNTs exhibit distinctly non-Arrhenius behaviour, characterized by ultrafast diffusion and extraordinary fragility, a result of significant importance in the efforts to understand water behaviour in hydrophobic nanochannels. The study of water diffusion inside Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) has attracted great interdisciplinary interest as conduit for understanding nanofluidic properties in a variety of nanoporous systems having potential in many applications, such as water treatment technologies In this paper we utilize two-dimensional 1 H NMR diffusion-relaxation correlation spectroscopy (D -T 2ef f ) to study water confinement in CNTs as a function of size (1.1 nm-6.0 nm) and temperature (265 K-305 K) The water structure inside the CNTs varies upon increasing the CNTs diameter; it forms a 1D chain of water molecules in ultranarrow single walled CNTs (d < 1 nm), and it is organized into coaxial WTS as the CNTs diameter increases. Figure In order to verify experimentally the role of the CNTs diameter on the water structure and dynamics, we conducted 2D 1 H NMR D -T 2ef f measurements of water in various CNT sizes, ranging from 1.1 nm to 6.0 nm, and in the temperature range 265K to 305K. Experiments were performed in the stray field of a superconductive magnet with a constant magnetic field gradient g = 34.7 T/m, at 1 H NMR frequency of 101.324 MHz. It is noticed that in a constant strong magnetic field gradient, as in our case, the CPMG spin-echo decay curves, assigned to the T 2 -axis In the case of NMR diffusion experiments with a uniform diffusion process, the self-diffusion coefficient D is obtained by appropriate fitting the 1 H NMR spin-echo decay data To uncover the nanotube water dynamics, we calculated separately the D projections corresponding to the short T 2ef f signal component, i.e. to the nanotube water. Figure Upon increasing the CNT diameter, additional waterlayers are formed. In the 3.5 nm size sample, MD simulations reveal two concentric WTS with different D values in agreement with the NMR results. The water density profiles indicate that the outer WTS close to the CNT wall corresponds to the main diffusion peak in Figure ∼ 2.2 × 10 -9 m 2 /s, in agreement with the NMR results, however, the central WTS differs significantly from the experimentally measured D value at the center of the CNT channel. Finally, in the large diameter sample (5.0 nm), although the MD simulation has revealed multiple water layers, their calculated D values are close to each other, unveiling uniform dynamics across the diameter, in agreement to the NMR results of Figure Figure for two different initial 1/D 0 values. Such liquids are denoted in the literature as strong liquids Liquids with this kind of behavior are denoted as fragile liquids. Similar to the bulk water, the temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient of nanotube water shows strongly non-Arrhenius behavior. Many theoretical explanations have been proposed to explain the fragile behavior of water, such as the change in the translational and reorientation dynamics where T S is the thermodynamic limit at which transport properties become zero In the case of bulk water, the solid black line is the power-law fit to the experimental data (yellow circles) with T S = 218 K and γ = -2 in agreement with previously reported values Figure Another important observation in Figure We have presented 2D NMR D -T 2ef f results of water inside CNTs of different sizes and at various temperatures in combination with MD simulations. Our experiments show in a unique way the existence of a favorable CNT size range (3.0 nm 4.5 nm) with anomalously enhanced water diffusion. In this size range the nanotube water is further resolved into two components, with the central one exhibiting astonishing transport properties, with extraordinary high liquidus temperature T l , and D values ranging from two to almost four times than the D values of the bulk water. Evidently, atomic scale interactions dominate water dynamics in this CNTs diameter range giving rise to the heterogeneity in the fragile behavior between the central and the outer components of the confined water. The origin of this behavior can be traced to the interrelation between the strength of the repulsive part of the interatomic potential and the liquid fragility Purified carbon nanotubes; Single, Double and Multiple (SWCNT, DWCNT, and MWCNT) were purchased from SES research, USA. The inner diameter of the CNTs used in this work was ∼ 1.1 nm for the SWCNT, ∼ 3.5 nm for the DWCNT and ∼ 4.5 nm for the MWCNT. Additionally, further MWCNT samples were purchased from Nanocs, USA with inner diameters 3.0, 5.0, 5.5, and 6.0 nm. The length of the tubes in all the CNTs used in this work was from 15 m to 20 m and all the CNTs were open ended as provided by the manufacturer. The samples were characterized using TEM-FEI Tecnai G20 with a 0.11 nm point to point resolution and found consistent with manufacturers specifications. The CNT powder was used with no further treatment and doubly distilled water was used for the NMR samples preparation. Further information on the CNTs and the preparation of the NMR samples is available in the Supporting Information. 2D 1 H NMR diffusion-relaxation D -T 2ef f measurements were performed in the stray field of a 4.7 T Bruker superconductive magnet providing a 34.7 T/m constant magnetic field gradient at 1 H NMR frequency of 101.324 MHz. The experiments were carried out by using a pulse sequence with more than 5000 pulses (more details can be found in the Supporting Information). The temperature was controlled by an ITC-5 temperature controller in a flow type Oxford cryostat. The accuracy of the temperature was 0.1 K. A 30 min time window was allowed at each temperature before collecting data. NMR data were analyzed using a 2D non-negative Tikhonov regularization inversion (discussed in the Supporting Information) algorithm code developed by the authors. Molecular dynamics simulations were used to investigate the diffusion of water inside single walled carbon nanotubes. Different systems were simulated for CNTs with different diameters. Each system consists of a nanotube of length 20nm immersed in a water bath. The nanotubes studied were armchairs The estimated slope β1 is equal to two times the diffusion coefficient (2D). In order to estimate the error in D (∼ 10 -12 m 2 /s), we used the estimated standard error of the slope β1 = √ M SE Sxx . The diffusion coefficients were calculated for all of the water inside the CNT and for all the components obtained from the density profile. In this document, we provide supporting information regarding the following: 1. Materials and Methods. Morphological analysis of the CNTs was conducted with Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) using a FEI Tecnai G20 microscope with a 0.11 nm point to point resolution, operated at 200 kV. For this analysis, approximately 1 mg of each sample was dispersed in 20 ml of high purity cyclohexane (Merck, 99.9%) via sonication for duration of 15 s; a drop of each suspension was deposited on copper grids (400 mesh) covered with a thin amorphous carbon film (lacey carbon). To avoid contamination, CNT samples were inserted into the TEM machine immediately following preparation. Bright field images were collected at several magnifications in order to observe structure and size homogeneity. prepare fully water saturated samples for NMR measurements, CNT powder was immersed in deionized water inside gamma shaped NMR quartz tubes, with outer/inner diameters of 5/3 mm respectively. The samples were then let to come to equilibrium at room temperature for three hours. In order to force water into the tube (expelling air out of them), the quartz tubes with the samples were connected to a vacuum system and air was carefully pumped out until small bubbles were observed leaving the immersed powder through the water, clear indication of water replacing the air inside the CNTs. The process was continued until no further air bubbles were observed. At the end of the pumping process, a water loss between 5 μl to 10 μl was observed in all water immersed samples. Each sample was then flame sealed under vacuum with a small layer of free water left in the vertical part of the tubes (Figure T , and applying a non-negative Tikhonov regularization algorithm In contrast to the above case, in the presence of a very strong magnetic field gradient g, as in our experiments, the kernel matrix K0 depends on T 2ef f and it can not be splitted into K0 = K1 ⊗ K2 .The inversion is acquired by reformulating equation (3) in one-dimension as s = K0 f , where s and f are vectors obtained by lexicographically ordering the relevant matrices (January 22, 2020)