We demonstrate an ionically gated planar PS-PV solar cell with ultra-thick fullerene ETL with porous CNT electron collector on top of it. Perovskite photovoltaic devices usually have undoped electron transport layers, usually thin like C60 due to its high resistance. Metallic low work function cathodes are extremely unstable in PS-PV due to reaction with halogens I-/Br-, and it would be desirable to have stable carbon cathodes on top of thick low resistance ETL for enhancing stability of PS-PVs. We show that gating such top CNT cathode in ionic liquid, as part of a supercapacitor charged by Vg tunes the Fermi level of CNT by EDL charging, and causes lowering of barrier at of C60/C70 ETL. Moreover, at higher gating voltage ions further propagates into fullerene by electrochemical n-doping, that increases dramatically PV performance by raising mostly two parameters: Isc and FF, resulting in PCE efficiency raised from 3 % to 11 %. N-doping of ETL strongly enhances charge collection by ETL and CNT raising Isc and lowering series resistance and thus increasing strongly PCE. Surprisingly Voc is not sensitive in PS-PV to external Vg gating, on the contrary to strongly enhanced Voc in ionically gated organic PV, where it is the main gating effect. This insensitivity of Voc to lowering of work function of Vg gated CNT electrode, is a clear indication that Voc in PS-PV is determined by inner p-i-n junction formation in PS itself, via accumulation of its intrinsic mobile ionic species halogens and cations and their vacancies. Development of perovskite photovoltaics has started from dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) conception in pioneer works Another interface problem is from the perovskite side, which has high defect density at interfaces due to accumulation of mobile iodine vacancies, excessive ions, Electrode interface also suffers from instability factors: metal diffusion into transport layers and perovskite absorber, A promising effort for improving the electrode-transport layer junction is interface engineering and accumulation of charge carriers. Electrode and transport layer energy levels can be aligned via interfacial polarization and dipoles caused by a buffer layer based on ionic liquids. As shown in works with organic solar cells by Yu, The gate field effect is another way to improve charge collection or accumulation in thin film solar cells. Cook This area of study is the main problem in developing thin film FET (field effect transistors) for modern electronics based on organic semiconductors, metal oxides and carbon derivatives (fullerenes, nanotubes, graphene). Ionic liquids can form a double electric layer (EDL) with applied bias and act as a gate due their specific capacity (can reach more than μF/cm 2 versus nF/cm 2 order in SiO2), which influences the quantity of induced carriers at low gate voltages <5 V In this work, we found motivation through a combined approach of interface engineering with ionic liquid and n-type accumulation of charge carriers by ionic gating under Vg applied to gate. Carbon nanotubes as a high-specific surface network is an advantageous concept for ionic gate. High surface of materials gives possibility to induce higher concentration of carriers in electrostatic regime. In this case, carbon network can act as effective charge plate for a supercapacitor based on ionic liquid. In its turn, such gate concept can be effectively used in three-interface interaction structure, when supercapacitor is placed on semiconductor surface and ionic liquid penetrates through CNT porous web to semiconductor surface and then to its bulk by diffusion/drift. Herein, we present a novel type of inverted perovskite planar cell with ultra-thickness (up to 300 nm), a robust fullerene electron transport layer (ETL), and a tunable cathode interface based on highly porous carbon nanotubes sheets. We have developed a horizontal architecture, then fabricated and characterized the p-i-n structure with horizontal CNT ionic gate placed at back electrode. In this device, high specific resistance of the undoped ETL layer and the series resistance on the electrode interface are reduced by charge carrier accumulation regimes. The use of the ionic gate is demonstrated as an effective, low voltage tool for improving solar cell output parameters in reversible electrostatic regimes. We compared device structures with two fullerene ETLs-C60 and C70 ranging from 200-300 nm thicknesses at different gate voltages finding correlations to output PV parameters. Perovskite ink was fabricated in 1.5 M concentration from methylamine iodide (MAI, Dyesol) and lead iodide (Alfa Aesar). Firstly, MAI was dissolved in mixture of DMF: γ-BL (1:1 volume ratio, from Sigma Aldrich, anhydrous), and then PbI2 was dissolved in MAI solution with a 10% volume addition of DMSO. Ink was heated overnight at 60 °C and cooled to room temperature in 5 minutes before device fabrication. PEDOT: PSS water dispersion from Hereaus Clevious (1,4 % Al 4083) was filtrated through 0.45 um PTFE filter prior HTL spin coating. Pixelated ITO substrates (Lumtec, 15 ohm/□) were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with acetone, toluene, and IPA (ME grade). Substrates were preliminary activated by 20 minutes UV-ozone treatment for PEDOT: PSS HTL deposition. A 30 nm layer was spin-coated at 3000 RPM during 60s and then annealed at 150 °C. A CH3NH3PbI3 450 nm photoactive layer was formed after a 2-step spin coating process: 20 s at 1000 RPM and 25 s at 4000 RPM and toluene dripping procedure (10s before 2nd step ending) with final annealing at 100°C during 10 minutes (all processes were provided in glovebox with inert atmosphere < 1 ppm O2, <1 ppm H20). C60 and C70 electron transport layers (200,250,300 nm thicknesses) were thermally evaporated at 2*10-6 Torr with 0.5 A/s rate. SWCNTs (synthesized accordingly, route described in previous work) were laminated as 3 mm stripe on the top of device structure and densified with HFE. MWCNTs (synthesized accordingly, route described in previous work) were laminated as 3 mm stripe on the top of device structure and densified with HFE. MWCNT as counter electrode was laminated (5 layers) in parallel to the SWCNT cathode in 3 mm distance and densified with HFE. Finally, a drop (2 μl) of DEME -BF4 ionic liquid (Kanto Chemicals) was squeezed between the SWCNT and MWCNT electrodes by glass coverslip on top of the warm wet planar layer. Preliminary, 50 and 100 nm ETL devices were tested, but ionic liquid interpenetrated the perovskite layer under pressure of cover slip and partially dissolved photoactive film. For the 50 nm, the ETL layer device degraded in first minute of testing; for 100 nm, the ETL device started to degrade after 5 minutes of measurement and showed poor performance (presented in supplement material). Therefore, thick fullerene film also acts as a protection layer for perovskite in devices with ionic gate. JV characterization were provided at standard 1.5 AM G 100 mW/cm2 conditions with Newport ABB solar simulator (calibrated with Si certified cell) and two Keithley 2400 SMU (JV sweep, gate applying) in inert atmosphere. Quantum efficiency measurements were provided on XP-6 system (PV MEASUREMENTS) calibrated with KG-9 Si reference cell. Raman characterization was done on Thermo DXR Raman microscope with 532 nm laser. The output performance of fabricated cells was measured in two regimes: without ionic liquid in ITO/HTL/Perovskite/ETL/SWCNT device structure and with SWCNT/DEME-BF4/MWCNT ionic gate at different biases. Gate voltage was applied with positive connection to the counter electrode and negative to the SWCNT device cathode for respective inducing of DEME + ions at SWCNT-ETL interface and BF4 -ions at MWCNT counter. The presence of cation and anion induce polar charge accumulation (electrons and holes respectively) at semiconductor interface provided a doping effect and Fermi level shift in electrostatic regime. As described in our previous works Large progress in PSC performance improvement was achieved with development of doping techniques of thick polymer hole transport layers like Spiro-Ometad, P3HT, PTAA, etc., but not many works tended to analogue approaches with organic electron transport materials. In this work, we show that thick fullerene layers >200 nm can be used as electron transport layers for perovskite solar cells without complicated doping methods like co-evaporation. The use of ionic gate in advanced planar device architecture compensates initial low conductivity of thick ETL and non-metal electrodes in the accumulation charging regime. Electrostatic inducing of n-type carriers at ETL-cathode interface improved mismatching energy levels and provided a significant gain of charge collection in initially intrinsic semiconductors (C60/C70, SWCNT). The use of horizontal ionic gate was addressed for managing three critical points in devices with thick ETL and undoped SWCNT electrodes: first, high sheet resistance of cathode; second, high resistance of thick ETL; and third, not optimal fullerene LUMO-SWCNT Wf matching. For optimal electron collection and provision of ohmic contact, zero barrier between the transport layer and electrode is required. The measurement of the SWCNT's work function is imprecise due containment of metallic and semiconductor parts and approximate acceptance equal to 4.7 eV, according to data from the literature During negative charge accumulation at SWCNT-DEME + cation, the interface Fermi level of SWCNT starts to shift up, providing better work function and matching with LUMO of fullerene. In turn, the ETL surface is also working under gate accumulation regime via soaking by ionic liquid through CNT network, and near-surface layers of fullerenes become n-doped in electrostatic mode. The level of accumulation was controlled by gate voltage (0.00-2.50 V), and in turn, high concentrations of induced carriers are provided via the high capacity of ionic liquid There is a very significant qualitative difference in the effect of Vg on Voc of perovskite PV as compared to our earlier results on ionic gating in Polymeric PV For comparison, we present the results of IV curves change with Vg for a similar Vg ranges in OPV (as originally presented in work of Voroshilov and co -authors 53 ): S-shape changes to good FF even with Vg=0, due to polarization by EDL formation at interface (as in our case). Then further doping at higher Vg increases Voc due to Fermi level raise of SWCNT electrode, till the CB of ETL, when the conductivity of SWCNT. So, the great and unusual observation is that Voc is not increased at all, although the Fermi level is known to raise in SWCNTs. This means that w.f. of SWCNT is not important for Voc, it already was high due to PS physics. And this physics is now showing its nature in this gating difference. The amazing second difference of PS-PV from OPV is the insensitivity of operation on Vg at higher Vg > 2.0 -25 V. this is again can be understood as due to n+ heavy doping of C60.C70 at higher Vg, which only slightly increase charge collection, and do not degrade the PV operation, like in OPV, as observed by Saranin Mainly C70 and C60 ETL based devices have different levels of current generation and output performance response to gate voltage in dependence to thickness. At initial conditions, devices with 200 nm C70 based ETL have 1.5 times bigger short current density 16 mA/cm 2 in comparison to 12 mA/cm 2 of 200 nm C60 based ETL cells (as it shown on Figure In turn, decreasing the contact resistance corresponds to doping effects, which occur at room temperature between the SWCNTfullerene-IL interfaces. Carbon nanotubes-IL interfaces can have strong interaction via Van-Der-Waals bonding, - bonding, and sidewall adsorption, as it presented in several reviews with modelling and experimental results At the same time, fullerene ETL-IL interface has another interaction in physics. Theoretical calculations, provided by Chaban and co-workers, Consequently, C60 ETL requires a higher-level pf n-type accumulation for level matching with cathode Wf and electron extraction. C60 molecule is buckminsterfullerene or buckyball, and its packing changes gradually from hexagonal to a cubic form, while C70 elongated fullerenes have a rugby ball-like shape, and prefer the hexagonal packing In summary, we demonstrated a combined approach of interfacial engineering and n-type accumulation in advanced planar p-i-n perovskite solar cell with ionic gate and ultra-thick ETL based on fullerene. Operation capability of such thick 200-300 nm fullerene-based ETL is presented for the first time for perovskite solar cells. Initial high series resistance of SWCNT with thick 200 nm ETL interface was dropped from extremely high kOhms*cm 2 values to 20 Ohm*cm 2 due to dipolar polarization by DEME + and BF4 -ions and Vg gate bias induced n-type doping of CNT/ETL via injected carriers. Sequential increase of gated bias successfully transformed SWCNT-fullerene Shottky contact to ohmic junction while simultaneous initial intrinsic and high ohmic nature thick 200-300 nm C60/C70 fullerene films were compensated by charge accumulation in ETL depths. Appearance of i-n junction (induced by gate bias) was confirmed by diode structure, JV measurements with presence of rectification ratio at Vgate ≥ 1.5 V. The different response of JV performance to gate bias and ETL thickness was observed for C60 and C70 devices. This effect occurs due to the higher curvature of C70 molecules packing that allows better IL cations-anions adsorption and distribution under the applied field, and initially lower LUMO position, which provides matching SWCNT Wf at lower gate bias. Therefore, C70 ETL have lower spread of Jsc in dependence to thickness with increased Vgate, while C60 ETL devices have brighter expression of dependence to layer thickness. Finally, devices showed dramatic improvement of output parameters with changes starting from the S-shape JV curve to 11+ % PCE performance. Best efficiencies were demonstrated on 200 nm C60 cells and 250 nm C70 devices at Vgate = 2.25 V and 2.50 V, respectively. For C60, most performing cells Jsc gain was + 54.2%, FF increased in 2.7 times, and efficiency grew from 2.46% to 11.29%, respectively, and for C70, Jsc improved +44 %, FF increased in 3 times, and efficiency grew from 1.47% to 11.13%. Using ionic gate for cathode junction opens new perspectives for improving electron transport materials of various thicknesses and promising materials for electrode application with ambient, vacuum-free processing. and 5(g-h). For both fullerene materials, such ETL thicknesses between 200-300 nm affect device output performance with series resistance values from 2000 Ohm*cm 2 (C60, C70 200 nm thick) to >12000 Ohm*cm 2 (C60, 300 nm) and >7500 Ohm*cm 2 (C70, 300 nm) due to the intrinsic low conductivity >10