We investigate the effect of the amount of disorder on the statistics of breaking bursts during the quasi-static fracture of heterogeneous materials. We consider a fiber bundle model where the strength of single fibers is sampled from a power law distribution over a finite range, so that the amount of materials' disorder can be controlled by varying the power law exponent and the upper cutoff of fibers' strength. Analytical calculations and computer simulations, performed in the limit of equal load sharing, revealed that depending on the disorder parameters the mechanical response of the bundle is either perfectly brittle where the first fiber breaking triggers a catastrophic avalanche, or it is quasi-brittle where macroscopic failure is preceded by a sequence of bursts. In the quasibrittle phase, the statistics of avalanche sizes is found to show a high degree of complexity. In particular, we demonstrate that the functional form of the size distribution of bursts depends on the system size: for large upper cutoffs of fibers' strength, in small systems the sequence of bursts has a high degree of stationarity characterized by a power law size distribution with a universal exponent. However, for sufficiently large bundles the breaking process accelerates towards the critical point of failure which gives rise to a crossover between two power laws. The transition between the two regimes occurs at a characteristic system size which depends on the disorder parameters. The disorder of materials plays a crucial role in fracture phenomena when subject to mechanical loads. Experiments and theoretical calculations revealed that under constant or slowly varying external loads the fracture of heterogeneous materials proceeds in bursts of local breakings The intensity of the crackling activity has been found to depend on the degree of materials' disorder Motivated by these recent findings, here our goal is to investigate the statistics of crackling noise in the limiting case of extremely high disorder. The fiber bundle model (FBM) provides an adequate framework Assuming equal load sharing after fiber breakings, we demonstrate that the fat tailed microscale disorder has a substantial effect on the statistics of breaking bursts of fibers. In particular, we show that the functional form of the burst size distribution depends on the size of the bundle: when the upper cutoff of fibers' strength is infinite the burst size distribution is a power law with a universal exponent. However, in the case of finite upper cutoff strength, for small system sizes the size distribution is identical with the one of the infinite cutoff strength. Deviations start at a characteristic system size beyond which a crossover occurs to another functional form. We give an explanation of the system size dependent avalanche statistics in terms of the extreme order statistics of breaking thresholds. We consider a bundle of N parallel fibers, which are assumed to have a perfectly brittle behavior with a Young's modulus E and breaking threshold σ th . The Young's modulus is assumed to be constant E = 1 so that materi-als' disorder is captured by the randomness of the breaking threshold σ th . The strength of individual fibers σ i th , i = 1, . . . , N is sampled from a probability density p(σ th ). The amount of disorder in the system can be controlled by varying the range σ min th ≤ σ th ≤ σ max th of strength values and by the functional form of p(σ th ). FBMs with moderate amount of disorder have been widely studied in the literature considering uniform, Weibull, and Gaussian distributions making the avalanche statistics of this universality class well understood To realize the limiting case of extremely high disorder, a fat tailed disorder distribution is considered, i.e. we implement a power law distribution of breaking thresholds over the range σ min th ≤ σ th ≤ σ max th with the probability density In our calculations, the lower bound of thresholds σ min th is fixed to σ min th = 1, while the amount of disorder is controlled by varying the power law exponent μ and the upper bound σ max th of thresholds. The value of σ max th covers the range σ min th ≤ σ max th ≤ +∞, while the disorder exponent is varied in the interval 0 ≤ μ < 1. For this choice of μ, in the limiting case of an infinite upper bound σ max th → ∞ the thresholds do not have a finite average, hence, varying the two parameters μ and σ max th the amount of disorder can be tunned in the bundle between the extrems of zero and infinity. Of course, at finite cutoffs σ max th , the average fiber strength σ th is always finite, however, the specific values of σ max th and μ have a very strong effect on the behavior of the system both on the macro-and micro-scales. The cumulative distribution P (σ th ) can be obtained from the normalized density as After fiber failure, we assume that the excess load of broken fibers is equally redistributed over the remaining intact ones. Hence, the constitutive equation σ(ε) of the bundle can be obtained from the general form σ(ε) = Eε[1 -P (Eε)] by substituting the distribution function P (x) from Eq. ( For brevity, we introduce the notation ε min = σ min th /E, ε max = σ max th /E, with E = 1, for the lower and upper Approaching the phase boundary, in both cases the system becomes more and more brittle, i.e. the maximum of σ(ε) is preceded by a smaller and smaller amount of fiber breakings. For comparison, the curve corresponding to the case of an infinite upper cutoff εmax → ∞ is also presented. bounds of strength in terms of strain. The stress-strain relation of the bundle is illustrated in Fig. and Recently, we have shown that if the threshold distribution Eq. ( The results imply that at a given value of the exponent μ in the parameter regime ε max > ε c max a quasi-brittle response is obtained where macroscopic failure is preceded by breaking avalanches. The phase boundary separating the brittle and quasi-brittle behaviours of the system is given by the relation Eq. Recently, we have demonstrated that the fat tailed microscale disorder gives rise to an anomalous size scaling of the macroscopic strength of the bundle The usual decreasing behaviour of strength We could explain this interesting effect based on the extrem order statistics of the strength of single fibers, i.e. Phase diagram of the system. The phase boundary separating the brittle and quasi-brittle macroscopic response is given by Eq. ( we pointed out that the bundle strength increases until the strongest fiber dominates the ultimate failure of the system Inside the quasi-brittle phase, we analyse the fracture process of the bundle under quasi-static loading, which is realized by slowly increasing the external load to provoke the breaking of a single fiber at a time. For simplicity, we assume that the load of the broken fiber is equally redistributed over the intact ones which may trigger additional breakings, followed again by load redistribution. As a consequence of the repeated breaking and load redistribution steps, an avalanche emerges which stops when all the remaining intact fibers are sufficiently strong to keep the elevated load. Global failure occurs in the form of a catastrophic avalanche which destroys the entire system. The size ∆ of the avalanche is defined as the number of fibers breaking in the correlated trail. Inside the brittle phase (see Fig. To understand the behaviour of the burst sequence, it is instructive to calculate the average number a of fiber breakings triggered immediately by the failure of a single fiber at the strain ε The right hand side of the equation was obtained by substituting the PDF p Eq. ( while the critical point ε c converges to ε c = ε max /e (see also Fig. The statistics of breaking bursts can be characterized by the distribution p(∆) of their size ∆. The complete size distribution p(∆) can be obtained analytically by substituting a(ε) into the generic form where for the upper limit of integration x c we have to insert the strength of the bundle. Utilizing the approximation ∆! ≃ ∆ ∆ e -∆ √ 2π∆, in the limiting case of an infinite upper cutoff with a(ε) = μ the burst size distribution can be cast into a simple analytic form A power law of exponent τ = 3/2 is obtained followed by an exponential cutoff. Here, ∆ * denotes the characteristic burst size, which controls the cutoff of the distribution This result means that at an infinite upper cutoff of fiber strength ε max = +∞ the size distribution of bursts always follows a simple power law of a universal exponent τ = 3/2, where the value of the disorder exponent μ only controls the cutoff burst size ∆ * . Using the Taylor expansion of logarithm around 1, it can easily be shown that as μ → μ c = 1 the cutoff burst size has a power law divergence with a universal exponent ν = 2. Burst size distributions obtained by computer simulations of a bundle of size N = 10 6 fibres are presented in the inset of Fig. To characterize the statistics of breaking bursts at finite cutoff strength ε max , we determined the burst size distribution p(∆) for several parameter sets along two straight lines inside the quasi-brittle phase of the bundle (see Fig. For moderate amount of disorder, it has been shown for fiber bundles under equal load sharing conditions that the size distribution of avalanches has a power law functional form with a universal exponent τ = 5/2 where a ′ (ε c ) denotes the derivative of a(ε) at the breakdown point. To apply this generic result to our truncated fat tailed disorder distribution, we substitute Eqs. (4,9) which yields This expression is valid for exponents 0 < μ ≤ μ c (ε max ). It can be seen in Eq. ( with a universal exponent γ = 2. To test the validity of this prediction Eq. ( When the cutoff strength ε max is varied while keeping the disorder exponent μ fixed, the burst size distribution exhibits an even more complicated behaviour. For a fixed μ, we express the cutoff strength relative to the phase boundary using the parameter λ = ε max /ε c max , which takes values in the range λ > 1. Figure when approaching the phase boundary λ → 1. The value of the exponent γ is the same = 2 as in Eq. ( To test this idea we analyzed in detail the statistics of burst sizes in a bundle of size N = 10 7 at the disorder parameters μ = 0.8 and λ = 500 where both power law regimes are present. Figure In Ref. butions of fiber strength, the number of fibers N has a substantial effect on the ultimate failure strength of the bundle: for small system sizes the strongest fiber controls the macroscopic failure, consequently the average bundle strength increases with the system size N described by Eq. The reason of this astonishing dependence of the statistics of avalanches on the size of the system is that for small system sizes, even for finite cutoff strength of fibers, global failure occurs when the strongest fiber breaks. Consequently, the entire sequence of bursts is close to stationary and their statistics is practically the same as for the infinite cutoff. The existence of a finite critical point ε c is only realized when the system size N exceeds a characteristic value N c . For bundles with N > N c global failure is preceded by an acceleration of the fail-ure process with increasing burst sizes. In this regime macroscopic failure occurs in the form of a catastrophic avalanche, however, the catastrophic event is completely absent for N < N c . In order to quantify this crossover of the avalanche statistics with respect to the size of the system N , we determined the average size of the catastrophic avalanche ∆ c as a function of the size of the bundle N varying the upper cutoff of fibers' strength λ in a broad range. The size of the catastrophic avalanche can be estimated as so that if a well defined critical bundle strength ε c exists, a linear dependence is obtained on the system size ∆ c ∼ N . Figure This characteristic value N c is of course the same as the one which controls the size scaling of the ultimate strength of the bundle Eq. ( The degree of materials disorder has a substantial effect on the fracture of heterogeneous materials both on the micro-and macro-scales. When subject to a slowly increasing external load, fracture proceeds in bursts which can be considered as precursors of global failure. Failure forecast methods of the imminent catastrophic failure strongly rely on the bursting dynamics In this paper we investigated the effect of the amount of disorder on the microscopic dynamics of the fracture process of heterogeneous materials in the framework of a fiber bundle model focusing on the limit of very high disorder. We considered a power law distribution of fibers' strength where the degree of disorder could be controlled by tuning the power law exponent and the upper cutoff of breaking thresholds. Assuming equal load sharing after local breakings, we showed that on the macro-scale the mechanical response of the bundle is either perfectly brittle where the bundle abruptly fails right at the breaking of the first fibre, or it is quasi-brittle where macroscopic failure is approached through a sequence of breaking bursts.The evolution of the crackling event series and the statistics of burst sizes have a high importance for the forecasting of the imminent failure of the bundle. We showed that for an infinite upper cutoff of fibers' strength, the sequence of bursts is stationary in the sense that the average burst size is constant. Hence, the system does not exhibit any sign of acceleration towards failure. Consequently, a power law burst size distribution is obtained, where the disorder exponent only controls the cutoff burst size. For finite upper cutoffs we showed that there exists a well-defined critical point of global failure, however, it can only be realized in sufficiently large systems. In small systems the global strength of the bundle is controlled by the strongest fiber. This peculiar behaviour gives rise to an astonishing dependence of the statistics of burst sizes on the size of the system: for small systems the burst sequence proved to be close to stationary, and hence, the burst size distribution coincides with the one corresponding to the infinite upper cutoff of fibers' strength. For large systems the initially stationary sequence is followed by an accelerating regime in the close vicinity of the critical point, which gives rise to a crossover between two power laws of the burst size distribution. Analysing the dependence of the average size of the catastrophic burst on the size of the bundle, we pointed out that the transition between the two types of burst size distributions occurs at a characteristic system size which depends on the disorder parameters of the bundle. The results can have relevance for the design of laboratory experiments: when the micro-scale materials disorder has a rapidly (exponentially) decaying distribution, the sample size mainly affects the cutoff of the size distribution of bursts but not its functional form. However, for fat tailed disorder the sample size has a strong effect on the functional form of the burst size distribution so that the size of specimens in laboratory tests has to be sufficiently large to reproduce the acceleration of the burst sequence towards failure obtained in field measurements. We also demonstrated that for a moderate amount of disorder, i.e. varying the disorder parameters in the vicinity of the phase boundary between the brittle and quasibrittle phases, a crossover occurs between two power laws of exponents 3/2 and 5/2. The reason is that bursts are generated in a narrow strain interval close to the critical point of macroscopic failure. In this case the crossover burst size was found to have a power law divergence as the phase boundary is approached. Our results set important limitations on the forecastability of the imminent failure In the present study we focused mainly on the integrated statistics of burst sizes considering all events up to failure. The quantitative characterization of the evolution of the event series towards failure requires further careful analysis which is in progress.