Based on the matrix product states method, we investigate numerically the ground state properties of one-dimensional mixtures of repulsive bosons and spin-imbalanced attractive fermions, the latter being in the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state, where Cooper pairs condense at a finite momentum k = kF F LO . We find that the visibility of such a state is dramatically enhanced as the repulsive Bose-Fermi mixture is brought close to the phase-separation point. In particular, large amplitude self-induced oscillations with wave-vector 2kF F LO appear in both the fermion total density and the boson density profiles, leaving sharp fingerprints in the corresponding static structure factors. We show that these features remain well visible in cold atoms systems trapped longitudinally by a smooth flat-bottom potential. Hence bosons can be used to directly reveal the modulated Fermi superfluid in experiments. According to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity, electrons with opposite spin bind into bosonic pairs, which then condense in the state of zero center-of-mass momentum, leading to macroscopic phase coherence and vanishing electrical resistance. An intriguing question is the possible coexistence of superconductivity with a spin imbalance, which destabilizes the BCS mechanism. Several exotic superfluid states have been proposed theoretically, including the breached pair or Sarma state The FFLO state is characterized by the condensation of Cooper pairs at finite momentum k F F LO , corresponding in real space to a spatially modulated order parameter. As a consequence, excess fermions, which are detrimental to superconductivity, are stored preferentially at the nodes of the pairing field, leading to an oscillation in the spin density with wave-vector 2k F F LO (corresponding to two nodes per wavelength). The FFLO state is currently being investigated in a variety of physical systems, including layered organic Spin-imbalanced atomic Fermi gases While the predicted two-shell structure of the density profiles was soon confirmed Atomic Bose-Fermi mixtures provide a natural playground for several quantum phenomena In this work we suggest that bosons can instead be used as a sensitive probe of the exotic superfluid, once the repulsive Bose-Fermi mixture is brought sufficiently close to the phase-separation point. Specifically, we find that robust self-induced density modulations with wave-vector 2k F F LO suddenly appear both in the boson and in the fermion total density profiles, leading to sharp kinks in the corresponding static structure factors (much sharper than the original kink in the magnetic response). The new phenomenon is completely general and can be observed experimentally with ultracold atoms confined in smooth flat-bottom traps. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the microscopic model for the Bose-Fermi mixture and the numerical method used to study it. In Section III we verify that the ground state of the spin imbalanced Fermi gas remains FFLO-like, even in the presence of bosons. Section IV describes the main result of our paper, namely the boson-induced enhancement of FFLO visibility near phase separation. In Section V we proove that the observed phenomenon persists also when the mixture is confined in a smooth flat-bottom trap. Section VI shows that for attractive Bose-Fermi interaction the effect is barely visible, pointing out the limitations of previous perturbative models for the mixture. Finally, Section VII provides a summary and an outlook. We describe a homogeneous Bose-Fermi mixture by the following lattice Hamiltonian: where the first two terms represent the Fermi Hubbard model, c † iσ being the local creation operators for fermions with spin component σ =↑, ↓, t f is their tunneling rate and U f (U f < 0) is the strength of the attractive interaction between fermions with opposite spin. The third and fourth terms yield the Bose-Hubbard model, where b † i is the bosonic creation operator at site i, while t b and U b (U b > 0) are the corresponding tunneling rate and the onsite repulsion strength. Bosons and fermions are coupled by repulsive contact interactions of strength U bf (U bf > 0), as described by the last term in the rhs of Eq.( Our numerical results are based on the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) method, expressed in terms of Matrix Product States (MPS) (for a review see Ref. We first show that the nature of the ground state of the spin-imbalanced Fermi gas remains FFLO-like even in the presence of bosons, as long as the homogeneous mixture remains stable. To this purpose, we define the pair momentum distribution (PMD) as where is the superconducting correlation function in the singlet channel. Figure where k F ↑ = πN ↑ /L and k F ↓ = πN ↓ /L are the Fermi momenta of the majority and minority spin components. We see from Fig. We have verified numerically that this behavior is not intrinsic to the FFLO state, as it also occurs for equal spin populations, N ↑ = N ↓ . The PMD could be measured by projecting the Cooper pairs into deep molecular states and performing time-of-flight experiments In coordinates space, the FFLO state appears as a selfgenerated spatial modulation of the superconducting correlation function, Eq.( Let us now investigate the much more interesting effects of the Bose-Fermi repulsion on the density profiles of the two species. With the spectacular recent advances in quantum gas microscopy We see in Fig. The situation for U bf = 3.4 is completely different. As displayed in Fig. We also see in Fig. Since we expect that the density modulations displayed in Fig. Let us now clarify under which conditions the FFLO nodal structure is imprinted on the density distributions of the two species. While the FFLO modulation in the spin density profile appears progressively as the bosonfermion repulsion becomes stronger, the corresponding effect in the total fermion density and in the boson density profiles appear only when the system is close enough to the phase separation point. This key fact is illustrated in Fig. We have verified numerically that the FFLO imprinting observed in Fig. The static structure factors of the density distributions of bosons ans fermions can be accessed experimentally in cold atoms samples via Bragg scattering where for fermions we distinguish between the spin response, corresponding to the operator O = m = n ↑ -n ↓ , and the total density response, where O = n = n ↑ + n ↓ . Fig. For U bf = 0 we see that both S f m and S f n exhibit similar shapes with kinks at k = 2k F ↓ and k = 2k F ↑ (dashed lines). This can be understood by noticing that in a noninteracting Fermi gas the two static structure factors coincide, S m = S n , and are given by The inclusion of a moderate attraction between fermions slightly smears the two kinks and decreases (increases) the overall scale of the magnetic (total density) structure factor, as indicated by the green curves in the panels (a) and (b). In contrast, the density response of the Bose gas is smooth and increases monotonously as the momentum increases, as shown by the panel(c) of the same figure. As U bf increases, we see that a kink progressively stands out in the spin response at k = 2k F F LO , signaling the FFLO state. At the same time both the total density and the boson density responses become approximately flat for k > 2k F ↓ . By further approaching the immiscibility point, these two quantities develop a sharp kink at k = 2k F F LO , as shown in Fig. So far we have considered homogeneous mixtures confined in a box with open boundary condition. The effects of a smooth trapping potential acting on bosons and fermions can be taken into account through the generalized Hamiltonian where V and p are positive numbers. Since the FFLO wave-vector is fixed by the value of the local spin density, the latter should stay approximately constant over a wide region of the trap for the corresponding density modulations to be observable. Hence a confinement sharper than harmonic, p > 2, is generally required. Flat-bottom potentials for ultracold atoms can be realized optically, by using a digital micro-mirror device (DMD); for instance p 16 in the experiment of Ref. In Fig. In Fig. FIG. It is worth emphasizing that our mechanism of bosonenhanced FFLO visibility cannot be described using perturbative models of the mixture which are only valid for weak boson-fermion repulsion, far from the phase separation limit. For instance in several mean field studies identical effects for positive and negative values of U bf . This fact, however, is in stark contrast with our numerical findings for attractive Bose-Fermi mixtures, shown in Fig. Interestingly, a zoom to the data of Fig. In summary, we have investigated the ground state properties of a 1D FFLO state coupled to a Bose superfluid through strong repulsive interactions. While bosons do not affect the energetic stability of the FFLO phase (as long as the mixture remains homogeneous), large amplitude modulations with wave-vector 2k F F LO appear in the density profiles of the two species, as the mixture is close enough to the immiscibility point. The same nodal structure is also imprinted in the density correlations, resulting in sharp kinks in the corresponding static structure factors. Our theoretical results show that the coupling with bosons offers a surprising direct path to experimentally observe the elusive Fermi superfluid using ultracold atoms in smooth one dimensional flat-bottom traps. The mixture can be brought close to the phase-separation point by tuning one of the three interaction strengths. Importantly, the combined use of the full microscopic model together with accurate (DMRG) numerics turned out to be essential to unveil the novel effect. While the density modulations in Fig. APPENDIX A Fourier analysis. Further insights into the behavior of the mixture can be obtained through a Fourier analysis of the density profiles of bosons and fermions plotted in Fig. For each type of profiles (spin density, fermion total density and boson density) we proceed as follows. Let x i denotes the i-th element of the truncated data set. To avoid uninteresting peaks in the Fourier spectrum we first normalize our data by setting y i = (x i -μ)/σ, where denote, respectively, the mean and the variance of the data. The corresponding Fourier coefficients are defined as Next, we repeat the same Fourier analysis for the data in Fig. We emphasize that the outcomes of the above Fourier analysis of the density profiles are fully consistent with the results for the corresponding static structure factors (SSF) presented in Fig. Finite-size analysis of SSF. In Fig. In Fig. Robustness of the observed effect. The boson-induced enhancement of the FFLO visibility is a very general phenomenon, which applies for any set of values of the model parameters such that the Bose-Fermi mixture is close enough to the phase separation limit. In Fig. As compared to the case U f = -2 shown in Fig. For U bf = 2.8 (panel b), close to the instability point, the FFLO order is finally imprinted on the density profiles of both species. Notice in particular that the sizes of the oscillations amplitudes are fairly similar to those shown in Fig. Fairly similar results can be obtained by varying the boson-boson interaction. In this case diminishing U b shifts the phase separation point towards weaker bosonfermion repulsions.