Because of the reduced dielectric screening and enhanced Coulomb interactions, two-dimensional (2D) materials like phosphorene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit strong excitonic effects, resulting in fascinating many-particle phenomena covering both intralayer and interlayer excitons. Their intrinsic bandgaps and strong excitonic emissions allow the possibility to tune the inherent optical, electrical, and optoelectronic properties of 2D materials via a variety of external stimuli, making them potential candidates for novel optoelectronic applications. In this review, we summarize exciton physics and devices in 2D semiconductors and insulators, especially in phosphorene, TMDs, and their van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs). In the first part, we discuss the remarkably versatile excitonic landscape, including bright and dark excitons, trions, biexcitons, and interlayer excitons. In the second part, we examine common control methods to tune excitonic effects via electrical, magnetic, optical, and mechanical means. In the next stage, we provide recent advances on the optoelectronic device applications, such as electroluminescent devices, photovoltaic solar cells, and photodetectors. We conclude with a brief discussion on their potential to exploit vdWHs towards unique exciton physics and devices. Since the first 'modern' 2D material, monolayer graphene, was mechanically exfoliated in 2004 Whereas these materials are marvelous per se, the more astounding discovery is that these 2D crystals can be combined freely to create layered compounds, paving a way for design of new functional materials and nano-devices Because of the charge confinement and reduced dielectric screening, the optical properties of semiconducting 2D materials are dominated by excitonic effects In this chapter, we provide a topical summary toward recent frontier research progress related to excitons in atomically thin 2D materials and vdWHs. To begin with, we clarify the different types of excitons in 2D materials, including bright and dark excitons, trions, biexcitons, and interlayer excitons. Moreover, we analyze the electronic structures and excitonic effects for two typical 2D materials (i.e., TMDs and phosphorene), as well as the excited-state dynamics in vdWHs. Furthermore, we address how external stimuli, such applied electric fields, strain, magnetic fields, and light, modulate the excitonic behavior and emission in 2D materials. Afterward, we introduce several representative optoelectronic and photonic applications based on excitonic effects of 2D materials. Finally, we give our personal insights into the challenges and outlooks in this field. When the dimension of crystals converts from 3D to 2D, the electronic Coulomb screening is dramatically reduced out of quantum confinement. As a consequence, dielectric constant ε can fall to ε=1 from ε≫1 in conventional bulk materials Excitons are hydrogen-like bound states of a negatively charged electron and a positively charged hole which are attracted to each other by the electrostatic Coulomb force Excitons can be bright or dark subject to the spin orientation of the individual carriers: the electron and the hole, as shown in Figure Because of the significant Coulomb interactions in 2D materials, exciton can capture an additional charge to form charged exciton known as trion, a localized excitation consisting of three charged quasiparticles (Figure Biexcitons, also known as exciton molecules, are created from two free excitons. Biexciton configurations can be distinguished from unbound or bound biexciton cases (Figure In addition to above-mentioned intralayer excitons, interlayer excitons, where the involved electrons and holes are located in different layers, can also form in bilayer or few-layer 2D materials especially in vdWHs because of the strong Coulomb interaction (Figure Among 2D semiconductors and insulators, TMDs and phosphorene have drawn tremendous attention owing to their intrinsic bandgaps and strong excitonic emissions, making them potential candidates for high-performance optoelectronic applications in the visible to near-infrared regime All TMDs have a hexagonal structure, with each monolayer consisting of the metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogenide layers (X-M-X). The two most common crystal structures are the semiconducting 2H-phase with trigonal symmetry (e.g., MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, WSe2, as shown in Figure As shown in figure To have an impact on excitonic effects and relevant applications, the binding energy of these quasiparticles must be clarified. As schematically illustrated in Figure Composed of stacks of atomically thin 2D materials, the properties of vdWHs are determined not only by the constituent monolayers but also by the layer interactions. In particular, the excited-state dynamics is unique, such as the formation of interlayer excitons After demonstrating the appearance of interlayer excitons in PL spectra, the research on exciton dynamics in vdWHs flourishes. The discovery of intralayer excitons in 2D materials can be traced back to 2015, when long-lived interlayer excitons were demonstrated in monolayer MoSe2/Wse2 heterostructures, where a pronounced additional resonance was observed at an energy below the intralayer excitons Empirically, charge transfer between layers of vertically stacking vdWHs is supposed to be much slow. However, transient absorption measurements, which are implemented by resonantly injecting excitons using ultrafast laser pulse, show a sub-picosecond charge separation in vdWHs: the holes injected in MoS2 takes 200 fs transferring to MoSe2 and even only 50 fs transferring to WS2, as shown in Figure 7b In contrast to the ultrafast charge transfer dynamics in vdWHs (<1ps), spin and valley relaxation dynamics take place on considerably longer timescale Since 2019, important breakthroughs about excitons in vdWHs has been obtained, especially three independent research simultaneously reporting the observation of moiré excitons in TMDs vdWHs, which lays a firm foundation to the engineering artificial excitonic crystals using vdWHs for nanophotonics and quantum information applications To have an impact on industrial applications especially photovoltaics, the binding energies of excitons in 2D semiconductors and insulators must be delicately designed and tuned. More importantly, these common control measures, from electrical to optical methods, function more potently in 2D materials than in 3D materials. Since the electric field can hardly modulate the dielectric constant in monolayer 2D materials The above-mentioned works are related to monolayer 2D materials, while when it comes to heterostructures, the electrical tuning functions more efficiently TMDs have drawn more attention with respect to magnetic tuning than other 2D materials, since they preserve time-reversal symmetry with excitons formed at K and K ′ points at the boundary of the Brillouin zone, which restricts valley polarization. However, when imposing magnetic fields, time-reversal symmetry can be broken, which splits the degeneracy between the nominally time-reversed pairs of exciton optical transitions at K and K′ valley: this is the valley Zeeman effect, as shown in Figure In addition, magnetic fields, which changes the surrounding dielectric environment, can also have an impact on the size and binding energy of excitons. By encapsulating the flakes with different materials on a monolayer WSe2, Stier et al. changed the average dielectric constant, k=(εt+εb)/2, ranging from 1.55 to 3.0 (Figure To control excitonic effects by breaking time-reversal symmetry in TMDs, imposing an intense circularly polarized light can also achieve the aim based on optical Stark effect, a phenomenon that photon-dressed states (Floquet states) can hybridize with the equilibrium states resulting in energy repulsion between the two states Besides, optical control and manipulation have been shown effective towards valley polaritons, a half-light half-matter quasiparticles arising from hybridization of an exciton mode and a cavity mode. Owing to the large exciton binding energy and oscillator strength in TMDs, spin-valley coupling can persist at room temperature when excitons are coherently coupled to cavity photons, leading to a stable exciton-polariton formation 2D materials possess excellent mechanical flexibility, making them stable under high compressive, tensile, and bending strain Another mechanical tuning method is by implying heterogeneous strain on 2D materials, which would result in a spatially varying bandgap with tunable exciton binding energy distribution, namely funnel effect 2D materials possess strong light-matter coupling and direct band gaps from visible to infrared spectral regimes with strong excitonic resonances and large optical oscillation strength. Recent observation of valley polarization, excitonpolaritons, optically pumped lasing, exciton-polaritons, and single-photon emission highlights the potential for 2D materials for applications in novel optoelectronic devices. Combined with external stimuli, like electrical and magnetic fields, optical pumps, and strain, exciton effects in 2D materials show a highly tunability and flexibility in electroluminescent devices, photovoltaic solar cells, and photodetectors. Excitonic electroluminescence (EL) emission in 2D materials is key to fully exploiting the EL devices As exciton emission induced by bipolar carrier injection, p-n heterojunction is the simplest device to achieving EL. Depending on the contacting way the two monolayers connect, it can be vertical or lateral. Typical p-n junction is MS2/MSe2 heterostructure, since their counterparts lack the caliber to function effectively Quantum well (QW) heterostructures consist of semiconductor layer sandwiched between insulator layers and metal electrodes. EL in QW heterostructures can be observed by bipolar recombination of injected electrons and holes in the semiconductor layer when applied a bias in the metal electrodes. Since the long lifetime of carriers and enhanced exciton formation in the semiconductor layer (typical one is TMDs), the emission efficiency of multiple QW devices is much higher than that of single QW devices, and can be improved by preparing alternating layers of TMDs Unipolar injection happens in a metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) or a semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor (SIS) heterostructures when a positive bias applied to the metal and semiconductor layers. The common insulator layer is hBN since its ability to transport holes but block electrons. If the bias is increased above a threshold, EL will be observed at extremely low current densities below 1 nA μm -2 , attributed to the unipolar tunneling across the hBN layer, which transfers holes from one metal/semiconductor layer (e.g., graphene and TMDs) to another electron-rich semiconductor layer (e.g., TMDs) The remaining three emission mechanism is relatively simple. For impact excitation devices, excitons are generated by impact excitation of excitons in the high field regime rather than bipolar recombination. For thermal emission devices, a semiconductor monolayer or few layers are partly suspended on a substrate, and thermal excitation and emission are evoked by locally heating the high current density regime. For bilayer emission devices, emission occurs due to the recombination of electrons and holes residing in the adjacent layers. 2D materials possess large exciton binding energy with the bandgap ranging from visible to near-infrared part of the spectrum, making them attractive as candidates for photovoltaic solar cells Compared with free-standing monolayer with merely 10% absorption Photodetection is a process converting light signals to electric signals, consisting of three physical mechanisms: light harvesting, exciton separation, and charge carrier transport to respective electrodes. According to the operation modes, photodetectors can be divided into two categories: photoconduction (i.e., photoconductor) and photocurrent (i.e., photodiode) Two common 2D materials used for photodetectors are graphene For graphene-based photoconductors, typical devices are hybrid, adding a light absorption material, such as quantum dots For TMD photodetectors, devices can have in-plane or out-of-plane structures, based on the semiconductor layers stacking laterally or vertically. In-plane devices take advantage of better control of the material's properties via electrostatic gating In summary, 2D materials exhibit excitonic effects due to spatial confinement and reduced screening at the 2D limit, resulting in fascinating many-particle phenomena, such as excitons, trions, biexcitons, and interlayer excitons. Enhanced binding energies owing to the strong Coulomb interaction makes these quasiparticles easy to characterize and control. In addition, the sensitivity of these quasiparticles to a variety of external stimuli allows the possibility of modulating the inherent optical, electrical, and optoelectronic properties of 2D materials, making them potential candidates for novel optoelectronic applications. In addition to well-studied 2D materials, such as graphene, phosphorene, and TMDs, the family of 2D crystals is continuously growing, making excitonic effects versatile in different 2D systems. In particular, assembling vdWHs, which now can be mechanically assembled or grown by ample methods, can open up a new route for exploring unique exciton physics and applications. For example, an in-plane moiré superlattice, formed by vertically stacking two monolayer semiconductors mismatching or rotationally misaligning, can modulate the electronic band structure and thus lead to electronic phenomena, such as fractal quantum Hall effect, unconventional superconductivity, and tunable Mott insulators. 