Stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) offers among the highest nonlinear gains in solid materials and has demonstrated advanced photonics functionalities in waveguides. The large compressibility of gases suggests that SBS may gain in efficiency with respect to condensed materials. Here, by using a gas-filled hollow-core fibre at high pressure, we achieve a strong Brillouin amplification per unit length, exceeding by 6 times the gain observed in fibres with a solid silica core. This large amplification benefits from a higher molecular density and a lower acoustic attenuation at higher pressure, combined with a tight light confinement. Using this approach, we demonstrate the capability to perform large optical amplifications in hollow-core waveguides. The implementations of a lowthreshold gas Brillouin fibre laser and a high-performance distributed temperature sensor, intrinsically free of strain cross-sensitivity, illustrate the large perspectives for hollow-core fibres, paving the way to their integration into lasing, sensing and signal processing. Stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) is a third-order optical nonlinear effect that manifests itself in a coherent light-sound coupling Gas turns out to be an attractive medium for nonlinear optics because, unlike condensed matter, it is not subject to optical damage at high intensities (with the notable exception of photochemical dissociation for some molecular gases). It shows a pressure-dependent nonlinearity and group-velocity dispersion, as well as a potentially wider transparency window from the vacuum ultraviolet to the mid-infrared region So far, backward SBS in gases has been exclusively observed using free space interactions Hollow-core fibres (HCFs) including hollow-core photonic bandgap fibres, Kagome-style hollow-core fibres and single-ring antiresonant fibres, show low-loss and diffraction-less optical transmission (state of the art loss: 0.65 dB/km In free space, a Gaussian beam converging to a spot of diameter 2a results in a nonlinear gain proportional to L eff /πa 2 , where L eff is the effective interaction length. L eff is given by twice the Rayleigh length z R = πa 2 /λ, where λ is the laser wavelength in vacuum. As a consequence, the nonlinear gain in bulk gases is proportional to 2z R /πa 2 = 2/λ, irrespective of the beam convergence. On the other hand, in gas-filled HCFs, L eff is solely function of the fibre length and attenuation and can actually reach a few hundred metres. Additionally, the mode field diameter is typically ∼ 10 μm, so that the nonlinear gain in gas-filled HCFs may turn six orders of magnitude larger than in unconfined gases (i.e. in free space) in the near-infrared region. Incidentally, the threshold for nonlinear effects, such as stimulated Raman scattering It has to be nevertheless mentioned that an optoacoustic interaction, in this case forward SBS, has been recently demonstrated in HCF filled with air at atmospheric pressure Here, we report a considerable optical amplification by using backward SBS in a gas-filled HCF. We achieve 0.32 dB of signal amplification per mW of pump power inside a 50 m long HCF filled with carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) at a pressure of 41 bar. This large gain results from two causes: firstly, the peak Brillouin gain coefficient shows a quadratic dependence on the gas pressure, in contrast with stimulated Raman scattering Kerr nonlinearity Stimulated Brillouin scattering in a gas-filled HCF is a process in which a pump and probe optical waves with a slightly different frequency counter-propagate along a HCF and their interference produces a longitudinally moving fringe pattern. When a strict phase matching condition is met, dictated by the relative velocities of light and sound in the medium, the fringe pattern gives rise, via electrostriction, to a travelling longitudinal acoustic wave in the gas, as illustrated in Fig. During the SBS interaction, the probe wave is amplified with a peak gain given by where γ e is the electrostrictive constant in the gas medium, ω is the light angular frequency, ρ is the gas density, n is the gas refractive index, c is the light velocity in vacuum, Γ B /2π is the gain spectrum linewidth (full width at half maximum (FWHM)), directly related to the acoustic attenuation, and A ao eff is the acoustooptic overlap effective area, as defined and calculated in Supplementary Section S4. Figures The acoustic velocity is given by v a = 1/ √ β s • ρ , independent of pressure for an ideal gas, where β s is the adiabatic compressibility. As the compressibility coefficient of gases (e.g. at 40 bar) is four orders of magnitude larger than that of solid materials (e.g. fused silica) and the density of gases (at 40 bar) is some 30 times smaller than that of a condensed material, the acoustic velocity is about 20 times smaller. This leads to a 20-fold increase in gain, as shown by Eq. ( We shall now discuss the two key-parameters contributing to the quadratic dependence of the Brillouin gain on gas pressure: the electrostrictive constant, γ e , and the acoustic attenuation coefficient, Γ B . The electrostrictive constant is defined as the normalised rate of change of the relative permittivity r in response to a change in the density ρ where χ is the electric susceptibility. At the pressure ranges considered in this manuscript, the electric susceptibility of CO 2 shows a linear dependence on density: χ = Aρ, where A ≈ 5×10 -4 m 3 /kg for CO 2 . As a result, the electrostrictive constant: is directly proportional to the density, hence to the pressure in the ideal gas approximation. The acoustic attenuation of a sound wave in CO 2 at megahertz frequencies arises mainly from two dissipative phenomena: viscous forces and thermal conductivity Within the ideal gas model, it can be shown that the temperature oscillations of the acoustic wave are given by where T 0 is the average ambient temperature and γ is the adiabatic index, namely the ratio of specific heats at constant pressure and volume, respectively. Thus, for an intensity kept constant, both gas velocity and temperature periodic variations (and hence, their gradient) decrease for an increasing density ρ. As a consequence, both thermal diffusion and viscosity forces are in proportion equally reduced. It can be more formally shown that the dissipated energy caused by each process is proportional to u 2 0 and the acoustic attenuation coefficient is therefore proportional to 1/ρ, expressed as where η s and η b are the shear and bulk viscosity respectively, κ is the thermal conductivity and C P is the specific heat at constant pressure. Inserting Eqs. (3) and (6) into Eq. ( The CO 2 Brillouin gain at atmospheric pressure is about 10 -13 m/W. In order to measure such a small gain, a lock-in detection technique has been the preferred approach to separate the gain signal from the background noise and spurious signals. and Eq. ( Figure linewidths match very well with the theoretical model given by Eqs. ( The evident primary application taking advantage of this large gain value is to raise the challenge of optical amplification within a HCF. To this end, we measure the amplification of a -34 dBm input probe beam as a function of pump power. The injected probe power is more than 40 dB smaller than the pump power, hence satisfying the small-signal amplification condition (i.e. absence of pump depletion) at least up to 30 dB amplification. The detailed set-up is shown in Supplementary Section S2. By scanning the pump-signal detuning frequency, the measured amplification spectra for different pump powers are shown in Fig. A straightforward estimation shows that the amplification coefficient could be enhanced up to 1.2 dB/mW by extending the effective length to 160 m using the same 41-bar CO 2 -filled hollow-core photonic bandgap fibre (∼ 10 μm core diameter). This estimation takes into account the 26 dB/km optical loss (16 dB/km of fibre loss and 10 dB/km of molecular absorption loss in 41bar CO 2 ). The pros and cons of this Brillouin amplification in gas do not fundamentally differ from those extensively reported in silica-core fibres This platform can be straightforwardly turned into a gas Brillouin laser by looping the 50 m long gas-filled HCF, so as to form a fibre ring cavity. Inset: zoomed-in view of the lasing spectrum. For comparison, the heterodyne beating spectrum of the amplified spontaneous Brillouin-scattered Stokes light is also shown (highly magnified), obtained using a single-pass set-up (opened cavity) when the pump power is 12 mW inside the HCF. The lasing beating linewidth (66 kHz) is much narrower than the spontaneous spectrum linewidth (3.66 MHz), though certainly not representing the real much narrower laser linewidth. one revolution, is stopped by that same circulator. Since the pump is not circulating in the cavity, it must not be stringently resonant. In contrast, the Brillouin-amplified light freely circulates in the ring cavity. The total cavity length is 55 m, made of the 50-m HCF connected to 5 m of diverse SMF patchcords (circulator and coupler pigtails), so that the free spectral range of the cavity is 5 MHz, roughly equivalent to the Brillouin gain linewidth of CO 2 at 41 bar. Figure Figure Temperature/strain cross-sensitivity is currently a crucial issue in all Brillouin-based sensing systems, because the acoustic velocity in a solid is indistinctly sensitive to both these quantities that will identically impact the Brillouin frequency shift. Many methods were proposed to solve this issue by measuring two parameters showing distinct responses to temperature and strain Here, we demonstrate an intrinsically strain-insensitive system based on SBS in gas-filled HCFs. In our system, optical signals keep confined into a gaseous medium, so that this configuration offers unique properties absent in solid waveguides. The absence of plasticity and stiffness of the gaseous medium leads to an insensitivity to any strain applied to its surrounding walls. Here, we take advantage of this specific properties, combined with the large Brillouin gain and its narrow linewidth to perform high performance strain-insensitive temperature measurements. We used the same 50 m long HCF filled with 41bar CO 2 and set up a phase-modulated Brillouin optical correlation-domain analysis system Our sensing system is depicted in Fig. Figure Figures The large light-sound interaction in a gas-filled HCF reported here leads to a measured gain nearly six orders of magnitude larger than in previous works using free-space optics. In a pure fibre perspective, the increased compressibility of gases and their lower acoustic attenuation with respect to solid materials result in a measured Brillouin gain in our 41-bar CO 2 gas-filled HCF that turns 6 times larger than in standard SMF. The issue of optical amplification in HCFs has already given rise to sustained efforts. Interesting results have been reported, mostly using molecular/atomic transitions in a low-pressure gas Gas Brillouin lasing has not yet been reported due to the extremely low scattering efficiency in free-space implementations. Using gas-filled HCF, we have demonstrated the first continuous-wave gas Brillouin laser with only 33 mW of threshold power, despite the high cavity roundtrip loss. The lasing threshold can be further decreased by dynamically matching the cavity resonance to the pump frequency in a doubly resonant configuration (both pump and Stokes are resonant). In addition, by changing the gas pressure, we evidenced that we can not only scale the gain but also modify the acoustic lifetime, which turns out to be a very important feature for building gas Brillouin photon or phonon lasers In a different perspective, we also demonstrated a highperformance distributed temperature sensor showing spatial and temperature resolutions of 1.28 cm and 0.3 • C, respectively. Note that, since we used a correlationdomain technique, the 10 times narrower linewidth (i.e. longer acoustic lifetime) compared to silica core SMF has no impact on the spatial resolution, but much improves the temperature resolution The natural question arises as to how the nature of the gas influences the Brillouin gain. From our theoretical analysis it comes up straightforwardly that the gain depends quadratically on the gas density, so that heavier molecules are expected to present a larger amplification potential. We observed SBS in a HCF filled with different types of gas, namely carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ), nitrogen (N 2 ) and methane (CH 4 ). The Brillouin gain spectra for these four gases under specific pressures are plotted in Fig. In our experiments, the maximum pressure used for CO 2 is 41 bar, which is not a physical limitation of the HCF, since such fibres can easily sustain a pressure in the kilobar range by virtue of their small core diameter and thick glass sheath Our platform is also suitable for the investigation of light-sound interactions in gases close to their critical point or in the supercritical region, as well as for the study of the bulk viscosity at high frequency, which is, so far, poorly documented. It should be pointed out that the gas consumption in volume for a 50 m long HCF having its core and cladding filled with 1 kilobar gas is equivalent to only about 200 ml at atmospheric pressure, thanks to the microscopic size of the structure. In a more practical approach, the gas-filled HCF can be hermetically sealed by splicing both ends to standard SMFs, thereby making a perfectly airtight compact all-fibre gas cell Stimulated Brillouin scattering cannot be reduced to a mere amplification process, since it has demonstrated its potentialities to realise advanced functions Thanks to the similar core and cladding diameters of our HCF and a standard SMF, the HCF gas cell can be formed by placing a segment of HCF between two SMF patchcords according to the following procedure: (1) two ceramic fibre ferrules having an inner diameter of 125 μm were inserted into a ceramic sleeve, keeping a 30 μm gap between the two ferrule tips. The ceramic sleeve's side slot enables visual monitoring of the butt coupling at fabrication stage and gas inlet/outlet into/from the HCF under operation. (2) An angled-cleaved SMF and a cleaved end of the HCF were inserted into the fibre ferrules and the coupling of the HCF/SMF was monitored by a microscope through the side slot. HCF and SMF ends were brought closer to each other until they are separated by a few μm gap. The other end of the HCF was coupled according to the same procedure. The total end-to-end loss for the assembling SMF/HCF/SMF is 9 dB. (3) We inserted each joint into a metallic T-tube and sealed its two facing sides using epoxy glue. Gas can be vacuum-pumped out or pressurised into the HCF through the third port of the T-tubes. Simulations of the optical and acoustic modes are performed using COMSOL Multiphysics 2D "Electromagnetic Waves" and 2D "Pressure Acoustics" modules, respectively. The silica refractive index nSiO 2 =1.444 and the gas refractive index ngas=1.01804 (for 41 bar CO2) are entered into the calculation of the optical modes. The effective refractive index of the fundamental optical mode n eff is calculated to be 1.0123 at a wavelength of 1.55 μm. The fundamental mode profile (optical intensity) is plotted in Fig. When measuring the Brillouin gain in low-pressure gas, the peak gain is relatively low (e.g. in 1 bar CO 2 , it is about 10 -3 m -1 W -1 ). In this situation, the pump reflection at the SMF-HCF coupling interface, directly entering into the detector, is the source of fluctuations screening the gain to be measured. This reflection issue is resolved by introducing a dual intensity modulation at frequency f S /2 and f P /2 on the probe and pump beam, respectively. The modulators are Mach-Zehnder modulators and their bias is set to suppress the carrier. As a consequence, the probe and pump light intensities are modulated at a frequency f S and f P , respectively. Since stimulated Brillouin scattering is a non-linear process involving the product of pump and probe powers, sum and difference of frequencies are generated. After Brillouin interaction with the pump inside the gas-filled hollow-core fibre (HCF), the probe intensity is detected and band-pass filtered at a frequency f ∆ = f Sf P using a lock-in amplifier. Hence, the pump beam directly reaching the detector is filtered out in the radio frequency (RF) domain, since the detection is made at a frequency very distant from f P a . The experimental set-up is illustrated in Fig. Figure In this derivation, it is assumed that both intensity modulation frequencies f S and f P are much smaller than the Brillouin frequency shift ν B . Moreover, the frequency difference f Pf S is assumed to be much smaller than the Brillouin linewidth Γ B /2π. Then, the acoustic wave governing the interaction at frequency f ∆ can be approximated to be at steady-state. Furthermore, absence of pump depletion is assumed. In a However, the reflection still needs to remain limited as to not damage the photodetector in the case of a high pump power. Furthermore, the photodetector may show a slight nonlinearity. In that case, the presence of both pump and probe beams at the detector could lead to sum-frequency difference generation within the detector itself, generating a background noise that may cover the desired signal. In our case, angled-cleaved SMFs are used to sufficiently reduce the reflection. these conditions, the probe electric field along the HCF (z-axis), E s (z), in presence of stimulated Brillouin scattering, is governed by the following differential equation where g B is the peak Brillouin gain, as defined in Eq. ( is the probe (amplification) field lineshape, for which the pump-probe detuning frequency Ω/2π = ν SCAN -ν 0 , the Brillouin frequency shift ν B = Ω B /2π, and the Brillouin linewidth (full width at half maximum), ∆ν = Γ B /2π, are defined. The equation is converted in units of power by using , where A eff is the fibre effective area and η is the gas impedance: where 2 is the intensity lineshape. In order to solve Eq. ( Using these expressions for the original coordinates as a function of the new coordinates, we apply the chain rule and express: ( These expressions allow rewriting the partial differential equation, Eq. ( where the pump power P P is now expressed as a function of the new coordinates. Since the time derivative disappears, it is now easier to solve the equation. An expression for the the pump power generated by the Mach-Zehnder modulator, P P (z, t), is derived in section S8. Using this derivation and the fact that the modulator bias is in carrier-extinct configuration, P P can be expressed as: where P P 0 = PP 0 (1 -J 0 (2ς P )) is the time-averaged input pump power at the end of the HCF (z = L), Ω P = πf P and K P = -Ω P n g /c. We now transform this expression from (z, t) to the new coordinate frame, (z , t ). Given that the pump counter-propagates, K P < 0, and the expression becomes: which, to simplify subsequent integration, can also be expressed as: Replacing pump power expression ( Hence we obtain the general solution: where is the fibre's effective length and is a modulation-dependent unitless parameter. The input probe power can be expressed as: where Ω S = πf S is the modulation angular frequency, P S,0 = PS,0 (1 -J 0 (2ς S )) is the time-averaged input probe power at z = 0, Φ s contains both a phase shift between pump and probe modulations as well as the phase shift due to the probe propagation along the fibre. ς S is the probe modulation depth. Section S8 gives a detailed derivation of intensity-modulated signals using a Mach-Zehnder modulator, including the definition of the modulation depth, ς. Since this technique was developed for the measurement of small Brillouin gains, we can now apply the small-gain approximation. After applying this approximation, the obtained expression consists of: • A DC term. • A term oscillating at multiples of the probe frequency, f S . • A term oscillating at multiples of the pump frequency, f P . • A term oscillating at multiples of the difference between the pump and probe frequencies, f Sf P . As the detection is performed at the difference of the frequencies, only the last term is considered. The power in the small-gain approximation can then be written as: where P S,det = PS,det (1 -J 0 (2ς S )) is the time-averaged probe power at detection. Since the lock-in amplifier only responds to the frequency difference Ω ∆ = 2 (Ω S -Ω P ), only the terms n = ±2, m = ±2 are kept: The photoreceiver delivers a voltage equal to V det = ρ pd P det , where ρ pd is the power-to-voltage conversion factor. Then, in presence of a voltage signal of type A cos(Ωt) + B sin(Ωt), the lock-in detection outputs the magnitude √ A 2 + B 2 , which gives: The dependence of the set-up's response on the length and modulation frequency is given by the parameter: The parameter ζ n quantifies the interference effect occurring when the wavelength related to the modulation frequency f P becomes comparable or smaller than the effective length of the fibre. That is, when the following condition: Λ < L eff , where Λ = c/(n g f P ), is met, the system's response significantly decreases. On the contrary, when Λ L eff , the parameter ζ n ≈ 1. Note that the pump beam is also attenuated by the probe beam. As a result, a π-phase shifted signal, co-propagating with the pump beam and of same magnitude as the one described above, is also generated. If the reflection of the HCF is too large (> -20 dB), then the reflection of this signal will interfere significantly with the main signal and this can be no longer neglected. In our case, the angled-cleaved SMF and the HCF connector generate <-36 dB reflection. We can therefore neglect the contribution from the pump reflection. Finally, note that in the special case of a bias at the quadrature-point for the two modulators (as used for the distributed temperature experimental set-up, section S3), the result given by Eq. ( Here, we experimentally verify the set-up response provided by Eq. ( A 5-m-long standard ITU G.652 single-mode fibre was connected to the experimental set-up shown in Fig. In order to verify the robustness of the dual intensity method against reflections, a 52-cm-long small-solid core fibre (ultra-high NA fibre with 1.8 μm core diameter), with its both ends spliced to a single-mode fibre patchcords was used (i.e. replacing the gas-filled HCF with the small-core fibre in Fig. Here, we use Eq. ( Parameter Voltage attenuation factor due to the band-pass filter 0.827 V s,det Using these values along with Eqs ( By evaluating this equation using values for all parameters, we obtain g B = 1.68 m -1 W -1 for 41 bar CO 2 , which is in good agreement with our Brillouin amplification and lasing measurements. ii. iii. iii. The detailed experimental set-up used for signal amplification measurements is shown in Fig. Value HCF attenuation (including the 0.5 dB CO 2 absorption) 5.99 km -1 Signal power at the input of the HCF (inside the HCF) -34 dBm Signal modulation frequency f 37.5 kHz Lock-in amplifier detection frequency 75 kHz Lock-in amplifier, signal power (average optical power) to voltage transfer coefficient 5.36 V/mW Table The experimental set-up we used is shown in Fig. Phase modulator AOM We measured the Brillouin gain spectrum at different gas pressures. The pump-probe frequency detuning at the peak gain is called Brillouin frequency shift and is given by where n eff is the effective refractive index of the optical mode, v a is the acoustic velocity and λ P is the pump wavelength. As an approximation, we used the gas refractive index n as the effective refractive index n eff . We can derive the measured acoustic velocity (shown by blue stars in Fig. An axial strain applied on the fibre will lead to the following effects: • Due to the Poisson effect, the honey-comb structure will be distorted, modifying the effective refractive index of the optical mode. • In particular, the holes will shrink and the fibre will elongate, leading to a change in the volume available for the gas along the fibre. • The silica refractive index will change due to the photo-elastic effect, leading to a change in the effective refractive index of the optical mode. In order to quantify these effects, a finite-element simulation has been performed. To this end, deformations of a 3D slice of the HCF subject to an axial strain, , were computed. The deformations in the cross-section plane have subsequently been used to compute the resulting change in the effective refractive index n eff . Although this computation was performed assuming 40 bar gas pressure in the holes, the results only weakly depend on the gas pressure. Figure We are now in position to estimate the local change in the Brillouin frequency shift due to an axial strain along the HCF. The change of the Brillouin frequency shift due to an axial strain can be written as: Considering the 40 bar CO 2 Brillouin frequency shift of 320 MHz and n ≈ 1, the first term can be directly evaluated to: In order to evaluate the second term, we consider that the fibre, of length L, is axially strained over a length l. In these conditions, the total change in the gas pressure P is: where we considered the change in volume of a cylinder of volume V c , stretched by a strain c , that can be expressed as: ∆V c /V c = c (1 -2κ), with κ being the Poisson ratio. Taking as an extreme example a 40-bar gas-filled 50-m-long fibre whose entire length is strained by an axial strain of 2% (i.e. 1 meter elongation), the total pressure change would be: ∆P = -0.5 bar. As the pressure-dependent Brillouin frequency was found to be of ≈ -1 MHz/bar, the total change in the Brillouin frequency due to the gas pressure variation would be of +0.5 MHz. In addition, the change in the Brillouin frequency due to the effective refractive index variation would be of -10.8 kHz. We can see that these two effects have an opposite sign and partly compensate for each other. For example, if we consider the same example but with the strain applied along a 20 centimeter-long portion of the fibre only, the change in the Brillouin frequency due to the gas pressure S13 variation would be 10 kHz and would almost perfectly compensate for the change in the Brillouin frequency due to the effective refractive index variation. In summary, we demonstrated that the change in the Brillouin frequency due to an applied axial strain can be neglected in normal operation. In this section, we discuss the Mach-Zehnder modulator and derive an expression for the output intensity in the special case of a RF sinusoidal modulation. A typical Mach-Zehnder modulator consists of a lithium niobate (LiNbO 3 ) substrate in which optical waveguides are imprinted. Metallic electrodes are subsequently deposited on top of the substrate. A top view and a cross-section of a typical Mach-Zehnder modulator is shown in Fig. In order to simplify the calculation, we assume a perfect modulator as possessing the following characteristics: • The modulator is lossless. However, insertion loss can be easily added by simple multiplication of the results with a loss factor. • The modulator has an infinite bandwidth. This essentially means that the modulation frequency is much smaller than the modulator cut-off bandwidth and simplifies the derivation by ignoring the effects of a finite bandwidth. • The modulator has exactly equal arm lengths. While never the case in reality, compensation for unequal arm lengths and temperature drifts can be easily done by adjusting the modulator's bias voltage. • In the case of a destructive interference, no light intensity is present at the output (infinite extinction ratio). As shown in Fig. where e φ A is the phase shift induced by the light propagation across the modulator, φ RF = πV RF /2V π is the phase shift induced when applying a RF voltage V RF (t) to the electrodes and φ B is the bias phase shift induced when applying a certain voltage to the bias port. Since e φ A is a common phase shift that is simply due to transmission across the device, we disregard it from now on. We now apply a sinusoidal RF voltage of frequency Ω/2π and of amplitude V : The RF phase shift is: where ς = πV /2V π is called the modulation depth. Inserting (30) into ( where J n are the Bessel functions of the first kind and n is a scalar going from -∞ to +∞. We will use this equation to derive an expression for the output intensity, as observed when connecting the modulator output to a photodetector. We now calculate the output intensity I = E 2 /2η, where η is the medium impedance. We define I 0 = E 0 2 /2η as the input light intensity and take the magnitude squared of Eq. ( At this point, it is useful to rearrange the terms by defining the following variable change: p = n + m and q = nm. As illustrated in table Table S3.1 Dual intensity modulation implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.2 PRBS generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.3 Phase modulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.4 Correlation location scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.5 Pump power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.6 Probe signal acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S9 S3.7 Scanning, quadratic fitting and repeatability estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S10 S3.8 Test bench . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S8.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S14 S8.2 Intensity at a photodetector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S16 S8.3 Analysis of the three bias configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S18 S and f ∆ are synchronised to the same frequency standard. PRBS, pseudo-random bit sequence; AOM, acousto-optic modulator; IM, intensity modulator; EDFA, erbium-doped fibre amplifier; PD, photodetector; AMP, radio-frequency amplifier; BPF, band-pass filter.