Single molecules in solids have been considered as an attractive class of solid-state single quantum systems because they can be chemically synthesized at low cost to have stable narrow transitions at desired wavelengths. Here we report and demonstrate single dibenzoterrylene molecules in crystalline anthracene nanosheets as a robust and versatile solid-state quantum system for delicate photophysics studies and as building blocks of quantum photonic devices. The high-quality nanosheet sample enables robust studies of single-molecule photophysics at room temperature, including for the first time direct observation of single molecule insertion site change, measurement of its associated changes of dipole moment orientation and magnitude, unambiguous determination of excitation-power dependent intersystem crossing rate and triplet lifetime. Thanks to the excellent mechanical stability of the nanosheet sample, we demonstrate its flexible assembly into planar antenna devices to achieve bright Gaussian emission pattern. The thin thickness, good photostability and mechanical stability make the dibenzoterrylene-in-anthracene nanosheet system an excellent candidate as static quantum nodes in integrated photonic circuit. Solid-state single quantum emitters have become an import resource in quantum information science and technology because they can function as ideal sources of single photons and strong nonlinear elements; owing to the fermionic nature of two-level quantum systems In this work, we demonstrate the growth of DBT doped crystalline anthracene (DBT:AC) nanosheets for delicate single-molecule photophysics studies and building blocks of single-photon quantum devices. Specifically, we report the first real-time observation of molecule insertion site jump and the associated changes of the emission dipole (both orientation and magnitude) at room temperature. In addition, we deduce the excitation-power dependent intersystem crossing rate and triplet state lifetime of DBT molecules at room temperature by measuring the second-order photon correlation over a large dynamic range (0.1ns ∼ 0.1 ms) A. Sample growth, characterization and setup We begin the discussion with the growth of crystalline DBT:AC nanosheets. Figure The high-quality crystalline DBT:AC nanosheets provide an ideal platform for studying delicate singlemolecule photophysics, for instance, direct observation of insertion site change at ambient conditions. In hostguest type of single-molecule systems, the guest molecule replaces one or a few adjacent host molecules, which usually forms one or more than one kind of well-defined insertion sites. All past experimental observations and studies of single molecules with different insertion sites, for instance, terrylene in p-terphenyl Figure One sees that the observations from different molecules are consistent and reproducible. The stable emission of single DBT molecules at site A allows us to make robust measurements on the rates of singlet-triplet intersystem crossing, triplet state decay and their excitation power dependence at room temperature. The existence of triplet state and the intersystem crossing will lead to photon bunching from the single molecule at the delay close to the triplet lifetime For the whole dynamic range, the normalized secondorder photon correlation function can be expressed as where the first term describes the short-term antibunching statistics, the second term is for the bunching effect and the third term c is responsible for the background (a -b + c = 1), respectively. A simplified energy level structure is shown in Fig. where σ is the absorption cross section of the molecule, k ij is the decay rate from simplified level i to level j, and I L is the excitation intensity. By fitting the measured g 2 (τ ) with the model given by Eq. ( These values are 2 ∼ 4 orders of magnitude larger than the value measured at cryogenic temperature We remark here that the DBT:AC nanosheet sample at room temperature has low intersystem cross yield and very short trapping times of a few microseconds depending on the level of excitation, which manifest it as a good solid-state quantum system. Having systematically studied the emission properties of DBT:AC nanosheets, we next demonstrate them as versatile building blocks of functional single-photon emitting devices. The thin and mechanically rigid DBT:AC nanosheets can be readily assembled to photonic nanostructures via the micro-manipulation technique, for instance, to form a planar antenna device for directional single-photon emission In summary, we have systematically investigated a class of clean, robust and versatile solid-state single quantum system, i.e., DBT molecules embedded in crystalline anthracene nanosheet. The high-quality DBT:AC nanosheet sample, manifested partially from the narrow emission spectrum, enables delicate single-molecule photophysics studies at room temperature, including realtime observation of insertion site change, the associated changes of emission dipole moment orientation and magnitude, unambiguous determination of excitation-power dependent rates of intersystem crossing and triplet decay of single DBT molecules. Moreover, benefiting from the excellent mechanical stability of the nanosheet sample, we have demonstrated its flexible assembly into planar antenna devices for bright Gaussian emission from single DBT molecules. The thin thickness, the excellent photostability, mechanical stability and cryogenic compatibility make the DBT:AC nanosheet system an excellent candidate as static quantum nodes in integrated quantum photonic circuit 