Features of low dimensional magnetism resulting from a square-net arrangement of Co atoms in trirutile CoTa2O6 is studied in the present work by means of density functional theory and is compared with the experimental results of specific heat and neutron diffraction. The small total energy differences between the ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM) configuration of CoTa2O6 shows that competing magnetic ground states exist, with the possibility of transition from FM to AFM phase at low temperature. Our calculation further suggests the semi-conducting behavior for CoTa2O6 with a band gap of ∼0.41 eV. The calculated magnetic anisotropy energy is ∼2.5 meV with its easy axis along the [100] (in-plane) direction. Studying the evolution of magnetism in Co1-xMgxTa2O6 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 1). it is found that the sharp AFM transition exhibited by CoTa2O6 at TN = 6.2 K in its heat capacity vanishes with Mg-dilution, indicating the obvious effect of weakening the superexchange pathways of Co. The current specific heat study reveals the robust nature of TN for CoTa2O6 in applied magnetic fields. Clear indication of short-range magnetism is obtained from the magnetic entropy, however, diffuse components are absent in neutron diffraction data. At TN , CoTa2O6 enters a long-range ordered magnetic state which can be described using a propagation vector, ( 1 4 1 4 0). Upon Mg-dilution at x ≥0.1, the long-range ordered magnetism is destroyed. The present results should motivate an investigation of magnetic excitations in this low-dimensional anisotropic magnet. CoTa 2 O 6 belongs to the class of M T 2 O 6 (M = Ni, Fe, Co; T = Ta, Sb) low-dimensional magnetic oxide compounds in trirutile structure. One of the earliest studies on CoTa 2 O 6 reports a broad transition at 14 K in magnetization and relates it to low-dimensional physics Recent investigation on CoTa 2 O 6 has revealed optical dichroism in the single crystals ing disordered even at very low temperatures below the T N (6.1 K) 17 . An anisotropic magnetocaloric effect has been reported in NiTa 2 O 6 Existing reports on the magnetic structure of CoTa 2 O 6 describe slightly differing structures The polycrystalline powder samples used in the present study were prepared following the prescriptions used in a previous work Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to study the electronic and magnetic properties of CoTa 2 O 6 with the full-potential local-orbital (FPLO) code The specific heat curves, C p (T ), of CoTa 2 O 6 obtained under the application of 0 T, 5 T and 7 T are presented in Fig In order to obtain the magnetic contribution, C m (T ) towards total specific heat, we subtracted the C p (T ) of have treated the Co atoms as a square net of Ising spins in order to model the experimental specific heat An attempt to model it using a 2-level Schottky term leads to an acceptable fit as can be seen by the blue solid line in (a). Short-range spin correlations that exist above the transition temperature giving rise to a broad peak in specific heat is reported in CuSb 2 O 6 for example Further, we have analyzed the low temperature specific heat of Co 1-x Mg x Ta 2 O 6 using the expression, C m (T ) = γT + βT The first term on the right-hand-side of this expression is the specific heat of free electrons near the Fermi level and the second term originates from the electrons that participate in the magnon dispersion. A fit using the above expression to the experimental magnetic specific heat below T N leads to the values γ = 0.018(3), A 2 = 0.06 (5) frequency, to a final value of 242 cm -1 in the Raman spectrum of Co 0.3 Mg 0.7 Ta 2 O 6 , a value that is very close to the corresponding one seen in the Raman spectrum of MgTa 2 O 6 . The Raman feature at 318 cm -1 in the spectrum of CoTa 2 O 6 shifts to 328 cm -1 in the spectrum of Co 0.3 Mg 0.7 Ta 2 O 6 . It also exhibits a similar intensity increase. The 386 cm -1 Raman line, too, presents higher frequency shifts, to 415 cm -1 in the Raman spectrum of Co 0.3 Mg 0.7 Ta 2 O 6 ; it also decreases in intensity. A similar decrease in intensity is observed for the Raman peak at 465 cm -1 without a frequency shift. Comparison of the intensity of this vibrational line in the Raman spectrum of CoTa 2 O 6 with its intensity in the spectrum of MgTa 2 O 6 reveals that the observed pattern in intensity changes in the Co The neutron powder diffraction patterns of Co 1-x Mg x Ta 2 O 6 were recorded at the PSD instrument at different temperatures between 295 K and 5 K. With the reduction in temperature to 5 K, additional Bragg peaks at 2θ ≈ 11.3 • , 14.2 • , 11.3 • , 17 • and 19 • are observed in the neutron powder diffraction pattern. The additional peaks, that correspond to the magnetic order developing in the compound below the T N , are shown enlarged in the inset of Fig 5 (b). In order to solve the magnetic structure, a profile fit and k-search was performed using the utilities within Fullprof Suite software. A k-value of The neutron powder diffraction patterns obtained for x = 0.1 and 0.7 at 5 K are presented in Fig We first consider the geometrical optimization for the experimental parameters obtained from our diffraction experiments as tabulated in Table II for T = 5 K. All the results presented here are from the relaxed structure. The deviation of the obtained data are negligible (i.e., ≤ 2% change in the experimental positions) compared with the experimental lattice parameters. We first consider the electronic properties of a non-magnetic configuration by DFT calculations, from where we observe a sharp peak at the Fermi level (E F ) indicating the magnetic instability of CoTa 2 O 6 . Based on this, we further investigate the magnetic ground state of CoTa 2 O 6 , using the optimized parameters as mentioned above. The total energy calculations for the collinear ferromagnetic (FM-↑↑), antiferromagnetic (AFM-↑↓), and non-magnetic (NM) configurations were calculated. The ground state was found to be FM where the energy difference between the lowest total energy state and the first excited AFM state amounts to just 5.77 meV per unit cell. The small energy difference between FM and AFM clearly indicates the competing ground state and the reasonable explanation to the AFM ground state below 5 K as observed here in the experiment. The FM ground state obtained through the DFT calculations is obtained by using the structural parameters reported by some of us recently We further consider the magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) of CoTa 2 O 6 for the FM ground state. The easy axis was found along the (100) direction with MAE of approximately 2.5 meV per unit cell. In the calculations, each Co couples ferromagnetically with its neighbor Co via oxygen and Ta in the trirutile structure. In CoTa 2 O 6 , each Co with charge state +2 formally has a 3d 7 configuration. This is expected to carry a magnetic moment of ±3 μ B within an ionic picture, while our first-principles calculation indicates the spin moment of 2.68 μ B and an orbital moment of 0.17 μ B per Co. Although finite strength of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) has been observed on the Co-site, its influence at and around E F in the electronic structure is negligible. Because of the charge transfer effects between Co(Ta) and O atoms, Ta and oxygen gain a partial moment of 0.048 μ B per Ta, 0.032 μ B per planar oxygen and 0.041 μ B per apical oxygen atoms. The difference between two in-equivalent atoms are mainly due to their different bond lengths (Co-O bond length: apical (planar) 2.053 (2.093) Å) arranged with the Co atoms. The obtained moment of Co is found to be in good agreement with our experimental moment of 2.13 μ B /Co. The small difference is attributed to the environmental effects (temperature, etc.), SOC and the hybridization among the Ta and oxygen atoms. We performed the DFT calculations using the crystal parameters obtained at 11 K. This data suggests the FM ground state. Within the GGA calculations, CoTa need to be probed in detail using high resolution X-ray spectroscopy. The vacancies of Co that may have occurred during the synthesis process can indirectly influence oxygen stoichiometry of CoTa 2 O 6 . In such a scenario, we can expect to observe FM similar to carbon-doped ZnO or aluminumdoped TiO 2 thin films Signatures of low dimensionality and short-range magnetic order are observed in the trirutile series, Co 1-x Mg x Ta 2 O 6 . The specific heat of CoTa 2 O 6 reveals a magnetic phase transition at 6.2 K and a broad feature at T > T N , ascribed to short-range magnetic order. The T N is relatively robust in applied magnetic fields but is reduced upon Mg-doping at the Co site. However, the broad feature related to shortrange spin order is present in all of the doped compositions. A low value of entropy is released at T N . Analysis of specific heat support low dimensional features of magnetism and short-range order in Co 1-x Mg x Ta 2 O 6 trirutiles. Mg-doping of 10% is sufficient to destabilize the antiferromagnetic order seen in CoTa 2 O 6 . Performing neutron diffraction on a phasepure sample, we have determined the magnetic structure of CoTa 2 O 6 to be a sine wave-type order with propagation vector k 1 4 , 1 4 , 0 . Density functional theory studies predict the ferromagnetic ground state, however, the negligible (small) total energy differences between the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic configuration indicates a competing ground magnetic state. This in turn supports the short-range order we observe in specific heat data. Our computational results supports the observation of strong anisotropy effects in the class of trirutile compounds.