This study was aimed to investigate the thickness dependent morphological changes of Mn films deposited on GaAs substrates by thermal evaporation technique. Ni films were deposited under same conditions to perform comparative study of the morphological changes with respect to the Mn films. The scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy studies revealed ripple-shaped structure of Mn film with good periodicity, while Ni film only exhibited small granules deposited throughout the surface. The influence of the thickness of the Mn film in producing the ripple structure was clearly observed. In addition, the annealing time was considered as the major parameter to control the ordering of the ripple structure. X-ray diffraction pattern indicated the formation of different phases of Ga-Mn and Mn-As due to diffusion of atoms during annealing. A model for the creation of stress-driven microstructure is proposed which indicates that Mn thin films grow on GaAs substrates in three stages: in the primary stage, the growth occurs via two-dimensional nucleation process; as the thickness increases, the stress is released by the film via creation of additional surface roughness which produce ripples; and finally an island-like growth occurs because of the non-uniform distribution of stress along the surface of the film. Thin films develop large internal stresses during deposition In this study, thin films of Mn and Ni (purity 99.998%) were deposited employing Hind Hivac (Model 12A4D) vacuum coating unit at a pressure of 2x10 -6 Torr over semi-insulating single crystalline GaAs (100) substrates and the substrate temperature during deposition was 80 o C. Two sets of experiments were carried out by taking different amounts of Mn (0.06 gm and 0.41 gm) but the other conditions such as pressure, source to substrate distance, etc. were remained same. Before deposition, the substrates were primarily cleaned with acetone, methanol and de-ionized water in sequence for 5 min each, then they were etched in H 2 SO 4 :H 2 O 2 :H 2 O (5:1:1) solution. Finally, the substrates were rinsed in deionized water and placed inside the deposition unit. After Mn deposition, the films thicknesses were measured by a profilometer (SLOAN Dektak). The films deposited with 0.41 gm of Mn (thickness ~5 micron) were assigned the name "Type-A" and the films deposited with 0.06 gm of Mn (thickness ~150 nm) were assigned the name "Type-B". Samples of "Type-A" were annealed at a temperature of 500°C in nitrogen atmosphere for different periods of time. A thermocouple was used to monitor and control the annealing temperature. X-ray diffraction (XRD) study of as deposited and annealed samples (Type-A) was performed using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro/PW: 3040/60 diffractometer. A rotating Cu target (wavelength 1.54056 Å) was used with a voltage of 40 kV and a current of 30 mA. Finally the Mn films were characterized by an AFM (Nanonics Multiview-1000 utilising the intermittent contact mode employing Nanonics AFM glass probe with force constant 40 N/m and resonant frequency 134.56 KHz) and a JEOL JSM-5800 SEM to examine the microscopic features. Ni film was deposited to compare the morphology with that of Mn films deposited under same conditions, on GaAs substrates and SEM study was performed on both the films and a comparison is made. The surface morphology of "Type-A" sample and that of Ni film were studied using SEM. Figure An AFM image of sample "Type-B" shown in Figure Since the CTE of Mn is larger than that of GaAs, the stress in the Mn film is of compressive nature Thus it may be concluded that the stress developed in the film was within the elastic limit at this thickness and therefore the surface morphology did not change, resulting in a smooth surface. As the ripple structures were quite interesting thus further analysis was performed on Mn films of "Type-A" employing AFM to explore the evolution of surface morphology with stress. Two-dimensional AFM image of sample "Type-A" shown in Figure As the ripple structures restricted the formation of a nucleation center in the inter-ripple regions so those regions remained stressed and consequently unfavorable for nucleation, whereas the peaks of ripple were stress-relaxed, subsequently acted as nucleation centers. Thus, three dimensional irregular islands were originated from these nucleation centers, indicating that the growth mechanism followed the three dimensional island growth mode. These islands were organized in continuous lateral rows and formed a micro-assembled pattern as shown in SEM micrograph (Figure In Figure In the primary stage of the Mn film growth on the GaAs substrate, compressive stress is not promptly relaxed owing to the extremely small film thickness and the stress at this thickness is within the elastic limit of the film (Figure Formations of dislocations produce non-uniformity in the stress distribution at the interface. The areas where dislocations formed become stressed, whereas the regions between adjacent dislocations are less constrained (Figure In this article, the effect of stress on the Mn films grown on the GaAs substrate was observed. Owing to the large difference in the thermal expansion coefficient in between Mn and GaAs, thermal stress exists along with intrinsic stresses. With increased film thickness, the total stress on the Mn film goes beyond the elastic limit and the effect of stress relaxation is visible as it changes the morphology of the Mn film and a ripple shape structure is produced. The periodicity of the ripple structure is achieved by increasing the surface diffusion of mobile species through annealing. Therefore it may be concluded that through the annealing of thick Mn films (Type-A) deposited on GaAs substrates periodic well-ordered ripple-shaped microstructures can be achieved. It can be put forward that the periodic surface corrugation could provide a well-ordered template to form micro or nano structures in the channels on the corrugated surface. As future scope, ZnO and TiO 2 nanostructures (nanorods, nanodots) can be deposited on these templates and the effect can be studied for spintronics and optoelectronics applications. 