The magnetic structure of the antiferromagnetic square cupola compound Ba(TiO)Cu4(PO4)4 with the tetragonal structure is studied with 31 P nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. The magnetic hyperfine shift K shows a clear splitting at the Néel temperature TN = 9.5 K, where the resonance splits into two lines when an external magnetic field is oriented along the c axis and into four lines when the field is along the a axis. In the paramagnetic region K(T ) follows temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility χ(T ). From K vs χ plot we determined nearly isotropic hyperfine field values H a hf = 765 mT/μB and H c hf = 740 mT/μB for the magnetic field oriented along a and c, respectively. From the rotation of the single crystal in the external magnetic field we determined eight different orientations of K-tensor in the paramagnetic region. In the antiferromagnetic state at T = 6 K we found that the local field at phosphorus is mainly due to dipolar field of coppers. Here the rotation of the single crystal shows eight different orientations of the local field Bint = 35.6 mT. The orientations correspond to the calculation of dipolar fields at phosphorus assuming magnetic quadrupolar configuration of magnetic moments Γ3(1) described previously [Nat. Recently, an interesting class of compounds,AE(TiO)Cu 4 (PO 4 ) 4 (AETCPO; AE = Ba, Sr, or Pb), was newly synthesized Magnetic structure of BaTCPO was carefully studied by neutron scattering experiments In the present report we will use 31 P NMR techniques to study the local magnetic fields in a single crystal of BaTCPO. Phosphorus ions in PO 4 tetrahedra see four coppers in two cupolas as next-nearest-neighbours. Therefore, the local field at phosphorus is definitely influenced by the magnetic arrangement of coppers. Previous NMR studies of SrTPCO 7 and BaTPCO 8 have used powder samples where detailed information about the magnetic structure is difficult to get. Single crystals of Ba(TiO)Cu 4 (PO 4 ) 4 were grown with the flux method by Kimura et al. The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured with the applied magnetic field B = 4.7 T along the [001] and [100] directions as shown in FIG. At high temperature χ (T ) followed the Curie-Weiss law: Here χ 0 is temperature-independent susceptibility. At T > 100 K the fitting gives the following parameters: for the magnetic field along the [001] direction: χ 0 = -7.3(4) × 10 -5 cm 3 /mole per Cu, C = 0.460(1) cm 3 K per mole Cu, θ CW = -29.0(4) K; and for the field along the [100] direction: χ 0 = -3.5(2) × 10 -5 cm 3 /mole-Cu, C = 0.454(7) × 10 -4 cm 3 K /mole-Cu, and θ CW = -29.3(2) K. From the Curie constant one gets the effective copper magnetic moment as μ eff = 3k B C/N A , where k B is the Boltzmann factor, and N A is Avogadro's number. We get μ eff = 1.920 μ B and 1.911 μ B for [001] and [100] directions, respectively. Here, μ B is the Bohr magneton. Using g = S(S + 1)μ eff we get almost equal Lande g-factor values as g = 2.22 and g = 2.20 for [001] and [100], respectively, which are common for Cu 2+ ions. Here we note, that in regular, collinear antiferromagnets the χ vanishes in the direction where the local magnetic moments are aligned parallel or antiparallel to an external magnetic field and stays constant in the directions where the external field is perpendicular to the local magnetic moments Temperature dependence of 31 P Knight shift is presented in FIG. Above the Néel temperature T N = 9.5 K, the Knight shift K(T) follows perfectly the magnetic susceptibility curve χ (T), as given 11 by Eq.(2): Here, K 0 is the temperature-independent shift, the chemical shift, and H hf is the hyperfine coupling constant. From the Kvs χ plots (insets of FIG. Below T N , due to the onset of local magnetic fields, the resonance line splits into four lines in the orientation a B and into two lines when the crystal is oriented with c B. Following the approach given in Ref. The temperature dependence of the frequency differ- ence is fitted by the formula The best fit was obtained with T N = 9.48 K, β = 0.26 for the orientation a B, and T N = 8.82 K, β = 0.20 for c B. The critical exponent β values, if compared to some theoretical values (as given e. g. in Ref. Before starting 31 P analysis of single crystal we recorded the spectrum of a powder sample. FIG. where I = (I x , I y , I z ) T , H 0 = (0, 0, H 0 ), and I x , I y , I z are Pauli matrices: Three successive rotations, each characterized by three Euler angles, transform the Hamiltonian from the principal axes frame (PAS) into the laboratory frame: There are four frames of reference: PAS with diagonal tensor (K P AS ), crystal frame (K * ), goniometer frame (K g ), and laboratory frame (K). The transformations between them are R p , R i , R g with the corresponding Euler angles. We used the conventional Euler ZYZ rotation of the Hamiltonian In Spin-lattice relaxation T 1 was measured with inversionrecovery pulse sequence at magnetic fields along [001] and [100] directions (Fig. where M (τ ) is the magnetization at delay τ after inversion, M 0 is the equilibrium magnetization, and A ≤ 2 is a constant depending on the accuracy of the inversion. The relaxation rate at T > 60 K is almost constant which is typical for a paramagnetic material, where the relaxation is caused by the fluctuation of the magnetic moments. Before the phase transition at T N , a sharp spike occurs in the relaxation speed which is connected to the rapid slowing of the fluctuations. Below T N , relaxation speed decreases sharply proportional to T In paramagnetic temperature region we can use the Moriya's theory of relaxation Here γ N is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio, S is the nuclear spin, H hf is the hyperfine field as in Eq. 2, z = 2 is the number of nearest Cu 2+ neighbors for the nucleus and ω E = (|J|k B / ) 2zS(S + 1)/3 is the Heisenberg exchange frequency (in units rad -1 ), where z = 2 is the number of Cu 2+ ions as nearest neighbors to 31 P, S = 1/2 is the electronic spin, and J is the exchange interaction. With the hyperfine field value of H hf = 7.650 kOe/μ B and the relaxation rate for the paramagnetic region 1/T 1 = 1410 s -1 we get an estimate for the exchange interaction inside the square cupola J/k B = 35 K with an exchange frequency of ω E = 4.5•10 12 rad/s. This value is in coherence with previous results of J = 3.0 meV = 34.8 K 1 . The resonance frequencies by rotation of the single crystal around the [001] and [100] at T = 6 K are given in Fig. The rotation patterns around the [001] axis show two sets of lines (blue and red). The phase shift within the set is 90 degrees. The red lines are shifted from b B by +16 degrees, while the blue lines are shifted -16 degrees. We can assign the blue lines to the phosphorus ions in "up" cupola and the red lines to the ions in "down" cupola. The rotation patterns of the crystal around the [100] (FIG. Here, the approximation of the frequencies by Eq. 9 is not particularly good. A possible reason might be that the magnetic structure in 4.7 T magnetic field at c B direction is not yet well settled at temperature 6 K. We found above (see FIG. Despite of that, one can clearly see the rotation patterns with two different amplitudes as expected for two different local field projections along the b axis. The assignment of the resonances to "up" and "down" cupola is not unique. For example, we cannot distinguish the cases, where all the local field directions of one cupola have positive projection to the c axis and the moments of the other cupola have negative projection, from the case, where the ions of one cupola have two positive and two negative projections and the field on ions of the other cupola have, respectively, two negative and two positive projections to the c axis. The assignment in FIG. The analysis of the data given in Table As noted above, unique assignment of the resonances to certain phosphorus in the unit cell is not possible. One possible local field configuration is given in FIG. The internal field at phosphorus ions consists of two components: where B hf is transferred hyperfine field, and B dip is the dipolar field from the magnetic moments of Cu 2+ ions. The lines are approximations with Eq. 9 using data in Table Table Comparison of the experimental field pattern to the calculated dipolar fields gives remarkable similarity to the case calculated for Γ 3 (1) structure -the calculated dipolar field directions are close to the experimental values in FIG. We performed 31 P NMR of the antiferromagnetic square cupola compound Ba(TiO)Cu 4 (PO 4 ) 4 in the applied magnetic field B = 4.7 T and provided an in-depth overview of the local magnetic environment around the Cu 2+ cupolas. From the 31 P NMR frequency dependence of the single crystal orientation we successfully determined the principal values of the 31 P magnetic shift tensor and the orientation of eight magnetic tensors in the unit-cell at room temperature and at temperature T = 6 K. The Knight shift temperature dependence in comparison of that of the bulk magnetic susceptibility enabled to determine the hyperfine field on 31 P nuclei H hf = 7.65 (5) for the exchange interaction constant between Cu 2+ ions J = 35K. 31 P NMR frequency dependence on the single crystal orientation in the antiferromagnetic state gave a clear picture of local magnetic fields at 31 P ions. The static magnetic field at every phosphorus was determined as B int = 35.6 mT. Experimental configuration of the local field was compared to the calculated dipolar field for several magnetic arrangement of the copper magnetic moments. We found that the magnetic structure Γ 3 (1) determined by the previous neutron diffraction studies This research was supported by the Estonian Science Council Grants IUT23-7 and PRG4, the European Re-gional Development Fund Grant TK134, JSPS KAK-ENHI Grant Numbers JP17H01143, JP19H05823 and JP19H01847, and by the MEXT Leading Initiative for Excellent Young Researchers (LEADER).