The interplay between superconductivity, spin-orbit coupling, and Zeeman or exchange field, is studied theoretically in two different setups: a single wire in which all these fields coexist, and a double wire system in which superconducting pairing and the spin-dependent fields are spatially separated. We first explore a magnetoelectric effect, namely the appearance of anomalous charge supercurrents. We determine the conditions under which such currents are allowed by symmetry and express them in terms of the SU(2) electric and magnetic fields. In leading order in the strength of the fields we find that in the single wire setup such currents may appear only when the Zeeman field has both, a longitudinal and transverse component with respect to the spin-orbit field. In contrast, in the two wire setup a parallel component to the SOC can generate the anomalous current, which is allowed by symmetry. We confirm these findings by calculating explicitly the current in both setups together with the self-consistent superconducting order parameter. The latter shows in the ground-state a spatial modulation of the phase that leads to currents that compensate the anomalous current, such that in both cases the ground state corresponds to a total zero-current state. However, in the two wire setup this zero-current state consists of two finite currents flowing in each of the wires in opposite direction. Superconductivity in low dimensional systems with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and a Zeeman field has been intensively studied in the context of Majorana zeroenergy modes Magnetoelectric effects in the superconducting state are reminiscent of the widely studied spin Hall effect (SHE) and Edelstein effect in normal conductors These effects also occur in the superconducting state In general, the Lifshitz invariant can be written as where T is a polar vector which is odd under time reversal, and SU(2) gauge invariant. This vector T can be expressed in terms of the so-called SU(2) magnetic and electric fields. For example in the case of a homogeneous 2D system the current induced via magnetoelectric effect is, in lowest order in the SOC and Zeeman fields, proportional to the vector product between the electric and magnetic SU(2) fields In the present work, we investigate the charge current originating from the interplay between superconductivity, SOC and a Zeeman field in different systems of wires. arXiv:1911.11741v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 30 Apr 2020 Specifically, we determine the Lifshitz invariant in terms of the SU(2) fields, and focus on the charge current to the leading order in the SOC and Zeeman field. We use this general method to study two different setups: a single wire with superconducting correlations, and a system where the superconducting and magnetic correlations and fields are spatially separated into two different wires which are coupled via a hopping term. In leading order in the fields, the single wire system displays a spontaneous current only if both transverse and longitudinal components (with respect to the spin-orbit field) of the Zeeman field are finite. On the other hand, in the two wire system, the parallel component is sufficient to generate a current. This result can be explained by the existence of an effective SU(2) magnetic field. This article is organized as follows: in Sec. II, we investigate the appearance of the charge current within the SU(2)-covariant formalism, by constructing a general Lifshitz invariant F L in lowest order in the SU(2) electric and magnetic fields. In Sec. III, we study the single wire system in the framework of Green's function formalism and compute the current explicitly in the limit of weak spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman field. By allowing a superconducting order parameter with an inhomogeneous phase we demonstrate that the ground-state of the system corresponds to a zero-current state due to the cancellation of the spin-galvanic current by the one generated by the inhomogeneous superconducting phase. Sec. IV is devoted to the double wire system. We derive the self-consistency equation and the expression of the current, and show that the zero-current state carried in the ground state corresponds to two opposite currents flowing in each of the wires. We finally present our conclusions in section V. In this section, we first provide a brief review of the SU(2) covariant formalism for 2D systems with Rashba SOC and an exchange field. We then apply this formalism to different systems of wires to understand the magnetoelectric effects from a symmetry consideration. To understand the magnetoelectric effect from a general perspective, we briefly introduce the SU(2)-covariant formalism where the spinor Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ ) T contains the annihilation operators ψ ↑,↓ ( r) for spin up and down electrons at position r and V = V ( r) is the superconducting potential. In the normal part of the Hamiltonian, ĥ0 , the linearin-momentum SOC and Zeeman field enter as a SU(2) gauge potential where μ is the chemical potential. Namely A 0 = 1 2 A a 0 σ a is the SU(2) scalar potential which describes either a Zeeman magnetic field in a normal metal or an intrinsic exchange field in a ferromagnetic metal, whereas the vector A a i σ a represents spin-orbit interaction, where σ a are the Pauli matrices. Lower (upper) indices i = x, y, z label space (spin) variables and sum over repeated indices is implied. In analogy to usual electrodynamics, the Hamiltonian Eq. ( , where U is a SU(2) rotation matrix The SU(2) electric and magnetic fields are then defined as E a k = F a 0k , and B a k = kij F a ij , respectively, ijk being the Levi-Civita symbol. We consider now a superconductor at temperature close to its critical temperature T c . Equilibrium properties can be described within the Ginzburg-Landau theory. As mentioned in the introduction magnetoelectric effect is related to a Lifshitz invariant in the free energy with the form of Eq. (1). The anomalous current induced in a system is then proportional to the polar vector T . The latter can be constructed using SU(2) gauge symmetry arguments only. In Ref. To illustrate the result of expression Eq. ( In this case, the electric field has two components given by F xy = m 2 α 2 σ z = -F yx . This leads to an in-plane current : when the Zeeman field is applied in y or x direction respectively, in agreement with the Edelstein result, Ref. The situation is rather different in a 1D system, for which the SU(2) magnetic field B a is zero and therefore, contribution from Eq. ( where ∇k denotes the covariant derivatives defined as In the next two subsections we discuss two different situations in which either one of the contributions Eqs. (5 -7) contributes to the anomalous current. Before that it is important to emphasize that in systems in which superconductivity and the spin-dependent fields spatially coexist, one should compute the superconducting order parameter self-consistently allowing for a spatially dependent phase. Generally, the ground-state corresponds to a zero-current state As mentioned above, in a system with a pure 1D SOC only the SU(2) electric field is finite and hence the anomalous current (in lowest order in the exchange field) is given by Eq. The second term is the field induced for example by homogeneous exchange field and SOC. The first term is finite for an inhomogeneous exchange field induced for example by a spin texture. We first consider a homogeneous situation, for which the exchange field has an arbitrary direction and the SOC is, without loss of generality, H so = α p σ z , such that the vector potential has only one finite component ] /2 and hence the anomalous current obtained from Eq. ( This result coincides with the one obtained in Refs. A gauge equivalent situation to the previous one is a system without SOC but with an inhomogeneous exchange field that varies in x-direction As a specific example we consider an exchange field with the following spatial dependence: h = (h 0 cos (Q x) , h 0 sin (Q x) , h z ). The corresponding SU(2) scalar potential has then three components: and according to Eq. ( From Eq. ( Expressions ( We now consider a two wire setup, as the one sketched in Fig. In a pure 1D system, when all interactions take place in one and the same wire, if the SOC and exchange field vectors are parallel, all SU(2) fields are zero and hence no magnetoelectric effects can take place. In the two wire system the situation is rather different, because strictly speaking the system is not pure 1D (indeed there is an additional internal degree of freedom which is the wire index) and the coupling between the wires prevents such a pure gauge situation. Namely, the fields depend not only on the spatial coordinate along the wires, but also on the one perpendicular to them denoted as z in Fig. x and A z 0 , then according to Eq. ( The above analysis only explains whether the anomalous currents are allowed by symmetry or not. In the next sections we compute explicitly the currents and also the ground state of the setups of Fig. In this section, we focus on a single superconducting wire in the presence of Rashba SOC and a Zeeman field. Similar setup has been studied in Refs. We assume that the Zeeman field has two components: one normal and one parallel to the SOC field (Fig. where T is the spinor containing the annihilation and creation operators in Nambu spin basis. The Hamiltonian operator ĥN describes the system in the normal state. We assume that the Zeeman field is in the x -z plane, h = (h x , 0, h z ), and that the wire lies on a substrate parallel to this plane, such that the SOC is along the z-direction: Here ξ = p 2 2 m -μ is the quasiparticle energy, μ is the chemical potential, α is the spin-orbit coupling constant and σ x,y,z , τ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices acting respectively in spin and Nambu space. The BCS Hamiltonian operator ĥBCS is expressed as: where ∆ 0 is the superconducting order parameter, first assumed to be a constant. To compute the anomalous charge current we use the Green's function formalism where G N is the Green's function in the normal state obtained from the Dyson equation i where ω n = π T (2 n + 1) are the Matsubara frequencies at temperature T , n being an integer. In Nambu space, G N reads where the matrix G λ (λ = ±) is defined in the spin basis: The charge current is proportional to the expectation value of the velocity operator v = ∂ ĥN ∂p , such that in terms of the Green's function G, the charge current reads: where T c is the critical temperature. The second term in Eq. ( We are interested in determining the current in the leading order of the spin-dependent fields. Therefore in what follows we assume that both, the Zeeman field and SOC, are small such that h x , h z T c and α p F T c (where p F is the Fermi momentum) and expand the expressions for the Green's functions G from Eq. (14-16) in series of h x , h z and α p. We then substitute this expansion into the current expression, Eq. ( where is the density of states at energy ξ. We assume that the chemical potential is the largest energy involved in the problem : μ T c , E so , where E so = m α 2 /2, and set the lower integration limit to -∞. Because in the expansion of the Green's function G one keeps terms up to order α 3 p 4 where p 2 = 2 m (ξ + μ), in the expansion of N (ξ), Eq. ( where v F = 2 m μ . After this transformation the ξ integration of Eq. ( where . This result implies the presence of a finite charge current along the wire, in agreement with our symmetry arguments in Sec. II B based on the SU(2) covariant formalism. Indeed, in leading order in SOC and Zeeman field, the anomalous current is proportional to α 3 h 2 x h z . Now we allow for an inhomogeneous superconducting state with an order parameter ∆(x) = ∆ 0 e i q x . We assume that q v F T c , i.e. when the system is near the emergence of the modulated phase. In this case the total current can be written as : where j an is the anomalous current, obtained for q = 0, and The value of q can be derived by maximizing the selfconsistency relation describing the superconductor with respect to q [39]: After substitution of this value into Eq. ( In the case of a finite wire, clearly no charge current can flow. This means that the anomalous current, Eq Here we consider a different setup in which superconductivity and spin-dependent fields are spatially separated in two different wires, see Fig. For the superconducting wire we assume a spatially oscillating order parameter ∆(x) = ∆ 0 e i q x . The second wire is in the normal state and exhibits Rashba SOC and a local exchange field. We assume that these fields are parallel to each other. The Hamiltonian of the system has the same form as Eq. ( where t is the hopping energy and η x,y,z are the Pauli matrices in the wire index space. To simplify, we assume that the chemical potential is the same in both wires. The BCS Hamiltonian ĥBCS is expressed as: As in Sec. III, we assume that the temperature is closed to the critical temperature T c , such that ∆ 0 T and can be treated perturbatively. At second order in ∆ 0 the Green's function describing the double wire system is obtained from Eq. ( where G λκ are 2×2 matrices in the wire space, and λ = ±1 (κ = ±1) corresponds to the Nambu (spin) indices. Specifically, the coefficients G λκ read : The total Green's function is then obtained by substituting Eqs. where γ is the effective attractive electron-electron BCS coupling constant. Close to the critical temperature, Eq. ( where T c0 is the critical temperature of the isolated superconducting wire, i.e. for t = 0. We assume that the Zeeman and spin-orbit interactions, as well as tunneling are small such that t, h z , α p F T c , and again that the chemical potential is the largest energy involved: μ T c , E so . We then expand the Green's function G in Eq. ( Only terms even in momentum survive the momentum integration in Eq. The equilibrium value of q is obtained by maximizing Eq. ( Contrary to the single wire system In terms of the Green's function G, these components read: Using Eq. ( By replacing q by its expression from Eq. ( This result is in agreement with the symmetry arguments discussed in Sec. II C. For practical purposes it is convenient to write the last expression in terms of dimensionless parameters. After restoring and k B we obtain: FIG. where φ 0 = π /e and γ is a numerical pre-factor of the order of 0.015. We have shown that the interplay between superconductivity, spin-orbit interaction and Zeeman field in 1D systems allows for the existence of spontaneous charge currents. We have first investigated these currents within the SU(2) covariant formulation, and determined the leading order contributions to the anomalous currents in the SOC and Zeeman field, in terms of the magnetic and electric SU(2) fields. In the case of a single wire we con-firmed that a finite anomalous current can only appear when the Zeeman field has a component parallel and one orthogonal to the SOC We confirmed these results by computing explicitly the anomalous currents in the framework of Green's function formalism for both setups. Moreover, allowing an inhomogeneous superconducting order parameter, we found that the ground state corresponds, in fact, to a total zero current state where the anomalous contribution is compensated by the contribution from the modulated superconducting order parameter (characterized by a finite wave vector). In the two wire system, however, the total zero-current state consists of two opposite currents flowing in each of the wires. Experimentally, ballistic double wire setups have been realized in hybrid semiconducting systems The study of such a setup can be an interesting extension of our work. In that case, superconducting correlations are imposed by the bulk superconductor and therefore no self-consistency relation is needed. We still expect a zero-current ground state with opposite currents flowing in each wire. The exact distribution of the currents in such system will depend on the exact geometry In addition, because the existence of the magnetoelectric effect is independent of the microscopic details of the systems and can be explained by symmetry arguments only (see section II). In this regard we expect that magnetoelectric effects can be observed in two metallic wires, for example a conventional superconductor as Al, and a heavy metal with SOC, as Pt. If the wires are tunnel coupled to each other one expects opposite supercurrents flowing in each wire, as described in section IV. In order to estimate the magnitude of these currents in a small metallic wire we multiply the contribution of a single conducting channel, Eq. 