The structural parameters and electronic structure of rare-earth pnictides are calculated using density functional theory (DFT) with the Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE06) screened hybrid functional. We focus on RE-V compounds, with RE=La, Gd, Er, and Lu, and V=As, Sb, and Bi, and analyze the effects of spin-orbit coupling and treating the RE 4f electrons as valence electrons in the projector augmented wave approach. The results of HSE06 calculations are compared with DFT within the generalized gradient approximation (DFT-GGA) and other previous calculations. We find that all these RE-V compounds are semimetals with electron pockets at the X point and hole pockets at Γ. Whereas in DFT-GGA the carrier density is significantly overestimated, the computed carrier densities using HSE06 is in good agreement with the available experimental data. Rare-earth monopnictides (RE-V) display interesting electronic, magnetic, optical and magneto-optical properties, with applications including thermoelectrics, 1 tunnel junctions, The electronic and magnetic properties of RE-V have long been studied both experimentally A remarkable feature of RE-V compounds is the presence of occupied 4f electronic states near to or resonant in the valence band. As the number of 4f electrons increases from La (no f electrons) to Lu (fully occupied 4f shell), the RE-V series displays a variety of magnetic and electronic effects. The coexistence of partially filled 4f shell along with itinerant p and d charge carriers has been quite challenging to an accurate description of the electronic structure of RE-V compounds. Petukhov et al. We use density functional theory (DFT) We note that the calculations including the 4f as valence electrons were only performed using HSE06, since GGA does not correctly describe the states originating from 4f orbitals, placing them at the Fermi level when the f shell is partially filled. For the compounds with Gd, Er, and Lu, we only considered the ferromagnetic ordering using the 2-atom primitive cells when including the 4f electrons in the valence, despite these compounds are known to be antiferromagnetic at low temperatures. The calculated lattice parameters of RE-V compounds using HSE06 along with the results from GGA calculations and experimental values are listed in Table We note from Table I that for a given rare-earth, the lattice parameter a increases going from As, Sb, to Bi, i.e, as the atomic size of the pnictide atom increases. On the other hand, the lattice parameter decreases by going from La, Gd, Er, to Lu, due to the lanthanide contraction effect on the atomic size. Material DFT-GGA HSE06 HSE06 Exp. (4f in the core) (4f in the core) (4f in the valence) The analysis of the electronic structure of the RE-V compounds starts with the results using HSE06 without spin-orbit coupling and without including the 4f electrons in the valence, shown in Figure 1. Effects of spin-orbit coupling on the electronic structure of RE-V The effects of spin-orbit coupling are very significant for the RE-V compounds, which are composed of heavy elements and the bands of interest, situated near the Fermi level, are derived from pnictide p and lanthanide d orbitals. Previous first-principles calculations have already pointed out the importance of spin-orbit coupling in the description of the electronic structure of RE-Vs. C. Effects of including 4f as valence electrons on the electronic structure of RE-V In most of the previous calculations of RE-V compounds using DFT-LSDA or GGA the 4f electrons were taken as core electrons. Treating the 4f as valence electrons in these approximations would lead to incorrect description of the bands near the Fermi level. For GdAs, the 4f shell is half filled, resulting in flat bands occupied well below the Fermi level, whereas the empty 4f bands lie well above the Fermi level. The occupied 4f bands are located around 8 eV below the Fermi level and the unoccupied 4f states lie around 4 eV above the Fermi level, in qualitative agreement with the results of Petukhov et al.. The overlap in energy of the electron and hole pockets determine the free carrier concentration in these materials. The volume of the Fermi surface for ErAs calculated using LSDA Due to the compatibility with conventional III-V semiconductors, we expect that the later can serve as substrates for epitaxial growth of RE-V, as demonstrated in the case of (In)GaAs/ErAs 5,8,9 and GaSb/LuSb. The superlattice consisted of 9 monolayers of each material, along the [110] direction in order to minimize the effect of charge transfer across the interface. In order to remove the effects of strain due to the small lattice parameters, we used the in-plane lattice parameter of the semiconductor and adjusted the out-of-plane lattice parameter of the semimetal to give its equilibrium volume. In this way, the calculated band alignments should be regarded as natural band alignments. in any case, effects of small strain on the absolute position of the Fermi level in the semimetal were shown to be negligible. The results for the band alignments are shown in Fig. We find that the the Fermi level of the semimetal lies within the band gap of the semiconductor in the cases of ErAs/GaAs and LuSb/GaSb. The band alignment between GaAs and GaSb was taken from the literature. In the case of ErAs/GaAs we find that the Fermi level in ErAs is 0.58 eV above the valence band of GaAs, and in the case of LuSb/GaSb the Fermi level of LuSb is 0.36 eV above the valence band of GaSb. From the transitivity rule, we obtain the Fermi level of LuSb 0.47 eV higher than that of ErAs, consistent with the Sb 5p orbitals being higher in energy than the As 4p orbitals. Note that our results for position of the Fermi level in ErAs with respect to the valence band edge in GaAs is higher than previous uncorrected DFT value by 0.3 eV, 66 yet only ∼0.1 eV lower than the experimental value. We performed HSE06 hybrid functional calculations for the electronic structure of RE-V compounds, where RE= La, Gd, Er, Lu and V = As, Sb, Bi. The HSE06 gives equilibrium lattice parameters in very close agreement with experimental data. All the studied compounds are semi-metals with the size of hole pocket increasing from As to Bi, whereas the gap at X point increases with increase in atomic number of the rare-earth element. We show that using HSE06 gives a good description of the electronic structure of RE-V including the 4f electrons explicitly as valence electrons. In particular, we find good agreement with DMFT calculations for ErAs. We also show that HSE06 gives hole and electron concentrations that are closer to the observed values, correcting the overestimation of the electron and hole pockets overlap in the DFT-GGA calculations. Our results for the band alignment at the ErAs/GaAs interface is in good agreement with experimental data, and it is a significant improvement over previously reported DFT calculations within local spin density approximation. 2 0 -2 -4 -6 L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ X W L Γ