Non-Federal Travelers Information Stations (TIS), a mobile service, are This textbook provides all relevant material for Master-level courses in the domain of antenna systems. For example, at Eindhoven University of Technology, we use this book in two courses (total of 10 ECTS) of the master program in Electrical Engineering, distributed over a semester. The book includes comprehensive material on antennas and provides a solid introduction into microwave engineering, ranging from passive components to active circuits. We believe that this is the perfect mixture of know-how for a junior antenna expert. The theoretical material in this textbook can be supplemented by labs in which the students learn how to use state-of-the-art antenna and microwave design tools and test equipment, such as a vector network analyser or a near-field scanner. Several chapters in this book can be used quite independent from each other. For example, chapter 6 can be used in a dedicated phased-array antenna course without the need to use Maxwellbased antenna theory from chapter 4. Similarly, chapter 3 does not require deep back-ground knowledge in electromagnetics or antennas. The antenna theory presented in chapter 4 is inspired by the original lecture notes of dr. Martin Jeuken According to the Webster dictionary, an antenna is: i. one of a pair of slender, movable, segmented sensory organs on the head of insects, myriapods, and crustaceans, ii. a usually metallic device (such as a rod or wire) for radiating or receiving radio waves. The second definition of an antenna is used within the domain of Electrical Engineering. An antenna transforms an electromagnetic wave in free space in to a guided wave that propagates along a transmission line and vice-versa. In addition, antennas often provide spatial selectivity, which means that the antenna radiates more energy in a certain direction (transmit case) or is more sensitive in a certain direction (receive case). Traditional antenna concepts, like wire antennas, are passive electromagnetic devices which implies that the reciprocity concept holds. As a result, the transmit and receive properties are identical. In integrated antenna concepts, where the transmit and receive electronics are part of the antenna functionality, reciprocity cannot always be applied. One of the principal characteristics of human beings is that they almost continually send and receive signals to and from one another, In 1886, Heinrich Hertz, who was a professor of physics at the Technical Institute in Karlsruhe, was the first person who made a complete radio system Reflector antennas provide high directivity (spatial selectivity), but have the disadvantage that the main lobe of the antenna has to be steered in the desired direction by means of a highly accurate mechanical steering mechanism. This means that simultaneous communication with several points in space is not possible. Wire and printed antennas are usually more omnidirectional, resulting in a low directivity. There are certain applications where these conventional antennas cannot be used. These applications often require a phased-array antenna. A phasedarray antenna has the capability to communicate with several targets which may be anywhere in space, simultaneously and continuously, because the main beam of the antenna can be directed electronically into a certain direction. Another advantage of phased-array antennas is the fact that they are relatively flat. Figure with transmitter and receiver modules (T/R modules) and 3) a signal-processing and control layer that controls the direction of the main beam of the array. The antenna layer consists of several individual antenna elements which are placed on a rectangular or on a triangular grid. Arrays of antennas can also be used to realize multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) communication systems. In such a system several non-correlated spatial communication channels can be realized between two devices (e.g. a base station and mobile user), resulting in a much higher channel capacity Antenna systems radiate electromagnetic energy at a particular frequency. The specific frequency range which can be used for a specific application is restricted and regulated worldwide by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The ITU organizes World Radiocommunication Conferences (WRCs) to determine the international Radio Regulations, which is the international treaty which defines the use of the world-wide radio-frequency spectrum. An example of such an allocation chart of the radio-frequency spectrum is shown in Fig. Radiation properties of antennas are generally expressed in terms of spherical coordinates. The spherical coordinate system is shown in Figure where ω = 2πf is the angular frequency, f is the frequency of operation and Re[] denotes the real part of the complex variable. The electric field E( r) in the space-frequency domain (phasor formulation) can now be expressed in terms of spherical coordinates: where φ r , φ θ , φ φ are the phases of the spherical components of the complex electric field. By combining 2.1 and 2.2 we can write the time-domain electric field E( r, t) in terms of the spacefrequency domain components: where we omitted the ( r) dependence of the amplitudes and phases of the field components to simplify the notation. An antenna transforms a guided electromagnetic (EM) wave that propagates along a transmission line into radiated waves that propagate in free space. These radiated waves can, in turn, be received by another antenna. Due to reciprocity, the receiving antenna will transform the incident EM waves into a guided EM wave along a transmission line. One could also interpret this as the transition of electrons in conductors to photons in free space. The transition from a guided wave along a transmission line to radiated waves from the antenna is illustrated in Fig. Free-space spherical wave E-field direction at t=t 0 The electromagnetic field radiated by an antenna can be divided into three main regions: 1) the near-field region, 2) transition or Fresnel region and 3) the far-field region. Fig. where R is the radial distance from the antenna, L is the largest dimension of the antenna, λ 0 = c f is the free-space wavelength of the radiated electromagnetic wave and c = 3•10 8 [m/s] is the speed of light. In chapter 4 we will show how criterium (2.4) can be derived directly from the theoretical antenna framework that we will introduce. Consider a transmit antenna located in the origin of the coordinate system of Fig. where k 0 = ω c is the free-space wavenumber and A the amplitude. Note that in (2.5), we have assumed that the plane wave propagates in the +z-direction. For the sake of simplicity we only considered a component in the u y direction. The corresponding magnetic field H is perpendicular both to the E field and the direction of propagation. The transmit antenna will radiate spherical waves. In chapter 4 and 6 we will investigate the radiated fields in more detail. It will be shown that the far field in spherical coordinates E( r) = E θ ( r) u θ + E φ ( r) u φ + E r ( r) u r due to an antenna placed at the origin of our coordinate system at r = (0, 0, 0) can be expressed in the following form: Since EM waves in the far-field locally behave as TEM waves, we can write the corresponding magnetic field H in terms of the electric field: where Z 0 = μ 0 0 = 377Ω is the intrinsic free-space impedance. The radiated power density expressed in Watts per square meter [W/m 2 ], is known as the Poynting vector and describes the directional energy flux (the energy transfer per unit area per unit time) of an electromagnetic field. The Pointing vector in the far-field region only has a component in the radial direction u r . The time-average Poynting vector S p ( r) over a period T = 2π ω at a specific position r in the far-field is now given by: (2.8) In the far-field region we can use relation since E( r) • u r = 0. We can conclude that the electromagnetic energy propagates in the radial direction u r . The radiation pattern is a graphical illustration of the radiated power in a certain direction in the far field region of the antenna. From (2.6) we can observe that the electric field vector E has a r -1 dependence in the far-field region. The radiated power per element of solid angle dΩ = sinθdθdφ can be determined from (see also Fig. where Poynting's vector is given by (2.9). Expression (2.10) is only valid in the far-field region where the radiated power per element of solid angle is independent of r. Let us assume that the maximum value of P (θ, φ) occurs at the angle (θ, φ) = (0, 0). The normalized radiation pattern F (θ, φ) is found from: Radiation patterns are always expressed in decibels [dB], that is using 10 log 10 (F (θ, φ)). Some examples are shown in Fig. The beam width defines the beam area for which the radiated or received power is larger than half of the maximum power, the so-called Half-Power Beam Width (HPBW). The beam width in the principle planes (θ = 0 and φ = 0 plane) is expressed by θ HP or as φ HP . The directivity describes the beamforming capabilities of an antenna. It describes the concentration of radiated power in the main lobe w.r.t. all other directions. Let us consider an antenna that generates a total radiated power P t [W]. When this antenna would be an isotropic radiator, the radiated power would be equally radiated over all directions with an uniform radiated power density of P t 4π [W per unit of solid angle]. Note that an isotropic radiator cannot exist in practise, it is only a theoretical reference that is used to define the directivity of a real antenna. The directivity function D(θ, φ) of a real physical antenna is defined as the power density per unit of solid angle in the direction (θ, φ) relative to an isotropic radiator: (2.12) Figure The maximum of the directivity-function is the directivity D = max[D(θ, φ)]. Antennas always have some losses, for example due to resistive losses in metal structures, dielectric losses in dielectric substrates or impedance-matching losses between antenna and the connected source. Due to these losses not all the power that is provided by the source will be radiated. When we substitute the total radiated power P t in (2.12) by the total input power P in to the antenna, we get the well-known antenna gain function G(θ, φ), which is given by: Similar to the directivity function, the antenna gain function will have a maximum, which is called the antenna gain G, with The antenna efficiency η is a quantity that descibes how much of the input power towards the antenna is transformed into radiated power: (2.15) Typically, antennas are connected to a generator (transmit mode) or detector (receive mode) by means of a transmission line. More details on transmission line theory can be found in the next chapter. Sometimes, antennas are directly connected to an amplifier, in which case power matching to a transmission line is not perse required. The input impedance of the antenna is an important measure that determines how much of the power transported along the transmission line is actually radiated by the antenna. The input impedance of an antenna will be complex in general: where R a is the antenna resistance, R r represents the radiated losses and R L the real losses like Ohmic or dielectric losses. Furthermore, X a is the antenna reactance which is related to the stored reactive energy in the close vicinity of the antenna. Note that the radiation resistance R r is directly related to the total radiated power by the antenna and is in fact a measure that defines how well the antenna works. Fig. In other words: (2.17) The total radiated power P t can be found by integrating the radiated power density over a sphere. Using relation (2.9) and (2.6), we obtain the following expression for P t : At microwave frequencies it is, in general, not possible to measure voltages and currents directly. Therefore, we cannot directly measure the input impedance Z a . We will show in chapter 3 that it is possible to measure the (complex) amplitude of incident and reflected waves along transmission lines. In this way we can experimentally determine the input reflection coefficient of the antenna using a vector network analyser (VNA). Now let us assume that the antenna is connected to a transmission line with a characteristic impedance equal to Z t 0 . Usually Z t 0 = 50Ω. Furthermore, we will assume that an incident TEM wave propagates along the transmission line with complex amplitude a and a corresponding reflected wave (in the opposite direction) with complexe amplitude b. The reflection coefficient is now defined as the ratio between both complex amplitudes: From transmission line theory (see chapter 3 for more details), it is well known that the relation between the reflection coefficient and the input impedance at the input of the antenna is given by: When the antenna is properly matched to a transmission line with Z a = Z t 0 , we will obtain a reflection coefficient Γ = 0. Up to now, we have investigated the antenna parameters mainly by considering the antenna in transmit mode. The receive properties of the antenna are, of course, also very important. One of the key parameters that describes the antenna properties in receive mode is the effective antenna aperture A e . A e defines the equivalent surface in which the antenna absorbs the incident electromagnetic field that is dissipated by the load impedance Z L which is connected to the terminals of the antenna. Now let S p represent the power density (W/m 2 ) of an incident plane wave. The effective antenna aperture is now defined as the ratio between the power P r delivered to the load impedance and the power density S p : Where we have assumed that the antenna is optimally matched to the load impedance, according to Z a = Z * L . In chapter 4, we will introduce the reciprocity theorem. The reciprocity theorem defines the relation between the receive and transmit properties of an antenna. We will show that there is an unique relation between the antenna gain G and the effective antenna aperture A e according to: The radiated electric field vector from an antenna will, in general, have two components, E θ and E φ , both perpendicular to the direction of propagation u r in the far-field region. Both components (when described as phasors in the frequency domain) will usually have a relative phase difference with respect to each other. With a phase difference equal to 0, the resulting field will be linearly polarized. As a result, the direction of the electric field vector in the time domain will be constant. When a phase difference between the E θ and E φ components exists, the direction of the realized total time-domain electric field E( r, t) will vary over time with a period of T = 2π/ω. The timedomain electric field vector will now describe an ellipse, corresponding to elliptical polarization. Now let us take a closer look at the time-domain electric field components: where φ is the phase difference between both electric-field components. Let us consider the case that r = 0. We can find the elliptical trajectory of the electric field vector E = (E θ , E φ ) by eliminating the time-dependence. We can rewrite resulting in: This equation describes an ellipse in the plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation u r . The ratio between the major and minor axis of the ellipse is defined as the axial ratio (AR), with AR ≥ 1. We can distinguish two special cases i. Circular polarization (E 1 = E 2 = E and φ = ±π/2). Equation (2.26) now represents a circle. The field will be circularly-polarized. When φ = π/2, we obtain Left-Hand Circular Polarization (LHCP): In case φ = -π/2, we obtain Right-Hand Circular Polarization (RHCP): (2.28) The axial ratio describes the quality of the circularly-polarized wave and is given by: Perfect circular polarization is realized when AR = 1. ii. Linear polarization (E 1 = E 2 and φ = ±π). Equation (2.26) transforms into the equation of a straight line, with corresponding axial ratio AR = ∞. The antenna is one of the components of a complete system. Examples of such systems include wireless communication systems (e.g. 4G/5G) and radar. The antenna parameters that we have introduced in the previous sections can be used to quantify the quality of a radio link or to determine the range of a radar. Fig. where G t is the antenna gain of the transmit antenna as compared to an isotropic antenna. The power received by the receive antenna with an effective aperture A er now becomes: This equation is also known as the radio equation or Friis equation. By using (2.31), we finally obtain: where G r is the antenna gain of the receiving antenna. The term λ 2 0 (4π) 2 r 2 is also known as the free-space path loss and depends on frequency, since λ 0 = c/f . However, this term is not really a loss, since we had assumed in our ideal radio link of Fig. As an example of a link-budget analysis, consider the Bluetooth system operating in the 2.4 -2.48 GHz band. Assume omni-directional antennas (G t = G r = 1), an output power of P t = 1 mW (0 dBm) and a receiver sensitivity P r,min = 10 -10 W (= -70 dBm). The maximum range r max of this system then becomes: Let us now consider a radar system. In this case, we replace the receive antenna by an object with a radar cross section σ[m 2 ]. The radar cross section of an object depends on the size and shape (e.g. car or airplane) and determines how much of the incident power is reflected back to the radar. We will assume that the transmit antenna can also be used as receive antenna, therefore G t = G r = G. The latter is due to the reciprocity theorem which applies to passive microwave structures including antennas. The received power of the radar is now given by: (2.34) This equation is known as the radar equation. It is a first-order estimation of the received power and shows that the probability of detection of an object decreases according to r 4 . In a real system, the radar equation will be somewhat more complicated. In addition, the maximum detection range can be increased by using advanced signal processing techniques. More background information can be found in Skolnik . (2.35) As an example, consider an X-band radar operating at f = 10 GHz with A e = 1m 2 , P t = 10 kW, σ = 1m 2 and P min = 10 -13 W (10 log 10 P r,min = -100 dBm). This implies that G = 14000 (G dB = 41 dB). The maximum range now becomes r max = 54 km. Transmission line theory and microwave circuits In this chapter we will extend the well-known circuit theory to transmission line theory. Circuit theory can be applied to electrical circuits in which the size of the individual (lumped) components, like resistors, capacitors and inductors, are much smaller than the electrical wavelength (size 0.1λ). In case the physical dimension of a component or network becomes a significant fraction of the wavelength (size > 0.1λ), we need to apply transmission line theory. We consider the transmission line to be a distributed network in which the voltages and currents vary along the location along the line. In this chapter, we will derive transmission line concepts by using circuit theory. Therefore, we do not need to solve Maxwell's equations explicitly to analyze networks based on transmission lines. Fig. Similarly, Kirchhoff's current law gives: Now divide (3.2) and (3.3) by ∆z and take the limit of ∆z → 0, resulting in two differential equations with two unknowns (v(z, t) and i(z, t)) which can be written in the following form: (3.4) Equation (3.4) is known as the Telegrapher equation in the time domain. Since we assume a sinusoidal time variation of all field components in this book, the voltage and current can be written as: in which ω = 2πf and f is the frequency of operation. In this case the time derivative of v(z, t) in (3.4) transforms into a simple multiplication in the frequency domain: By applying this in (3.4) we obtain the frequency-domain Telegrapher equation: The general solution of the frequency-domain Telegrapher equation is now a combination of a voltage and current wave propagating in the +z direction and a wave propagating in the -z direction: where γ is the complex propagation constant: in which α is the attenuation of the line and β is the phase constant. Note that the wavenumber k 0 used in chapter 2 and chapter 4 is strongly related to the phase constant β. However, we will use different symbols, since it is more common to use k 0 in the antenna community and β in the microwave engineering community. The term e -γz corresponds to a wave propagating in the +z direction and e γz to a wave propagating in the -z direction. Note that V (z) and I(z) in (3.8) represent the total voltage and current, respectively, at the position z along the line. It can be easily verified that (3.8) describes the general solution by substituting (3.8) into the Telegrapher equation (3.10) In addition, the characteristic impedance Z 0 of the transmission line is defined by: The time-domain representation of the voltage along the transmission line can be obtained by using the frequency domain solution (3.8) and relation where it can be observed that α describes the exponential attenuation along the line and where the phase constant β determines the wavelength on the line: Question: Why is there a -sign in the expression of I - 0 in (3.10)? In the previous section we have derived the solution for the voltage and current along a transmission line with losses, resulting in a complex propagation constant γ = α + β and complex characteristic impedance Z 0 . In a lot of practical applications, the losses along the transmission line are very small and can, therefore, be neglected for a first-order analysis. When the transmission line is lossless, the series resistance R and the shunt conductance G in Fig. The corresponding wavelength and associated phase velocity of the wave along the line are given by: (3.15) A transmission line operating at f = 500 MHz has the following per unit length parameters: Using (3.9), we find that the complex propagation coefficient is calculated by: in which the square root was evaluated according to Im(γ) > 0. Re-calculating this for a lossless line with R = G = 0 gives: Consider the terminated lossless transmission of Fig. This equation still has two unknown coefficients V + 0 and V - 0 . A relation between both coefficients can be found by using the relation between the voltage and current along the load impedance. At z = 0 this relation is given by: We can now introduce the reflection coefficient Γ as: Some special terminations are: In case of a matched load Z L = Z 0 , the voltage along the line is constant |V (z)| = |V + 0 |. This line is now also called to be "flat". In other cases when Γ = |Γ|e θ = 0, the magnitude of the voltage will not be constant over the line: -2βl) , at z = -l. (3.24) The voltage along the line fluctuates according to: where the VWSR is the voltage standing wave ratio which is a quantity that describes the fluctuation of the voltage along the line. The VSWR is an important quantity that is often used to specify the load conditions of active devices, like power amplifiers (PAs). PAs use semiconductor transistors which have a maximum break-down voltage. By specifying a maximum VWSR, we can avoid the maximum voltage along the line to exceed the break-down voltage of the transistor. The reflection coefficient as defined in where Γ = Γ(z = 0). Now let us consider the configuration of Fig. Equation z Z in Consider a lossless transmission line of length l which is short-circuited at the termination (Z L = 0). As expected in case of a short-circuit, we find from (3.28) The corresponding V SW R = ∞ since the minimum voltage on the line V min = 0. When a power amplifier is connected to a short circuited transmission line, the output voltage at the output port of the amplifier may become much larger than the breakdown voltage. In this case, the amplifier will be destroyed. When the terminated transmission line is not well matched to the connecting transmision line, that is Z in = Z 0 , part of the incident power will be reflected. Now let us assume that the load impedance is purely resistive Z L = R L . The incident power P in and reflected power P r can be related by using the magnitude of the voltage reflection coefficient: Note that in in which a similar derivation as used in (2.8) was applied. Note that the time domain voltage and current can be expressed as: Exercise Derive the expression for time-average power, given by (3.30), by using relation The return loss RL is now defined as the amount of power reflected by the load: RL = -10 log 10 |Γ| 2 = -20 log 10 |Γ|. (3.32) Related to return loss is the insertion loss. The insertion loss describes the loss of a transition between two transmission lines, as illustrated in Fig. where T is the transmission coefficient: Let P in be the power of the incident wave and P 1 the power of the transmitted wave. The insertion loss IL is now found as: A very nice application of the terminated transmission line is the so-called λ/4 transformer as illustrated in Fig. The λ/4 transformer in which a λ/4-transmission line is connected to a terminated lossless transmission line, terminated with a load impedance R L the transformer at z = -λ/4 can be calculated using where βl = 2π λ λ 4 = π 2 . From (3.36) we find that the reflection coefficient at z = -λ/4 is zero when the following condition is satisfied: Example Consider a load resistance R L = 100 Ω which needs to be matched to a long transmission line with characteristic impedance Z 0 = 50 Ω. Design a quarter-wave transformer at the frequency f 0 and plot the magnitude of the input reflection coefficient versus the normalized frequency f /f 0 . From (3.37) we find that Z 1 = √ Z 0 R L = 70.71 Ω. The magnitude of the input reflection coefficient is found from: (3.38) Fig. In practise, transmission lines will always be lossy, although the theory of lossless lines is generally a very good first-order estimation. In case of a lossy terminated line, as illustrated in Fig. where Γ is the reflection coefficient at the termination z = 0. The input impedance at z = -l is now found by: The power delivered at z = -l is now: The corresponding power delivered to the load at z = 0 is found by: (3.42) The loss in the terminated line of length l is found as the difference between P in and P L : The first term in Real transmission lines may take various shapes. Fig. Nowadays, several open-source and commercial software packages, like QUCS and ADS are available with tools to determine the transmission line parameters for various types of transmission lines. A type of transmission line for which we can easily solve Maxwells' equations is the parallelplate waveguide as illustrated in Fig. In this case, it can be shown that the transverse components of the electric and magnetic field can be found by solving Laplace's equation: where the transverse electric field is that the electric field in (3.44) can be expressed as a gradient of a scalar potential Φ(x, y): This scalar potential Φ(x, y) satisfies Laplace's equation: The boundary conditions of this differential equation are as indicated in Fig. A solution of Φ(x, y) cannot depend on x, since we have assumed that the width w is very large (close to infinite). Therefore, Φ(x, y) takes the form: which can be easily verified by substituting this in (3.46) and (3.47). The electric and magnetic fields between the plates are now obtained using (3.45): where the propagation constant β = ω √ μ 0 and the intrinsic impedance η = μ 0 / . The corresponding voltage and current along the line are now given by: (3.50) The transmission line parameters are then found by (with R = G = 0): (3.51) The Smith chart is a very useful graphical tool to visualize the behaviour of transmission-line circuits. The Smith chart was developed by P. Smith in 1939, well before computer-based design tools had become available. The Smith chart is still de-facto de standard representation tool in microwave engineering. The Smith chart is basically built around the complex representation of the reflection coefficient of a transmission line circuit, for example as described in When we would plot Γ in the complex plane, we find that all values are within the unit circle, since |Γ| ≤ 1. In case Z in = Z 0 , Γ = 0 and we would end up in the center of the unit circle. The most common form of the Smith chart is shown in Fig. In this case we find that: Now Γ is real and describes a line along the horizontal axis with Γ = -1 for r in = 0 (short), Γ = 0 for r in = Z 0 (matched load) and Γ = 1 for r in = ∞ (open). Usually, Z 0 = 50 Ω is used. Another special case occurs when the load is purely reactive with be shown that the reflection coefficient Γ now describes a circle with amplitude |Γ| = 1. This can be generalized to the case of a constant resistance and varying reactance. In this case we obtain circles as can be seen in Fig. Exercise Plot the following load conditions in the Smith chart: Consider a microwave network with K-ports as illustrated in Fig. (3.54) Microwave network The relation between the port voltages and port currents is defined by the impedance matrix [Z]: In most practical case we will investigate two-port microwave networks with K = 2. The relation between port voltages and currents then reduces to: where the individual components of the Z-matrix are found by: Example Consider the network of Fig. The components of the impedance matrix are now found using (3.57): where the individual components of the Y -matrix are found by: Although the impedance and admittance matrices describe the behaviour of a microwave network completely, it appears that this description is not very practical at microwave frequencies. This is due to the fact that we cannot measure the complex values of the total port voltages and currents in an accurate way at these frequencies. However, we can measure the amplitude and phase of the incident and reflected voltage waves in an accurate way by measuring the complex amplitude of the incident and reflected electric field of the TEM wave. This is done with a vector network analyzer (VNA). Let us consider again the K-port microwave network, but now described in terms of the complex amplitude of the incident and reflected waves at each port. This is illustrated in Fig. (3.61) Note that Z 0 = 50 Ω is usually used in measurements. The relation between the incident waves [a] Microwave network .16: K-port microwave network described using normalized complex amplitudes of the incident and reflected TEM waves and reflected waves [b] is determined by the scattering matrix [S], which for a two-port microwave network takes the following form: where the individual scattering parameters are found by: So the scattering parameter S 11 can be found by properly matching output port 2. The other parameters are found in a similar way. In case of a one-port network, we find that the input reflection coefficient Γ in = S 11 . Now consider the two-port microwave network of Fig. Reverse Gain (|S 12 | 2 ) Figure where Γ S and Γ L are the reflection coefficients when looking into the source and load, respectively: Exercise Consider the two-port network of Fig. (3.66) .18: Two-port microwave network consisting of a 50 Ω lumped element connected in series between input and output ports Power combiners and power splitters are one of the most commonly used microwave circuits. For example, in basestations for wireless communications, where a high effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP) is required to provide coverage of large macro-cells. A high EIRP can be achieved by combining the output power of several power amplifiers using a power combiner. Another application is in array antennas, where received signals from the individual antennas can be combined into a single output signal. An example of a 4-channel power combiner is shown in Fig. . Now suppose that we would like to design an equal-split divider with α = 0.5 and Z 0 = 50 Ω. The input power delivered to the matched divider is: The corresponding output powers are given by: Both equations can be satisfied with the following choice for the characteristic impedances: The input impedance is now indeed Z in = 50 Ω because of the parallel connection of two 100 Ω impedances. However, the output ports are not matched and have a quite poor reflection coefficient: Note that poor output matching is not always a problem in an application. Another limitation of the simple T-junction divider is the poor isolation between the output ports, which could be a major issue in phased-array antennas. A way to improve the poor output matching and poor isolation is by adding a star connection of lumped-element resistors at the junction, as illustrated in Fig. Resistive power divider with equal power division ratio α = 0.5 From the input port we then obtain a Z 0 /3 resistor in series with a parallel connection of Z at both output ports: As a result, the input is well matched. Due to symmetry, the two output ports are also matched. Therefore, all diagonal components of the scattering matrix [S] are zero: S 11 = S 22 = S 33 = 0. The other components of the scattering matrix can be found by determining the relation between the input voltage V 1 and the output voltages V 2 and V 3 . Since all ports are matched, the total voltage is equal to the voltage amplitude of the TEM-wave travelling in the +z direction, see also The corresponding output votages at port 2 and 3 then become: As a result, the three-port scattering matrix takes the following form: From (3.76) we observe that S 21 = S 31 = S 23 = 1/2, which corresponds to a power level of -6 dB with respect to the input power level. The output power at each of the output ports Therefore, 50% of the input power is dissipated in the resistors. This is a major drawback in most microwave applications. However, in integrated circuits (ICs) resistive dividers could be useful, due to their small size. The power loss in such a circuit is not always a big issue since it can be compensated by adding additional amplification stages. Note that the isolation between the output ports of the resistive divider is also quite poor. So far we have investigated power dividers with major limitations in terms of matching, isolation or power dissipation. A power divider which combines excellent matching properties, high isolation and low loss is the Wilkinson power divider. Wilkinson dividers can be made for any division ratio, but we will only investigate the equal split case α = 0.5 in more detail in this section. we will excite the output ports with either the same voltage 2V s (even mode) and with opposite voltage 2V s and -2V s (odd mode). By using superposition, we then obtain the total voltage at the input port. From the voltages, we can determine the scattering matrix. The even-odd mode analysis starts by creating a new drawing that illustrates the symmetry of the Wilkinson power divider as shown in Fig. In this case the source voltages at port 2 and port 3 are equal with V s2 = V s3 = 2V s . Due to the symmetry in Fig. The voltage along the lossless λ/4 line with phase constant β is found using: As a result, the port voltages are given by: where Γ is the reflection coefficient looking at port 1 into the load impedance 2Z 0 : (3.80) The voltage at port 1 now becomes Odd-mode analysis The source voltages at port 2 and port 3 now have equal amplitudes but opposite sign, V s2 = 2V s and V s3 = -2V s . Due to the asymmetry, the voltage along the symmetry line is zero as illustrated in the equivalent circuit of Fig. Total solution: superposition of even-odd modes By applying superposition of the even-and odd-mode analysis we obtain the total solution when exciting port 2. In a similar way, the solution when exciting port 3 can be found. In both the even and odd mode, port 2 is matched. Therefore S 22 = S 33 = 0. In addition, it can be shown that with Z = √ 2Z 0 port 1 is also matched S 11 = 0. The transfer functions when all ports are matched are now found by superimposing the port voltages: The ideal Wilkinson divider has no losses since |S 21 | 2 = |S 12 | 2 = 1/2, so when used as a divider, 50% of the power is directed to each of the output ports. Furthermore, the isolation between the output ports is perfect since S 23 = S 32 = 0. When we use it as a combiner to combine input signals from port 2 and port 3, the ideal Wilkinson combiner will also be lossless as long as both signals are identical, both in phase and amplitude. Any unbalance between the input signals will be dissipated in the resistor. In a practical realization of the Wilkinson divider, there will be losses due to metal losses, dielectric losses and spurious radiation. In addition, the isolation (20 log 10 |S 32 |) will be limited, typically to a value between -20 and -30 dB. Consider the circuit of Fig. The source could be a power amplifier and the load could be an antenna. The time-average power delivered to the load is found by: where (3.85) Conjugate matching of a source impedance to a complex load impedance. When substituting (3.85) in (3.84) we obtain: The maximum delivered power is now found by determining the value of (R L , X L ) for which the partial derivatives are equal to zero: We find that this occurs when R L = R S and X L = -X S , in other words when Z L = Z * S . The maximum power transfer to the load occurs when the source and load impedances are conjugate matched to each other. In a lot of situations direct conjugate matching of the source to load is not possible. In these cases, we can use a matching circuit as illustrated in Fig. where ω = 2πf . The Smith chart is a useful tool to design such a network. Several commercial and open-source tools are available to design lumped-element matching circuits. Suppose that we want to match a particular load impedance Z L to a source impedance Z S . Fig. Exercise Design a lumped-element matching circuit to match a complex load impedance Z L = 200-100 Ω to a real load Z S = 100 Ω. The frequency of operation is 1 GHz. You can use the design tools shorted stub : Apparently, a shorted stub is the equivalent of an inductor and an open stub is the equivalent of a capacitor, with l ≤ λ/4. This equivalence appears to be very useful when designing microwave filters, as we will discuss in more detail in section 3.12. Impedance matching with the single-stub tuner of Fig. Now choose the length d in such a way that G T = Y 0 . Furthermore, the shunt stub is designed to cancel the imaginary part of Y T , so Y s = -B T . Next to single-stub tuners, double stub tuners can be used to increase the degrees of freedom. One of the additional advantages of a double-stub tuner is that it can be designed in such a way that the line length between the two stubs can be fixed, which simplifies the construction of such a tuner. Exercise Determine the parameters (l, d) of a single-stub tuner with a shorted stub to match a complex load impedance Z L = 100 -60 Ω to a 50 Ω transmission line. Use transmission lines with Z 0 = 50 Ω. Answer: d = 0.125λ and l = 0.118λ, where λ is the wavelength in the transmission line. Microwave filters can be used to manipulate the frequency response of a microwave system. Microwave filters are constructed using transmission line components. At lower frequencies (< 5 GHz) lumped elements (L, C) can be used as well. Well-known filter characteristics are low-pass, high-pass, bandpass or bandstop. Fig. which resembles the equivalence of an inductor with inductance L and capacitor with capacitance C at ω = 1, respectively. parallel (see Fig. how Kuroda's identity can be used to design a low-pass filter in microstrip technology. We will start with a lumped-element prototype, corresponding to a third-order maximally flat low-pass filter prototype (see Next the lumped elements are transformed to transmission line sections, in line with Fig. and for the coupled pair with k = 2...N we have where g k are the component values of the low-pass prototype filter with cutoff radial frequency ω ' 1 = 1. Furthermore, ω 0 = 2πf 0 is the design radial frequency and ω 1 = 2πf 1 is the radial frequency corresponding to the lower edge of the passband of the bandpass filter. The bandwidth of the filter is 2(f 0 -f 1 )/f 0 . Let us now consider an example to illustrate the usage of design equations (3.92) and (3.93). We will design a two-section Chebyshev coupled-line filter with a 20% bandwidth, 3 dB ripple in the passband and a center frequency at 28 GHz. The first step is to determine the low-pass prototype equivalent circuit. From Antennas are almost always connected to amplifiers. In transmit mode, the antenna will be connected to a power amplifier (PA), whereas in receive mode the antenna will be connected to a low-noise amplifier (LNA). With the continuous increase of the operational frequency of new wireless applications, highly integrated active antenna concepts will need to be developed in order to combat the interconnect losses between antenna and amplifier. Therefore, it is crucial for the future antenna engineer to have a good understanding of amplifiers. Microwave amplifiers can be realized in several semiconductor technologies, such as siliconbased technologies (CMOS and BiCMOS), and III-V technologies, such as gallium arsenide (GaAs) or gallium nitride (GaN). Discrete transistors can be used to realize an amplifier, but most commonly the amplifiers will be integrated in a more complex RF integrated circuit (RF-IC). More background material on microwave amplifiers can be found in For the analysis and design of amplifiers it is convenient to use three definitions for power gain. Consider the amplifier circuit of Fig. iii. Transducer power gain G T = P del,L P av,S , which is the ratio between the delivered power to the load P del,L and the available input power from the source P av,S . In section 3.9 we already derived the expressions for the input and output reflection coefficients, given by (3.64) and (3.65). Now let Z in be the input impedance looking into the amplifier as indicated in Fig. From (3.96) we can determine V + 1 and calculate the time-average input power to the amplifier, similar to the approach of section 3.6: where Γ in , Γ S and Γ L are given by (3.64) and (3.65). In addition, we have expressed Z in in terms of Γ in by using In a similar way we can determine the delivered power to the load: where we have written the incident and reflected voltage wave amplitudes in terms of the scattering coefficients using (3.61) and (3.62). We then finally find the delivered power gain by using (3.97) and (3.99): In a similar way we can determine the other two power gain definitions: where M S and M L represent the source and load mismatch factors, respectively, and are given by: (3.102) Note that Γ out is given in (3.64). Note that in case of a unilateral amplifier, e.g. S 12 = 0, the expressions for the input and output reflection coefficient (3.64) simplify to Γ in = S 11 and Γ out = S 22 . As an example, we will use the BFU730F transistor from NXP Semiconductors. A basic circuit (excluding biasing) using this amplifier is shown in Fig. The power available from the source is which corresponds to -37.7 dBm. The available power at the output of the amplifier is then P av,out = G av P av,S = 1.3 mW which is equal to +1.2 dBm. One of the key aspects in the design of amplifiers is the so-called stability of the amplifier circuit. (3.111) Often we are only interested in knowing whether an amplifier is unconditionally stable within a certain frequency range for all source and load impedances. To check this we can use the Rollett stability condition As an example, we can check the stability of the BFU730F transistor by substituting the scattering parameters of (3.103) in to (3.112) or (3.113). We then find that K = 0.039 and |∆| = 0.836. The corresponding μ-test value is μ = 0.38. This means that this device is not unconditionally stable at this frequency. The overall gain of the amplifier of Fig. where the source and load mismatch factors are now given by: The factor M S is maximised when Γ S = S * 11 with maximum value: We can now introduce a normalized value g S with For a constant value of g S , expression (3.117) will be a circle in the Γ S plane when plotted in a Smith chart with radius and center given by: (3.118) If we again consider the BFU730F transistor and assume that this transistor is unilateral with S 12 = 0 and where the other scattering parameters are given by (3.103) at 400 MHz, we obtain the constant-gain circles as illustrated in Fig. The maximum value for this device is M S = 6.1 dB. In order to improve/simplify the matching towards the source, we could compromise a few dB, for example by choosing the M S = 2 dB circle in Fig. (3.119) where g L is the normalized value given by: (3.120) The constant gain circles in the load plane for the BFU730F transistor at 400 MHz are shown in Fig. In 1926 John Johnson at Bell Labs observed for the first time that a resistor generates noise in the absence of external current biasing. This so-called thermal noise or Johnson noise is due to the random motion of charges in the resistor material. Consider the resistor connected at the input of a microwave amplifier, as illustrated in Fig. where k b = 1.38 × 10 -23 J/K is Boltmann's constant and B [Hz] is the noise bandwidth of the system. Note that by adding additional resistors in series or in parallel at the input would not affect the available noise power, since the available noise power is independent of the resistor value. As a result, the available noise power at the input of any receiver will always be equal to -174 dBm/Hz at room temperature (T 0 = 300 K). Note that dBm refers to decibel-milliwatts, where 0 dBm corresponds to 1 mW of power. The noise figure F of a two-port microwave network is defined as the ratio between the input signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and output SNR: The noise which is added by the amplifier ∆N amp i seen at the input of a noise-free amplifier with available power gain G av is given by: Microwave receivers usually consist of several cascaded stages, each stage being characterized by an available power gain and noise figure. In Fig. where relation (3.125) was used. The total noise figure of the cascaded two-stage network is then given by where T e1 and T e2 are the equivalent noise temperatures of the first and second stage, respectively, which can be found using Consider a low-noise amplifier which is connected to a source with complex source impedance The noise figure of this amplifier can be determined from the following relation where the source admittance is Y S = 1/Z S = G S + B S . The other three parameters in (3.132) quantify the noise performance of a particular single-stage low-noise amplifier: • F min , the minimum noise figure at particular DC-biasing of the transistor, • R n = 1/G n , the equivalent noise resistance of the transistor, • Y opt , the optimum source admittance that provides the minimum noise figure. Relation (3.132) can also be rewritten in terms of impedance values: Sometimes (e.g. in case of ultra low-noise amplifiers for radio astronomy) it is also convenient to convert (3.132) to the equivalent noise temperature: where the minimum noise temperature is T min = (F min -1)T 0 . It appears to be very convenient for the design of a particular low-noise amplifier to use the Smith chart. In the Smith chart we can indicate the region for the source impedance Z S for which the amplifier has a noise figure below a certain value. In the same Smith chart other regions can be indicated for Z S in which other relevant performance indicators, such as the available power gain G av , is higher than a certain minimum required value. If the regions overlap, a suitable choice for Z S can be obtained that satisfies all requirements. In order to be able to use we can transform (3.132) in the following form: where Γ opt is the optimum source reflection coefficient that would result in a minimum noise figure and Γ S is the realized source reflection coefficient. It can be shown that (3.136) represents a circle for Γ S in the Smith Chart with center O N and radius R N given by where N is also known as the noise figure parameter. Let us now consider an example to illustrate how noise circles can be used. Consider the SiGe bipolar transistor BFU730F from NXP Semiconductors. From the datasheet we find that at 400 MHz, with a DC collector current of I c = 10 mA and collector-emitter voltage V CE = 2 V, we get N F min = 0.57 dB, R n = 6 Ω and Z opt = 100 + 5.2 Ω. Suppose we want to design an amplifier using this transistor with a noise figure below 1 dB. The noise circle that defines the area in which Γ S can be selected to obtain a maximum noise figure of 1 dB is given by: The resulting noise circle is shown in Fig. In this chapter we will introduce the general properties of radiated fields from antenna sources. We will use Maxwell's equations in the space-frequency domain as a starting point in which the antenna is represented by a current or charge distribution. Next, we will determine the electromagnetic field in the far field of an arbitrarily electric current or charge distribution. Based on this, several elementary antenna structures will be analyzed, such as wire antennas and loop antennas. Finally, we will introduce magnetic sources and the Lorentz-Larmor theorem in order to extend the theoretical framework towards the analysis of aperture antennas, such as horns, reflector antennas and microstrip antennas. Maxwell's equations describe the propagation of electromagnetic waves generated by a current or charge distribution in any medium. In the time domain Maxwell's equations are given by Note that the continuity equation is not an independent equation, but can be derived from Maxwell's equations (4.1). Since the propagation of electromagnetic waves from a transmit antenna to a receive antenna usually takes place in free-space, we can state that: Furthermore, we will again assume a time-harmonic dependence of all field components, currents and charges, with angular frequency ω = 2πf , where f is the frequency expressed in Hertz A similar relation holds for the other components of (4.1). Maxwell's equations now reduce to the following set of equations: Next step is to determine the electric and magnetic fields, E( r) and H( r), due to the source distributions, given by J e ( r) and ρ e ( r). From these frequency-domain fields, we can then determine the physical (time-domain) fields E( r, t) and H( r, t) by using relation Note that A e does not have a unique solution, since the vector A 1 e = A e + ∇φ e , with φ e an arbitrarily scalar potential, provides exactly the same solution of H. Substitution of (4.6) in the first equation of (4.5) provides which leads to where φ e is an unknown scalar function of r. Substituting (4.8) in the second equation of (4.5) gives Where k 0 is the wavenumber in free space with k 2 0 = ω 2 0 μ 0 = ω 2 /c 2 , with c the speed of light. By using the vector property ∇ × ∇ × A e = ∇∇ • A e -∇ 2 A e , (4.9) becomes Up to now, we did not specify the scalar potential φ e . We will choose φ e according to This particular choice is known as the Lorenz-gauge. Equation (4.10) can now be re-written in the well-known Helmholtz equation Note that we also need to satisfy the last equation of (4.5). This results in Again, we apply the Lorenz-gauge, which provides us When considering antennas, the sources which are represented by the electric current density J e and charge distribution ρ e , will be located within a finite-size volume V 0 . This is illustrated in Fig. Here δ(r) represents the three-dimensional delta function. Since the current has only a component in the z direction, the vector potential will also only have a component in the z-direction, i.e. A e = A ez u z . The vector potential now satisfies the following equation The scalar quantity A ez needs to represent a spherical behavior, since we have assumed a point source. As a result A ez ( r) = A ez (r). Therefore, we can rewrite (4.16) in the following form Outside the origin, we now find two possible solutions of this differential equation: where C is a constant. The first solution A 1 ez represents a spherical wave propagating towards the source, whereas the second solution A 2 ez represents a wave which propagates away from the source. This is due to the fact that we have assumed a e ωt time dependence of the fields. We will use the second solution, where we still need to determine the constant C. We can determine C by substituting k 0 ↓ 0 in (4.17), which transforms into the Poisson equation known from electrostatics with solution As a result, we find that C = μ 0 I 0 l 4π . The general solution of the vector potential A e of an electric dipole along the z-axis now takes the following form: The vector potential in (4.20) has the same direction as the dipole. This can be generalized to all directions. Therefore, the vector potential of an arbitrarily oriented dipole located at r 0 = u x x 0 + u y y 0 + u z z 0 can be found by substituting r in expression (4.20 The function G( r, r 0 ) is known as the Greens function and represents the response of a point source. The Greens function plays an important role in numerical electromagnetic methods (e.g. Method-of-Moments) which are used to analyze complex antenna structures. More details can be found in chapter 5. The vector potential of a general electric current distribution J e within the volume V 0 can be obtained by applying the superposition principle. The solutions of expression (4.12) and (4.14) for an observation point P outside the source volume V 0 can now be easily found by: ) where r 0 indicates a source coordinate in the volume V 0 and r indicates an observation point at which the fields are being determined. It should be noted that the solutions of (4.12) and (4.14) should meet the Lorenz-gauge. By using the notation we find that Note that the operator ∇ r is related to r and not to r 0 . Furthermore, we have used the fact that ∇ r φ( r, r 0 ) = -∇ r 0 φ( r, r 0 ). As a next step, we will determine By applying Gauss theorem and by selecting a volume V 0 much larger than the source region, the second integral on the right-hand side of equation (4.26) will vanish. In the first integral we can replace J e ( r 0 ) by means of the continuity equation (4.2) by ρ e . This results in the Lorenz-gauge: By using the Lorenz-gauge we are able to express the fields E and H directly in terms of the vector potential A e . Outside the source region, we now find that (4.30) Since the vector potential A e only depends on J e (and does not depend on the charge distribution ρ e ), we only need to know the electric current distribution J e on a particular antenna structure in order to determine the radiated electromagnetic fields. This is a consequence of the applied Lorenz-gauge. In chapter 2 we have discussed the various field regions of antennas. Since most antennas are used to transfer information over long distances, we are primarily interested in the fields far away from the antenna. In this section we will determine a general analytic expression of the electromagnetic field in the so-called far-field region of the antenna. The derivation starts with the expression of the vector potential (4.22), which we derived in the previous section. Combining this with (4.30) results in where φ has been defined in 4.24. Furthermore, operator ∇ r × is performed on the field point r. We now know that ∇ r × J e ( r 0 )φ( r, r 0 ) = φ( r, r 0 )∇ r × J e ( r 0 ) + ∇ r φ( r, r 0 ) × J e ( r 0 ). (4.32) Note that ∇ r × J e ( r 0 ) = 0 and By using the following relations and we find that where we have introduced the coordinate r d according to r d = r -r 0 with r d = | r d | and where the unit-vector in the direction r d is given by u r d = r d r d . We will now derive an approximation of the magnetic field H, which is only valid at a large distance from the antenna system. The distance r d between a field point P with coordinates (x, y, z) and the source point with coordinates (x 0 , y 0 , z 0 ) is given by This can also be written in the following form with r 2 = x 2 + y 2 + z 2 . In the far-field region x 0 , y 0 and z 0 will be very small as compared to r. As a result, we can express r d in terms of a binomial distribution according to with u r = r r . This approximation is only valid if the term 2r is small enough. The corresponding exponential factor will be close to 1. The criterion which is often used in literature is Consider an antenna with maximum dimension L and assume that the center of the antenna is located in the origin of our coordinate system. Equation(4.40)now corresponds to the well-known far-field criterion introduced in chapter 2 The second condition is fulfilled when r L. In addition, the first condition is then also fulfilled since x/r, y/r and z/r are both of order 1. If r λ 0 , we can replace -k 0 + 1 r d by -k 0 . By applying these approximations, we now obtain the following expression for the magnetic field H H = -k 0 e -k 0 r 4πr If our observation point P is located far away from the antenna, the vector u r d and vector u r will be parallel to eachother. As a consequence, we can replace u r d by u r . The unit vector u r does not depend on the source point Q and can, therefore, by moved outside the integral. We then finally obtain Expression (4.45) leads to several important conclusions: i. H has an 1 r dependency. ii. From e -k 0 r and the time-harmonic behavior e ωt , we can conclude that the waves propagate away from the source. iii. H • u r = 0. This implies that the radial component vanishes in the far-field region. iv. The magnetic field can now be expressed as The components H θ (θ, φ) and H φ (θ, φ)) can be determined in the following way. We can express the electric current density in the following form We then obtain The field H can now also be written as This specific formulation of the far field was already used in (2.6) in order to determine the radiation pattern of an antenna. v. The field H in the observation point P can be interpreted as the superposition of the contributions from all source points. Note that the term e k 0 ur• r 0 corresponds to a phase difference between source point Q (x 0 , y 0 , z 0 ) and the origin (0, 0, 0) The final step in the derivation of the radiated fields from a general antenna is the determination of the electric field E( r) using expresssion (4.30) The vector operator ∇ × A e was already applied previously resulting in (4.36). The electric field E now takes the form Note that the operator ∇ r is not only a function of the vector r 0 but also of r due to the factor and a( r, r 0 ) = r d × J e ( r 0 ), we obtain By substituting this expression in (4.52) we obtain When we apply the same kind of far-field approximation as used for H we find that By substituting u r d by u r , we finally arrive at the expression for E in the far-field region of the antenna: Note that the expressions of E and H given by (4.56) and (4.45) can also be obtained by substituting the operator ∇× in equation (4.30) by (-k 0 ) u r ×. Applying the vector identity )) e k 0 ur• r 0 dV 0 . (4.57) From (4.57) we can conclude that E • u r = 0, which implies that the radial component of E vanishes in the far-field region of the antenna. As a result, the electric field E is perpendicular to u r . By combining expression (4.45) and (4.56) we can observe that where Z 0 = μ 0 0 ≈ 377Ω is the free-space wave impedance. From (4.58) we find that the electromagnetic waves in the far-field region behave locally as TEM waves. The Pointing vector is now readily found from (4.58) since E • u r . As expected, the electromagnetic energy indeed flows in the radial direction. For an antenna described by an electric current distribution J e ( r 0 ) within a finite volume V 0 , we can express the corresponding electromagnetic fields in the far-field region by (4.60) The most elementary antenna is the electric dipole. The electric dipole is an infinitely small current element, which can be approximated in practice by a small linear antenna with a length much smaller than the free-space wavelength λ 0 . The electric dipole is located in the origin of our coordinate system and directed along the z-axis, as indicated in Fig. Where I 0 is the total current which we assume to be constant along the electric dipole. The length of the antenna is l. The delta-function δ(z) belongs to the class of generalized functions with the property: The delta-function can be visualized as follows where w needs to be very small. In order to determine whether (4.61) indeed represents an electric dipole, we need to investigate the corresponding charge distribution ρ e which can be found by applying the continuity equation (4.2): By considering the derivative of (4.63), δ (z), we can represent(4.64) by a set of two point charges with opposite sign and located on the z-axis at z = w/2 and -w/2, respectively, since Let us now determine the electromagnetic fields in the far-field region of the electric dipole by using the general expressions derived in chapter 4.2: Substituting the current distribution of the electric dipole (4.61) in the above equation and using the fact that leads us to the magnetic field far away from the dipole The corresponding electric field in the far-field region is now given by where we have used the following relation The time-average power flux density (Pointing vector) expressed in [W/m 2 ] is found by using equation (4.59), which provides (4.71) From (4.71) we can conclude that the electric dipole does not radiate uniformly in all directions. In the direction along the z-axis (θ = 0) the dipole does not radiate al all. The power density S p ( r) decreases as r -2 with increasing distance from the dipole. However, since the total power radiates through a sphere with radius r and surface 4πr 2 , the total radiated power is independent of r. The total radiated power by the electric dipole is then found by where we have used the fact that As expected, the total power P t does not depend on r. Let us now explore some fundamental antenna parameters of the electric dipole. According to (2.11), the normalized radiation pattern is given by This pattern is plotted in Fig. The length l of the dipole is small as compared to the wavelength. For example, let l = 0.01λ 0 , which results in an input impedance of R a = 0.08Ω. This imples that the electric dipole has a very low radiation resistance which will makes it difficult to match to a transmission line since most commonly used transmission lines have a much higher characteristic impedance (often Z t 0 = 50Ω). This will result in a poorly matched antenna and a high corresponding reflection coefficient (2.20) at the antenna port. Electric dipoles are only used in very specific applications in which powermatching is not important. A nice example is low-frequency radio-astronomy The half-wavelength dipole has much better radiation and matching properties. This type of antenna will be explored in the next section. In the previous section we found that the radiation resistance of an electric dipole is very small, which makes it difficult to match to a transmission line. The matching properties can be improved by increasing the length of the dipole, resulting in a so-called linear wire antenna. This antenna consists of a cylindrical metal wire with diameter d 0 and length 2l, which has a small gap in the center of the wire to accommodate a balanced feed using a so-called two-wire transmission line, also known as twin lead or Lecher line. Furthermore, we will assume that the diameter d 0 of the wire very small compared to the wavelength d 0 λ 0 . Fig. The current distribution along the two-wire transmission line will be sinusoidal, when we neglect radiation and other losses. The wire antenna can now be interpreted as the last part of an open-ended two-wire transmission line. The radiation from this folded part of the transmission line is much larger as compared to the spurious radiation from the transmission line itself. This is, of course, our aim, since we want to construct an efficient antenna. Nevertheless, the current distribution along the wire will remain the same (first-order approximation) as the un-folded openended transmission line, so with the sinusoidal current distribution. The current distribution at the end point of the antenna must be equal to zero. Furthermore, we will assume that the gap at the center of the wire antenna is negligibly small. With all these assumptions, the current distribution J e along the wire takes the following form: for -l < z < l. Lateron in this book we will use numerical methods to determine the exact current distribution along the wire. It will be shown that (4.77) is an accurate approximation of the current along the wire antenna when the diameter of the wire is smaller than λ 0 /100. Some examples of the current distribution for various lengths of the wire antenna are illustrated in Fig. Since the current is directed along the z-axis we can rewrite e k 0 ur• r 0 into the expression e k 0 z 0 cos θ . Furthermore, As a result, we can conclude that the electric field E only has one component, being E θ . The radiated field is linearly polarized and takes the following form As a first step towards a closed-form solution of (4.80), we will determine the integral by dividing it into two parts: Substitution of (4.81) in (4.80) provides: Note that E θ does not depend on the φ coordinate, which could have been expected as a result of the symmetry. The corresponding magnetic field is now easily found, since in the far-field region we have As a result, only the H φ component is non zero and is given by Note that also H φ does not depend on the φ coordinate. The Pointing vector (power density in [W/m 2 ]) is found by using the expression (4.59): (4.85) We will now determine the normalized radiation pattern for several wire antennas with varying length. The radiation pattern is found by using expression (2.11). i. λ 0 /2 wire antenna. When 2l = λ 0 /2 we find that E θ is equal to The radiation pattern of the λ 0 /2 dipole antenna is shown in Fig. With 2l = 3λ 0 /2 we find that E θ takes the form: The corresponding radiation pattern of the 3λ 0 /2 antenna is shown in Fig. In order to determine the other antenna parameters of the wire antenna, such as the directivity and radiation resistance, we first need to calculate the total radiated power P t by integrating the power density over a sphere according to (2.18) A general analytic solution of the integral I p is not easily found. However, in case of a λ 0 /2-wire antenna we can express the integral I p in terms of the cosine integral. By applying the coordinate transformation u = cos θ and dθ = -du/ sin θ we can write integral I p in the following form where we have used the substitutions 1+u = t/π and 1-u = s/π. Furthermore, we have used the fact that cos 2 (x/2) = (1 + cos x)/2. The integral can now be expressed in terms of the well-known cosine integral ci(x) The cosine integral is well tabulated (for example in the famous book of I. S. Gradsteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, "Table of integrals, series and products", tabel (8.230), where C = 0.577 is Euler's constant. The total radiation power is now found from: (4.93) By using definition (2.17) of the radiation resistance, we easily find that R a = 73.1Ω. Finally, we can determine the directivity of the λ 0 /2 wire antenna. By using the definition of the directivity function (2.12), we obtain The corresponding directivity expressed in Decibels (10log 10 D) is D dB = 2.15 dB, which is slightly higher than the directivity of the electric dipole D = 1.5 or D dB = 1.76 dB. Up to now we have assumed that the antenna is located in free space. However, in practise the antenna will often be placed close to objects, e.g. earth surface or in case of printed antennas close to a ground plane of the printed-circuit board (PCB). As a result, the radiation properties and input impedance will change. In this section we will investigate the effect of a perfectly conducting ground plane on the radiation properties of wire antennas. We will assume that the horizontally-oriented resonating wire antenna of length 2l = λ 0 /2 is located above the conducting ground plane at a height h. The configuration is shown in Fig. It is now interesting to investigate the radiation pattern of the horizontal wire antenna above a ground plane in more detail in the φ = 90 0 -plane. Note that we had assumed that the antenna is located along the x-axis. Based on the symmetry in the y -z plane, the radiation pattern of a wire antenna in free-space would have been independent of the angle θ. The ground plane makes the antenna θ-dependent. Now let E o be the radiated electric field from a wire antenna in free-space and E i the corresponding radiated electric field of the image antenna. By applying the superposition principle we obtain the total field in the far-field region as: where the vector E f ree represents the electric field of a horizontal wire antenna in free space and located at the origin of the coordinate system. The factor 2 sin(k 0 h cos θ) describes the effect of the ground plane. The corresponding radiation pattern, normalized to an horizontal wire antenna in free-space (so ignoring the factor E f ree in (4.96)) is now given for the φ = 90 0 plane by: F r (θ) = P (θ, φ = 90 0 ) P f ree (θ, φ = 90 0 ) = 4 sin 2 (k 0 h cos θ). (4.97) The antenna does not radiate energy in the horizontal plane with θ = 90 0 . Fig. We have previously shown that a basic λ 0 /2 wire antenna has an input impedance at resonance of approx. 73Ω. A two-wire transmission line (Lecherline or twin-lead) has a somewhat higher characteristic impedance, for example Z t 0 = 300Ω. As a result a matching circuit would be required to match the antenna to the transmission line, resulting in additional losses and bandwidth limitations. By modifying the basic λ 0 /2 wire antenna to the structure of Fig. The loop antenna consists of a circular thin metal wire with radius a. In this section we will assume that the current I 0 along the loop is constant, which is only a valid approximation when the radius is very small as compared to the wavelength, i.e a λ 0 . For larger loop antennas, this can only be realized by using additional phase-shifters in the loop. Figure (4.99) The integration for the loop antenna is carried out over a circle with radius r 0 = a. We will use polar coordinates to facilitate the integration. Furthermore Due to the symmetry of the geometry, we can assume that the fields will not depend on the φ coordinate. Therefore we can use φ = 0 in (4.101). In addition, u φ 0 = -u x sin φ 0 + u y cos φ 0 . In the φ = 0 plane it is found that u φ = u y . We can now divide the integral in (4.101) into two parts according to sin φ 0 e k 0 a cos φ 0 sin θ dφ 0 + u y 2π 0 cos φ 0 e k 0 a cos φ 0 sin θ dφ 0 = u y 2π 0 cos φ 0 e k 0 a cos φ 0 sin θ dφ 0 . (4.102) The first integral is equal to zero, since the integrand is an odd function with respect to φ 0 . The remaining integral can be analytically solved: sin φ 0 e -k 0 a sin φ 0 sin θ dφ 0 = 2 u y π/2 0 sin φ 0 e k 0 a sin φ 0 sin θ -e -k 0 a sin φ 0 sin θ dφ 0 where J 1 (z) is the Bessel function of the first kind with order 1 and argument z. Bessel functions are well tabulated (e.g. Since u θ × u r = -u φ , we can conclude that the corresponding electric field will only have a φ component: A small loop antenna, also known as magnetic dipole, consists of a circular metal wire with radius a λ 0 and with a constant current I 0 along the loop. We can use expression (4.104) and (4.105) to determine the far fields, where we can approximate the Bessel function J 1 (z) for small argument z according to By substituting this in (4.104) and (4.105), we find that the far fields are given by: The factor πa 2 I 0 is also known as the "transmitter-moment" and is the product of the current I 0 and the surface of the loop. Usually it is denoted by m with m = πa 2 I 0 . There is a strong analogy between the fields radiated by a magnetic dipole according to (4.107) and the fields from the electric dipole, given by (4.68) and (4.69). The radiation patterns of the magnetic and electric dipole are exactly the same. Now let us assume that both an electric as well as an magnetic dipole are located in the origin of our coordinate system. Furthermore, assume that the electric dipole is oriented along the z-axis and the magnetic dipole is situated in the x-y-plane. When we choose the dimensions of both dipoles and current to fulfill the relation p = -mk 0 , (4.109) the corresponding electromagnetic field generated by these two sources will fullfill the following relation The minus sign in (4.109) indicates that the currents in the electric and magnetic dipoles are 180 0 out of phase. When the currents are in phase, i.e. p = mk 0 , we find the following form of the radiated electromagnetic field: for all directions (θ, φ). Therefore, we satisfy the relation between E θ and E φ as described in section 2.9 for a perfectly left-handed circularly-polarized field. Fields that satisfy (4.111) are right-handed circularly polarized for all directions (θ, φ). Exercise Calculate the directivity of a magnetic dipole. The electromagnetic fields in the far-field region of a loop antenna with uniform current distribution along the loop was already determined in (4.104) and (4.105). We can use these expressions to determine the radiation pattern, resulting in . (4.113) The shape of the pattern will be similar to the behavior of the Bessel function J 1 (z). Fig. In order to be able to introduce aperture antennas, it is useful to extend Maxwell's equations, given by (4.1). We will do this by introducing magnetic currents and associated magnetic charge distributions. Note that both magnetic currents as well as magnetic charges do not exist in the real-world: both are non-physical quantities.. However, it will help us to introduce several new electromagnetic concepts in an elegant way. For that purpose, we will introduce the magnetic current distribution J m ( r) and the magnetic charge density ρ m ( r). When we assume that there are no electric currents J e ( r) = 0 and electric charges ρ e ( r) = 0, Maxwell's equations take the following form in the space-frequency domain: By combining the first and third equation from (4.114) we observe that the following continuity equation yields: The solution of these equations related to magnetic sources can be found by using a similar approach as used in section 4.1 for the case of electric sources. As a first step, we will introduce a vector potential, in this case the electric vector potential A m , using the fourth equation in (4.114). As a result, we find that This gives ∇ × H = -ω∇ × A m . We can now write H in the form: where φ m is (yet) an arbitrarily scalar function. By substituting this relation into the first equation of (4.114) and using the Lorenz-gauge according to leads towards the well-known Helmholtz equation for the vector potential A m , given by A similar expression can be found for the scalar potental φ m directly from the Lorenz-gauge that we used. In section 4.1 we solved Helmholtz equation for an arbitrarily electric current distribution J e by first looking for the solution for an elementary point source. The general solution was then found by applying the superposition concept, since any electric current distribution J e can be written as a continuous superposition of point sources. By applying the same strategy here, we find that the electric vector potential A m due to an arbitrarily magnetic current distribution J m takes the following form: where we have assumed that the observation point P , indicated by the vector r, is located outside the source region V 0 . The electromagnetic fields outside the source region V 0 are now found by (4.121) Similar to section 4.2, we can determine the electromagnetic fields far away from the sources (far-field region) by using several approximations. The fields in the far-field region than take the following form: We again can conclude that the fields in the far-field region locally behave as TEM-waves (Efield perpendicular to H and perpendicular to the propagation direction u r ). The strong analogy between magnetic and electric sources is known in literature as the duality concept. Always keep in mind that magnetic currents and charges are mathematical quantities that cannot exist in nature. We have now introduced all tools to determine the radiated electromagnetic fields from a general source, consisting of both electric and (fictive) magnetic currents and charges. We can do this by using expressions (4.60) and (4.122) and by applying the superposition principle. In the origin of our coordinate system a magnetic current distribution exist with the following properties: where I 0m is the total magnetic current. Show that the radiated electromagnetic fields due to this source are identical to the fields due to the magnetic dipole (small loop antenna) as discussed in section 4.7.1. In order to analyze aperture antenna, it is convenient to introduce the Lorentz-Larmor theorem. This concept defines the electromagnetic relation between two situations A and B. Later in this section we will show that we can apply this theorem to replace a particular antenna problem, represented by a source region V a with electric and magnetic (volume-) current distributions J a e and J a m , by an equivalent and simpler antenna problem. In literature this concept is also known as the Equivalence principle where u n is the normal vector on surface S a . The equivalent sources (4.124) produce within V a an zero electromagnetic field and outside V a an electromagnetic field equal to the original problem. Intermezzo: derivation of Lorentz-Larmor theorem The derivation of the Lorentz-Larmor theorem provides interesting insight into the relation and electromagnetic interaction between two source regions. As a first step, we will formulate Maxwell's equations in the space-frequency domain for situation A where the fields E a and H a are generated only by the sources in volume V a (see also The divergence of the vector function The first term of the right-hand side of equation ( where we have used the vector identity ∇ In a similar way, we can determine the second term in the right-hand side of equation ( Applying Gauss theorem according to on the volume V enclosed by surface S (see Fig. This relation is known as Lorentz' theorem. In order to derive the Lorentz-Larmor theorem, we will apply Lorentz' theorem on several special cases. i. Volume V encloses the entire free-space V ∞ . The corresponding surface S is now a sphere S ∞ with infinite large radius. The sources ( E a , H a ) and ( E b , H b ) are located within a finite region. At large distances from these sources we have, according to (4.60) and (4.122), the following relations: Furthermore, for a point with location vector r on the sphere S ∞ we know that u r = u n . Therefore, the integrand of the left-hand side of expression (4.132) can be written in the following form The surface integral in (4.132) will vanish when S = S ∞ . Therefore, expression (4.132) can be reduced to Although the integration in (4.135) is performed over the entire volume V ∞ , it is evident that the integration can be limited to the (finite) source volume. ii. Source distribution B is an electric dipole. Assume that our source distribution is an electric dipole with dipole moment p = 1 and direction u b located at r outside the source regions. This is illustrated in Fig. where the vector r is fixed and r 0 variable. When using this relation in (4.135) we find that In the special case that we only have electric sources within V a , expression (4.138) takes the form: It appears that the electric field E a ( r) due to source distribution A can be found by determining the electromagnetic fields of an electric dipole with p = 1 located at r with direction u b and substituting it in the volume integral. By choosing the direction of the dipole u b to be u x , u y and u z , respectively, we can determine the Cartesian components of E a ( r). In section 4.1 we have determined the field generated by an electric dipole. Using relation with Now introduce the variable φ according to We can rewrite (4.140) into: where we have used the relation Note that expression (4.143) is identical to in which u n is the unit vector which is directed outwards from V 2 . Based on the our findings in case i), the contribution over S ∞ will be zero. As a result (4.145) will take the form: Consider the volume V in which the sources J a e , J a m and corresponding charge distributions exist. Outside V , in V 1 , we find the sources J b e and J b m with corresponding charge distributions (see Fig. where we have used relation (4.146), while the minus-sign in front of the surface integral accounts for the fact that source distribution B consists of an electric dipole with direction u b and dipole moment p = 1. Furthermore assume that J b m = 0. This is the same situation as used in case ii). From (4.147) we arrive at (4.148) With these four special cases, we can make our final last step in the derivation of the Lorentz-Larmor theorem. For that purpose, we should compare expression (4.149) and (4.138). Both expressions are derived for the same situation as shown in Fig. The sources J a e and J a m and the corresponding charge distributions within V generate outside V an electromagnetic field E a , H a . The volume V is enclosed by surface S. The fields E a , H a outside V can also be assumed to be generated by an electric surface current distribution J a es on S and an magnetic surface current density J a ms on S, where (4.150) These equivalent sources generate inside volume V an electromagnetic field equal to zero. We can further derive the expression for the electric field at location r outside the source region V (4.149) by applying the derived expressions for the dipole fields E b and H b . From (4.30) we find that where φ is defined in (4.142). Substitution of(4.151) in ( By using the vector relations provided in (4.144) and relation The corresponding magnetic field H a ( r) outside source region V can be found by placing a magnetic dipole of unit strength and direction u b at the location indicated by the position vector r. From (4.147) we than obtain (4.155) The (magnetic) dipole fields E b and H b have already been derived in section (4.8) and are given by Substitution of (4.156) in (4.155) results in By again applying vector relations we can rewrite (4.157) in the following form Summary Assume that the sources J e , J m and corresponding charge distributions exist within volume V , enclosed by the surface S, The generated electromagnetic field outside V is then found by: where J es = u n × H and J ms = E × u n are the equivalent electric and magnetic surface current distribution on the surface S, respectively. When r is within volume V we find that This is the Lorentz-Larmor theorem also referred to as equivalence principle It is now fairly straightforward to derive expressions for the electromagnetic fields far away from the sources, in the so-called far-field region. The integrand in (4.159) consists of products of vector functions and scalar functions, where the vector function does not depend on r, while the operator ∇ r × operates only on r. Formulas with such a structure have been discussed before in section 4.2. We concluded that for far-field points r the following relations can be used: Furthermore, in the far-field region the following approximation can be used: Substitution of (4.161) and (4.162) in (4.159) provides the following result This can also be written in a more compact form: The subscript a is used to indicate that the function F a is found by integrating the fields on the antenna aperture (= surface S). Note that the following relation also holds in the far-field: The formulas (4.164) can now be used to determine the radiation properties of arbitrarily-shaped aperture antennas. A proper choice of the surface S is very important. In the next sections we will show how S can be chosen in a convenient way for some well-known aperture antenna concept. In this way, we are able to find an analytic expression of the radiated fields. A well known example of an aperture antenna is the horn antenna as illustrated in Fig. • The outer surface of the antenna and the generator are perfectly electric conductors (PEC). This implies that the tangential electric field along this surface is zero: • The (secondary) currents along the outer surface of the antenna and generator are very small and can be ignored in our analysis, i.e. u n × H = 0 on S c . As a result, the integration in (4.163) is limited to S a . As a first-order approximation we will assume that the aperture fields are uniformly distributed in the x-y plane, as indicated in Fig. valid for the rectangular region Furthermore, E 0 is a constant and we have assumed that the characteristic impedance is equal to Z 0 . The equivalent electric and magnetic surface currents on S a are now given by We can calculate the electric field in the far-field region by applying expression (4.163) on aperture S = S a . We now find where the integrals L m and L e are given by u r × u r × J es ( r 0 )e k 0 ur• r 0 dx 0 dy 0 . (4.170) We can determine the integrals easily by writing the in-and outer-products in (4.170) in terms of spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ): with u = sin θ cos φ and v = sin θ sin φ. Substitution of (4.171) and (4.168) in (4.170) provides for the first integral L m e k 0 (x 0 u+y 0 v) dx 0 dy 0 , where we have used the well-known integral We can observe that E has two components, E θ u θ and E φ u φ . In the principle planes of the antenna, i.e. the φ = 0 plane (H-plane) and φ = π/2 plane (E-plane), one of both components is equal to zero. The magnetic field H in the far-field region is easily found by using the far-field relation E = Z 0 H × u r . The radiation pattern is determined according to the approach in chapter 2 by using relation (2.9) up to The corresponding half-power beam width is given by θ HP = 2 arcsin(0.433λ 0 /a) in the H-plane and θ HP = 2 arcsin(0.433λ 0 /b) in the E-plane, respectively. When the dimension of the horn increases, the beam width decreases, so the antenna will become more directive. The directivity is found from D = 4π ab λ 0 . Fig. Reflector antennas can take many shapes, e.g. parabolic, spherical or cylindrical. The parabolic reflector antennas is the most commonly used type. Reflector antennas provide a large antenna gain and associated effective antenna aperture, which makes them very suited for long-range wireless applications, such as satellite communication, point-to-point (PtP) backhauling and longrange radar. The parabolic reflector antenna is fed by a small antenna element(feed), such as a dipole antenna or horn antenna. The feed is placed in the focal point of the reflector and illuminates the reflector. As a result of this, electric currents are generated on the metal reflector surface. These currents generate the scattered field of the reflector. Fig. (4.177) Therefore, we can limit the integration in (4.163) to the aperture S a . The radiation pattern of the feed antenna located in the focal point F determines the field distribution over the aperture plane S a . This method is known as the aperture method. However, it is also possible to select the surface S as indicated in Fig. The magnetic field in the aperture H a on S a can be easily determined from the radiation characteristics of the feed antenna located in the focal point F . This method is known as the current integration method. In this section we will use the apeture method to determine the radiation characteristics of a parabolic reflector antenna. Now consider the configuration of Fig. For the sake of simplicity, we will first assume that the feed antenna provides a uniform illumination of the aperture S a . Now let the incident electric field E i coincide with the x-direction and the magnetic field H i with the y-direction, as illustrated in Fig. where E 0 is a constant. The electric field in a point P far away from the aperture, can be calculated by using expresion (4.163) We have already shown in section 4.2 that the electric field E in the far-field region only has two components: E θ and E φ . Therefore, we can express u r × u n × E a ( r 0 ) -u r × u n × Z 0 H a ( r 0 ) in the following form: Furthermore, the inner product ( r 0 • u r ) can be written in polar coordinates according to The electric field in the far-field region then takes the following form E 0 e k 0 r 0 sin θ cos(φ-φ 0 ) r 0 dr 0 dφ 0 . (4.183) Since we have assumed a uniform aperture illumination, E 0 is constant and can be put outside the integral. The φ 0 integral can be expressed in terms of a Bessel function according to 2π 0 e k 0 r 0 sin θ cos(φ-φ 0 ) dφ 0 = 2πJ 0 (k 0 r 0 sin θ), where J 0 is the Bessel function of the first kind with order zero. The remaining integration w.r.t. r 0 can now be expressen in closed-form as: where J 1 is the Bessel function of the first kind with order one. Inserting this in (4.183) provides The radiation pattern is found by using relations (2.9)-(2.11): Note that we used the relation lim Up to now, we have assumed a uniform illumination of the aperture: we have assumed E 0 to be constant over the aperture surface S a . The drawback of a uniform distribution is the relative high first sidelobe level of -17.6 dB. We will now extend our analysis to a more general aperture distribution. For that purpose, we will assume that the aperture distribution on S a can be expressed in the following form: with aperture distribution (or weighting) function given by The specific case p = 0, which provides a uniform illumination, is already discussed in this section. For other valus of p we have to return to expression (4.183) and replace E 0 by the aperture distribution function W (r 0 ). This provides us with the following integral e k 0 r 0 sin θ cos(φ-φ 0 ) dφ 0 r 0 dr 0 . The φ 0 integration is done in a similar way as in (4.184). As a result we obtain the following integral along r 0 : Substituting ρ = r 0 /a and u a = k 0 a sin θ results in This integral can be expressed in terms of a Bessel function by applying the integral of Sonine (see Here Γ f is the Gamma function As a result, the integral takes the form The electric field in the far-field region is now easily found by inserting Microstrip antennas, also known as patch antennas or printed antennas are resonant antennas which can be realized on printed-circuit boards (PCBs). In order to determine the radiation properties of microstrip antennas, we can use the same method as used for aperture antennas in the previous sections. Microstrip antennas can take many forms and shapes. We will limit ourselves to some basic structures. Fig. to describe the antenna configuration. With these assumptions, we can introduce the following simplifications: i. The electric field will be concentrated between the circular patch and the ground plane within a cylinder with radius a and height h. This cylinder is called cavity. The cavity is filled with a homogeneous diectric material with permittivity r . ii. Due to the small thickness of the substrate, the fields within the cavity will not depend on the z-coordinate. iii. The electric field has only a component in the z direction, so E = E z u z . iv. The current distribution J e along the edge ρ = a of the circular patch will be directed parallel to the edge of the patch. This implies that the magnetic field given by H = u z × J e , will be perpendicular to the side walls of the cavity, so u n × H = 0. Note that u n is the normal on the side walls of the cavity. With these assumptions, our problem is reduced to a cavity structure with the following boundary conditions: on the top and bottom side of the cavity, where u n is the normal vector on the surface under consideration. Since E will only have a zcomponent, we can express the condition that u n × H = 0 when ρ = a in terms of a condition for E z , since As a result, we can express the components of the magnetic field in the following form: Apparantly, on the side walls the following condition holds Inside the cavity, we can derive the Helmholtz equation for the electric field E = E z u z by using Maxwell's equations for a source-free region (4.5). We now obtain where k = k 0 √ r represents the wave number in the substrate. The Helmholtz equation in cylindrical coordinates then takes the following form (with The solution of this second-order differential equation is where J n (kρ) is the Bessel function of the first kind with order n and E 0 is a constant which is determined by the applied voltage at the feed point. The other field components are given by All other field components are zero, so E ρ = E φ = H z = 0. The side wall of the cavity acts as a magnetic wall with u n × H = 0 or H φ = 0. This provides us the resonance condition: Since ∂J n (ka) ∂ρ has multiple zeros for a particular values of n, we will find multiple resonance frequencies for a given radius a and n. Now let K nm be the m-th zero of ∂J n (ka) ∂ρ . Table resulting in The mode with (n, m) = (1, 1) provides the lowest resonance frequency for a particular radius a of the circular patch. Note that the cavity model does not account for fringing fields at the edges of the cavity. These fringing fields will slightly change the resonance frequency. This effect can be included in formula (4.206) by introducing an effective radius a e . Closed-form expressions for a e can be found in literature Near resonance it is quite easy to match the input impedance of a microstrip antennas to a transmission line, such as a 50Ω coax cable. The bandwidth of microstrip antennas (defined as the frequency band over which the antenna can be matched to a transmission line with a Mode (n, m) zero ka 0, 1 0 characteristic impedance Z 0 ) strongly depends on the electrical thickness of the substrate. An accurate estimation of the input impedance of microstrip antennas can be best obtained using numerical methods, such as the Method-of-Moments (MoM), see also chapter 5. Fig. As a result, we find that the field components E θ and E φ in the far-field region are given by where we have assumed that the patch is fed by a transmission line in the φ = 0 plane. For the fundamental mode with (n, m) = (1, 1) we obtain: Fig. - In chapter 4 we have determined the radiation characteristics of several antenna types with a given electric and/or magnetic current distribution. In section 4.4 we have investigated wire antennas, where we assumed a sinusoidal current distribution along the wire. When the antenna is operated close to its resonance, this will be a very good approximation of the real current distribution. However, at other frequencies the current distribution will be different. In general, it is not easy (or not possible) to derive an accurate analytic description of the currents on antenna structures, even not for a fairly simple λ 0 /2 dipole (wire) antenna. For that purpose, antenna designers use numerical methods to determine the current distribution on the antenna structure. Several numerical approaches are described in literature, including the Finite-Element-Method (FEM), Finite-Difference-Time-Domain (FDTD) and the Method-of-Moments (MoM), see for example in The method of moments is a general numerical procedure for solving integral equations. One of the first books which describes MoM for electromagnetic problems is the book of Harrington • determine the integral equation of the antenna problem at hand, • discretize the antenna structure in small segments (also known as sub-domains), • derive the matrix equation for the (still) unknown current distribution along the antenna, • calculate the elements of the matrix and solve the matrix equation. Now consider the cylindrical wire antenna in free space as illustrated in Fig. ii The current at both ends of the cylinder is zero. In our MoM approach we will only apply the first boundary condition directly. This boundary condition can be describes as where the surface S 0 is the outer surface of the cylinder and where E ex ( r) and E s ( r) are the excitation field and the scattered field, respectively. Furthermore, u n is the normal vector on the metal cylinder. The scattered field is the field due to the induced currents on the wire antenna. The excitation field is the field induced by the voltage source which is connected to the differential port at the center of the antenna. The scattered field can be expressed in terms of the (yet) unknown electric current distribution J and the free-space Greens' function G( r, r 0 ) by using expressions (4.30), (4.21) and (4.22) from chapter 4. In case the antenna is not located in free-space, i.e. in case of a microstrip antenna, we can still use the proposed approach. However, the Greens function will be more complicated, see for example in (5.2) Integral equation (5.2) can be solved numerically by using the method of moments. The first step is the expansion of the yet unknown current distribution J on the wire antenna in expansion functions according to where I n are the mode coefficients which we need to determine. The expansion functions J n (x, y, z) are also called basis functies and can take many forms. When we want to have an exact solution of the surface current distribution J, we need to use an infinite summation in In practice we will limit the summation in (5.3) to a maximum number of basis functions of n = N max . In this way, we can approximate the exact solution with a limited computational effort. There are many types of basis functions. We can subdivide them into two main categories, that is in global basis functions and local basis functions. Global basis functions are non-zero over the entire domain, in our example over the entire cylindrical wire, whereas local basis functions are only non-zero over a very small part of the entire domain. For that reason, local basis functions are also known as sub-domain basis functies. Two examples of sub-domain basis functions are shown in Fig. (5.4) The scattered electric field E s (x, y, z) can be written in terms of the current distribution J(x, y, z) where L is a linear operator. By combining (5.5) and (5.4) we obtain I n E s n (x, y, z). (5.6) Piece-wise constant (PWC) basis functions Piece-wise linear (PWL) basis functions I n E s n (x, y, z) + E ex (x, y, z) . for m = 1, 2..., N max , where S m represents the surface on which the weighting function J m is nonzero. The set of weighting functions J m , is also known as a set of test functions. Often the set of test functions is the same as the set of expansion functions in for m = 1, 2..., N max . We can write this set of linear equations in a more compact form: for m = 1, 2..., N max . In matrix notation we now obtain: where the elements of the matrix [Z] and the elements of the excitation vector [V ex ] are given by The matrix [Z] includes N max × N max elements, [I] is a vector with N max unknown mode coefficients and [V ex ] is the excitation vector with N max elements. The matrix equation (5.12) can be solved rather easily by using standard numerical linear-algebra routines such as those available in MATLAB. In practise it will turn out that the largest computational effort is claimed for the calculation of the elements of the matrix [Z]. After matrix equation (5.12) has been solved, we obtain a solution for the mode coefficients and we can find an approximation of the current distribution J on the antenna surface by inserting the mode coefficients in expression The elements of the matrix [Z] can be found by using the expression for E s as applied in (5.2), which results in: In general it will not be possible to find an analytic expression for the elements of [Z]. We will need to use numerical methods. Note that, depending on the particular antenna structure under investigation, several numerical problems (e.g. singularities) might occur while evaluating More on this can be found in We will now return to our example, the cylindrical wire antenna as illustrated in Fig. where the Green's function G(z, z 0 ) is given by As a result, only element i of the vector [V ex ] is nonzero. We have now determined all elements of [Z] and [V ex ] in matrix equation where I i is the mode coefficient of mode i. Chapter 6 Phased-array antennas with electronic beamsteering capabilities have been developed in the period between 1970-1990 mainly for military radar applications to replace mechanically rotating antenna systems. Reflector antennas have a high antenna gain, but have the disadvantage that the main lobe of the antenna has to be steered in the desired direction by means of a highly accurate mechanical steering mechanism. This means that simultaneous communication with several points in space is not possible. Small antennas, like a dipole or microstrip antenna have a close to omnidirectional radiation pattern, but have a very low antenna gain. Therefore, small antennas cannot be used for large-distance communication or sensing. By combining a large number of small antennas, we can create an array of antennas. When each of these individual antenna elements is provided with an adjustable amplitude and phase, we obtain a phased-array antenna. In this way, a phased-array antenna can communicate with several targets which may be anywhere in space, simultaneously and continuously, because the main beam of the antenna can be directed electronically into a certain direction. Another advantage of phased-array antennas is the fact that they are usually relatively flat. Examples of modern phased array systems are shown in Fig. In this chapter, we will first investigate the general properties of phased arrays, starting with linear arrays of isotropic radiators. Then, we will extend the theory to two-dimensional arrays. As a next step, we will introduce real antenna elements, like dipoles and microstrip antennas 6.1 Linear phased arrays of isotropic antennas We will investigate the basic principle of operation of linear arrays by considering the array in receive mode, as illustrated in Fig. where we have normalized the received signal s 1 of element 1 to be equal to 1. In addition, k 0 = 2π λ 0 is the free-space wavenumber. The received signals at each array element can be physically interpreted as the voltage along the output port of each antenna element or can represent the (complex) amplitude of the guided wave along the transmission line which is connected to the antenna element, for example in case of a waveguide or a microstrip transmission line. Since the incident plane wave illuminates the array with an angle θ 0 , a phase difference will occur between the signals received by each of the array elements. This phase difference could also be interpreted as a time delay, since element k will receive the signal a fraction τ earlier as compared to array element (k -1), where τ is given by: where c = 3.10 8 is the speed of light in free-space. By using the superposition concept of electromagnetic waves we can write the total received signal at the output of the array of Fig. The function S(θ 0 ) is called the array factor. The array factor is the response of the array of Fig. A similar analysis could be done for an array in transmit mode. Besides some constants and the factor e -k 0 r /r, we would obtain a similar expression as (6.3) for the electromagnetic field far away from the array (far field). The maximum of the array factor occurs when the applied phase shift -ψ k by the electronics connected to each of the receiving antenna elements exactly compensates the phase of each of the received signals. This occurs when: By changing the set of applied phases ψ k , we can manipulate the direction θ 0 for which the array is maximized. In other words, by changing the set of phases ψ k , we can electronically scan the beam of the array. Because of this, this type of antenna is called a phased array. Let us now assume that we use a set of excitation coefficients a k of which the phase ψ k is given by (6.4). The resulting array will have a maximum sensitivity when incident plane waves hit the array with an angle of θ = θ 0 w.r.t. to the z-axis. Let us now introduce the variables u and u 0 according to: u = sin θ u 0 = sin θ 0 (6.5) If we now assume that a plane wave is incident on the array under an angle θ, we can re-write the array factor (6.3) by means of the following expression In case of a uniform amplitude weighting (tapering), where |a k | = 1 for k = 1...K, we can express the summation of (6.6) in terms of an analytical expression. By introducing β = k 0 d x (u -u 0 ), we can re-write the array factor: = e (K-1)β/2 sin(Kβ/2) sin(β/2) . (6.10) Expressed in u coordinates, we then finally find the following expression for the array factor of an array with uniform tapering: The antenna radiation pattern can by found by normalizing the received power w.r.t. its maximum value, according to the definition introduced in chapter 2. When we apply this to our array factor, we obtain the following expression for the normalized (power) radiation pattern of the linear array: For small values of the term k 0 d x (u -u 0 )/2, this reduces to Expression (6.13) is exactly equal to the radiation pattern of a uniformly illuminated continuous line source of length L = Kd x . This can easily be verified by comparing (6.13) with expression (4.175), which resembles the radiation pattern of a uniform aperture. As an example, let us investigate a linear array with uniform tapering consisting of K = 16 isotropic antenna elements, separated by a distance d x = λ 0 /2. The normalized radiation pattern can be found by using equation (6.12). Fig. When we investigate expression (6.6) more carefully, we can recognize a Discrete Fourier Transformatie (DFT). The DFT can be written in the following general form: We can rewrite the array factor (6.6) in a similar form as (6.14) by choosing the sample points in the u space according to: For the specific case that the number of array elements K is a power of 2, the array factor simplifies in to a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). By using FFT processing, we can efficiently compute the radiation pattern of very large phased arrays. FFT processing is also often used in the digital back-end of phased array antennas with digital beamforming. Previously, we have already shown that the main beam of a linear array can be scanned to any angle θ 0 by applying a linear phase distribution along the array according to The existence and exact location of the grating lobes w.r.t. the main beam depends on the element spacing d x . In most practical systems, d x will be chosen in such as way as to avoid the existence of grating lobes in the visible space, where the visible space is defined by -1 ≤ u = sin θ ≤ 1. A grating lobe will appear in the direction u m when the argument of the exponent in expression (6.6) can be written as an integer number of 2π where m is an integer number and where k 0 = 2π λ 0 . For a given scan angle of the main beam u 0 , a grating lobe will appear in the visible space when |u m = 1| or θ m = ±90 0 . The relation between the element spacing and the maximum scan angle θ max 0 of the main beam of the linear array without the appearance of a grating lobe is given by: A lot of applications require scanning over the entire visible space. By substituting θ max 0 = 90 0 in expression(6.17), we can observe that grating lobes are avoided when the element spacing d x ≤ λ 0 /2. This corresponds to the well-known Nyquist sampling criterium used in analog-todigital convertors (ADC). In section 6.1.2 we have shown that a linear array with uniform amplitude tapering, i.e. |a k | = 1 for all k, generates quite high sidelobes in the radiation pattern, corresponding to the behavior of the sinc function. This results in a first sidelobe level of -13.2 dB w.r.t. the main beam power level. We can reduce the sidelobe level of phased arrays considerably by using an amplitude weighting along the array elements. The weighting function or amplitude taper needs to be chosen in such a way that contributions of the edge elements to the total array factor are reduced. In other words, the illumination of the edges is reduced. One of the well-known taper functions is the cosine-power taper given by: in case of an array along the x-axis, where x k represents the x-coordinate of array element k. Note that we have assumed in this case that the center of the array is located at x = 0. The parameter h allows us to use an offset (also known as pedestal). in a peak sidelobe level of approx. -23 dB and the cosine-square taper results in a peak sidelobe level of -32 dB. This is a significant improvement as compared to a uniform taper. Other wellknown taper functions are the Taylor taper and the Dolph-Tchebycheff taper where z = e k 0 dx sin θ and a k = |a k |e -k 0 dx sin θ 0 . Note that |z| = 1, so located on a unit-circle in the complex z plane. The Schelkunov polynomial (6.19) can also be written in terms of a product of K -1 factors: where z 1 , z 2 , .... z K-1 represent the zeros of the polynomial. A zero in the polynomial corresponds with a null-location in the radiation pattern of the linear array. As an example, we will consider a linear array with K = 8 elements with spacing of d = λ 0 /4 and main beam directed towards broadside (θ 0 = 0). Let us first consider a uniform amplitude tapering. Fig. z = e k 0 dx sin θ = e The separation between the nulls of a uniformly illuminated array in Fig. The directivity of an array directly determines the range of a wireless link or radar system as stated by the radio-and radar equation (see chapter 2). The directivity of a linear array of In this way, we can obtain the directivity in the direction θ 0 : where the integration is done over the entire visible space. The integral can be solved by using a new coordinate ξ, where ξ is defined as the opening angle with the positive y-axis in the y -zplane. The differential solid angle is now given by dΩ = cos θdθdξ. In case of a linear array located along the x-axis, the array factor will not depend on the ξ coordinate. Let us assume that the main beam of the array is directed towards broadside, so θ 0 = 0 0 . By using u = sin θ and du = cos θdθ, we can rewrite When k 0 d x = mπ (which implies that d x = mλ 0 /2), we find that sinc[k 0 d x (k -l)] can only be non zero when k = l. Therefore, the directivity can be written as: As a result, we can observe that the directivity of a uniformly-illuminated linear array with element spacing d x = mλ 0 /2 is equal to D = K. Consider for example, an array with K = 1000 (isotropic) elements. The corresponding directivity is in this case D = 10 log 10 (1000) = 30 dB. When we apply an amplitude tapering with |a k | ≤ 1, the directivity will be reduced as compare to the uniform case according to: where the taper efficiency η tap is given by An example is shown in Fig. The beam width of an antenna has been defined in chapter 2. In this section, we will again consider a uniformly illuminated linear array of isotropic radiators. The array factor is given by expression (6.12). From this expression, we can observe that the array factor depends on the coordinate u -u 0 , where u 0 is a fixed value corresponding to the direction of the main beam (scan angle). Therefore, we can conclude that the array factor does not depend on the absolute value of u. As a result, the 3 dB beam width ((i.e. the u value for which the amplitude of the array factor is equal to 1/ √ 2 w.r.t. the maximum value) will also not depend on u. To conclude, the beam width will be constant in the u-domain. However, when we express the array factor in terms of θ, the situation is different since the relation between u and θ is given by: Assume that ∆u indicates the difference in u corresponding to the 3 dB beam width in the expression of the array factor (6.12). The corresponding beam width expressed in θ will then have a 1 cos θ 0 dependence. As a result, we can write the 3 dB beam width in the following form: As expected, the beam of the array becomes broader when the main beam is scanned towards the horizon (θ 0 = ±90 0 ). The theory of linear arrays can be easily extended to planar arrays. Fig. We will again investigate the array in receive-mode first. Now let us assume that a plane wave illuminates the array from the direction (θ, φ), denoted by the unit vector u r . The array factor can now be obtained by summing all received contributions from the array elements according to: where represents the excitation coefficient of element j with phase ψ j and amplitude |a j |. The inner product ( r j • u r ) can be found by As a result, we can rewrite the array factor (6.32) in terms of (u, v)-coordinates according to When we want to direct the main beam of the array towards (θ 0 , φ 0 ), the phase shift ψ j at each array element should be chosen as: with u 0 = sin θ 0 cos φ 0 and v = sin θ 0 sin φ 0 . Substituting (6.37) in (6.36), results in the expression for the array factor of a planar array with the main beam directed towards (u 0 , v 0 ): Now consider a uniformly illuminated array with |a j | = 1, for all j. The array factor can now be expressed in terms of a product of two array factors corresponding to two linear arrays with uniform illumination: (6.39) Fig. for integer values of m, where m = 0 corresponds to the main beam. In case of a rectangular array grid, the grating lobes will occur along a rectangular grid in the (u, v)-plane given by: The rectangular grid of grating lobes in the (u, v)-plane is illustrated in Fig. Up to now, we have assumed that the individual array elements are ideal isotropic radiators with omni-directional radiation characteristics. As already discussed before, isotropic radiators can physically not exist. Therefore, we need to introduce physical antenna structures in our array theory. However, most of the array features that we have already discussed in this chapter will not change significantly by using real antenna elements. Several types of antennas can be used as a building block in a phased array system, such as dipole antennas (usually with a length of λ 0 /2) and microstrip antennas. These individual antennas should have a broad beam width, else the scan range of the phased array will be very limited. More details about the radiation characteristics of various types of antenna can be found in other chapters. An example of a realized array for radio-astronomy is shown in Fig 6 .16, where a 64-element planar array of bow-tie antennas is shown Figure Since we have assumed here that all array elements are identical with f j = f , we can rewrite (6.42) in the following form: The normalized radiation pattern can be determined from 6.43 by: .44) In the previous sections we have assumed that mutual electromagnetic interaction between the individual array elements can be neglected. However, in practise the array elements will be placed on an array grid with a typical element spacing of only λ 0 /2. Since most antenne elements only operate at resonance, the physical size of the antenna elements will not differ that much from the element spacing. As a result, the individual antenna element will interact with each other, causing so-called mutual coupling. Mutual coupling will affect the element pattern of each array element and will have an influence on the input impedance. Since each antenna element will observe a (slightly) different electromagnetic environment, the element pattern and input impedance of each element will be different. A rigorous electromagnectic analysis of mutual coupling in phasedarrays is outside the scope of this book. Numerical electromagnetic methods (e.g. MoM, see chapter 5) can be used to determine the mutual coupling. In addition, in In this book we will restrict ourselves to the introduction of the key performance parameters that describe the effect of mutual coupling. We will use the concept of microwave networks (see chapter 3) in which we will use propagating waves along transmission lines instead of currents and voltages. Let us consider the microwave network of Fig. where [S] is the de scattering matrix. Note that S 11 represents the reflection coefficient at port 1 when port 2 is terminated with a matched load impedance, also known as the reference impedance. In practise the reference impedance will often by equal to 50Ω. Similarly, S 22 is the reflection coefficient at port 2 when port 1 is terminated with a matched load impedance. The coefficient S 21 is the coupling coefficient between antenna element 1 and 2. It is a result of the electromagnetic interaction between both antennas. Since array antennas are passive, reciprocity applies. As a result S 21 = S 12 . The coupling coefficient can be obtained by using In case the array is used in transmit mode, the reflected signal at port 1 will include two components according to where a 1 and a 2 represent the excitation coefficients which have already been introduced in (6.33). Since a 1 and a 2 both depend on the scan angle of the main beam of the array (θ 0 , φ 0 ), the resulting reflection coefficient R act 1 will also depend on the scan angle. Therefore, R act 1 is referred to as the active reflection coefficient of array element 1. Similarly, R act 2 is the active reflection coefficient of array element 2. From (6.47), we can observe that a large coupling coefficient S 12 can significantly deteriorate R act 1 and R act 2 Note that in practise, the active reflection coefficients not only depend on the scan angle, but also on frequency. For an array consisting of K × L elements, the active reflection coefficient of array element j is given by where the excitation coefficients a i with i = 1, 2, ... are given by We can also define the active input impedance of the j-th array element as: where V j and I j are the voltage and current at the input port of the j-th element and where Z ji is the mutual impedance between array element j and i. The relation between the active input impedance and the active reflection coefficient is now given by: ). More details can be found in example of the effect of mutual coupling is shown in Fig. where we assumed that f 0 is the design frequency of the array (in this case 12 GHz) and f is the frequency of interest. Note that beam squinting can also be useful: it is a way to realize beam steering without the need of adjustable phase-shifters. In this section we will investigate the effect of phase and amplitude errors on the radiation characteristics of phased arrays. Errors in phase and amplitude at the output of each array element will occur due to non-perfect electronics, mechanical tolerances and environmental changes, like a change in temperature. Let us first consider a linear array of isotropic radiators with uniform amplitude distribution (|a k | = 1). In addition, we will assume that the main beam of the array is directed towards broadside (θ 0 = u 0 = 0). This configuration is shown in Fig. e k 0 (k-1)dxu . (6.54) Let us now first determine the effect of phase errors. Lateron, we will generalize our analysis to include amplitude errors as well. Phase errors will affect the main beam (directivity, beam width) and the sidelobes. As a first step we will investigate the main beam. Assume that the applied phase of each element has an error, say δ k according to a Gaussian or uniform probability density function with mean value 0 (since we are considering the non-scanning case here first). The array factor at u = 0 can now be written as: Assume that δ k is small, so the sum over the sin δ k terms can be neglected, resulting in: where we have applied a Taylor expansion of cos δ k . The main beam average complex power is given by: Assume that the variance of δ k of all elements is equal δ 2 k = δ 2 . This implies that for large K and small δ 2 : since the last term in (6.57) can be neglected. As a second step, we will determine the effect of phase errors on the sidelobes. Let us assume that we are at a null of the error-free radiation pattern. For the non-scanning case the array factor is now written as: We have now transformed the phase-error in an amplitude error occuring in the error-free array pattern. The average power at a null of a sidelobe now becomes: = Kδ 2 , (6.61) with again δ 2 k = δ 2 and we have assumed that δ k and δ l are uncorrelated. The average normalized sidelobe power due to phase errors at a null of the error-free array pattern is now given by: From (6.62) we can conclude that large arrays can tolerate much larger phase errors for a given required sidelobe level. The is due to the fact that we have assumed the errors to be uncorrelated. The directivity and associated antenna gain will be reduced in case of phase errors. Starting from the definition of the directivity (6.22), we can determine the directivity in case of errors D e of a linear array with uniform illumination with u 0 = θ 0 = 0 as: (6.63) In (6.63), the average radiated power |S ideal (u)| 2 of an error-free linear array with uniform tapering (|a k | = 1) is equal to K. The normalized directivity loss then becomes: , (6.64) since the directivity of an ideal linear array with uniform tapering is D = K. Electronic phase shifting is commonly realized using discrete settings. Let us consider a phase shifter with P bits. The total number of settings is 2 P . The incremental phase step [radians] is: (6.65) Assuming an uniformly-distributed random phase error in the range [-∆ψ k /2, ∆ψ k /2], we find that the variance is given by: Example: 4-bit phase shifter. Let us consider a 4-bit phase shifter used in a linear array of K = 64 elements with uniform tapering. The phase step is 22.5 0 and the corresponding maximum phase error is now ±11.25 0 . We now find that the variance is given by: which corresponds to an average phase error of 6.5 0 (rms). The average sidelobe level at a null of the error-free pattern and the directivity loss and can be found by: The corresponding radiation pattern is shown in Fig. As a final step we can generalize to the case of a planar array with both amplitude and phase errors and where the main beam is scanned towards any direction. Let us consider a planar array with K × L elements with phase and amplitude error of element j given by δ j and ∆ j , respectively. We again will assume that the variance of the phase and amplitude errors of all elements are identical and given by δ 2 and ∆ 2 , respectively. It can be shown that the average sidelobe level at a null of the error-free pattern and the directivity loss are given by: where D 0 is the directivity of the array. Fig. Let us first do a quick review of noise in microwave receivers by considering the configuration shown in Fig. Therefore, the additional noise ∆N amp i added by the amplifier seen at the input of a noise-free amplifier with available power gain G av is now: Now let us connect an antenna at the input of the receiver. We will assume that the noise generated by the antenna can be considered to be white noise, so it would not depend on the frequency within the bandwidth of interest. In this case, we can model the antenna noise as a thermal noise source, equivalent to the case of a resistor at the input of the receiver. The noise power N a from a single antenna element with antenna noise temperature T a is now equal to N a = k b T a B. The antenna noise temperature can be determined by integrating the antenna gain function of the antenna over the sky-noise distribution: T (Ω)G(Ω)dΩ, The noise from the electronics at the input of the power combiner is given by: N e = k b T 0 B(F -1)G av . (6.74) The transmitted noise due to the electronics at the output of the power combiner now becomes: The signal power at the output of the combiner is: where S a is the signal power received by a single array element. The signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the combiner is therefore given by: Most application of phased-arrays do not tolerate grating lobes. In radar applications, grating lobes would create confusion about the position of the target and it would spread the radiated power into multiple directions. In telecommunication applications, grating lobes could allow strong interfering signals to saturate the receiver electronics. However, some applications could allow grating lobes to appear. An example is radio astronomy. Sparse arrays are arrays of which the inter-element distance (d x , d y ) is much larger than 0.5λ 0 . Fig. So in case of a sparse-random array with 1000 elements, the average SLL will be -30 dB below the main beam gain. Amplitude and phase errors will occur in phased-array systems. These errors can have a systematic time-invariant nature, but can also be caused by changes in the environmental conditions, e.g. temperature changes. Calibration must be used to correct for these errors. A schematic diagram of a calibration concept which is often used in modern phased arrays The second step is to measure the amplitude and phase at the output of each array element due to a signal from one of the calibration elements. This part is called on-line calibration, since it can be done while the system is operation in the application environment. The measured signal from the calibration element is now: Phased arrays often consist of many elements, e.g. common values are 1024 and 4096 elements. Therefore, the on-line calibration could take a lot of time. Several techniques have been proposed in literature to overcome this problem. An example is the multi-element phase togging (MEP) technique A major draw-back of phased-arrays is the large amount of individual antenna elements and associated electronic circuits that is required, leading to high cost and high power consumption. However, several applications do require a high antenna gain, but do not require a very wide scan-range, instead these applications only use a limited field-of-view (FoV). In this case, the hybrid concept of focal-plane arrays (FPAs) is very interesting. FPAs combine the benefits of phased-arrays and traditional reflector-based solutions by offering a high antenna gain, relative low costs and electronic beam scanning over a limited FoV. Therefore, FPAs have already become an interesting alternative for conventional horn-fed reflector antennas in a number of applications, e.g. in radio astronomy and in satellite communication. Moreover, emerging applications such as point-to-point wireless communications, 5G new-radio millimeter-wave (mm-wave) wireless and low-cost Ka-band multi-function radars could be areas in which FPAs can play a major role. Fig. where J 1 is the Bessel function of the first kind with order 1, Ψ 0 = π/4, the subtended angle of the reflector, k 0 is the free-space wavenumber and r is the distance from the center of the focal plane (aperture radius), see Fig. A.4 Vector operations in spherical coordinates A.5 Commonly used vector products 1 Introduction 1.1 Purpose of this textbook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 Antenna functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.3 History of antennas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.4 Electromagnetic spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 System-level antenna parameters 2.1 Coordinate system and time-harmonic fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2 Field regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3 Far field properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.4 Radiation pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5 Beam width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.6 Directivity and antenna gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.7 Circuit representation of antennas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.8 Effective antenna aperture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.9 Polarization properties of antennas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.10 Link budget analysis: basic radio-and radar equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Transmission line theory and microwave circuits 3.1 3.10 Power Combiners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.11 Impedance matching and tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.12 Microwave filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.13 Microwave amplifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.13.1 Power gain, available gain and transducer gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.13.2 Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The amplifier is unconditionally stable if |Γ in | < 1 and |Γ out | < 1 for all passive source and load impedances, e.g. with |Γ S | < 1 and |Γ L | < 1. The amplifier is conditionally stable if (3.108) is satisfied only for certain source and load impedances. Conditional stability can be easily visualized by using input and output stability circles in the Smith Chart. Let us consider the output stability circle in more detail. It defines the boundary in the Smith chart between the stable and unstable region for Γ L when |Γ in | = 1. The radius r L and center c L of this output stability circle are given by [21]: (3.110) Fig. 3.42 illustrates the use of the output stability circle in a Smith Chart. In a similar way, source stability circles can be drawn in a Smith Chart to indicate the boundary between the stable and unstable region for Γ S when |Γ out | = 1. The corresponding radius r S and center c S of the input stability circle are given by: .129) Equation 1: Overview of the most relevant antenna parameters as a function of the order p of the aperture distribution function W = E 0 1 -(r 0 /a) 2 p in case of a parabolic reflector antenna with diameter D = 2a. : Zeros of ∂J n (ka) ∂ρ .