Scanning nanobeam electron diffraction (NBED) with fast pixelated detectors is a valuable technique for rapid, spatially resolved mapping of lattice structure over a wide range of length scales. However, intensity variations caused by dynamical diffraction and sample mistilts can hinder the measurement of diffracted disk centers as necessary for quantification. Robust data processing techniques are needed to provide accurate and precise measurements for complex samples and non-ideal conditions. Here we present an approach to address these challenges using a transform, called the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC), inspired by cepstral analysis in audio signal processing. The EWPC transforms NBED patterns into real-space patterns with sharp peaks corresponding to inter-atomic spacings. We describe a simple analytical model for interpretation of these patterns that cleanly decouples lattice information from the intensity variations in NBED patterns caused by tilt and thickness. By tracking the inter-atomic spacing peaks in EWPC patterns, strain mapping is demonstrated for two practical applications: mapping of ferroelectric domains in epitaxially strained PbTiO3 films and mapping of strain profiles in arbitrarily oriented core-shell Pt-Co nanoparticle fuel-cell catalysts. The EWPC transform enables lattice structure measurement at sub-pm precision and sub-nm resolution that is robust to small sample mistilts and random orientations. Characterization of nanoscale variations in lattice structure is essential for understanding the properties of many materials systems. (Scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM) provides a powerful toolset for this, with several techniques for mapping local crystal structure, strain, and lattice distortions. Recent advances in fast, high-dynamic-range pixel-array detectors In this paper we propose a transformation to aid in the extraction of lattice structure and strain information from nanobeam diffraction maps, which can be applied both with and without PED. Our approach is inspired by the use of cepstral analysis in signal processing. Cepstral analysis was developed for echo detection and pitch determination, and was subsequently used for a wide variety of audio and image processing applications, especially the analysis of speech. The PC provides a very useful separation property for signals that are convolved in the time domain. In the frequency domain these signals become multiplicative, and then additive after the application of a logarithm. The originally convolved functions remain additive after the second Fourier transform to the time-domain PC, allowing convenient, independent measurement of signals with differing time-scales. The measurement of crystal structure with NBED is analogous to short-time Fourier analysis of audio signals, with the goal instead being the determination of spatial variations in crystal structure. In NBED, a small real-space area is selected by the probe, and the diffraction pattern reveals its periodic structure in reciprocal space. The diffraction process physically "calculates" the Fourier transform of the real-space structure. Several of the problems complicating lattice structure measurements from NBED patterns, including intensity variations from sample mistilt and multiple scattering, can be approximated as multiplicative in diffraction space (and therefore convolutions in real space). Analogy to audio signal processing suggests that a real-space cepstrum may be useful for separating these effects from the lattice structure of interest. Because the first steps of producing a real-space cepstrum are performed physically by the diffraction process, a real-space cepstrum can be calculated by taking the power spectrum of the log-scaled NBED pattern. As shown in Section 2, this is equivalent to the power cepstrum of the exit wave, and so we denote this transform the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC). The process of calculating the EWPC is illustrated in Figure In this manuscript we present a simple model of the EWPC transform in the context of NBED and experimentally demonstrate its key features for strain mapping. Using Bloch wave simulations to incorporate dynamical diffraction effects, we investigate the robustness of the approach to varying sample thickness and mistilt. We then demonstrate its practical value for two applications: ferroelectric domains in epitaxially strained PbTiO3 films and core-shell Pt-Co nanoparticle catalysts. For the PbTiO3 films we show EWPC mapping is robust to large mistilts caused by ferroelastic strain. For the Pt-Co nanoparticles we show that the EWPC transform enables sub-nm resolution strain mapping that is robust to random particle orientations and suitable to provide strain measurements in ~nm thick shells. These examples show that the EWPC transform is a powerful tool for high spatial resolution NBED strain mapping that is precise, dose efficient, and robust to a variety of sample complexities, suppressing artefacts from thickness fringes and bend contours. Cepstral analysis was originally developed for the analysis of human speech, with the goal of determining the time evolution of the pitch in audio signals. where F denotes a Fourier transform. (2) For α(t), β(t) with well-separated frequency bands, this allows additive separation of the convolved signals, PC'α(t) * β(t)( ≈ PC'α(t)( + PC'β(t)(, (3) as desired for independent analysis of pitch and formants. This situation is closely analogous to the problem of lattice mapping using nanobeam diffraction, where our goal is to measure the spatial variation of the periodic lattice structure in a sample. Sample tilt and thickness create modulations in the intensity of diffracted beams, similar to the effect of formants on an audio power spectrum, which we would ideally separate from the lattice information. These similarities suggest that some form of cepstral analysis may be useful in nanobeam diffraction mapping as well. To determine how to structure the analysis, it is useful to consider the trade-off presented by the choice of probe size in nanobeam diffraction. A probe that provides high localization in real space will result in delocalization of the reciprocal lattice information in diffraction space by broadening diffracted peaks into disks. As a result, measurement of the lattice structure in diffraction space may become imprecise or computationally inconvenient. A transform into real space can avoid these challenges for lattice measurement. To take advantage of the cepstral separation properties and real space lattice measurement, we will define the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC) as follows: EWPC " (x) = PC'φ(x)( = *F ,ln /0F'φ(x)(0 for exit wave φ(x) with real-space position x and reciprocal-space scattering vector q. The EWPC can easily be calculated from the diffraction pattern I(q) = 0F'φ(x)(0 ! , which "calculates" the first part of the power cepstrum transform physically. The EWPC concentrates the signal from the set of periodic diffracted disks into sharp real-space points that are convenient for high-precision lattice measurements while also separating out "undesirable" effects from specimen tilt and thickness, as we will discuss in detail below. We will use a simple model of nanobeam electron diffraction to qualitatively illustrate the separation properties of the EWPC and provide a basis for the interpretation of EWPC patterns for diffraction mapping. Dynamical effects are considered using Bloch wave simulations in Section 4.2, and similar trends hold. To provide an illustrative and simplified analytical model of the real-space exit wave φ(x) and the EWPC we can begin by approximating the specimen as a strong phase object, such that: φ(x) = φ # (x)exp'iσV P (x)(, '5( where φ # (x) is the probe function, σ is a scaling factor, and V P (x) is the projected specimen potential. Foreshortening from geometric projection where Φ # (q) is the diffraction-space probe and V(q) = F /exp'iσV P (x)(1. In the kinematical or weak phase approximation, we take exp'iσV P (x)( ≈ 1 + iσV P (x), so that V(q) is essentially the Fourier transform of the projected specimen potential. In the strong phase approximation, the additional higher order terms can be thought of as multiple scattering corrections. The strong phase model can be extended to account for kinematical specimen tilt and thickness effects by inclusion of the Ewald sphere's intersection with the reciprocal lattice. A tilt in the reciprocal lattice by an angle τ about the k ' -axis will add an additional term Δs A sample of thickness T can be represented in real space by a top-hat function in the z-direction multiplied on the infinite lattice. In reciprocal space, this finite thickness broadens the reciprocal lattice points by convolving with the Fourier transform of the top-hat function, sinc(k ( T/2). The excitation error thus leads to an attenuation of the diffracted amplitude 1 : ( 1 Here we have neglected phase shifts on the diffracted beams, which do not impact the diffracted intensities. where V % is the "tilt-free" object function, defined such that V(q) = E(q) • V % (q), and The function E(q), illustrated in Figure '9( This approximation allows for separation of the tilt envelope in the EWPC: The second term above can be further simplified with the assumption of nanobeam diffraction conditions. In particular, we will assume that the probe Φ # (q) is a flat, top-hat function in diffraction space, and the separation between Bragg points in V % (q) is larger than twice the convergence semi-angle, so that the diffracted disks do not overlap. Under these conditions, the second term in Equation 10 is equivalent to a simpler form with the probe function outside of the logarithm: With these simplifications, the EWPC becomes: where we have defined the real-space tilt-blur function ε(x) = F )* 'E(q)(, and the real-space tilt-free object function v % (x) = F )* 'V % (q)(. We will generally have ε(x) and v % (x) with well-separated frequency bands, allowing us to assume no overlap between these terms: This provides a simple interpretation of EWPC patterns. The lattice information in contained in the power cepstrum of the tilt-free real-space lattice PC'v % (x)(. The lattice power cepstrum is similar to a Patterson function For simplicity, the calculations of the EWPC in this paper will generally omit the outermost power of two from the definition. This exponent is sometimes included to give the power cepstrum a symmetric form to the power spectrum, where the power of two allows physical interpretation as an energy density per unit frequency for many applications. However, the power cepstrum does not carry any equivalent physical meaning, as it does not represent an energy distribution. For purposes of strain mapping this exponent has no practical importance because it does not alter the position of peak maxima, and simply acts as a gamma adjustment on EWPC patterns that can make secondary features more difficult to discern. All of our patterns are thus calculated from nanobeam diffraction patterns using the transform: EWPC = *F /ln'I(q)(1* . '14( In practice, it is also useful to multiply the log-scale diffraction pattern by a window function to prevent the introduction of artifacts caused by non-periodic boundaries in diffraction space. A Hann window is used for this purpose in calculations throughout the paper. Lattice mapping can be achieved by calculating the positions of the inter-atomic spacing peaks in EWPC patterns. These peaks will include full-unit-cell translations, which will generally have the brightest peaks, as well as sub-unit-cell spacings. If peaks are identified to correspond to known lattice spacings, this provides a direct measurement of the local lattice parameters. Systems with spatially varying lattice distortions or strain are of particular interest for high resolution lattice mapping. Calculation of lattice distortions or strain requires the selection of a reference structure. It is often ideal to use the local lattice parameters of the material in its undeformed state as a reference, and strain calculated using this convention is known as the "material strain". However, the local, undeformed lattice parameters are often not known, making this approach impractical. An alternative is to use a single fixed reference, giving a quantity known as the "Lagrange strain". To determine the projected strain tensor, a 2X2 matrix D is calculated that transforms the reference lattice points p onto the measured points p + , i.e. p + = D ⋅ p. This distortion matrix D includes both rigid rotation of the lattice and strain deformation. These may be separated by polar decomposition: where R is a unitary rotation matrix, and U and V are the non-rotational deformation transformations. The choice of U or V determines the coordinate system of the strain tensor: U is in "lattice coordinates", corresponding to the local lattice directions, and V in "image coordinates", corresponding to the fixed q & and q ' directions in the diffraction pattern (independent of the lattice rotation). The strain tensor ε is then calculated as: ε = U -1, or ε = V -1. '16( The components of the strain tensor, ε && , ε '' , and ε &' = ε '& are the x-direction stretch, ydirection stretch, and diagonal xy-direction stretch or shear, respectively. These quantities, along with the in-plane lattice rotation θ determined from R, are often of interest and can be examined directly. For some systems, such as core-shell nanoparticles, the geometry leads to varying strain directions that are not easily interpreted in rectangular coordinates. An alternative formulation is the "strain ellipse", which describes the strain through the semi-major axis, semi-minor axis, and angle of the ellipse formed by applying the strain transformation to a circle. This is mathematically equivalent to describing the strain in its local eigenbasis, with the eigenvalues defining the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the strain ellipse and the direction of the eigenvectors defining the angle of principal strain. Cross-sectional specimens of PbTiO3 thin films on DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates were prepared using focused ion beam lift-out and thinning with an FEI Strata 400 Focused Ion Beam with a final 2 keV milling step to reduce surface damage. Specimens of carbon-supported Pt-Co nanoparticle fuel cell catalysts were prepared by cross-sectioning a fuel cell membrane electrode assembly that had undergone an accelerated stability test. Details of catalyst, cell assembly, and stability testing are reported in another manuscript. STEM imaging, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and diffraction mapping were performed in a FEI Titan Themis (S)TEM operated at 300 kV (120 kV for 2D materials). Atomic resolution imaging was performed using a convergence semi-angle of 21.4 mrad with the image signal collected on a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector. EELS mapping of Pt-Co nanoparticles was performed using a Gatan GIF Quantum 965 spectrometer in single-range EELS mode. Maps were acquired with a convergence semi-angle of 21.4 mrad, a ~200 pA beam current, a 10 ms dwell time, and ~1 Å pixel size, leading to a total dose of ~10 9 e -/nm 2 . Composition maps were extracted by integrating the signal from the Co L2,3 and Pt M4,5 edges after background subtraction using exponential and linear-combination-of-power-laws background fits, respectively. EELS calculations were performed in MATLAB using functions in the image processing toolbox. Lattice maps from atomic resolution STEM imaging were calculated using high-quality images made from 12-24 cross correlated acquisitions taken with a short dwell time (0.5-2 us) to minimize drift and improve signal. Using a 40 pA beam, this corresponded to a typical beam dose around 10 7 e -/nm 2 . Rough atomic positions were found by segmenting the image using a threshold after morphological background subtraction. Then, precise atomic positions were found by fitting with a two-dimensional Gaussian function near each rough atomic position. The atomic columns for Pb and Ti were then separated based on their HAADF intensity. Strain calculations were made from the Pb atomic positions following the same conventions detailed in the following section. Nanobeam diffraction maps were acquired in STEM microprobe mode using the EMPAD pixelated detector, which has high dynamic range and single electron sensitivity to allow collection of all scattered electrons as well as the unsaturated direct beam. All computation was performed in Matlab. Essential functions and example codes for powercepstral STEM (PC-STEM) analysis are available on Github at https://github.com/muller-groupcornell/PC-STEM. Prior to calculating the EWPC transform, a constant value is added to the raw diffraction patterns to make all values greater than zero for numerical convenience when computing logarithms. For calculation of 2D EWPC transforms a discrete fast Fourier transform is used, with a 2D Hann window to minimize edge artifacts. Peaks are identified for lattice mapping using small rectangular masks that include the peak maximum for all pixels in the region of interest. At least two peaks must be tracked. At each real space pixel and for each peak mask, the mapping routine first determines a coarse (1-pixel precision) peak position from the pixel with maximum EWPC intensity within the mask. A high precision (sub-pixel) measurement of the peak maximum is then calculated using an optimization routine initialized at the coarse peak position. The objective function for the optimization calculates the value of the EWPC transform at a single point using a continuous Fourier transform, as well as the same constant offset and 2D Hann window used for 2D EWPC calculations. Optimization was performed using the Nelder-Mead simplex method (Matlab's fminsearch). The optimization algorithm is constrained within the peak region using a modified objective function. The convergence tolerance of the optimization algorithm can also be adjusted to improve computation time. Strain mapping calculations were performed on a high-end desktop computer (2015 iMac 27"; 4.0GHz Quad-core Intel Core i7; 32GB 1600MHz DDR3 SDRAM). Typically ~10 ms of computation time was required per EWPC peak fit, allowing strain map calculations within a few minutes. After peak maxima are located for the entire map, lattice parameters may be calculated directly, or lattice distortions may be tracked by calculation of a 2X2 strain tensor. For calculation of the strain tensor, a transformation matrix D is first determined for each real-space pixel by fitting the peak positions to reference points, (using Matlab's fitgeotrans,) either absolute lattice vectors for known structures or relative, internal references for the Lagrange strain. High crystal quality PbTiO3 films were grown on 110-oriented DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates by reactive molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in a Veeco GEN 10 system using distilled ozone (»80% mol O3) as an oxidant and elemental Pb and Ti as source materials, with typical fluxes of 1.7x10 14 and 1.5x10 13 atoms/(s×cm 2 ). Distilled ozone pressure in the MBE chamber and the substrate temperature were fixed to 9x10 -6 Torr and 600°C, respectively. Pb and Ti were continuously codeposited, achieving the alternation of PbO and TiO2 atomic layers by adsorption-control. The layer-by-layer growth and the adsorption control growth window is continuously monitored by reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). After deposition, the films were cooled down at »100°C/min, while setting the distilled ozone pressure at 5x10 -6 Torr. The diffraction simulation is based on the Bloch-wave method A series of experiments was conducted to validate and illustrate the model presented in the theory section and to guide use of EWPC patterns for strain mapping. The EWPC transform leverages the additive separation properties provided by the log-scaled NBED to separate the effects of tilt and thickness from useful lattice information. Figure These two components can be additively recombined to reconstruct the original log-scaled NBED. The relative tilt between the left and right halves of Figure The upper bound on the spatial resolution achievable for EWPC structure determination comes as the convergence angle approaches a value where the disks in the NBED pattern would overlap. At this point the probe envelope in the EWPC pattern shrinks so that the first order lattice spacing peaks are lost. EWPC lattice measurement may be done using a FWHM probe diameter just larger than the unit cell. For example, Figure Another important experimental consideration is the camera length used for NBED pattern acquisition. Changing the camera length will scale the size of the NBED pattern on the detector and the calculated EWPC pattern, as illustrated in Figure The precision of lattice measurements from either direct diffraction or EWPC patterns is also affected by the choice of camera length. the standard deviation of the average lattice parameter σ -calculated using a center of mass (COM) approach and the EWPC. In the direct diffraction approach, which is similar to that used by Han et al., Figure To benchmark the performance of the EWPC method while accounting for dynamical diffraction effects, we performed a Bloch-wave simulation of NBED diffraction from a SrTiO3 specimen over a range of tilts and thicknesses (Figure In contrast, the EWPC spots are more stable, showing smaller variations in intensity and measured lattice parameter. The stability of the EWPC pattern despite instability in the diffraction pattern results from the logarithm and Fourier transform in its calculation, which averages out dynamical variations across many diffraction spots. The lattice parameter measured from the EWPC shows little variation (~1 pm) with thickness (Figure In the [100] spacing, which is oriented parallel to the tilt axis, there is minimal variation in the lattice parameter with tilt up to 3° (Figure Ferroelectric materials often have atomic displacements in the crystal that drive the ferroelectric polarization, and require microscopic techniques such as atomic resolution imaging to determine local polarization. Additionally, many ferroelectric systems experience ferroelastic distortions of their unit cell on the order of a few percent of the lattice parameters and rotations of a few degrees, making strain mapping useful as a proxy for ferroelectric domains. Ferroelectric domains span wide length scales from nanometers to microns and can have atomically abrupt domain walls with emergent properties that may not be present in the bulk. While studying the domain and domain wall structure by STEM is an important step in understanding these materials, ferroelastic strain and other complexity in the specimen may introduce challenges such as varying crystallographic tilt which requires more robust characterization methods than direct lattice imaging with atomic resolution STEM. Lattice mapping with nanobeam electron diffraction and the EWPC transform combines the potential for high spatial resolution, large fields of view, and robust measurement to address these challenges. Here we demonstrate this approach for epitaxially-grown PbTiO3 films. PbTiO3 has a tetragonal unit cell with its long axis in the direction of the ferroelectric polarization. Here we will examine two types of ferroelectric-ferroelastic domain arrangements: periodic a-and c-domains, alternating lattice elongation along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions; and periodic a1-and a2-domains alternating lattice elongation along [100] and [010] in-plane directions. The a/c and the a1/a2 domain configurations are formed as a mechanism to accommodate the epitaxial strain when PbTiO3 is grown on lattice-mismatched DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates, respectively. Details on this material system and the domain structure can be found in a separate publication. Another application space where high-resolution strain characterization can be highly valuable is catalytic nanoparticles. Application of strain to a catalytic surface to alter chemical binding strengths is an important strategy to enhance the catalytic activity. To demonstrate the effectiveness of EWPC strain mapping for catalytic nanoparticles, we will examine the strain distribution in Pt-Co/C fuel cell catalyst nanoparticles. Pt-alloy fuel cell catalyst nanoparticles are generally prepared with a thin Pt shell which experiences a compressive strain from the smaller lattice constant of the alloy core. To simulate a lifetime of fuel cell use, the Pt-Co/C catalyst examined here has been subjected to an electrochemical stability test, as described in a separate publication. The Lagrange strain was calculated using the center of the particle as a reference, and the resulting strain tensor components and lattice rotation are shown in Figure In this manuscript we have demonstrated the EWPC transform for NBED to enable robust mapping of strain and lattice structure in complex specimens. We presented a simplified analytical model to aid in interpretation of transformed patterns. This model indicates that the EWPC transform allows additive separation of the effects of tilt and thickness from the lattice information contained in periodic diffraction spots. The resulting peaks correspond to real-space inter-atomic spacings, similar to a Patterson pair-correlation function. The EWPC peaks are attenuated by a function corresponding to the real-space probe, and first-order inter-atomic spacings can be measured for probe sizes just above the unit cell size. This allows the method to attain near-unit-cell resolution, which is sub-nm for many materials. Fitting of the EWPC peaks can provide measurements of the lattice parameters with sub-pm precision. Precision is optimum for NBED patterns acquired with low camera lengths to allow inclusion of many diffraction spots. Measurement of lattice structure from EWPC peaks is also highly dose efficient, using ~1000X less dose than comparable atomic-resolution STEM measurements. We have demonstrated the practical use of the EWPC transform for mapping ferroelectricferroelastic domains in strained PbTiO3 films and compressively strained Pt shells in core-shell Pt-Co nanoparticle fuel cell catalysts. The distortions in the PbTiO3 films measured with the EWPC technique were consistent with measurements by atomic-resolution STEM atom-fitting, while providing a larger field of view and lower beam dose. Use of the EWPC technique provided the additional benefit of allowing quantitative lattice mapping in domains tilted ~3-4° off zone-axis, which could not be resolved in atomic-resolution STEM. For the core-shell Pt-Co nanoparticles, the EWPC technique allowed sub-nm resolution mapping of strain in Pt shells thinner than a few nanometers. The technique was further demonstrated to be capable of mapping strain in off-axis particles and providing high-throughput analysis for statistically representative study of heterogeneous nanoparticle samples. The EWPC transform for NBED mapping has the potential to be a useful tool in a wide range of applications. The sharp interatomic spacing peaks make precise fitting for lattice structure extraction numerically convenient, which may be beneficial even when precession is used. The EWPC properties allowing separation of useful lattice information from tilt and thickness effects make the technique robust for application to complex and challenging specimens. The EWPC peaks maintain stable intensity to allow precise mapping even with varying mistilt, and the presence of sharp peaks when far from major zone axis enable strain mapping in randomly oriented crystallites. Essential functions and example MATLAB codes for power-cepstral STEM (PC-STEM) analysis are available on Github at https://github.com/muller-group-cornell/PC-STEM. For a sample tilted far from a major zone axis, the assumption of a slowly varying envelope function degrades, and the effect of tilt will remain convolved into the EWPC to some degree rather than separating linearly, causing some blurring of the pattern.