When bilayer graphene is rotationally faulted to an angle θ ≈ 1.1 • , theory predicts the formation of a flat electronic band and correlated insulating, superconducting, and ferromagnetic states have all been observed at partial band filling. The proximity of superconductivity to correlated insulators has suggested a close relationship between these states, reminiscent of the cuprates where superconductivity arises by doping a Mott insulator. Here, we show that superconductivity can appear without correlated insulating states. While both superconductivity and correlated insulating behavior are strongest near the flat band condition, superconductivity survives to larger detuning of the angle. Our observations are consistent with a "competing phases" picture, in which insulators and superconductivity arise from disparate mechanisms. Strongly correlated electron systems often host dissimilar ground states vying closely for dominance. In certain instances, doping an interaction-driven phase can give rise to further correlated phases, in a hierarchy of emergence. Examples include the fractional quantum Hall phases that emerge doping the composite fermion sea in a partially filled Landau level Twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) offers an appealing platform to explore the interplay of competing states due to its high degree of tunability and panoply of apparently interaction driven ground states that break one or more system symmetries Here, we report superconducting behavior in tBLG devices decoupled from the appearance of correlated insulators, strongly suggesting disparate origins for the superconductivity and correlated insulating behavior. Figure The contrasting behavior observed between Devices 1-2 and 3-4 raises the question of the role of disorder, particularly inhomogeneities in θ which may vary from sample to sample and obscure the intrinsic phenomenology of tBLG. For example, previous studies of twisted bilayer graphene have found that in the low temperature limit, superconductivity may obtain even at exactly ν = -2 While the quantum oscillations show highly contrasting behavior between flat band and detuned devices, superconducting states appear to be phenomenologically similar to each other. Figures To quantitatively compare transport data across devices, Fig. Nevertheless, the observation of superconductivity in the absence of correlated insulating states constitutes powerful evidence that superconductivity arises independently. While more exotic scenarios cannot be ruled out definitively, a simple picture is that the superconductivity arises through the usual electron-phonon coupling The tBLG used in this study were fabricated using a drytransfer and "cut-and-stack" technique (Fig. All transport measurements in this study were carried out in a dilution refrigerator (Bluefors LD400) with a base temperature of 10 mK, which is equipped with a 14 T superconducting magnet and heavy RF and audio frequency filtering with a cutoff frequency of ∼ 10 kHz. The temperature dependent measurements were done by controlling the temperature using a heater mounted on a mixing chamber plate. Standard low frequency lock-in techniques with Stanford Research SR860 amplifiers were used to measure the resistance ρ xx and ρ xy with an excitation current of 1-2 nA at a frequency of 17.777 Hz. The twist angle θ is determined from the values of charge carrier density at which the insulating states at ±n s are observed, following n s = 8θ 2 / √ 3a 2 , where a= 0.246 nm is the lattice constant of graphene. The values of ±n s are determined from the sequence of quantum oscillations in a magnetic field that project to ±n s or ±n s /2 for devices. Yu Saito, Jingyuan Ge, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi and Andrea F. Young Correspondence to: andrea@physics.ucsb.edu 