Additive manufacturing techniques enable the fabrication of functional microstructures with mechanical and chemical properties tailored to their intended use. One common technique is stereolithography, which has recently been augmented in response to modern demands to support smaller features, larger build areas, and/or faster speeds. However, a limitation is that such systems typically utilize a single-aperture imaging configuration, which restricts their ability to produce microstructures at large volumes due to the tradeoff between the image resolution and image field area. In this paper, we demonstrate three versatile imaging functions based on the coupling a planar lens array, namely, parallel image transfer, kaleidoscopic superposition, and integral reconstruction, the combination of which is termed integral lithography. In this approach, the individual microlenses in the planar lens array maintain a high numerical aperture and are employed in the creation of digital light patterns that can expand the printable area by the number of microlenses (10 3 -10 4 ). The proposed lens array-based integral imaging system provides the concurrent ability to scale-up and scale-down incoming image fields, thereby enabling the scalable stereolithographic fabrication of three-dimensional features that surpass the resolution-to-area scaling limit. The proposed system opens up new possibilities for producing periodic microarchitectures spanning four orders of magnitude from micrometers to centimeters that can be applied to biological scaffolds, metastructures, chemical reactors, and functional surfaces. Rapid developments in the fabrication of three-dimensional (3D) printed architectures has revolutionized the ability to produce functional structures for mechanical/acoustic metamaterials However, despite these system improvements, conventional PμSL methods use an imaging platform that relies on a single-aperture imaging system in which an incoming image is focused directly onto a single planar area. The consequence is that the amount of transferred spatial information is fundamentally limited by the space-bandwidth product (SBP) of the pixelated digital projection system, which is defined as the number of pixels required to realize the maximum information capacity. The SBP of a conventional PμSL platform is typically in megapixels (Mpx) range regardless of the numerical aperture (NA) or magnification (M) of the imaging optics used, which results in a compromise between the achievable feature resolution and the total image area This problem can potentially be solved with an image multiplication strategy (i.e., numbering-up) in conjunction with a planar micro-optical imaging system. With continued advances in low-cost and large scale microlens array fabrication techniques, micro-optical devices have become a promising tools for large-area display applications such as integral imaging 3D displays At present, both micro-optical and single-aperture imaging systems require further development and no existing technologies can support a scalable SBP in additive manufacturing. Here, we propose a new stereolithographic printing system that combines integral image formation with a planar micro-optical device to provide a scalable SBP for additive manufacturing applications without requiring serial scanning. The proposed engineered projection system is based on a lens array, in which each individual microlens can maintain a high NA and the overall print area can be expanded by the number of microlenses. The functional micro-optical device combined with digital light processing enables the projected output images to be manipulated via versatile projection functions of the incoming images, namely, parallel transfer, kaleidoscopic superposition, and integral projection. We developed an approach, integral lithography, to realize the concurrent ability to scale-up (increasing areal build size without compromising the critical feature size) and scale-down (reducing the feature size while maintaining the areal build size) incoming image fields. The imaging mechanism is described with a simple thin-lens equation that predicts the complex output patterns of the lens array from simple inputs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the reconstructed patterns obtained from the integral imaging of multiple incoming images allows us to improve the scalability of the print area and provide it with a more uniform light distribution. As part of our validation, we evaluated the scalability of the approach and its ability to expand print areas 10 2 -10 3 times larger than those of current commercial systems, which translates to an SBP of 0.1-0.28 gigapixels (Gpx). Of particular interest was the ability to produce periodic microarchitectures spanning four orders of magnitude in scale from micrometers to centimeters. periodic bicontinuous structures (total layers with a slicing thickness of 20 μm: 60); (E) circular-lattice microscaffolds (total layers with a slicing thickness of 10 μm: 10); (F) trapezoidal shell-type microstructures with a reentrant geometry (total layers with a slicing thickness of 20 μm: 20). A schematic overview of the proposed 3D printing system is shown in Figure A description of how the imaging mechanism manipulates the projected output patterns is provided in Figure To describe the relationship between the elements of the input objects and output images, we consider the optical system of a one-dimensional model with the column vectors a in n , a out , and matrix H, where a in n and a out are the elements of the input objects and the projected images, respectively, and H denotes the optical system matrix (see the Methods section). Then, the system can be described as [a out H a in n , as shown in Fig. The coupling of digitally-controlled integral imaging patterns with a lens array enabled the scalable microprinting of various structures. Intertwined fibrous lattice microstructures were printed under Lens 1 (defined within the Fig. In single-aperture imaging systems based on a pixelated digital microdisplay where k eff is k/D 2 and R eff must be compliant with the Abbe diffraction-limited spot size d = 1.22λ / 2NA We have demonstrated a means of integrating a micro-optical imaging device into a lightbased 3D printing system to enable scalable stereolithographic manufacturing via integral image formation. The proposed approach leverages the periodic nature of the geometries produced by reconstructing input images using versatile projection functions consisting of parallel replication, kaleidoscopic superposition, and integral reconstruction based on the complex local geometries generated by the unit-lens. We envision the proposed approach will be used to expand the Minimum feature size, R (μm) capabilities of large-area fabrication towards complex and periodic microstructures with mechanical and structural benefits that have yet to be fully utilized at scales that are practical in volume production applications. If such microarchitectures are made accessible at larger scales than currently exist, architected materials like those described in this paper could find widespread applications ranging in biomedical devices The input images in Fig. Printing experiment: The integral lithographic system was implemented by modifying the optical platform in a conventional PμSL system comprised of a DMD-based digital microdisplay with a 405-nm LED source, the delivery optics, an optical diffuser (Thorlabs, DG100X100-1500), and the lens array, as shown in Fig. Illumination scheme: Increasing the illumination distribution over the lens array is an important factor in achieving scalable photopolymerization. Integral imaging is particularly beneficial for large-area printing because multiple superimposed array objects increase the area of uniform illuminance, as compared to the smaller region illuminated by a single object. In the proposed configuration, a digital microdisplay device projects dynamic images onto an optical diffuser, which functions as a virtual and reconfigurable photomask. The diffuser then scatters the light to produce a near Lambertian profile, which ensures homogeneous illumination in all directions at the plane of the lens array plane To describe a simple analytical equation for the illumination distribution in our system, we assume that the input image produces an incoherent illuminating source and a nonperfect Lambertian distribution defined as a cosine-power function of P r, θ ∝ P r cos θ where θ is the radiating angle, m is the directionality, P0(r) = P0/r 2 is the radiant power on the axis at distance r from the image source when θ = 0°, and P0 is proportional to a 2 . In Fig. We measured the illumination distribution over the c x -c y plane with variations of size a when b = 68.75 mm, and further fitted the measured irradiance distribution to determine the constant m. Based on the measurements of the radiant power distribution for a single image source along the c x axis at c y = 0 for a selected value of a = 9 mm, we extracted the fitting constant m = 65 in our system (Fig. • c M 1 2i • . (S2) For the simple analytic approach, we used a paraxial approximation that the divergence angle shifts only the distance between array image sources and thereby model the illumination propagation to the array-lens without divergence (Fig. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Changwon National University, Changwon, South Korea. Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) Centre, 1 Create Way, Singapore 138602. *e-mail: nicfang@mit.edu