The goal of integrated quantum photonics is to combine components for the generation, manipulation, and detection of non-classical light in a phase stable and efficient platform. Solid-state quantum emitters have recently reached outstanding performance as single photon sources. In parallel, photonic integrated circuits have been advanced to the point that thousands of components can be controlled on a chip with high efficiency and phase stability. Consequently, researchers are now beginning to combine these leading quantum emitters and photonic integrated circuit platforms to realize the best properties of each technology. In this article, we review recent advances in integrated quantum photonics based on such hybrid systems. Although hybrid integration solves many limitations of individual platforms, it also introduces new challenges that arise from interfacing different materials. We review various issues in solid-state quantum emitters and photonic integrated circuits, the hybrid integration techniques that bridge these two systems, and methods for chip-based manipulation of photons and emitters. Finally, we discuss the remaining challenges and future prospects of on-chip quantum photonics with integrated quantum emitters. PICs provide a compact, phase stable, and high-bandwidth platform to transmit, manipulate, and detect light on-chip. By leveraging advances in semiconductor manufacturing for classical communication, PICs have been demonstrated with over a thousand active components in a few square mm The laws of quantum mechanics promise information processing technologies that are inherently more powerful than their classical counterparts, with examples including quantum computing Photons are a promising system to realize quantum information processing applications due to their low noise properties, excellent modal control, and long-distance propagation However, fully integrating the generation, manipulation, and detection of photons is an outstanding challenge for the field due to the unique material requirements for each distinct component. For example, epitaxially grown III-V semiconductor quantum dots are a leading approach for the near-deterministic generation of single photons in terms of purity, brightness, and indistinguishability Hybrid integration provides a potential solution by incorporating disparate photonic technologies into a single integrated system that may not be otherwise compatible in a single fabrication process. Hybrid integration techniques include pick-and-place, wafer bonding, and epitaxial growth. In the context of quantum technologies, hybrid integration offers the tantalizing goal of bringing together quantum emitters, quantum memories, coherent linear and nonlinear operations, and single photon detection into a single quantum photonic platform as described in Fig. Solid-state quantum emitters provide an essential building block for photon-based quantum technologies with their ability to produce single photons or entangled photon pairs in a deterministic manner Since the solid-state medium hosts the quantum emitters, they do not require a complicated trapping setup, which is essential for cold atoms and trapped ions. However, the solid-state environments create several issues such as limited light extraction efficiency, randomness of the position and frequency, and dephasing induced by interaction with charges and phonons in the quantum emitters. Initial efforts to solve these issues have focused on efficient generation of single photons by employing various micro/nanophotonic structures, including photonic crystals, photonic nanowires, microdisks, and micropillars [Fig. Many material platforms exist, each with varying levels of maturity. For example, silicon photonics benefits from an advanced silicon-on-insulator (SOI) manufacturing process that enables cointegration of photonics and CMOS electronics, enabling thousands of opto-electronic components on a single chip In the context of hybrid integration, one limitation of the SOI platform is a bandgap at ~1.1 μm, as many solid-state quantum emitters generate photons below this wavelength, causing significant loss. An approach for overcoming this limitation is to use telecom-compatible quantum emitters, such as InAs/InP quantum dots In terms of emerging quantum photonic platforms, LiNbO3 possesses strong electro-optic and acousto-optic properties A key consideration for PICs for hybrid integration of quantum emitters is modulation at emitter-compatible cryogenic temperatures (< 10 K). Fast, low-loss modulation is critical for multiplexing An alternative approach is to incorporate materials with a strong Pockels effect into a non-electro-optically active material via hybrid integration. Organic polymers Breakthroughs in hybrid integration of PICs for quantum photonics will benefit from a two-step approach: advances in PIC technology will open up new opportunities for hybrid integration, and fully understanding the unique requirements of quantum technologies will help direct PIC research. PICs can efficiently manipulate and route light across the chip. To perform quantum information processing tasks, however, quantum light sources are required. These photons can be externally generated outside the chip and brought to it with various coupling techniques, or internally generated using the nonlinearity of the waveguide materials Quantum emitters in the form of nanoparticles, such as colloidal quantum dots or diamond nanoparticles, can be simply integrated with photonic structures by dispersing them onto the photonic platforms The simple dispersion method does not precisely control the position of the emitters, instead randomly places them near the photonic structures (e.g., waveguides or cavity structures). This fact limits the use of the random dispersion method for quantum photonic applications where the deterministic coupling of multiple quantum emitters with high coupling efficiency is crucial. To improve the coupling efficiency, it is possible to selectively disperse the nanoparticles using lithography-based masking Optically stable single photon emission with high single photon purity and indistinguishability can be generated from quantum emitters embedded in a high crystalline bulk medium, which can be achieved from epitaxially grown quantum dots or defects in a diamond film. Using the epitaxial growth technique, growing quantum materials directly on a photonic platform can provide hybrid hetero-structures for both emitters and photonic circuits in a single wafer. For example, hybrid hetero-structures of III-V compound semiconductors on Si, which are particularly important for realizing many optoelectronic applications Another well-known method for integrating dissimilar material platforms is the wafer-to-wafer bonding technique, an example of which is shown in Fig. In the wafer-bonding technique, the independent growth of the materials for the quantum emitters and photonic platform preserves the crystal quality and provides hybrid hetero-structures at the waferscale. However, one limitation of this method is the reliance on random coupling between the emitters and photonic chips. To overcome this problem, a number of groups have suggested the pick-and-place method that transfers small-scale quantum devices one-by-one instead of wafer-scale integration. This single device transfer method allows the emitters to be pre-characterized before assembly Another effective technique for the pick-and-place approach is using a sharp micro-probe Along with the efficient integration of quantum emitters with photonic circuits, controlling the quantum emitters to be identical to each other is essential to meet the criteria for quantum operation based on multiple, indistinguishable single photons. Furthermore, to establish efficient quantum operation on a chip, the photonic circuits should route, modulate, and detect the generated photons with minimal loss. In this section, we introduce the promising techniques for on-chip control of the emitters and photons as well as recent demonstrations of on-chip quantum operation. Two-photon interference based on the Hong-Ou-Mandel interferometer is the primary mechanism for achieving measurementbased quantum interaction with photons Recently, a number of groups have reported near transform-limited linewidth based on resonant One obstacle to the use of resonant excitation is a strong laser background scattered from the solid-state chip. Since the resonant scattered laser cannot be filtered out from the single photons using a spectral filter, it is necessary to employ other techniques for the separation of the two resonant signals. For example, a cross-polarization technique with a polarizing beam splitter combined with linear polarizers can selectively eliminate the laser background Together with phonon interaction, the fluctuating charge environment in the vicinity of the quantum emitters is another source of dephasing Having coherent single photons from a single quantum emitter enables us to scale up to multiple indistinguishable single photon emitters on a chip. This is particularly important for large-scale photonic quantum simulators, such as boson samplers [140] and large-scale entangled photonic cluster states A bright single quantum emitter combined with a temporal-tospatial demultiplexing technique is one possible way to achieve multiple single photons in a deterministic manner [Fig. On-chip-integrated quantum emitters with matched frequency can provide not only multiple indistinguishable single photons, but also an outstanding platform to study many-body quantum physics. For example, multiple quantum emitters coupled to the same optical mode form entangled superposition states known as Dicke states, resulting in a super-radiant emission with an increased spontaneous emission rate [145]. In particular, integrating the emitters into a one-dimensional waveguide can realize long-range interactions between the emitters [146]. For example, Fig. Along with the frequency control, the positional control of the emitters is another important factor for generating quantum emitter arrays with high coupling efficiency between the emitters and photonic circuits. Depending on the types of emitters, various experimental approaches have demonstrated deterministic positional control of the emitters. For instance, site-controlled quantum dots have been achieved by employing pre-patterned substrates or three-dimensional nanostructures such as pyramidal structures These successful demonstrations of local controls of quantum emitters' frequency and position on a chip show strong potential of PICs with integrated sources of multiple identical quantum emitters and multiple indistinguishable single photons. In the absence of direct photon-photon interaction, requiring strong Kerr nonlinearity, efficient quantum information processing can be established with quantum light sources, linear optical components, and detectors The use of quantum emitters as quantum light sources requires additional photonic components to spectrally filter single photon emission from unwanted background emissions, including the scattered laser. Such frequency sorters have been demonstrated by using nano-photonic structures The integrated nano-photonic structures add more functionality to PICs by enhancing optical nonlinearity. Frequency conversion of photons is one representative example and is very useful for the quantum emitters. Although, applying strain or an electric field on the quantum emitters can shift the emission frequency, the achievable tuning range typically remains below 10 nm. In contrast, the frequency conversion using or nonlinearity in the nano-photonic structures such as a ring resonator acts on photons and offers a much wider tuning range from a few tens of nm up to a few hundred nm. Figure In the previous sections, we introduced on-chip generation and control of photons in PICs. Although photons provide an excellent carrier for quantum information, the storage time and deterministic interactions between photons are absent unless coupled to nonlinear matter. Integrated quantum emitters can provide not only photonic qubits but also spin qubits. Therefore, incorporating quantum-specific components, such as quantum memories and quantum gates, as well as coherent nonlinear optical elements based on stationary qubits, enable a wider range of photonic quantum information processing schemes [153] [Table Quantum entanglement between spins and photons has been demonstrated from various quantum emitters [131], and nanophotonic cavities or waveguides with strongly coupled quantum emitters can provide efficient spin-photon quantum interfaces by tailoring the light-matter interaction. In the context of cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED), the spin-photon interface controls the spin state via the polarization state of photons and vice versa. Recent work has demonstrated the conditional phase shift of photons [158], and strong photon-photon interaction [159] based on strongly coupled cavity-quantum emitter systems. Recent theoretical work also indicates that dynamically switchable cavities can mediate deterministic photonphoton gates with high fidelity Along with the high Q cavity, nanophotonic waveguides can also mediate efficient spin-photon interface using waveguide QED. The slow-light mode in the waveguide plays an important role in the waveguide QED, which has a similar principle to the cavity QED. Since the waveguides use propagation modes instead of localized modes, as in the cavity, multiple quantum emitters at different positions can couple to the waveguide and interact via real and virtual photons, enabling long-range connectivity. In addition, since the integrated emitter efficiently couples to the propagating photons in a waveguide, the emitter can induce strong optical nonlinearity at the single-photon level. Figure Therefore, the light-matter interaction with the integrated emitters enables a vast range of practical applications, such as quantum repeaters [163], quantum logic gates [158], photon-photon gates [164], single photon transistors [159], and photon number filters [165] in integrated photonic circuits. The studies show the potential capability of integrated quantum emitters as a source of photonic and stationary qubits and a mediator on spin-photon interfaces on a chip. However, so far, most demonstrations were performed in monolithically integrated platforms, which limits the number and function of the quantum emitters. The hybrid integration methods can provide a solution for scalable, integrated quantum photonic systems by the post-assembly of independently optimized emitters, cavities, and photonic circuits in a single chip. Recently, on-chip strong light-matter interaction in a hybrid system has been demonstrated with combined quantum emitters, high Q cavity, and photonic waveguide as shown in Figure Quantum information processing ends with the efficient readout of the state of the photons. Since the photons travel along the waveguide in photonic circuits, to be detected it is necessary to extract out on-chip propagating photons and couple them into an objective lens or a fiber. To minimize the coupling loss, various methods have been suggested, such as grating-assisted coupling, evanescent coupling, tapered waveguides, and end-fiber coupling with a lensed fiber The most desirable way for detecting propagating photons in a chip is to integrate the detectors in the same chip. Single photon detectors based on superconducting nanowires are of great interest for this purpose because they can be fabricated on the photonic circuits directly and offer a fully integrated on-chip quantum photonic device, as shown in Fig. In this review, we have presented recent advances in integrated quantum photonic systems that generate and manipulate quantum light and establish spin-photon interaction in a single chip. Solid-state quantum emitters now demonstrate high single photon generation rates, purities, and indistinguishability, with controlled position and frequency as well as spin with long coherence times. Meanwhile, photonic circuits can manipulate photons in various degrees of freedom using combined couplers, phase shifters, and linear/nonlinear components on a chip. Recent approaches for the hybrid integration of solid-state quantum emitters with photonic circuits have shown a possible solution for the long-standing issue of lack of internal, deterministic quantum light sources in the PICs. Also, integrating the quantum emitters in PICs provides many quantum functional components on a chip, and therefore it adds more functionality and flexibility for on-chip photonic quantum information processing. However, despite this progress, realizing practical on-chip quantum photonic devices with integrated quantum emitters still faces many challenges. The principal obstacle is the need to generate multiple indistinguishable single photons from independently controlled quantum emitters. Although the number of quantum emitters that can be simultaneously controlled on a chip is increasing using several approaches, introduced in section 4, those emitters still lack long coherence times Another challenge is realizing efficient on-chip quantum interaction. We reviewed the possible mechanisms for such quantum interactions in section 5, which included two-photon interference using linear optics, atom-mediated nonlinear photon-photon interaction in cavities, and photon-mediated atom-atom interaction in waveguides. However, the interference visibility, single dipole cooperativity, and entanglement fidelity need to be further improved for a large-scale quantum system. To meet the performance criteria for deterministic quantum information processing with photons, higher efficiency, scalability, stability, and controllability of the emitter and photons are required. Satisfying all these conditions may be implausible within a single material. However, hybrid integration may pave the way by combining efficient single photon sources, coherent spins, and high-quality nanophotonic structures, as well as spectral and spatial control of the emitters and the photons. Integrated quantum node Large scale system involving multiemitter coupling Cooperative behavior of emitters mediated by photons Although it remains experimentally difficult to realize large-scale quantum photonic devices, the field of integrated quantum photonics is rising with developing quantum photonic technological capability, and it will provide a promising platform for various chip-scale quantum optics applications such as Boson sampling [176] and quantum chemistry 