The electronic spectral function of BaNi 2 As 2 is investigated using both the angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and a combined computational scheme of local density approximation together with dynamical mean-field theory (LDA+DMFT). In contrast to well studied isostructural iron arsenide high temperature superconductors, the BaNi 2 As 2 demonstrate weak correlation effects although Ni-3d elections have even lager on-site interaction than Fe-3d ones. LDA+DMFT effective mass enhancement for bands crossing the Fermi level is found to be only about 1.2 which agrees well with ARPES data. This reduction of the correlation manifestation with respect to iron pnictides comes from the increase of 3d-orbital filling, when going from Fe to Ni. The electron correlations cause remarkable reconstruction of the bare BaNi 2 As 2 LDA band structure below -0.8 eV due to self-energy effect. A simplified toy model to understand weakness of correlation effects in BaNi 2 As 2 and to describe the LDA+DMFT self-energy shape is discussed. For more realistic comparison of LDA+DMFT spectral function maps with ARPES data we take into account several experimental features: the photoemission cross-section, the experimental energy and angular resolutions and the photo-hole lifetime effects. Thus presented here LDA+DMFT calculations with experimental features included provide nearly qualitative agreement with ARPES data and assure the observation of a dramatic apparent decrease of the correlation strength compared to the Fe compounds. At present, for more than ten years, new high-temperature iron-based superconductors are being intensively studied both experimentally and theoretically (cf. reviews As it turned out, one can synthesize many materials isostructural to the iron superconductors. For example, once arsenic is completely substituted by selenium, From the very beginning, it was pointed out that the band renormalization in BaNi 2 As 2 at the Fermi level is much weaker than in iron pnictides. In this paper we present a joint experimental-theoretical study of BaNi 2 As 2 using ARPES measurements and LDA+DMFT of the electronic spectrum on the scales of the entire Ni-3d and As-4p bands. We explicitly demonstrate that the band renormalization is rather weak near the Fermi level in BaNi 2 As 2 because of almost occupied Ni-3d states. However correlation effects in BaNi 2 As 2 remarkably reconstruct bare LDA bands at the higher binding energies due to self-energy effects. Finally in Appendix a simplified toy model to understand weakness of correlation effects in BaNi 2 As 2 and to describe the LDA+DMFT self-energy shape is proposed. To provide a better comparison of LDA+DMFT spectral functions with ARPES data the photoemission cross-section, the experimental energy and angular resolutions and the photohole lifetime effects are included into consideration (details of that are given in Appendix). All these give good, almost quantitative agreement with experimental photoemission data. Despite the popularity and importance of the BaFe 2 As 2 compound in the studies of the unconventional superconductivity and relevant effects, the BaNi 2 As 2 system has been addressed less widely. In the BaNi 2 As 2 there is no spin density wave (SDW) or any other type of magnetic ordering in contrast to iron arsenides. However, the articles The crystal structure of BaNi 2 As 2 above T = 131 K has the tetragonal symmetry with I4/mmm space group. Lattice constants are a = b = 4.112 Å and c = 11.542 Å. The atomic positions in the elementary unit cell are following: Ba -2a(0, 0, 0), Ni -4d(0, 0.5, 0.25), As -4e(0, 0, 0.3476). The DMFT(CT-QMC) computations were done at the inverse temperature β = 40 (∼ 290 K) with about 10 8 Monte-Carlo sweeps. The interaction parameters of the Hubbard model were taken as U = 4.5 eV and J = 0.85 eV. The U value is slightly larger The LDA+DMFT spectral function maps were obtained after an analytic continuation of the local self-energy Σ(ω) from the Matsubara frequencies to the real ones. To this end we have applied the Pade approximant algorithm The crystal structure of BaFe 2 As 2 has I4/mmm space group with a = b = 3.909 Å and c = 13.212 Å, As -4e(0, 0, 0.3538). The ARPES experiments were performed at the I05 beamline of the Diamond Light Source. The photoemission spectra with total energy resolution of 20 meV and angular resolution of 0.5 • were measured at 7 K, using photons with the energy 120 eV of various polarizations. In order to increase the contrast of second derivative of ARPES here we have used a procedure similar to the one described in. However, the hybridization of the Fe(Ni)-3d -As-4p states did not change significantly (Ni-3d bandwidth is only about 5% larger than Fe-3d one). But, there is spectral weight shift of As-4p states upwards in energy induced by correlations on Ni-3d states for BaNi 2 As 2 . For BaFe 2 As 2 this effect is absent. It is well established that direct Coulomb electron-electron interaction and Hund's coupling are important for iron based superconductors. First of all we compare experimental photoemission spectrum to LDA or LDA+DMFT calculated spectra (Figure The position of the main peak (about -1. It is well known that by varying the beam energy in ARPES experiments one can access different values of k z component of the momenta. In the panels (b) and (c) of Figure To illustrate the difference between LDA (dashed lines) and LDA+DMFT (solid lines), the quasiparticle bands in X-Γ-X direction are ploted on Figure In oder to compare ARPES and LDA+DMFT calculated spectral function maps directly, we consider the following experimental features: the photoemission cross-section, the experimental energy and angular resolutions and the photo-hole lifetime effects (see Figure It's well known that the Hund's coupling plays a major role in iron-based superconductors, Let us emphasize another peculiarity of BaNi 2 As 2 that differs it from regular iron arsenide superconductors. Once we plot orbital-resolved LDA+DMFT spectral function maps for Ni-3d and As-4p states, one can see that all these orbitals are present at the Fermi level (see Figure Energy (eV) As-4p x As-4p z In of the bare LDA bands below -0.8 eV due to LDA+DMFT self-energy effects. Also, the LDA+DMFT self-energy is descriptively explained with the toy model using only the bare DOS as an input. For realistic comparison between theoretical and experimental results, several details are to be accounted for: the photoemission cross-section, the experimental energy and angular resolutions and the photo-hole lifetime effects. All this provides almost quantitative agreement of the LDA+DMFT spectral function map with ARPES data. themselves produce significant band damping. Energy (eV) LDA+DMFT, (f) plus cross section effects LDA+DMFT LDA+DMFT, (g) plus energy resolution LDA+DMFT, (i) plus angular resolution LDA+DMFT, (g) plus photo-hole lifetime effects X Energy (eV) Figure Then on the (d,k) panels the energy resolution and the photo-hole lifetime effects are added. Finally on the panels (e,l) the k-space resolution is introduced. Corresponding LDA and LDA+DMFT spectral functions have the same intensity scale. ARPES data recoding with horizontal (f,m) and vertical (g,n) light polarization. The Fermi level is at zero energy. In our earlier work Ref. The maximum allowable broadening was limited to 0.5 eV for the energy lower than -1 eV. Corresponding Energy (eV) As-4p x As-4p z Theoretical PES (Figure To contribution of bands of different symmetry the orbital resolved LDA+DMFT spectral function maps (Ni-3d and As-4p states) with experimental details included are presented in Figure The hν-dependent data set imaged with the photon energy ranging from 40 to 120 eV is Toy Model for the Self-Energy Calculation In this paper to account for correlation interactions we did LDA+DMFT calculation for BaNi 2 As 2 . Strictly speaking DMFT is a way of complete summation of full set of diagrams (or in other words -electron scattering processes) for the case of Hubbard (local) Coulomb interaction. For such kind of exact theories it is difficult to extract, so to say, leading Thus, in this section we propose a toy model allowing us to pick up the "leading" (as we suppose) electron-electron scattering processes to the noninteracting system. This toy model, as we show below, captures difference of the correlation strength between BaFe 2 As 2 and BaNi 2 As 2 and provide qualitative explanation of the DMFT self-energy in a wide window around Fermi level. The physical idea we will rely upon is rather straightforward: for each electronic state we will calculate the scattering rate resulting from the particle-particle interaction. In terms of the Green function formalism such scattering rate corresponds to the imaginary part of the self-energy, Σ . The two-particle processes resulting in the filling of this hole are depicted in the panel (c). As soon as we consider the effects resulting from the particle-particle interaction, the energy in this process should be conserved, ω 1 + ω 2 = ω 0 + ω 3 . Upon such unitary electron-electron scattering, the momentum is also conserved. However, we will omit the momentum in our consideration altogether, and will characterise the states only by their energy. The probability of filling our test hole in a unitary process shown in Figure where DOS(ω) is the density of states, and f (ω) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. Generally there should also be a matrix element of the corresponding transition -a product of the initial and final electronic wave functions over the particle-particle potential -but we will assume it to be equal for all possible transitions. The probability for the test hole to scatter is expressed then as an integral over all possible unitary processes. Taking into account that ω 3 = ω + ω 2 -ω 0 owing to the energy conservation, •DOS(ω 2 )f (ω 2 ) In order to complete the consideration of all possible processes involving the state ω 0 , we formally need to consider the possible scattering of the test electron placed into this state, see Figure •DOS(ω 2 )[1 -f (ω 2 )] • DOS(ω 1 + ω 2 -ω 0 )f (ω 1 + ω 2 -ω 0 )dω 1 dω 2 , and the imaginary part of the self-energy is Σ (ω 0 ) = Σ hole (ω 0 ) + Σ el-n (ω 0 ). As the selfenergy is an analytic function, the real part of the self energy can be restored from Σ via the Kramers-Kronig transform. In the Figure times smaller in the presented simple model. The calculation scheme described in this section can be regarded as a mnemonic rule with a certain physical meaning. The toy model results support the idea that the band renormalization at the Fermi level is largely determined by the bare density of 3d states and the 3d band filling. In particular, the DOS(ω = 0) and large amount of both occupied and empty states are important parameters. Finally, these simple considerations illustrate weakness of correlation effect in BaNi 2 As 2 in contrast to BaFe 2 As 2 in agreement with LDA+DMFT and ARPES data. Thus, the LDA+DMFT obtained bands (solid lines on different. And we will see that in ARPES too. Possible reasons why the intensity of the -3 eV for BaNi 2 As 2 and -1.5 eV BaFe 2 As 2 peaks are overestimated for the theoretical * /m ∼ 3. For the case of BaNi 2 As 2 our LDA+DMFT results give Ni-3d state occupancy ∼ 9.2 electrons which is far away from the situation in iron arsenides. * /m = 1.2 despite the strong Coulomb interactions U =4.5 eV and J=0.85 eV, in contrast to the iron superconductors with m * /m ranging from 3 for arsenides up to 5 in chalcogenides. line), LDA+DMFT (black solid line), LDA+DMFT Ni-3d states only (red dashed line), LDA+DMFT As-4p states only (green dotted line). Panel (b): PES of BaFe 2 As 2 from 50 (red circles), LDA (dash-dotted brown line), LDA+DMFT (blue dashed line), LDA+DMFT BaNi 2 As 2 (black solid line). The Fermi level is at zero energy. PES might be explained by energy and polarization dependences of matrix elements and/or orbital character dependence of matrix elements.Γ X X Γ X X (b) (c) red -LDA+DMFT bands at k Z =0.95 ARPES Vertical polarization ARPES Horizontal polarization red -LDA+DMFT bands at k Z =0.95