The ZrSiS-type compounds are Dirac semimetals and thus have been attracting considerable interest in recent years due to their topological electronic properties and possible technological applications. In particular, gapped Dirac nodes can possess large spin Berry curvatures and thus give rise to large spin Hall effect (SHE) and spin Nernst effect (SNE), which may be used to generate pure spin current for spintronics and spin caloritronics without applied magnetic field or magnetic material. In this paper we study both SHE and SNE in ZrXY (X = Si, Ge; Y = S, Se, Te) based on ab initio relativistic band structure calculations. Our theoretical calculations reveal that some of these compounds exhibit large intrinsic spin Hall conductivity (SHC) and spin Nernst conductivity (SNC). For example, the calculated SHC of ZrSiTe is as large as -755 ( /e)(S/cm). Since the electric conductivity of these Dirac semimetals are much smaller than that of platinum which has the largest intrinsic SHC of ∼2200 ( /e)(S/cm), this indicates that they will have a larger spin Hall angle (and hence a more efficient charge-spin current conversion) than that of platinum. Remarkably, we find that both the magnitude and sign of the SHE and SNE in these compounds can be significantly tuned by changing either the electric field direction or spin current direction and may also be optimized by slightly varying the Fermi level via chemical doping. Analysis of the calculated band-and k-resolved spin Berry curvatures show that the large SHE and SNE as well as their remarkable tunabilities originate from the presence of many slightly spin-orbit coupling-gapped Dirac nodal lines near the Fermi level in these Dirac semimetals. Our findings thus suggest that the ZrSiS-type compounds are promising candidates for spintronic and spin caloritronic devices, and will certainly stimulate further experiments on these Dirac semimetals. Spintronics, a field combining the spin degree of freedom with traditional electronics, has drawn increasing attention over the past decades. The generation, detection and manipulation of spin current are the most important issues in spintronics. Several methods have already been developed to generate spin current. For example, spin current injection from ferromagnets to nonmagnetic materials, spin pumping Similarly, a longitudinal temperature gradient (∇T ) could play the role of the applied electric field (E) in driving the electrons through the nonmagnetic sample, also leading to a pure transverse spin current. This thermally driven spin transport phenomenon in nonmagnetic materials is called the spin Nernst effect (SNE) Among the Dirac semimetals, the studies of the ZrSiStype compounds have been particularly intense in the past few years. The members of the ZrSiS family share the same space group P 4/nmm (No.129), and they all possess the symmetry protected Dirac nodal features in the band structures In this paper, therefore, we present the main results of our systematic ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations on the SHE and SNE in DSM compounds ZrSiS, ZrSiSe, ZrSiTe, ZrGeS, ZrGeSe and ZrGeTe. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe the Berry phase formalism for calculating the intrinsic spin Hall and Nernst conductivities as well as the computational details. Section III consists of four subsections. We first present the calculated relativistic band structures of the six considered compounds and also analyze their topological properties in Sec. III A. We then report the calculated spin Hall conductivities, which are compared with that of some well-known spin Hall metals, in Sec. III B. To understand the origins of the large SHC, we present the bandand k-resolved spin Berry curvatures especially near the Dirac nodes in the vicinity of the Fermi level in Sec. III C. We finally present the calculated spin Nernst conductivities and their temperature dependences, and also discuss the validity of the Mott relation in Sec. III D. Finally, the conclusions drawn from this work are summarized in Sec. IV. As mentioned above, the ZrXY compounds crystallize in the tetragonal structure [see Fig. The intrinsic SHC is calculated within the Berry phase formalism where J s i is the ith component of spin current density, f kn is the Fermi distribution, and Ω n,s i,j (k) is the spin Berry curvature for the n th band at k. i, j = x, y, z and i = j. s is the spin direction, τ s is the Pauli matrix, and v i is the velocity operator In the SHC and SNC calculations, the velocity kn |v i |kn and spin velocity kn|{τ s , v i }/4]|kn matrix elements are calculated from the self-consistent relativistic band structures within the PAW formalism A. Electronic band structures The six compounds of the ZrSiS-family studied in this paper all have a non-magnetic ground state. The calculated relativistic band structures are shown in Fig. Unlike the nonsymmorphic symmetry-protected line nodes, the unprotected nodes along the Γ-X, Γ-M, Z-R, and Z-A would be gapped out because the C 2v symmetry has only one irreducible representation in the presence of the SOC. These gapped nodes can be seen from the calculated band structures in Fig. The SHC (σ s ij ; s, i, j = x, y, z) for a solid is a thirdorder tensor. However, for a highly symmetric crystal such as the ZrXY family, most of the tensor elements are zero. The nonmagnetic ZrXY family has space group P 4/nmm, which corresponds to the magnetic Laue group 4/mmm1'. In Table In Table ered here are listed in the increasing order of their SOC strengths. Among them, ZrSiS has the weakest SOC strength while ZrGeTe has the strongest one. This is based on the well-known fact that the larger the atomic number of an element is, the stronger the SOC in the atoms of the element. The values of some nonzero elements of the SHC tensor in the six compounds can be large. In particular, the σ y zx of ZrSiTe has the largest SHC value of -755 ( /e)(S/cm). This SHC value is ten times larger than that [72 ( /e)(S/cm)] of the noncollinear antiferromagnetic Mn 3 Sn Since the SHC could be sensitive to the location of the Fermi energy (E F ), we also calculate the SHC as a function of E F . In panel (b) of Fig. To understand the origin of the large SHC in some of the six compounds, let us now take a look at the bandand k-resolved spin Berry curvatures for the bands near the Fermi level. According to Eq. ( Figure Since there are many slightly gapped Dirac nodes near the Fermi level in the considered compounds [see panel (a) in Figs. The SNC (α s ij ) for a solid is also a third-order tensor. Since the transverse spin currents generated by a longitudinal electric field and a longitudinal temperature gradient have the same transformation properties under the symmetry operations, the shape of the SNC is identical to that of the SHC As for the SHC, the SNC of the six compounds is significantly anisotropic. For example, Table We also calculate the SNC as a function of E F . In panel (c) of Fig. which indicates that the SNC is proportional to the energy derivative of the SHC at the E F . In other words, a peak in the SNC would occur when the SHC has a steep slope. In Table In summary, we have thoroughly studied the SHE and SNE in Dirac nodal-line semimetals ZrXY (X = Si, Ge; Y = S, Se, Te) by performing systematic ab initio calculations within the Berry phase formalism. The calculated SHC and SNC of the six considered materials are large. In particular, the calculated SHC of ZrSiTe is as large as -755 [( /e)(S/cm), being smaller but in the same order of magnitude of that of platinum, which posseses the largest intrinsic SHC among the metals. However, since the Zr-SiS semimetals have a much smaller electric conductivity, they are expected to have a larger spin Hall angle than platinum. The calculated SNC of ZrSiS is α y zx = 1.51 ( /e)(A/mK), being even larger than that of platinum. More importantly, it is found that both the amplitude and sign of the SHC and SNC of these compounds can be significantly manipulated by tuning the direction of the applied electric field or spin current, and also can be optimized by slightly varying the Fermi level via, e.g., chemical doping. This indicates that these materials can be useful materials for spintronics and spin caloritronics. Furthermore, the calculated band-and k-resolved spin Berry curvatures reveal that the large SHE and SNE in these compounds and their remarkable tunabilities originate from the large number of Dirac nodal points and lines in the vicinity of the Fermi level. In the presence of the SOC, these Dirac nodes are slightly gapped, resulting in large spin Berry curvatures, and thus make major contributions to the SHC and SNC. This work is thus expected to stimulate further experimental investigations such as spin-related transport measurements on these interesting materials. a