Superconductivity of YBa2Cu3O 7-δ single crystals was investigated in small magnetic fields. In magnetic measurements the superconducting transition for H c appears 0.4 K higher than for H⊥c. In this temperature range superconductivity is two-dimensional and the total thickness of superconducting layers is about 0.83 of the sample thickness, which is a consequence of the occurrence of the quasi-insulating plane in the unit cell of the crystal structure. Resistivity in the ab-plane and along the c-axis was measured simultaneously. In these measurements two-dimensional superconductivity was observed in a temperature range of 0.6-0.8 K with the clear signs of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Touless (BKT) transition which occurs approximately 0.15 K below Tc, the mean-field transition temperature. 3 pieces: two of them (with a surface S = 3.2 • 10 -3 cm 2 ) were used for magnetic measurements, one of them (S = 8.8 • 10 -3 cm 2 ) was used for studying the resistivity. The BKT transition (Nobel Prize in 2016) was predicted by Berezinskii where λ is the London penetration depth of bulk material and d is the film thickness Besides BKT transition that influences the magnetism and electrical conductivity of superconducting films below the mean-field critical Ginzburg-Landau (GL) temperature, T c , fluctuating conductivity of the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) type exists at T > T c After the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity, the theory was expanded to explain numerous unusual properties of HTSC in normal and superconducting states. For example, diamagnetism above the critical temperature T c and in high magnetic fields was observed and explained in Single crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) were grown in a gold crucible by a conventional self-flux growth method. Then they were annealed in flowing oxygen for 80 hours whilst cooling from 470 • C to 420 • C. The single crystals have the shape of a thin plate with the main surface perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis. One large single crystal with a thickness of 21 μm and a sharp transition to the superconducting state was broken into Most measurements were done with a home-made SQUID magnetometer. This device was constructed for investigation of the quadrupolar magnetic field created by antiferromagnetic Cr 2 O 3 A zero-field cooling procedure was used, i.e., the sample was cooled down from 95 K to 85 K in zero magnetic field, then the magnetic field was applied and the magnetic moment was measured during slow heating (dT /dt ≃ 0.12 K/min) in the fixed field. The magnetization measurements in fields higher than 2 Oe were also performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System with a Magnet Reset option which allowed us to reduce the trapped field below 0.3 Oe. A schematic diagram of resistivity measurements is shown in Fig. For resistivity measurements, the real temperature of the sample is usually difficult to measure with a high degree of precision. This is especially important for the investigations of I-V characteristics when a large current may overheat the sample. Simultaneous measurements of both V ab and V c signals allowed us to overcome this difficulty (see below) and removed doubts in the interpretation of the experimental results. Examples of M (T ) records for the YBCO single crystal are shown in Fig. The superconducting transition temperature, T 0 , of the single crystal was determined at intersection of the tangent to the M (T ) curve with the M (T ) = 0 line (Fig. and Fig. The two transitions, one for H c and the other for H ab, observed in fields lower than 1.5 Oe at different temperatures, manifest in the shape of the M (T ) dependence obtained for H c, as shown in Fig. Resistivity in the ab-plane (Fig. Resistivity along the c-axis was measured using the Schnabel configuration were α = (ρ c /ρ ab ) 0.5 • α 0 , α 0 = d/s, d is the plate thickness and s is the distance between current and potential contacts. Function G(α) is tabulated in If the plate is a rectangle, then the function G(α) may be calculated by the method proposed in Resistivity in the ab-plane and along the c-axis of the YBCO single crystal was measured on cooling from room temperature to below T c and is shown in Fig. Results shown in Fig. Experimental data for magnetization of the YBCO single crystal (Fig. Another explanation could be proposed if one takes into account the crystalline structure of YBCO, which is a layered compound with conducting (metallic) layers (blocks of double CuO 2 planes with one yttrium layer) separated by buffer layers (blocks of CuO chain with two barium layers) serving as a charge reservoir. Thus, this compound is considered as a quasi 2D system due to the smallness of the coherence length along the c-axis, ξ c , with respect to the thickness of the buffer layer. In this case, with temperature decreasing from T = 92.18 K, the superconductivity appears in CuO 2 planes forming a stack of weakly coupled quasi 2D super- conducting plates. Further lowering of the temperature will result in the transition to bulk superconductivity at T 2D-3D . When a magnetic field smaller than the lower critical field, H c1 , is applied along the c-axis at T = 85 K, the sample acquires a negative magnetic moment due to the surface screening current. For T < T 2D-3D , this current fills the entire side surface of the sample, as shown schematically in Fig. Earlier, the thickness of the superconducting plates in several high-temperature superconductors was estimated from the crossing-point phenomenon in magnetization measurements where k B is the Boltzmann constant and Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. It should be noted that in other theoretical works, d s was assigned to the interlayer distance and the numerical coefficient in Eq.( Behaviour of the resistivity of our sample in the normal state (Fig. Resistivity measurements were repeated after six weeks and the results shown in Fig. Exponent α of the I-V characteristics, V ab ∝ I α(T ) , gradually increases from α = 1 to α = when the temperature decreases from 92.95 K to 92.55 K (Fig. An attempt to describe the resistive transition in the ab-plane was performed by using the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) paraconductivity model with the resulting formula where σ is a constant. This attempt was not successful, as shown in Fig. where ξ 0 is the zero-temperature coherence length and A and b are fitting parameters, which we will discuss below. As shown in Fig. where α determines the increase of the vortex-core energy, μ, compared to the XY-model valid for a singlelayer superconductor: μ = αμ XY Summarizing the experimental results we can state that both magnetization and resistivity measurements showed the 2D behavior of our YBCO single crystals close to T c and revealed a transition to the 3D state at lower temperatures. A characteristic non-monotonic temperature dependence of R c has been observed and interpreted as a result of the BKT transition. For one set of measurements, the BKT transition temperature T BKT = 92.60 K was found from the R c (T ) dependence (Fig. Experimental results on critical currents (Fig. Our results for the BKT transition have been obtained in conditions different from those reported earlier for YBCO single crystals The main problem that arises in measurements of I-V characteristics is the precise control of the sample temperature. Usually it is difficult to ensure very good thermal contact of a sample and a thermometer even when they are stuck together. Strongly non-linear current and the temperature dependence of the resistivity result in uncontrollable heating of the sample Magnetic measurements of YBCO single crystals revealed the 2D-3D transition in the superconducting state, in fields lower than 1.5 Oe. Magnetization curves obtained at temperatures above T 2D-3D showed a twostage transition to the normal state which allowed us to estimate the effective thickness d s ≃ 1 nm of a single quasi two-dimensional superconducting plate. The value of d s , which is important for the calculation of the helicity modulus (phase stiffness) of the superfluid phase 