Recently, it has been shown that two dimensional frustrated mixedspin systems with anisotropic exchange interactions display supersolid phases in their ground state phase diagrams even in the absence of long-range interactions. In this paper, using cluster mean field theory, we investigate the effects of thermal fluctuations on the ground state phases of this kind of systems and show that various thermal solids and thermal insulators emerge around the ground state solid and Mott insulating phases. We also study the thermodynamic properties and magnetocaloric effect of these systems and demonstrate that at low temperatures, a large cooling rate is seen in the vicinity of the solid-supersolid, solid-superfluid and Mott insulator-superfluid critical points, with the large accumulation of the entropy and the minimums of the isentropes. Our results show the sign change of the magnetocaloric parameter inside the solids and the Mott insulator, which is a characteristic of ordered phases. Supersolid is an exotic state of matter, characterizing by the coexistence of solid and superfluid long-range orders In this paper, in the first part we investigate the effects of thermal fluctuations on the stability of the ground state phases of the mixed-spin systems. Using cluster mean field theory (CMFT), we show that, in comparison with the off-diagonal superfluid order, the diagonal solid orders are more stable against thermal fluctuations. We demonstrate that various thermal solids and thermal insulators also emerge around the ground state solid and Mott insulating phases. We also show that the solid-solid and supersolid-Mott insulator phase transitions in these systems maintain first order even at high temperatures where the ground state phases around these transition points are washed out completely. In the second part of this paper, we study thermodynamic properties and magnetocaloric effect (MCE) of the models. MCE, introduced by Warburg In this paper we study the MCE in the two different frustrated mixed-spin systems on the square lattice. We demonstrate that at low temperatures, a large cooling rate is seen in the vicinity of the solid-supersolid, solid-superfluid and Mott insulator-superfluid quantum critical points, with the large accumulation of the entropy and the minimums of the isentropes. Up to our knowledge, this is the first study about the MCE in the supersolid phases, which a large cooling rate around this phase in addition to the multipeak structure of the specific heat could be a signature of this phase. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce our frustrated mixedspin models on the square lattice with two different arrangements. In Sec. 3, we briefly review the CMFT ground state phase diagrams of the introduced models, and investigate the effects of thermal fluctuations on the stability of the ground state phases. In this section we also present the temperature phase diagram of the systems. In Sec. 4, we study the isothermal and also temperature variations of different thermodynamic functions, such as magnetization, magnetic susceptibility, specific heat and entropy. The magnetocaloric effects in different phases are also investigated in this section. Finally, we will summarize our results and give the concluding remarks in Sec. 5. We consider a two-dimensional mixed spin system, composed of two different spins: τ = 1 and σ = 1/2, interacting via the following Hamiltonian: where H σ , H τ , and H στ include the interactions between spins σ, spins τ , and spins σ and τ , respectively. Depending on the sequences of the spins σ and τ on the square lattice, two different arrangements are considered in this paper. The first is an staggered mixed spin system where each spin-1/2 is surrounded by four spins τ (SMS model) and the second is an stripe mixed spin system where spin-σ chains are alternatively coupled to spin-τ chains (coupled alternating spin chains (CAS) model). These two systems are schematically illustrated in Fig. The Hamiltonians H σ , H τ , and H στ for SMS and CAS models are respectively given by and where the summations nn and nnn run over nearest neighbor (NN) and next nearest neighbor (NNN) sites, V 1 and V 2 are respectively the NN and NNN interactions, and h is a magnetic field along z direction. These mixed (1/2,1) spins models correspond to modified Bose-Hubbard models with respectively hard-core and semi hard-core bosons with occupancy up to one and two particles per lattice sites Recently, we have studied the ground state properties of the SMS and the CAS models, using different methods like mean field approximation, cluster mean field theory and linear spin wave approach, and shown that various solids, supersolids, and Mott insulator emerge in their ground state phase diagrams In the left panel of Fig. is the total magnetization in x(y) direction. The red (black) dotted lines show first-order (second-order) phase transitions. The different orders are defined in the table Table transition to the bCS(4/6) phase occurs. By more increasing of the magnetic field, the bCS(4/6) changes to the aCS(5/6) solid. In this phase the spins-τ flip to the magnetic field direction and the translational symmetry of the subsystem with spin τ is restored, while the translational symmetry is broken in the subsystem with spin σ. Finally, at strong magnetic fields both the translational and the U(1) symmetries are restored and the system enters to the Mott insulating Full phase, where all spins align parallel to the magnetic field. An enhancement of the hopping energy J/V 1 , adds a superfluid component to these solid orders, and different supersolid phases such as CSS, aCSS and bCSS emerge around the solid phases, where both the translational and U(1) symmetries are broken. Further increasing of hopping energy, restores the translational symmetry and the system enters to the superfluid phase (SF). In the ground state phase diagram of the SMS model for V 2 V 1 < 0.5 (not shown), a MI(4/6) Mott insulating phase takes place rather than CS(3/6) and bCS(4/6) solids at small and moderate magnetic fields. In this phase both the translational and the U(1) symmetries are preserved, and spins-τ (σ) are parallel (anti-parallel) to the magnetic field direction. In order to see the effects of thermal fluctuations on the ground state phases of the SMS model, utilizing cluster mean field theory we have obtained the J -h phase diagram of the SMS model at temperature T /V 1 = 0.1. In general, thermal fluctuations melt plateaus on longitudinal magnetization curve versus magnetic field and reduce amount of diagonal and off-diagonal order parameters. Therefore, in the presence of temperature aside from the ground state phases, several thermal solids like CS, bCS and aCS also appear respectively around CS(3/6), bCS(4/6) and aCS(5/6) phases, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 5, the TI phase also appears around the MI(4/6) phase (not shown). In order to obtain the transition temperatures for different phases, we have plotted in Fig. At zero temperature, in the superfluid phase each particle is spread out over the entire lattice, with long range phase coherence. At finite temperatures, the superfluid order at the small hopping energy is suppressed and the system undergoes a transition to the TI phase where the U(1) symmetry is preserved and the filling factor is not conserved. The superfluid order at larger hopping energy maintains up to larger temperature. For example, when J/V 1 = 0.165, the superfluid phase persists up to T V 1 = 0.18, while for J/V 1 = 0.22 the transition temperature is T V 1 = 0.33. There are some narrow regions at the lower border of the SF phase which transform to the aCSS supersolid phase. In this phase thermal fluctuations try to destroy both the diagonal and the off-diagonal long range orders. Competing solid and superfluid orders affects transition temperature for the supersolid order. Generally, in comparison with the solid orders the superfluidity order is more fragile, and by increasing temperature the superfluidity order destroys at a critical temperature where the supersolid transforms to a thermal solid. Therefore, CSS and bCSS phase phases persist up to T V 1 = 0.12 when J V 1 = 0.165, while for J V 1 = 0.22 the transition temperature is T V 1 = 0.25. Also aCSS phases is present up to temperature T V 1 = 0.18 for J V 1 = 0.165, while this phases transforms to aCS phase at larger temperature T V 1 = 0.44 for the J V 1 = 0.22. Stability of the supersolid phase up to a temperature comparable with the interaction energy V 1 , makes the SMS system a playground for experimental realization of the different supersolid phases in mixed spin systems. The ground state phase diagram of the CAS model for the frustration V 2 V 1 = 0.6 is plotted in the left panel of Fig. For small values of J/V 1 , the translational symmetry of both subsystems breaks for weak and strong magnetic fields and stripe solids ST(3/6) and ST(5/6) with different filling factors appear in the ground state phase diagram. At moderate magnetic fields, Table and , and also the total transverse magnetization M v are obtained using cluster mean field theory. sublattices magnetizations the translational symmetries of both subsystems are however restored in the MI(4/6) Mott insulating phase, where the spins 1 (spins 1/2) align parallel (anti-parallel) to the magnetic field. Strong enough magnetic fields (h/V 1 5.5) align all spins and the system enters to the Mott insulating Full phase. An enhancement of the hopping energy breaks the U(1) symmetry, and adds the superfluid component to the stripe solids and Mott insulating phases. Therefore stripe supersolid (STS) and superfluid (SF) appear around the stripe solids and Mott insulator, respectively. While stripe solids to STS and SF transitions, and MI(4/6)-SF phase transitions are of second order, MI(4/6)-STS transition is of first order for all parameters ranges. This transition remains first order even when these phases vanishes at finite temperature. Therefore TI-STS and TI-ST transitions are first order in all ranges of T (see Fig. For V 2 V 1 < 0.5, the translational symmetry breaks in the presence of a moderate magnetic field and the ST(4/6) solid emerges instead of the MI(4/6) Mott insulator (not shown). In the presence of thermal fluctuations, similar to the SMS model, magnetization plateaus melt and a thermal stripe solid (ST) appears around the ST(3/6) and ST(5/6) phases, as shown in the right panel of Fig. Also melting process results in the emergence of a thermal insulator around the MI(4/6) and Full phases, where both the U(1) symmetry and the translational symmetry of the CAS lattice are preserved, however the magnetization varies with h. Moreover thermal fluctuations destroy the superfluid order and causes the STS and SF phases to be disappeared for We have also plotted in Fig. Since the superfluid order is more fragile than solid order, the supersolid transition temperature is controlled by hopping energy. STS phase which is formed at lower magnetic field transforms to ST solid phase at temperature T V 1 = 0.14 in J V 1 = 0.21, while this transition happens at T V 1 = 0.27 in larger hopping energy J V 1 = 0.24. Also the STS phase which is formed at larger magnetic field persist up to temperature T In this section we investigate the behavior of various thermodynamic functions as well as the magnetocaloric effect in the mixed spin-(1,1/2) model with the SMS and CAS arrangements. Using CMFT (see the appendix), we have obtained the magnetization, entropy, specific heat and also investigated the behavior of the magnetocaloric effect. Magnetic susceptibility and specific heat respectively demonstrate the amount of thermal fluctuations in the magnetization and internal energy, while magnetocaloric effect contains both of these fluctuations. In this subsection, we investigate the isothermal variations of mentioned thermodynamic functions in different solids, supersolids, Mott insulators and superfluid phases. The longitudinal magnetization is obtained from the following relation: where . . . denotes the ensemble average, computing from Eq. (A.5). The magnetization versus magnetic field is plotted in Fig. In the absence of temperature, for both the SMS and CAS models, the longitudinal magnetization increases by increasing the magnetic field, passes through three nontrivial mid-plateaus m = 0, m = 0.25 and m = 0.5, and finally saturate at large saturation field (roughly around h/V 1 = 6), as shown in Fig. At low temperatures, any break in the plots of the magnetization and susceptibility versus h/V 1 , indicates the second order phase transition. However, at the first order transition points, the magnetization shows a jump at the critical field and the susceptibility diverges. The bCS(4/6)-aCS(5/6) transition in the SMS model and the STS-MI(4/6) transition in the CAS model are of first order, while all other transitions are of second order. Thermal fluctuations soften the transitions, by emerging thermal solids and thermal insulator phases around the ground state solids and Mott insulators, however for the bCS(4/6)-aCS(5/6) transition at h/V 1 3.6 in the SMS model and the STS-MI(4/6) transition at h/V 1 1.1 in the CAS model, thermal fluctuations are not able to destroy the discontinuity in the magnetization and these transitions remain first order (see Fig. The entropy (S) and the specific heat (C V ) of the SMS and CAS models, are obtained from the following relations: where averages are computed from Eq. (A.5) and k B is the Boltzmann constant. We have plotted in the top panel of Fig. where h, T and S are the magnetic field, temperature and entropy of the system, respectively. Using cyclic relations between these parameters, Γ MCE is given in terms of the specific heat and the magnetization of the systems as: In order to obtain Γ MCE numerically, it is helpful to simplify the above equation as: This relation indicates that fluctuations in both the magnetization and the internal energy play essential role on the behavior of Γ MCE . We have plotted in Fig. In the solid and the Mott insulating phases, Γ MCE changes sign and becomes negative at larger h. This behavior which is a characteristic of ordered phases At low temperatures, MCE increases or changes behavior at the second order transition points, while it has a discontinuity at the first order transition points. At low temperatures, the maximum cooling rate occurs in the vicinity of the solid-supersolid, solid-superfluid and MI(4/6)-superfluid quantum critical points, where there are a large accumulation of the entropy, see top panel of Fig. We have also plotted in Fig. It is seen that entropy is constant in the solid and MI(4/6) phases and increases in the thermal solid and thermal insulating phases around them. Therefore isentropes develope a peak in these ranges of the T -h phase diagram which confirms the sign changes of the MCE around the solid and MI(4/6) phases. Moreover, the linear behavior of the isentropes in some ranges of the superfluid and supersolid phases confirms the linear behavior of the MCE in these phases. In Fig. We have also plotted in Figs. In the ST solid phase the MCE depends on the magnetic field, it is negative at small magnetic fields, while positive at larger fields. In the SF phase, the specific heat shows a peak, MCE is positive and increases with temperature. The superfluid component is vanishing by increasing temperature where TI phase emerges. In the supersolid phases CSS, bCSS and aCSS, and STS, the entropy increases by temperature and the specific heat shows a peak. The MCE is negative in the CSS phase, while it is positive in the bCSS and aCSS phases where magnetic field is stronger. In the STS supersolid, the MCE is negative at small magnetic fields, whereas it's positive at larger ones. By increasing T and reduction of the superfluidity, in the bCSS, aCSS and STS supersolids, there is an small enhancement in the longitudinal magnetization, but the magnetization decreases in the CSS supersolid with low h. According to the values of Γ MCE , in the SMS model the maximum cooling rate occurs at the CSS-CS transition points. In CAS model, a large positive value of the MCE is seen at the SF-TI border with larger h, however there is a large cooling rate at the SF-TI transition point in the smaller magnetic field. Finally, in the Mott insulating MI(4/6) and Full phases with the longitudinal magnetization plateaus, the entropy and specific heat are vanishing. The MCE is negative in MI(4/6), while it's positive in the Full phase. At larger T where these phases transform to the TI phase, the specific heat has a broad peak, magnetization decreases, entropy increases and MCE is positive. In conclusion, the entropy increases with temperature in all phases of the both models. Also specific heat shows a narrow peak in the superfluid, supersolid and thermal solid phases, and develops a broad peak in the TI phase. To summarize, in the present paper, employing CMFT, we have studied thermal phase diagram of the mixed-spin (1,1/2) model on the square lattice with two different arrangements. We have demonstrated that at a finite temperature, thermal fluctuations soften the transitions, and different thermal solid and thermal insulators phases emerge around the ground state phases. Our results show that the solid-solid and supersolid-Mott insulator phase transitions maintain first order even at high temperatures where the ground state phases around these transition points are washed out completely. As the supersolid phase persists up to comparable temperature with the interaction terms, this model would be a playground for finding different supersolid phases in experiment. In the second part of the paper we have also studied isothermal variations of different thermodynamic functions and magnetocaloric effect. Our results show that the MCE changes sign in the thermal solids and thermal insulator. At low temperatures, the maximum cooling rate is seen in the vicinity of the solid-supersolid, solid-superfluid and MI(4/6)-superfluid critical points, whereas at higher temperatures it placed inside the thermal solids and thermal insulator. At low temperatures, the large positive values of Γ MCE was seen in the tricritical points between superfluid and thermal solid or TI phases, however they placed inside the thermal solid and TI phases at higher temperature. This work is the first study on the MCE in supersolid phases, and a large cooling rate around this phase in addition to the multi-peak structure of the specific heat could be a signature of these phases, which is useful for experimental detection of such phases. We have also investigated temperature variations of the thermodynamic functions and magnetocaloric effects inside different phases. In both systems the entropy increases by increasing temperature, while depending on the strength of magnetic field, the specific heat has a single-, double-and triple-peak structure. It increases by increasing temperature, shows a narrow peak in the supersolid and superfluid phases, and a broaden beak in the thermal solids and thermal insulator, and eventually decreases toward zero at higher temperatures. In this appendix we explain the details of the cluster mean field theory. In this method clusters of different sizes are considered on a sublattice background, so that interactions within clusters are included exactly and interactions with outsides are considered as effective fields where the interactions within cluster C are given by H C , that contains the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In these equations C is the part of the system outside the cluster. Also the magnetizations m j = σ j and M j = τ j are the expectation values within the CMFT which act as the mean fields on the spins σ and τ . The order parameters m x,y,z j and M x,y,z j are calculated self-consistently as the expectation value of the spins inside the cluster. At the zero temperature these expectation values are calculated on the ground state of the system, and self-consistent solutions should be done until the minimal ground state of the system would be achieved. However at the finite temperatures T all the ground state and excited states of the system are contributed in the solution and thermodynamic averages of the order parameters are calculated as: m x,y,z j (T, h) = σ x,y,z = 1 Z T r(σe -H CMFT /K B T ), M x,y,z j (T, h) = τ x,y,z = 1 Z T r(τ e -H CMFT /K B T ), Z = T r(e -H CMFT /K B T ), (A.4) where K B is the Boltzmann constant. H CMFT and Z respectively are corresponding CMFT Hamiltonian in Eq. (A.1) and partition function of the system. At the finite T , the free energy of the system i.e. F = 1 N k B T ln Z, should be minimized, which F is the free energy of the system. Finally the set of the CMFT energies that minimizes the free energy of the system, should be used for calculating any averages as the following equation: where A is the corresponding function. In this appendix we explain how to obtain Eq. ( 