In this paper, we study chain melting state in the commensurate host-guest structure of calcium. We trained a NN (neural network) force field with DeepMD-kit, and by implementing classical simulations, we found that the convergence of z-proejcted MSD of guest atoms needs at least 8192atom supercell. We ascribe the origination of chain melting to the phase transition at 600 K, in which the arrangement of guest chains transform from a checkerboard pattern to a stripe pattern, and the energy barrier of sliding chains against each other is obviously reduced. We also found that the chain melting state of calcium could be separated into two 2D (two-dimensional) and 3D (three-dimensional) disorder, with distinct chain dynamics. In recent years, the chain melting state in HG (hostguest) crystal structures has attracted lots of attention. Sodium It is important to figure out how the atoms of the guest sublattice move in the chain melting phase. One possibility is a 2D disorder state, in which the guest chains slide freely against each other, but the atoms within a chain move in a coherent manner; another possibility is a 3D disorder state, in which guest atoms within one chain diffuse, and inter-chain correlations are also lost. Neutron-scattering experiments show that the chain melting phase of incommensurate linear-chain mercury compound Hg 3-δ AsF 6 is consistent with a 2D disorder state. At room temperature, it has long-range order within one Hg chain, but quite weak correlations between Hg chains At 231 GPa, Ca-VII has been characterized as a hostguest structure (space group is P 4 2 ncm) with a commen-surate host-guest ratio of 4/3 The development of NN (neural network) potential enables us to construct ab-initio quality force field, so that we can implement long-time scale MD simulations. It provides an accurate and efficient way to explore longrange correlation and long-time thermodynamic stability. Here, we trained DeepMD potential and perform classical molecular dynamics simulations to explore properties of chain melting phase of Ca-VII. We demonstrate that it successively undergoes three phase transitions: firstly, the ordered arrangement of guest chains transits from a checkerboard pattern to a stripe pattern at 600 K; upon heating, guest chains start to move in a manner much like 2D disorder; eventually both intra-chain and inter-chain correlations of guest atoms disappear, and the guest sublattice becomes 3D disorder. We performed AIMD (ab initio molecular dynamics) simulations with the VASP (Vienna Ab initio simulation package) code Classical MD simulations are performed using LAMMPS As shown in Fig. Firstly, we implemented AIMD simulations at 231 GPa and 1200 K. After long-enough simulation time, the arrangement of guest chains always exhibit a random distribution, consistent with the disappearance of the Bragg peaks of guest sublattice. To visualize the chain melting state, we extracted two snapshots from AIMD trajecto- ries for comparison. As shown in Fig. Secondly, we calculated MSD (mean-squared displacement) to analyse quantitative behavior the chain melting state. The divergence of MSD can indicate the melting state of a particular set of atoms in MD simulations. The MSD of a group of atoms is calculated using ) where r i (t) is the position of atom i in the group at simulation time t, R C (t) is the center of mass of the group of atoms at t, and the summation runs over all atoms in the group, of which there are N atoms in total. We then calculated MSDs of guest and host atoms separately. At 600 K, MSD of both guest and host atoms are convergent through an enough long simulation time. Even though z-projected MSD of guest atoms shows a deviation from 0 initially, it is still recognized as typical solidlike oscillations versus time afterwards. While at 1200 K, z-projected MSD of guest atoms shows obvious divergence, growing nearly linearly with respect to time. The corresponding diffusion coefficient is approximately 1 × 10 -4 cm 2 /s, consistent with a liquid phase. In contrast, x-or y-projected MSD of guest atoms and MSD of host atoms are always in the proximity of 0. Then, with AIMD trajectories, we calculated phonon density of states by makeing Fourier transformation of VACF (velocity auto-correlation function), of guest and host atoms, respectively, as shown in Fig. The above evidence supports that the chain melting state is a phase in which guest chains are sliding freely along z-direction, without specific coherent manner. Besides, the state can be stabilized by the obvious decrease of free energy. But there could be severe finite size effects in AIMD simulations, which make the results unreliable. AIMD constrains us from further exploring the long-range order, since a simulation cell which is large enough is computationally demanding in AIMD simulations. Therefore, we use the classical force field to run MD simulations, which can gauge the potential finite size effects in small supercells of AIMD simulations. We use the DeePMD (deep potential molecular dynamics) scheme After building the NN force field, we examined the convergence of MSD as a function of the size N of the simulation cell. Since the guest atoms diffuse along z direction, it's necessary to use a simulation cell with a long enough x axis, so as to obtain the correct quantitative behavior. Hence, rather than using cubic cells, we chose the simulation cells which are elongated in the c axis, including the 2*2*16 supercell (N = 8192) and 3*3*16 supercell (N = 18432). As shown in Fig. To better understand the decorrelation of guest chains in the chain melting state, we pay a particular focus on the loss of order within the guest sublattice. We define the chain correlation function σ xy (∆r, ∆z) to detect the chain disorder within and between the guest chains, (a) Normalized chain-correlation function σxy(∆r, ∆z) from MLMD simulations at 231 GPa, and T = 600 K (Chain Order) and 1500K (Chain 3D Disorder), respectively. ∆r and ∆z refer to separation in the xy plane and along the z axis respectively. See legends on the sides for color scheme, which range from σxy = 0 (dark) to σxy = 1 (white). Chain Order (T = 600 K) has well-defined peaks and thus long-range order both in-plane and along the chains. which gives n and m are indices of the chains, and i and j label guest atoms within the n -th and m -th chain, respectively. For a solid guest lattice, σ xy shows long-range order along z and perpendicular direction. MLMD enables us to simulate chains of lengths up to 100 atoms. We calculate the correlation function based on the 18,432-atom Ca-VII supercell, with 72 chains and 64 atoms in each chain. Above the chain-melting transition temperature, we expect σ xy to detect loss of order between chains and along chains. We show normalized σ xy (∆r, ∆z) from MLMD simula-tions at 600 K, 1200 K and 1800 K, respectively (see supplementary materials). For each simulation, the Ca sample is held at the selected temperature with NVT annealing for at least 20,000 steps. At 600 K, both host and guest structures remain solid. The guest lattice retains intrachain and interchain correlations and sharp peaks can be observed. MSD is convergent at this temperature. While at 1800 K, the peaks along z and along r have vanished in long range, indicating loss of correlation both within and between guest chains. It is essential to seek clarification for the origin of chain melting transition. Usually, the energy barrier of sliding a chain relative to each other can be a small value in hostguest structures 3 ) • c g and z = (n + 2 3 ) • c g , consistent with the structure of Ca-VII. While at 600 K, peaks of σ xy (r 1 , ∆z) transit to z = (n + 1 2 ) • c g . Additionally, 500 K appears to be an intermediate state, in which the peaks at z = n • c g are weakened a lot, and the peaks at z 2 ) • c g . The new arrangement of guest sublattice at 600 K shows "ABAB..." pattern, different from the "AABB..." pattern at 0 K (as shown in Fig. The next step is to examine whether the guest sublattice of Ca-VII develops a 3D disorder after the transition of guest-chain arrangement. We calculate intrachain correlation σ xy (∆z) and inter-chain correlation σ xy (r p , ∆z) versus temperature from 600 K to 1800 K. We use p = 1 and p = 2 to reflect interchain correlations. The loss of order within the guest sublattice can be separated into three stages. As shown in Fig. 