The paper presents an ab initio study of temperature-induced nanostructural evolution of hydrogen-rich voids in amorphous silicon. By using ultra-large a-Si models, obtained from classical molecular-dynamics simulations, with a realistic void-volume density of 0.2%, the dynamics of Si and H atoms on the surface of the nanometer-size cavities were studied and their effects on the shape and size of the voids were examined using first-principles density-functional simulations. The results from ab initio calculations were compared with those obtained from using the modified Stillinger-Weber potential. The temperature-induced nanostructural evolution of the voids was examined by analyzing the three-dimensional distribution of Si and H atoms on/near void surfaces using the convex-hull approximation, and computing the radius of gyration of the corresponding convex hulls. A comparison of the results with those from the simulated values of the intensity in small-angle X-ray scattering of a-Si/a-Si:H in the Guinier approximation is also provided, along with a discussion on the dynamics of bonded and non-bonded hydrogen in the vicinity of voids. Amorphous silicon and its hydrogenated counterpart have a wide range of applications, from photovoltaics to thin-film technology. The presence of hydrogen to an extent thus is often preferred Heat treatment or annealing is an effective tool for nanostructural relaxation of laboratorygrown samples. Annealing at low to medium temperature (400-700 K) can considerably improve the quality of as-deposited samples, by removing unwanted impurities and reducing imperfections (e.g., defects) in the samples. However, despite numerous studies on computational modeling of a-Si and a-Si:H over the past several decades, there exist only a few computational studies The purpose of the present study is to conduct ab initio simulations of hydrogen-rich voids in ultra-large models of a-Si at low and high annealing temperatures. We are particularly interested in the structural reconstruction of the void surfaces, induced by annealing, and the resulting effects on the intensity in small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). Further, we intend to study the evolution of the shape of voids with temperature in the presence of hydrogen inside the voids. To this end, we develop significantly large models of a-Si, which are characterized by realistic distributions of voids as far as the results from SAXS, We began by generating an ultra-large model of amorphous silicon in order to be able to study the intensity due to SAXS in the small-angle region of scattering wavevector k ≤ 1.0 Å -1 . Since the key purpose of the study is to examine the structural evolution of the voids in a-Si on the nanometer length scale, by joint analyses of simulated SAXS intensities and three-dimensional distributions of atoms near void surfaces, it is necessary to simulate a sufficiently large model that can accommodate a realistic distribution of nanometer-size voids with the correct void-volume fraction, in the range from 0.01% to 0.3%, as observed from SAXS and IR measurements. The details of the simulation procedure can be found in Ref. 34. Having obtained an ultra-large model of a-Si, we proceed to generate a realistic distribution of voids. Since computational modeling of void formation in a-Si, by mimicking the actual deposition and growth processes, is highly nontrivial, we generated a void distribution using experimental information on the shape, size, and the number density of voids. Experimental data from an array of measurements, such as small-angle scattering (SAS), The void region is indicated by the gray circle of radius R v , which is surrounded by a layer of Si atoms (yellow) with a thickness d. Silicon atoms in the layer constitute the surface/wall of the void, which we shall refer to as the void-surface atoms. The remaining Si atoms, within the cubic box (of length l), will be referred to as bulk Si atoms and are indicated as black and blue circles. To study the effect of hydrogen on the evolution of void surfaces, H atoms were introduced inside the voids so that no two H atoms were at a distance less than 1 Å from each other. The presence of H atoms in the network requires that the problem must be treated at the quantum-mechanical level using, for example, first-principles density-functional theory. However, given the size of the ultra-large model, such a task is hopelessly difficult and computationally infeasible, and an approximation of some sort is necessary. Here, we employed the local approach to electronic-structure calculations by invoking the principle of nearsightedness of an equilibrium system, as proposed by Kohn, In the preceding section, we have generated a number of models (supercells/subsystems), containing as many as 2200 atoms and a central void of radius 6 Å, using the modified Stillinger-Weber (SW) potential. However, since the SW potential may not accurately describe the chemistry of silicon surfaces, it is necessary to treat these models using a first-principles total-energy functional from density functional theory (DFT) in order to reduce artifacts, such as the number of excessive dangling bonds or defects, associated with the SW-generated void surfaces. The standard DFT protocol here is to compute the self-consistent-field (SCF) solution of the Kohn-Sham (KS) equation, and the presence of voids or inhomogeneities in the system suggests that the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) should be employed in order to deal with the atomic density fluctuations near void surfaces. However, it is simply not feasible to solve the KS equations self-consistently for a problem of this size (i.e., about 2,200 atoms) and complexity using the existing plane-wave-based/local-basis DFT methodology. In particular, the computational cost for conducting SCF AIMD runs for several picoseconds is prohibitively large, even for a single configuration. To reduce the computational complexity of the problem, it is thus necessary to employ a suite of approximations for solving the KS equation. Here, we invoke the non-self-consistent Harris-functional approach Ab initio calculations and total-energy optimization were conducted using the first-principles density-functional code Siesta. Here, SZ functions correspond to one s and three p orbitals for Si atoms, whereas DZP functions refer to two s and three p orbitals for H atoms. The size of the simulation box or supercell is large enough in this work so that the Brillouin zone collapses onto the Γ point, which was used for the Brillouin-zone sampling. The SAXS intensity for a binary system can be expressed with the aid of the partial structure factors and the atomic form factors of the constituent atoms. For a binary system, the scattering intensity, I(k), can be expressed as, 51 where is the partial structure factor associated with the atoms of type i and j such that S i j = S ji , and g i j (r) is the partial pair-distribution function. Here, x i = N i N and f i are the atomic fraction and the atomic form factor of the atoms of type i, respectively. In Eq. ( Since the effective small-angle region of k is approximately given by 4π/L < k < 1/R G , where L is the linear dimension of the sample, a sufficiently large model is needed in order to obtain the mean value of R G , via averaging over several independent configurations. However, it has been observed Here, r i and r cm are the position of the i th atom and the center of mass of n s void-surface atoms, respectively. The atoms on the reconstructed surface are distributed within a spherical region of radius R v + x and H[y] is the Heaviside step function that asserts that only the atoms with y ≥ 0 contribute to R g . Here, we chose a value of x = 1.5 Å for Si atoms in order to define the boundary of a reconstructed void surface. Since annealing at high temperature can introduce considerable restructuring of void surfaces, it is often convenient to invoke a suitable convex approximation to estimate the size and shape of the voids. Here, we employ the convex-hull approximation that entails constructing the minimal convex polyhedron that includes all the void-surface atoms on the boundary. The size of the convex region can be expressed as the radius of gyration of the convex polyhedron, or convex hull, In Eq. ( The definition above is frequently used to measure the shape and roundness of sedimentary quartz particles, and it expresses the ratio of the surface area of a sphere to that of a non-spherical particle having an identical volume. Before addressing the temperature-induced nanostructural changes in voids, we briefly examine the ultra-large model of a-Si, developed in sec. IIA, in order to validate its structural properties. Figure In this section, we discuss the three-dimensional shape and size of the voids in pure a-Si obtained from classical and quantum-mechanical annealing of the system at 300 K and 800 K, followed by total-energy optimization. Starting with an examination of the classical-and ab-initiogenerated void surfaces, we analyze the computed SAXS spectrum obtained from the ultra-large model, which is embedded with the supercells containing voids annealed at 300 K and 800 K. Figure Gaussian-convoluted isosurface from the Xcrysden package. Small-angle X-ray scattering measurements on HWCVD films indicate that the presence of preexisting H clusters can affect the nanostructure of voids due to H 2 bubble pressure in the cavities, which, upon annealing, can lead to geometric changes, as observed via tilting SAXS and surface transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Figure To obtain the linear size of the voids, we computed the radius of gyration, R g , using Eq. ( Likewise, the convex-hull approximation of a void region, defined by a set of void-surface atoms, provides the radius of the convex polyhedron, R H , from Eq. ( Table In this section, we shall make a few observations on the dynamics of hydrogen atoms in the vicinity of void surfaces from ab initio molecular-dynamics simulations. Since the mass of H atoms is significantly smaller than that of Si atoms, the motion of H atoms is more susceptible to the annealing temperature and, more importantly, to the resulting temperature-induced structural changes on the void surfaces. This is particularly noticeable at high temperature. Having established earlier that the structural changes on the void surfaces are more pronounced at 800 K, we shall now examine the character of hydrogen dynamics inside (and near the surface of) the voids at 800 K. Despite the limited timescale of the present AIMD simulations, spanning 10 ps only, it is reasonable to assume that, at high temperature, the dynamical character of hydrogen motion inside the voids would be reflected in the first several picoseconds. It may be noted that, unlike structural properties, the dynamics of hydrogen in a-Si may depend on the accuracy of total energies and forces from DFT calculations. The use of the Harris-functional approximation in the present work, in an effort to address the structure of voids on the nanometer length scale, suggests that the results on hydrogen dynamics presented here are somewhat approximate in nature. A full self-consistent-field DFT calculation, over a period of a few tens of picoseconds, using plane-wave The surface structure of V7 can be seen to be more open or scattered compared to its counterpart in V12, which is more compact or well-defined, as shown in Figs. Experimental data from positron-annihilation lifetime (PAL) spectroscopy, In this paper, we studied the temperature-induced nano-structural changes of the voids in a-Si at low and high annealing temperature in the range 300-800 K using classical and quantummechanical simulations, in the absence and presence of hydrogen near voids. This was achieved by generating an ultra-large model of a-Si, consisting of more than 260,000 atoms, in order to be able to produce a realistic distribution of nanometer-size voids in the amorphous environment of Si atoms, as observed in SAXS, PAL, IR, and hydrogen-effusion measurements. An examination of the distribution of the atoms near the voids reveals that the reconstruction of void surfaces in pure a-Si at 300 K led to minimal changes in the shape and size of the voids, which can be readily understood from a classical treatment of the problem. By contrast, the high-temperature annealing at 800 K caused significant changes in the shape and size of the voids, with noticeable structural differences between classical and quantum-mechanical results. This observation appears to indicate that classical potentials, such as the modified SW potential, might not be particularly suitable for an accurate description of the dynamics of Si atoms near voids and the resulting reconstruction of the void surfaces at high temperatures. An important outcome of the present study is that the dynamics of bonded and non-bonded hydrogens near the voids and the degree of void-surface reconstruction are found to be intrinsically An examination of the silicon-hydrogen bonding configurations near the voids suggests that the interior walls of the voids are decorated with SiH 2 , which is supported by experimental results from infrared and ellipsometric studies. Likewise, the concentration of H 2 molecules obtained from the first-principles density-functional simulations in the present study is found to be consistent with the experimental value estimated from the collision-induced weak IR absorption by H 2 molecules in the frequency region of 4100-5500 cm -1 .