Recent experimental realizations of the topological semimetal states in several monolayer systems are very attractive because of their exotic quantum phenomena and technological applications. Based on first-principles density-functional theory calculations including spin-orbit coupling, we here explore the drastically different two-dimensional (2D) topological semimetal states in three monolayers Cu 2 Ge, Fe 2 Ge, and Fe 2 Sn, which are isostructural with a combination of the honeycomb Cu or Fe lattice and the triangular Ge or Sn lattice. We find that (i) the nonmagnetic (NM) Cu 2 Ge monolayer having a planar geometry exhibits the massive Dirac nodal lines, (ii) the ferromagentic (FM) Fe 2 Ge monolayer having a buckled geometry exhibits the massive Weyl points, and (iii) the FM Fe 2 Sn monolayer having a planar geometry and an out-of-plane magnetic easy axis exhibits the massless Weyl nodal lines. It is therefore revealed that mirror symmetry cannot protect the fourfold degenerate Dirac nodal lines in the NM Cu 2 Ge monolayer, but preserves the doubly degenerate Weyl nodal lines in the FM Fe 2 Sn monolayer. Our findings demonstrate that the interplay of crystal symmetry, magnetic easy axis, and band topology is of importance for tailoring various 2D topological states in Cu 2 Ge, Fe 2 Ge, and Fe 2 Sn monlayers. In the past decade, topological insulators and topological semimetals have attracted considerable attention because of their promising prospects in both fundamental research and technological applications Most of the NLS states have so far been experimentally observed in three-dimensional (3D) materials such as PtSn 4 In this paper, we systematically investigate the different 2D topological states in three monolayers Cu 2 Ge, Fe 2 Ge, and Fe 2 Sn using DFT calculations with the inclusion of SOC. We find that these monolayers have different ground states depending on the presence/absence of magnetism and mirror symmetry: i.e., massive DNLs for the NM Cu 2 Ge monolayer having the mirror symmetry with respect to the x-y plane [see Fig. The present DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package with the projectoraugmented wave method For the exchangecorrelation energy, we employed the generalized-gradient approximation functional of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) We begin by optimizing the atomic structures of Cu 2 Ge, Fe 2 Ge, and Fe 2 Sn monolayers, where Cu or Fe (Ge or Sn) atoms form a honeycomb (triangular) lattice. Their optimized structures are displayed in Figs. Figure In order to examine how SOC influences the four-fold degeneracy of DNLs in Cu 2 Ge monolayer, we perform the DFT calculations with including SOC. Figure To realize the symmetry-protected nodal lines in 2D monolayers, it is prerequisite to split two-fold degenerate bands via the emergence of ferromagnetism that breaks time reverse symmetry. In the present study, we consider the two FM Fe 2 Ge and Fe 2 Sn monolayers. For Fe 2 Ge and Fe 2 Sn monolayers, the FM phase is found to be more stable than the NM (antiferromagnetic) one by 0.758 (0.404) eV and 1.181 (0.413) eV per unit cell, respectively. The calculated magnetic moments for the FM Fe 2 Ge and Fe 2 Sn monolayers are m = 2.08 and 2.38 μ B per Fe atom, respectively. Figures Contrasting with the buckled geometry of Fe 2 Ge monolayer, Fe 2 Sn monolayer has a planar geometry which involves the same crystalline point group of D 6h as Cu 2 Ge monolayer. The resulting preservation of mirror symmetry M z in Fe 2 Sn monolayer will be demonstrated to allow the protection of WNLs in the presence of SOC. Figure Supplemental Material for Two-dimensional topological semimetal states in monolayers Cu 2 Ge, Fe 2 Ge, and Fe 2 Sn 