The advent of computational statistical disciplines, such as machine learning, is leading to a paradigm shift in the way we conceive the design of new compounds. Today computational science does not only provide a sound understanding of experiments, but also can directly design the best compound for specific applications. This approach, known as reverse engineering, requires the construction of models able to efficiently predict continuous structure-property maps. Here we show that reverse engineering can be used to tune the magnetic properties of a single-ion molecular magnet in an automated intelligent fashion. We design a machine learning model to predict both the energy and magnetic properties as function of the chemical structure. Then, a particleswarm optimization algorithm is used to explore the conformational landscapes in the search for new molecular structures leading to an enhanced magnetic anisotropy. We find that a 5% change in one of the coordination angles leads to a ∼50% increase in the anisotropy. Our approach paves the way for a machine-learning-driven exploration of the chemical space of general classes of magnetic materials. Most importantly, it can be applied to any structure-property relation and offers an effective way to automatically generate new materials with target properties starting from the knowledge of previously synthesized ones. The design of new materials with specific target properties is the ultimate goal of reverse materials engineering. This approach requires the construction of a range of maps between the chemical structure {r i , Z i } and the properties of interest P ({r i , Z i }) where {r i , Z i } contains the position and atomic number of the atoms forming the material and the weights, γ l , set the relative importance of the single properties, P l . While in principle quantum mechanical methods could be used for such a task, their computational overheads render them impractical. Machine-learning-based models, with their ability to reproduce quantum mechanical results at a negligible computational cost, are the perfect tool to construct reverse engineering and generative approaches Magnetism is an exotic phenomenon that emerges from a very delicate balance between the electronic and structural properties of chemical compounds. Magnetic compounds form a paradigmatic materials class containing rare members with large technological impact. The working principle of hard magnets is based on the presence of a large axial magnetic anisotropy that stabilises the magnetic moment against thermal fluctuations. This picture * lunghia@tcd.ie can be formally explained with the spin Hamiltonian where Ŝz is the z component of the spin operator and a negative D parameter corresponds to an axial anisotropy. When the magnetic anisotropy is not large enough to overcome thermal fluctuations or when a magnet is perturbed by external stimuli, demagnetization processes take place. Spin relaxation in non-metallic materials is ultimately due to the interaction between the magnetic and lattice degrees of freedom, namely the spin-phonon coupling. This interaction manifests itself through the dependence of the magnetic anisotropy tensor D(r i ) on the atomic positions r i . In general D(r i ) is interpreted in terms of a Taylor expansion around the equilibrium molecular geometry r i,0 : The understanding of the microscopic processes leading to spin-phonon coupling and demagnetization is of interest for several applications such as heat-assisted magnetic recording The design of magnetic materials is a prototypical example where multiple features must be optimized at the same time to reach optimal efficiency. Eq. (3) suggests that making high-temperature hard-magnets requires: i) the maximization of the axial magnetic anisotropy |D|, ii) the minimization of its derivatives (the spin-phonon coupling coefficients), and iii) little thermally populated molecular motions (r i -r i,0 ). This effectively corresponds to the design of D(r i ) having a maxima in correspondence of the equilibrium geometry and a very stiff material We have applied our method to molecular magnets, which appear as the ideal materials class for a systematic design strategy. These compounds represent the ultimately small building blocks of magnetic recording media Our machine learning strategy is based on Ridge regression and bi-spectrum components as molecular geometry fingerprints where the index j runs over the N j bi-spectrum components, B j , describing the atomic environment of the i-th atom, and α m j are the coefficients that need to be determined through Ridge regression. Magnetic anisotropy is a tensor quantity, so that Eq. (4) needs to be recast in a covariant form to ensure that the correct rotational symmetries are enforced. Similar concepts have been recently applied in the context of Kernel regression for the prediction of atomic forces and general tensor quantities where W m m (l, l 0 ) is the Wigner matrix corresponding to a rigid rotation of the atomic environment of the l-th atom with respect to the atomic environment state l 0 of the same atom chosen as reference orientation. The atom l, which defines the local environment used to perform the rotation, is chosen on the basis of the property to model. In the case of the magnetic anisotropy it is the magnetic element. It is important to remark that the choice of a local atomic environment as reference orientation, instead of the entire molecular structure, is fundamental in order to maintain the local nature of the properties learned by the model. For instance, in the case of magnetism, this avoids the issue of accounting for a spurious rotation of the tensor T m when only atoms far away from the magnetic atom are moving. Once the Ridge regression has determined the unknown coefficients α m j (i 0 ), equations ( In order to illustrate our approach we apply it to two typical coordination environments: bi-pyramidal [FeCl 5 ] 2-and trigonal prismatic [FeCl 6 ] 3-. For each molecule we prepare 700+700 configurations, where all the Cartesian coordinates of all the atoms are displaced by a random value within the limits ±0.1 Å and ±0.2 Å. The size of the maximum displacements is chosen to be large enough to guarantee a broad sampling of outof-equilibrium configurations, while maintaining a sensible chemical structure. These random displacements are applied to the DFT-optimized geometry. We use CASSCF In general, the covariance of the Ridge regression is imposed by enforcing the correct rotational properties to the regression's coefficients. This can only be done when a rotation between structures is well defined. Thus, structures with different number of atoms and different chemical species must belong to different references. Since the two molecules contain Fe +3 in two distinct atomic environments with different numbers of atoms, one reference orientation per molecule is needed. More-over, since magnetism is a local property of the Fe atoms, the Wigner matrices used to impose the covariance condition are calculated with respect to the Fe atomic environment. In particular, the Fe atomic environments of the FeCl 5 and FeCl 6 optimized geometries are chosen as the reference atomic environments appearing in Eq. For each new molecular configuration, it is possible to automatically select one of the two reference orientations by introducing a norm function d(l, l 0 ) = Nj j |B j (l) -B j (l 0 )| 2 that points the reference atom l to the optimal reference state on the basis of atomic environment similarities, i.e. the optimal reference configuration l 0 is represented by the one that minimizes the norm d(l, l 0 ). In the case of FeCl 5 and FeCl 6 this trivially corresponds to selecting the reference atomic environment with the correct number of atoms. However, the procedure is general and can be applied to any number of reference configurations. Once the correspondence between a molecular configuration and a reference environment is established, the rotation between the two can be computed by applying the Eckart-Sayvets conditions to the Cartesian displacements of the two set of coordinates To summarize, the procedure that lead to the calculation of a local property of atom l through Eq. ( In order to illustrate the importance of imposing the covariance property to the Ridge regression we perform the training of a model with and without its enforcement. For this purpose the configurations in the training and test sets were rotated along the y direction by a random angle in the range [-45 • : 45 • ]. Results are reported in Fig. Next we want to demonstrate that our strategy works for real systems and that can be effectively used to explore the magnetic-anisotropy landscape. To this end we show results for one of the top-performance high-anisotropy single-ion magnet [Co(pdms) 2 ] 2-, where pdms=1,2-bis(methanesulfonamido)benzene As shown in the inset of the bottom panel of Fig. The ability to reconstruct continuous structure-energy and structure-magnetic anisotropy maps with virtually no computational effort opens now the possibility to select new molecular conformations with optimal properties. We implement a particle-swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm Here the energy of a molecular conformation E(r i ) and the magnetic axial anisotropy D(r i ) are the features of interest. Large values of the parameter γ would allow for more severe distortions of the equilibrium molecular geometry in favour of a more favourable anisotropy. Even though magnetic anisotropy is the relevant figure of merit, the inclusion of energy in the target quantity of Eq. ( Fig. Figure The method presented here can be generally applied to explore the conformational space of compounds in the search for their optimal properties, either scalar or tensorial. The approach can be readily applied to the prediction of any local atomic quantity of both solidstate materials or isolated molecules as long as an appropriate electronic structure method for the preparation of the training/test sets exists. Regarding magnetism, while solid-state anisotropy is expected to be easily accounted for with the proposed method, an interesting challenge is posed by the modelling of exchange coupling constants because of their non-local nature. We also anticipate that this approach can be extended to the exploration of the entire chemical space, once the scheme is combined with high-throughput electronic structure theory Particle Swarm Optimization. The α -th particle in the swarm corresponds to a vector p α that stores the position of every atom in space. The vectors p α are propagated by summing them with the particle velocity v α . The velocity of each particle in the swarm was updated at each i -th step with a simple scheme: v i+1 α = ωv i α + Γ[c 1 p α best + c 2 p best ]. p α best corresponds to the vector p α that scored the best in the history of the particle α, while p best correspond to the vector that scored the best among all the particle in the swarm. The coefficients ω and Γ were chosen as 0. 