Analyzing coordination environments using X-ray absorption spectroscopy has broad applications ranging from solid-state physics to material chemistry. Here, we show that random forest models can identify the main coordination environment from K-edge Xray absorption near edge structure (XANES) with a high accuracy of 85.4% and all associated coordination environments with a high Jaccard score of 81.8% for 33 cation elements in oxides, significantly outperforming other machine learning (ML) models. In a departure from prior works, we used a robust description of the coordination environment as a distribution over 25 distinct coordination motifs with coordination numbers ranging from 1-12. The random forest models were trained on the world's largest database of ∼ 190, 000 computed K-edge XANES spectra. Furthermore, the random forest models can be applied to predict the coordination environment from experimental K-edge XANES with minimal loss in accuracy (82.1%) due to the use of data augmentation. A drop-out feature importance analysis highlights the key roles that the pre-edge and main-peak regions play in coordination environment identification, with the post-peak region becoming increasingly important at higher coordination numbers. This work provides a general strategy to identify the coordination environment from K-edge XANES across broad chemistries, paving the way for future advancements in the application of ML to spectroscopy. Element-wise classification model Prediction X-ray absorption spectroscopy is an important technique for probing the local environments, i.e., atomic coordination symmetries, the number and chemical identities of neighboring atoms and oxidation states, in a material. A typical analysis of XANES relies on comparisons between experimentally measured spectroscopy and spectra from well-known compounds. For example, the authors have previously shown that an ensemble-learning spectra matching algorithm can achieve a 84.2% accuracy in identifying oxidation state and local environment by matching unknown spectra with computed spectra in the XASDB. For example, Timoshenko et al. In this work, we comprehensively address the above limitations and develop an approach to identify local environments in oxides from K-edge XANES using random forest models. In contrast to prior models, CNs up to 12, and a total of 25 distinct coordination motifs (CMs), which are enumerated in Figure The training data was constructed from a database of ∼ 190, 000 site-specific K-edge XANES of ∼ 22, 500 oxides in the Materials Project. In our previous work, For each site, the coordination environment is defined as the combination of the CN and the CM. Figure p = {p 1 , p 2 , p 3 , p 4 , ..., p 12 }, where where p i denotes the OP for a CN of i. CNs greater than 12 are not considered due to their extremely low counts in the data set, as shown in Figure The coordination environment classification task can then be divided into two sequential steps powered by two separate models for each element. In the first step, the CN model identifies the CN ranking label from the spectra, and in the second step, the CM model identifies the CN-specific CM ranking label. The models are trained for each element as the characteristic XAS absorption edge energy follows a power law with atomic number and is well separated. In the next steps, optimized element-specific ML models sequentially identify firstly the CN ranking label, followed by the CN-specific CM ranking label, from the spectra. Five ML models were assessed in terms of the performance in CN and CM classification, namely k-nearest neighbor (kNN), random forest, multi-layer perceptron (MLP), As shown in Figure were not investigated because the lack of resolution in the K-edge absorption spectra for elements with atomic number greater than 52. where P i is the probability of a ranking label i out of all ranking labels. The label entropy S is high if the variability of the label values is high, i.e., an element exists in a spectrum of coordination environments with similar probabilities. For example, the alkali metals Li, Na and K have high label entropy because they exist in a variety of local environments -tetrahedral, octahedral -with relatively high probabilities, while the transition metals have low label entropy because they exist mainly in the octahedral coordination, with the exception of the higher oxidation states of V and Cr which nearly almost exists in tetrahedral coordination. From Figure The especially poor performance on the light alkali elements (Li, Na and K) may already be attributed to the well-known issues with the FEFF software in reproducing the spectra of light alkali elements. As a comparison, Figure Figure We evaluated the random forest classifiers using 28 high-quality normalized XANES experimental spectra, obtained from the XAFS Spectra Library, 42 EELS database, We selected the spectral region from -5 eV to 55 eV with reference to edge energy (E 0 ) determined by the MBACK algorithm. The random forest classifier successfully identified 23 of 28 top coordination environment dominant CN (CN with highest p CN ) with 100% accuracy. For V 2 O 5 , the classifier successfully predicts the dominant CM, i.e., trigonal bipyramidal, but does not predict the correct order of secondary and tertiary CMs (a failure by our strict definition). The likely reason for this failure is the small difference in OPs between the second (i.e., q pentagonal planar ) and third (i.e., q square,pyramidal ) ranked CMs of ∼ 0.029. In ZnO, the coordination environment of Zn does not resemble any target CMs, i.e., all CM OPs are < 0.22. Here, the relatively low resemblance between the absorbing atom's coordination pattern and target motifs seems to be the critical issue. For Na 2 O, the failure of the model may be attributed to the possible contamination of the experimental sample. ones. Our data-driven approach is able to capture this relationship known from group theory analysis. In summary, we have demonstrated that random forest models trained on FEFF-computed K-edge XANES can be used to directly predict the coordination environment -CN and CM -with high accuracy. In contrast to prior works, we eschew a rigid classification of coordination environments into mutually-exclusive labels, opting instead for a more rigorous, mathematical definition of coordination environment based on multiple labels with order parameters. Prior works to identify coordination environment from XANES have primarily focused on deep learning models, i.e., MLP and CNN. We also strongly advocate the development of baseline models for the evaluation of ML models in materials science. The commonly-used "accuracy" metric means little without this context. As is evident from Figure in a six-coordinated octahedron environment. Indeed, the random forest models yield far more substantial accuracy improvements in coordination environment identification over the baseline model for elements that exist in many different environments with high probability, e.g., Cu, Zn, C and the alkali metals. For the 3d transition metals, the accuracy improvement is a relatively modest ∼ 20%, even though all instances achieved high absolute accuracies exceeding 90%. Finally and most importantly, we demonstrate a data-augmentation approach that enables the random forest models trained on computed data to be directly applied to experimental K-edge XANES with minimal loss in accuracy. The models achieved an outstanding accuracy of ∼ 82.1% in identifying the dominant coordination environment over a diverse experimental spectra test set comprising 28 experimental K-edge XANES spectra of 13 chemical species. This addresses a critical gap in ML-based K-edge XANES analysis. High-quality experimental XANES data is difficult and expensive to obtain, and high-throughput computations are currently the only approach to generate large and diverse XANES datasets. Being able to develop a coordination environment identification ML model using the latter that can be applied to the former is therefore of major value, and represents a transformative advance in the application of ML to coordination environment identification. Given a real-valued vector ÔP ∈ R L , the i-th OP represents how closely the site's local coordination environment resembles a CN condition or a specific CM. A threshold t is applied to Ô Ps to create a bipartition of relevant and irrelevant CN and CM labels. The multi-label prediction ŷ can be obtained as: Instead of using an arbitrary threshold like 0.5, we adopted the concept of label cardinality (LCard) and calibrated the threshold t to minimize the possibility of a spectrum being assigned to the no-label set. The LCard 52 is a standard measure of "multi-labeled-ness", which is simply the average number of labels associated with each example. For N examples and L labels, the LCard measure can be calculated as: The threshold t 1 for CN and threshold t 2 for CM were calibrated using the same procedure as follows: where D site-specif ic and D site-averaged are the dataset of ∼ 110, 000 site-specific and ∼ 36, 000 site-averaged computed K-edge XANES spectra, respectively. The site-averaged spectral dataset was also considered here as experimentally measured XANES spectra are the averaged absorption coefficients. The OPs of site-averaged spectra were obtained by averaging site-specific OPs of the same element. The calibration procedure aims at minimizing the difference between label cardinality of site-specific spectra and that of site-averaged spectra. This calibration approach has been found to be more effective and efficient in reducing the probability of empty-set prediction issues. The average number of coordination environment labels associated with each spectrum was ∼ 3.2. After applying the calibrated thresholds, we then encoded the CN and CM label sets into the form of ranking labels in terms of descending OPs. Using 0.2 as cutoff for CN OPs, the average number of CN ranking labels per element was 10. Note that the labels contain joint labels such as CN4-CN6. In the CM classification task, the average number of CM ranking labels is 5 per element per CN. As expected, the distribution of relevant CN labels, i.e., CN with p CN ≥ 0.2, was inhomogeneous (Figure For each absorbing specie, we excluded CN and CM ranking labels with less than 30 samples. After applying this rule, all Tc, Ru and Rh ions are six coordinated. Therefore, we removed the their K-edge XANES from the first step CN classification task's training dataset. For the CM classification task, we repeated this operation and excluded those sub-datasets (see Table To validate the necessity of using ranking labels to represent the absorption elements' coordination environments, we visualized the joint distributions of the CN and CM OPs of the alkali and the transition metal elemental group (Figure In this work, we use the top-1 accuracy and Jaccard index as metrics to evaluate the performance of classifiers. The top-1 accuracy of a classifier is evaluated by its ability to yield the top-ranked coordination environment. The Jaccard index measures the overlaps between the true CN-CM labels and the predicted CN-CM labels. Let y n be the ground true CN-CM label set and ŷn be the predicted CN-CM label made by a classifier. The Jaccard index can be computed based on the number of labels in the intersection set divided by the number of labels in the union set. The Jaccard index yields a number (0-100%) indicating how well a given classifier identifies all relevant coordination environments compared to the correct coordination environments. The hyper-parameter space investigated for each ML model are as follows: 1. kNN: The k-nearest neighbors classifier was optimized with respect to the number of neighbors (N ) and the distance metric (p). The values of N examined were 10, 20, 30, and 50. The minimum value of N = 10 was set to avoid overfitting and increase the generalizability of models. The Manhattan distance and Euclidean distance were used to assess the distances metric effects. 2. Random forest classifier: The number of trees in the forest was tested at values 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200. The rest of the parameters were kept at the default settings. 3. Multi-layer perceptron (MLP): For the MLP classifier, the number of hidden layers (L) was varied from 1 to 3, and the number of neurons in each hidden layer was varied from 10 to 100. The activation functions tested were the logistic, tanh and ReLU functions. For CN ranking labels classification, we found that the model using 10 nearest neighbors and Manhattan distance performs the best for kNN models. The random forest classifier's performance converged at 30 trees for all elemental groups. For the MLP classifier, the twolayer neural network architecture with ReLU activation function outperformed the rest of the models with tanh or logistic sigmoid neurons. The best MLP model had 50 neurons in the first hidden layer and 100 in the second hidden layer. We found that further increasing number of hidden layers has a detrimental effect on classification performance. For the RBF SVC classifier, the model with C = 100 and γ 0.013 performed the best. For the CM ranking labels classification task. The optimum CN classifiers' parameter configurations were the best sets for kNN classifier, MLP classifier, and RBF SVC classifier as well. We found that the random forest classifier performed the best when the number of trees in the forest equals 50. One key observation from Figures