It has been recently revealed that strontium titanate (SrTiO3) displays persistent photoconductivity with unique characteristics: it occurs at room temperature and lasts over a very long period of time. Illumination of SrTiO3 crystals at room temperature with sub-bandgap light reduces the electrical resistance by three orders of magnitude and persists for weeks or longer (Tarun et al., Phys. Rev. Photoconductivity is a fundamental physical process in semiconductors where excess carriers created under illumination lead to often dramatic enhancement in electrical conductivity Hydrogen is an ubiquitous impurity in oxides and can greatly alter their physical properties Here we use first-principles calculations based on DFT and hybrid functional to investigate the role of hydrogen in the observed PPC in STO. We find that H + O introduces a doubly occupied defect state near the valenceband maximum (VBM) of STO, as schematically shown in Fig. Our calculations are based on DFT For the chemical potentials μ O , μ H , and μ Sr , we used the values of Ref. In the experiments of Tarun et al. Recent studies by Poole et al. First, H + O and (V Sr -H) -defects, in which one H atom is bonded to an O in the Sr vacancy, are introduced during the high-temperature annealing process under the "hydrogen rich" condition, resulting in almost fully compensated samples with low electrical conductivity. Upon exposure to light, one electron from the H + O -related level is excited to the conduction band, resulting in H 2+ O : H O in the doubly positive charge state is metastable, and the H atom sees a barrier of only 0.4 eV to leave the substitutional site and become an interstitial hydrogen (H + i ), which is stabilized by forming a H-O bond with an nearby oxygen atom. This process is represented by the following charge-conserving equation: the calculated energy barrier along the reaction path is shown in Fig. The oxygen vacancy, in turn, is a shallow donor, with the (2+/+) transition level close to the conduction band, and the neutral charge state V 0 O is always higher in energy, even for the Fermi level at the CBM. Therefore, we O , H + i , (VSr-H) -and (VSr-2H) 0 as a function of the Fermi level position. These results are essentially the same as those published in Ref. expect that a large fraction of the oxygen vacancies will become doubly ionized V 2+ O at room temperature, contributing with additional free electrons to the conduction band, i.e., V + O → V 2+ O + e -. Without exposure to light excitation, H + O is quite stable at room temperature, and is unlikely to move out of the O site. The calculated energy barrier for the chargeconserving reaction H + O → H + i + V 0 O is 3.5 eV, as shown in Fig. Once the H atom moves out of the O site, becoming H + i , the barrier to come back to the O site, forming H 2+ O , is 1.6 eV as shown in Fig. tion is exothermic and driven by the Coulomb attraction between the two oppositely charged centers, with an estimated barrier of only 0.25 eV (the same as the migration barrier of H + i ), with an energy gain of 0.7 eV for the system, as schematically shown in Fig. The reaction rate for processes in Eq. 1 and 2 can be estimated using where E a is the reaction barrier, k B is the Boltzman constant, T is the temperature and Γ 0 can be approximated by the highest frequency of the local vibration mode (see below). If we take Γ 0 =40 THz, T =300 K, we obtain Γ = 1.3 × 10 -45 s -1 for E a = 3.5 eV, and Γ = 8 × 10 6 s -1 for E a = 0.4 eV, i.e., H + O will not move out of the O site at room temperature, while, upon illumination, H + O turns into H +2 O , which is metastable and easily moves out of the O site. To aid in the experimental identification of H + O in STO before illumination, we calculated the frequencies of the local vibration modes associated with the H impurity. Infrared (IR) spectroscopy peaks of around 3500 cm -1 observed in hydrogen-doped STO samples have been assigned to interstitial H In the case of H + O , H is bonded to two Ti atoms with H-Ti distances of 2.0 Å. We thus expect the frequencies of the H + O local vibration modes to be much lower than those associated with O-H bond stretching. For the H + O local vibration modes we obtained a non-degenerate mode at 1300 cm -1 and a twofold degenerate mode at 837 cm -1 . Although these are much higher and outside the phonon spectrum of STO, it may be difficult to probe them due to possible overlap with absorption due to free-carriers. Having discussed the role of H O in the observed PPC in STO at room temperature, we then ask if this effect is exclusive to STO. We explored if H O would behave in the same way in other oxides with similar band structure of STO, such as BaTiO 3 and TiO 2 . These oxides have band gaps of 3.20 eV The configuration coordinate diagram corresponding to the reaction path of Eqs. 1 and 2 for H O in BaTiO 3 , displayed in Fig. In summary, our calculations show that hydrogen incorporated on oxygen site (H 