Electron optics in the solid state promises new functionality in electronics through the possibility of realizing micrometer-sized interferometers, lenses, collimators and beam splitters that manipulate electrons instead of light. Until now, however, such functionality has been demonstrated exclusively in one-dimensional devices, such as in nanotubes, and in graphene-based devices operating with p-n junctions. In this work, we describe a novel mechanism for realizing electron optics in two dimensions. By studying a two-dimensional Fabry-Pérot interferometer based on a resonant cavity formed in an InAs/GaSb double quantum well using p-n junctions, we establish that electron-hole hybridization in band-inverted systems can facilitate coherent interference. With this discovery, we expand the field of electron optics to encompass materials that exhibit band inversion and hybridization, with the promise to surpass the performance of current state-of-the-art devices. Common interferometers in optics, such as the Fabry-Pérot or the Mach-Zehnder interferometer, rely on the interference of monochromatic waves with the same propagation direction. In this sense they can be regarded as one-dimensional. In an optical Fabry-Pérot interferometer, the interference pattern can be observed as a periodic change of maxima and minima in the transmitted intensity while the wavelength of the light is gradually varied. However, the wavelength period of the interference pattern depends on the incident angle of the light because it is the projection of the wave vector onto the interferometer axis that enters the conditions for constructive and destructive interference. As a result, the interference pattern is averaged out if light of all possible incident angles is sent through the interferometer at once. The same arguments apply to electronic Fabry-Pérot interferometers. Pronounced interference is usually observed only in one-dimensional systems, such as carbon nanotubes Recently, electronic interference has been discovered in two-dimensional pnp-(or npn-) junctions of singleand multilayer graphene Here, we report an interference mechanism fundamentally different from that in graphene by studying transport through a two-dimensional Fabry-Pérot interferometer realized using p-n junctions in an inverted InAs/GaSb double quantum well. The interference is facilitated by electron-to-hole scattering in the bandinverted regime. Such a scenario effectively produces parallel one-dimensional transport channels which share almost identical conditions for constructive interference, leading to a nonvanishing interference pattern even after angle averaging. With this finding, we expand the field of electron optics to include materials that exhibit band inversion and hybridization. Figure In the InAs/GaSb bilayer system, which has recently been studied due to its topological insulator properties The measurement in Fig. In the pn p configuration, p-n junctions delimit the cavity. Across each junction, the density of states exhibits a local minimum as the Fermi energy transitions smoothly from below to above the hybridization gap To better understand the nature of the resistance oscillations, we systematically investigate pn'p junctions with local gates of various lengths, both in a single device and across multiple devices, and find the oscillations to be re- V lg (V) producible (Supplementary Information Figs. S3, S4, S9, S10). This robustness also holds for multiple cooldowns, with the pattern of minima and maxima hardly changing despite repeated thermal cycling. We observe that both the oscillation amplitude and the average period in V lg decrease with increasing L (Supplementary Information Fig. Our experimental results are consistent with the emer-gence of standing wave modes in the cavity, such that the oscillations arise due to quantum interference in a two-dimensional electronic analogue of the Fabry-Pérot etalon. The decrease in amplitude with increasing L is in agreement with a finite phase coherence length. From the temperature dependence, we extract an energy scale of ∼ 1 meV for the mean level spacing in the cavity (Supplementary Information Fig. In order to understand the origin of the interference, we model the hybridized electron-hole system using the min- imal Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang (BHZ) Hamiltonian where h(k) = Bk 2 1 + (M 0 + M 2 k 2 )σ z + Ak x σx -Ak y σy , σi are Pauli matrices operating on the orbital degrees of freedom and k = (k x , k y ) is the wave vector. The nonzero blocks in the Hamiltonian act on the two spin degrees of freedom separately. The parameter M 0 governs the band inversion, M 2 symmetrically controls the band curvatures (effective masses), B is a symmetry breaking term between electron and hole bands and A determines the electron-hole coupling. In Fig. Upon inspection of the reflection amplitudes |r ij | at the interface between the cavity and the leads (see Fig. where ∆k eh/he is the energy-dependent momentum transfer in x-direction in the eh and he scattering processes and m ∈ N is the ordinal number of the transmission maxima. This approximation agrees well with the calculated T , see Fig. To obtain the conductance, we integrate the calculated T over all incident states with different momenta k y , and set the resistance R(E ) = 1/G(E ). The width of the sample in y-direction is W and the integration boundaries, ±k F , are given by the Fermi wave number associated with the larger of the two Fermi circles in the leads. The numerical derivative dR/dE is shown in Fig. We now analyze the periodicity of the experimentally observed oscillations (Fig. In the np'n configuration no oscillatory features appear, even upon extension of the voltage range to more negative V lg (Supplementary Information Fig. We now turn to the dependence of the resistance oscillations on a perpendicular magnetic field B. In the experiment (Fig. Placing model (1) on a lattice Semiclassically, we expect the interference phenomenon to be suppressed with increasing magnetic field as the cyclotron radius r c = hk F /eB decreases below a threshold related to the length L of the cavity, where k F is the Fermi wave number in the cavity. Namely, when 2r c = L at a critical field B c , quasiparticles cannot traverse the cavity any longer. As the hole-like states have smaller k F than the electron-like states, their B c occurs earlier, see dotted lines and the inset in Fig. Our results set the stage for engineering electron optics phenomena in a variety of materials that feature band inversion and hybridization, or equivalently, a Sombrero hat dispersion. Examples include systems with strong Rashba spin-orbit interaction To fabricate devices from the heterostructures, we first define the mesa by wet chemical etching. Then, we deposit the first layer of insulating Al 2 O 3 , followed by evaporation of the local gates, typically three per device and having different length L. We subsequently deposit another layer of Al 2 O 3 , and then evaporate the global top gate. The final step is the electrical contacting of the QWs and the buried local gates. This is achieved by etching the oxide stack and the heterostructure down to the InAs QW, the latter required for the ohmic contacts only, and depositing metal. Extended Data Fig. 1. Preparation: • Cleave a 3 × 2.8 mm 2 piece from the wafer using a diamond wafer scriber. • Clean with warm acetone and IPA (50 • C), applying gentle sonication if necessary. • Perform dehydration bake for 120 s at 120 • C. • Spin photoresist AZ 1505 at 3000 rpm for 3 s by accelerating for 3 s from standstill, then accelerating for 5 s to 5000 rpm and holding for 60 s. • Perform prebake for 120 s at 120 • C. The resulting photoresist thickness is around 500 nm. • Remove edge beads from the sample by exposing the edges using contact printing with a square pattern on a quartz mask in a Karl Süss MJB3 mask aligner (400 nm 350 W Hg light source). The exposure lasts 10 s, and is followed by developing in Microposit MF319 for 15 s and rinsing in DI water for 20 s. • Perform exposure of the structure proper for 3.2 s similar to above, then develop in Microposit MF319 for 20 s and rinse in DI water for 20 s. • Perform optional postbake for 60 s at 120 • C. • Etch the heterostructure to define the mesa. The etching solution is a citric acid based etchant consisting of DI water, C 6 H 8 O 7 (50% diluted), H 3 PO 4 (85%) and H 2 O 2 (30%) in the volume ratio 220 : 110 : 3 : 5. We add the chemicals in that order to the solution and let it stand for around 10 min at room temperature (RT) under agitation with a magnetic stirrer. We then etch at RT and remove around 100 to 200 nm of material while continuing to agitate, checking the etch depth with a surface profilometer. The etching process is suspended by rinsing in DI water for 20 s. The etch depth is chosen such that we are sure to have etched past the second, i.e., the lower, of the two Al(Ga)Sb confinement layers. • Strip the photoresist in warm acetone and IPA (50 • C). 3. Deposition of 25 nm of Al 2 O 3 at 150 • C using atomic layer deposition 4. Definition of local gates with lift-off process: • Perform dehydration bake for 120 s at 120 • C. • Spin PMMA 50 K 4% 1 : 1 in anisole at 1000 rpm for 1 s by accelerating for 1 s from standstill, then accelerating for 5 s to 5000 rpm and holding for 45 s. • Perform prebake for 240 s at 180 • C. • Spin PMMA 950 K 6% in anisole using the same settings as before. • Perform prebake for 240 s at 180 • C. The total resist thickness is around 400 nm. • Perform electron-beam lithography (30 keV beam energy, Raith 150 system), then develop for 30 s in MIBK/IPA in 1 : 3 ratio at RT and rinse in IPA for 30 s. • Evaporate Ti/Au with thicknesses 10 and 130 nm, respectively, using electron-beam evaporation, where the final 10 nm of Au are evaporated at a tilt angle of 20 • . • Perform lift-off in DMSO at 80 • C. • Spin photoresist AZ 5214E at 3000 rpm for 3 s by accelerating for 3 s from standstill, then accelerating for 5 s to 5000 rpm and holding for 60 s. • Perform prebake for 110 s at 60 • C. The resulting photoresist thickness is around 1 μm. • Perform exposure of the top gate pattern using contact printing with a quartz mask in a Karl Sïss MJB3 mask aligner (400 nm 350 W Hg light source). The exposure lasts 3.5 s. • Perform reversal bake for 120 s at 120 • C. • Perform flood exposure for 20 s in the mask aligner, then develop in Microposit MF319 for 30 s and rinse in DI water for 20 s. • Perform optional postbake for 60 s at 120 • C. • Evaporate Ti/Au with thicknesses 10 and 130 nm, respectively, using electron-beam evaporation, where the final 10 nm of Au are evaporated at a tilt angle of 20 • C. • Perform lift-off in DMSO at 80 • C. • Perform dehydration bake for 120 s at 120 • C. • Spin photoresist AZ 5214E at 3000 rpm for 3 s by accelerating for 3 s from standstill, then accelerating for 5 s to 5000 rpm and holding for 60 s. • Perform prebake for 110 s at 60 • C. The resulting photoresist thickness is around 1 μm. • Perform exposure of the ohmic contact pattern using contact printing with a quartz mask in a Karl Süss MJB3 mask aligner (400 nm 350 W Hg light source). The exposure lasts 3.5 s. • Perform reversal bake for 120 s at 120 • C. • Perform flood exposure for 20 s in the mask aligner, then develop in Microposit MF319 for 30 s and rinse in DI water for 20 s. • Perform postbake for 60 s at 120 • C. • Etch the oxide stack and the heterostructure down to the InAs QW using BOE, employing the InAs as the etch stop layer. • Evaporate Ti/Au with thicknesses 50 and 200 nm, respectively, using electron-beam evaporation. The contacts are not annealed to prevent shorts to the back gate. • Perform lift-off in DMSO at 50 • C. 8. Gluing of the sample into a chip carrier using PMMA or silver epoxy and bonding. We have investigated a total of three working devices, as summarized in Table All electronic transport experiments are conducted in a pumped 4He cryostat (also known as a variable temperature insert) at a base temperature of 1.3 K, or in a 3He/4He dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 50 mK. The dc current I = 50-100 nA injected into the device (see Fig. where R j is the dc junction resistance and dR j /dV lg is the differential junction resistance which is sensitive to changes in the transmission of the region (cavity) below the local gate only. The dc component V j is recorded with a multimeter, whereas the ac component δV j is recorded with a lock-in. The four-terminal differential resistance is obtained by dividing δV j with the ac modulation voltage and the input current, dR j /dV lg = δV j /δV lg I. The oscillations in the resistance, which are the focus of this work, are visible in both dc and ac components. However, we prefer to show the ac signal, as the oscillations are clearer there and the slowly varying background due to the changing resistance of the leads is automatically suppressed. To model the experiment, we use a minimal BHZ model, see equation We employ a scattering matrix approach to calculate the transmission through the device shown in Fig. We work in the limit of infinitely sharp p-n interfaces, although preliminary studies show that the oscillations are also present if the p-n interfaces are broadened. In Extended Data Fig. where the subscript L/R denotes the left/right interface and r, r , t, t are 2 × 2 matrices describing reflection and transmission amplitudes for electron-like and hole-like waves impinging on the interface from left (r, t) and right (r, t) with the following structure: We can write down the scattering equations for the full pn p junction, where C denotes the cavity and the subscripts +/-denote waves moving to the right/left, i.e., waves with positive/negative velocities. In general, Ψ j ± = [ ψ j (±|k e |) ψ j (∓|k h |) ] T is a two-component vector with spinor components that denote waves with electron-like dispersion (marked with red circles in Extended Data Fig. Now that we have set up the scattering problem in terms of scattering processes at each junction individually, we can proceed in determining the total transmission through the device. Let us write down the equations that connect the incident states from the left lead to the transmitted waves in the right lead, where ŝ is the scattering matrix of the whole pnp junction, In the experiment, current is injected only from the left lead and so we set Ψ R -= 0. The final solution for the waves transmitted in the right lead, Ψ R + , is The matrix t can be easily obtained from the matrices ŜL , ŜR and φ. After considering time-reversal symmetry, ŜT L/R = ŜL/R , and inversion symmetry around the middle of the cavity (x = L/2), ŜR (E, k y ) = σ x ŜL (E, -k y )σ x , where σ x is a Pauli matrix, we obtain with {r(k y ), t(k y )} = {r(-k y ), t(-k y )}. Finally, the total transmission through our Fabry-Pérot interferometer, as shown in Fig. The solutions of the Schrödinger equation in both cavity and leads are plane waves with k(E F ) momenta, which are obtained from the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian in equation ( x (E F , k y ), where e/h denotes electron-like/hole-like states (see Extended Data Fig. We concentrate on one interfacea n p junction, i.e., the system consists of an n-type cavity and a p-type lead. The cavity and the lead are semi-infinite in x and +x directions, respectively. Since the coefficients that enter the overall scattering matrix of a Fabry-Pérot interferometer depend on the reflections inside the cavity, we consider the incident wave from the cavity to the lead. The wave function in the cavity is then given by the sum of incident and outgoing waves while inside the lead, there are only outgoing transmitted waves: where ψ(k x , k y ) is a momentum-dependent spinor, and k e/h x is the momentum in x-direction which depends on the Fermi energy E and k y . At the junction between the cavity and the lead, the wave function and its derivative must be continuous, which then yields eight equations, allowing us to calculate all the coefficients a ij and b ij . To obtain the final reflection and transmission coefficients that enter the scattering matrices at the left and right interfaces, i.e., the pn and n p junctions, we need to multiply a ij and b ij with the respective velocities in x-direction where To obtain the interference condition in Eq. ( . Assuming solely eh and he scattering processes (r ee = r hh = 0), this factor becomes x * ≈ 200 nm not only for the L = 320 nm local gate, but also for larger local gates, as the sharpness of the density profile is determined by the interplay of electric fields at the edge of the local gate, independent of L. The density in the regions lying exclusively below the top gate is shown as a function of V tg in Supplementary Fig. In order to measure ρ xx = V xx /IW/L l and ρ xy = V xy /I, we use voltage probes specifically designed to this end, refer to Extended Data Fig. The regions below the other local gates of device A exhibit similar density dependencies as shown in Supplementary Fig. To find the mean oscillation amplitude and its uncertainty (standard deviation) for a given L, we first placed two interpolating cubic splines through the local minima and maxima of dR j /dV lg , respectively. Then, taking their average gave us the signal background. The amplitude is then calculated for each minimum and maximum by subtracting this background from the data. Finally, we average over all minima and maxima in the interval -0.85V < V lg < 1 V, thereby obtaining a mean and standard deviation. minimum in the aforementioned interval is labeled with i = 1, the first maximum with i = 2, the second minimum with i = 3, and so on. We fit all points thus obtained with a linear function. The corresponding slope multiplied by two (to account for having both minima and maxima) gives the average (global) period ∆V lg of the oscillations in V lg . We obtain ∆V lg = 160 mV, recognizing however that the oscillations are not truly periodic in V lg , as the points systematically deviate from the fit in places. This deviation is exemplified in Supplementary Fig. We now convert the gate voltage axis to new axes k n -k p (Supplementary Fig. We repeat the same analysis on the 2k n axis at high energies where the holes are almost depleted by fitting the last six points of the index plot in Supplementary Fig. Lastly, we duplicate the above analysis for the other local gates of device A. The results agree with those obtained for the L = 320 nm gate. The average period ∆V lg decreases from 160 to 140 to 100 mV as L increases from 320 nm to 400 nm to 540 nm. We obtain 2π/∆(k n -k p ) = 560 nm and 2π/∆(2k n ) = 450 nm compared to L ± x * = 400 ± 200 nm. Likewise, we have 2π/∆(k n -k p ) = 680 nm when L ± x * = 540 ± 200 nm, opting not to provide an estimate of the period in 2k n as the determination of the minima and maxima at high energies is ambiguous due to poor signal to noise ratio for the local gate of length L = 540 nm. Increasing the perpendicular magnetic field B eventually leads to Landau quantization in the cavity. Supplementary Fig. The lines associated with the quantum Hall state in the cavity connect to the zero-field FabryProt oscillations. Apart from a transition region in which the lines may become interrupted, we may track the resistance oscillations starting from B = 0 all the way up to the highest magnetic fields (solid lines in Supplementary Fig. In the L = 530 nm case (Supplementary Fig. In the L = 700 nm case (Supplementary Fig. Overall, the resistance oscillations seen in device B exhibit the same behavior as reported in device A. This consistency demonstrates the robustness of the interference phenomenon in our hybridized electron-hole bilayers. We have also discovered resistance oscillations due to quantum interference in device C, which has a heterostructure featuring a thinner InAs QW, leading to a shallower band inversion and therefore to a lesser degree of hybridization. The strength of the oscillations is lower than in devices A, B for the same or comparable L and at the same temperature, as summarized in Supplementary Fig. There exist multiple explanations as to why the interference effect is weaker in device C compared to devices A, B. The most trivial reason is simply coincidence, i.e., naturally occurring variations in device quality. Another reason involves differences in mobility, and therefore perhaps phase coherence length. In our experience, the heterostructure with d InAs = 13.5 nm typically has average Drude mobilities which are roughly two to three times greater than those in the heterostructure with d InAs = 12.5 nm at comparable densities in the electron dominated regime. Lastly, the hybridization of electrons and holes is weaker when the InAs QW thickness is reduced as this decreases the band overlap. As we conjecture that the hybridization plays a key role in facilitating the interference, we would indeed expect to see a difference in visibility in this case. 