Properties of superconducting nanowires set the performance level for Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detectors (SNSPD). Reset time in commonly employed large area SNSPDs, 5-10ns, is known to be limited by the nanowire's kinetic inductance. On the other hand, reduction of the kinetic inductance in small area (waveguide integrated) SNSPDs prevents biasing them close to the critical current due to latching into a permanent resistive state. In order to reduce the reset time in SNSPDs, superconducting nanowires with both low kinetic inductance and fast electron energy relaxation are required. In this paper, we report on narrow (15-100nm) and long (up to 120μm) superconducting MgB2 nanowires offering such combination of properties. In 5 nm-thick MgB2 films, grown using Hybrid Physical Chemical Vapor Deposition, the electron relaxation time was 12ps, the critical temperature was ∼32K, and the critical current density was ∼5×10 7 A/cm 2 (at 4.8K). Using microwave reflectometry, we measured a kinetic inductance of Lk0(4.8K)=1.3-1.6 pH/□ regardless of the nanowire width, which results in a magnetic field penetration depth of ∼90 nm. These values are very close to those in pristine MgB2. For 120 μm long nanowires the response time was only ∼100ps, i.e. 1/80 of that in previously reported NbN nanowire photon detectors of similar dimensions. During the last two decades we have seen enormous progress with Superconducting Nanowire Single Photon Detectors (SNSPD), from first demonstration of priciples 1 to integrated circuits and a wide range of applications in nanophysics 2 , high speed communication 3 , quantum information 4, , quantum key distribution 5 , laser-ranging 6 , deep space communication 7 , etc. SNSPD's operation is based on photon assisted disruption of supercurrent in a superconducting nanowire, which is dc-biased close to the critical current. NbN nanowires, large kinetic inductivity (Lk0(4.8K)=90 pH/□) (inductance per square of the nanowire, l=w) leads to a significantly slower current return (restoration of the superconducting state), resulting in a much larger reset time τ 13 : τ=Lk/RL >>τ0, where Lk = Lk0×l/w is the total kinetic inductance of the nanowire and RL is the impedance of the read-out circuit (∼50 Ω). This is particularly critical in large area SNSPDs, with a kinetic inductance as large as hundreds of nH, leading to a reset time of a few tens of ns. On the other hand, large kinetic inductance delays current return from the load RL back into the SNSPD, prior to the hot-spot cooling down, hence preventing the SNSPD from latching into a permanent normal (non-sensitive) state. In this work, we report on the successful demonstration of MgB2 nanowires made from clean and ultra-thin (5nm) films. We study both kinetic inductance and response rate in the devices within a large variety of widths (15 nm -900 nm) and lengths (3 μm -120 μm), and show that a 100 ps voltage relaxation time can be achieved in 120 μmlong devices with a standard 50 Ω readout without latching. MgB2 films were grown on 6H-SiC substrates using a custom-built Hybrid Physical Chemical Vapor Deposition (HPCVD) system. All experiments were conducted in a cryogen-free probe station (base temperature 4.8 K) with an optical view port and microwave ground-signal-ground (GSG) probes (Fig. As measured in a large variety of samples (width and length), the kinetic inductivity in thin MgB2 nanowires was 1.35-1.60 pH/□ at 4.8K (Fig. Kinetic inductance (and its temperature dependence) is a sensitive indicator for superfluid (Cooper pairs) density, hence providing the value for the superconducting energy gap. In MgB2, πand σ-sheets of the Fermi surface display quite dissimilar energy gaps, with temperature dependences following: 27 Previously, in the frame of double-band modeling By fitting Eq (2) to the experimental Lk0(T) data (Fig. In order to study the effect of kinetic inductance on the voltage response in MgB2 nanowires, we recorded voltage pulses (Fig. For the longest (in the number of squares) samples (30nm×120μm, 3870 squares), the measured inductance was 5153pH, which should result in a voltage fall time of τ=Lk/RL=103ps for a 50 Ω readout. This is close to the value which we found experimentally (Fig. Fast quasiparticles relaxation (12 ps in MgB2 vs 50ps in NbN) is a positive factor and reduces the effect of latching in small kinetic inductance samples. We were able to register multiple photon detection events (i.e. no lathing took place) for short MgB2 samples biased directly at the critical current. By increasing laser intensity, the number of pulses on the oscilloscope increases yet preserves fast voltage relaxation. In conclusion, our results show that fabrication of narrow and long nanowires is feasible using MgB2 superconducting ultra-thin films made by a low deposition rate HPCVD process. With the preserved high quality of films manifested in a high critical temperature (>30K), a high critical current density (∼5×10 MgB2 nanowires have a high potential for fast response rate photon (as well as particle) b) M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity: Second Edition (Dover Publications, 2004).