The pairing glue of high-Tc superconductivity in heavily electron-doped (e-doped) FeSe, in which hole-pockets are absent, has been an important unsolved problem. Here, we focus on a heavily e-doped bulk superconductor Li1-xFexOHFeSe (Tc ∼ 40 K). We construct a multiorbital model beyond the rigid band approximation and analyze the spin and orbital fluctuations by taking both vertex corrections (VCs) and self-energy into consideration. Without e-doping (x = 0), the ferroorbital order without magnetism in FeSe is reproduced by the VCs. The orbital order quickly disappears when the hole-pocket vanishes at x ∼ 0.03. With increasing x further, the spin fluctuations remain small, whereas orbital fluctuations gradually increase with x due to the VCs. The negative feedback due to the self-energy is crucial to explain experimental phase diagram. Thanks to both vertex and self-energy corrections, the orbital-fluctuation-mediated s++-wave state appears for a wide doping range, consistent with experiments. The high-T c superconducting (SC) state in heavily electron-doped (e-doped) FeSe systems attracts great attention, but its pairing mechanism is still an open question. One of the characteristics of e-doped FeSe is the lack of magnetic order. Bulk FeSe exhibits spontaneous orbital polarization n xz = n yz at T S = 90 K, whereas no magnetic order occurs down to the SC transition temperature T c = 9 K In usual Fe-based superconductors with electron-FSs (eFSs) and hole-FSs (hFSs), strong spin orbital fluctuations coexist in many compounds. This fact means that two kinds of s-wave SC states, the s ± -wave state with sign reversal and the s ++ -wave state without sign reversal, can be mediated by spin and orbital fluctuations, respectively In e-doped FeSe compounds, in contrast, the top of the hFSs completely sinks below the Fermi level The present authors investigated the pairing mechanism in e-doped FeSe by focusing on the vertex corrections (VCs) that induce the orbital order and fluctuations In this paper, we discuss the mechanism of high-T c superconductivity in bulk heavily e-doped compound Li 1-x Fe x OHFeSe (T c ∼ 40K). To understand the x-T phase diagram with wide superconducting region, we analyze the model using the self-consistent-vertex correction (SC-VC) theory The key ingredient of the present orbital/spin fluctuation theory is the interference process between spinand orbital-fluctuations shown in Fig. Here, we construct the model Hamiltonian for Li 1-x Fe x OHFeSe. We first perform the WIEN2k band calculation for general x using the virtual crystal approximation (VCA). Next, we derive the eight-orbital tight-binding model ĤVCA x using the Wannier90 package. Then, the unfolded eight-orbital d-p Hubbard model for Li 1-x Fe x OHFeSe is given as Ĥ = Ĥ0 x + r ĤU , where Ĥ0 x = ĤVCA x + Σexp (k). Here, the static self-energy Σexp (k) is introduced to reproduce the experimental FSs of FeSe at x = 0 Figures where )), and l, l ′ , m, m ′ represent the d-orbital indices. (l =1,2,3,4,5 corresponds to 3z 2 -r 2 , xz, yz, xy, x 2 -y 2 orbitals.) The electron Green function is Ĝ(k) = [{ Ĝ0 (k)} -1 -Σ(k)] -1 , where Ĝ0 (k) is the bare Green function. The spin (charge) susceptibility is χs , where Û s(c) is the spin (charge) channel Coulomb interaction. The self-energy represents the mass-enhancement and quasiparticle damping due to spin fluctuations. Here, to keep the shape of FSs, we drop the static Hermite part in the self-energy ( Σ(k, +iδ) + Σ(k, -iδ))/2 Figure Next, we study the orbital susceptibility by including the VC for the susceptibility χ-VC ( Xc ) and Σ [61], because its significance in Fe-based superconductors has been discovered in previous studies Hereafter, we set T = 20 meV. Figure In contrast, for x = 0.2, strong ferro-orbital fluctuations with respect to O z 2 ≡ n xy -(n xz + n yz )/2 appears. The obtained χ c 4;4 (q) is shown in Fig. Figure Here, α c ∼ 1 for x = 0 corresponds to the ferro-orbital order (n xz = n yz ) in undoped FeSe. Through doping, α c drops quickly since hFS disappears at x = x c . Interestingly, α c gradually increases for x x c , indicating the orbital-fluctuation-meditated superconductivity in the absence of the hFS. To confirm the numerical results in Fig. Next, we study the SC state in e-doped FeSe by following the theoretical procedure reported in Refs. where λ SC is the eigenvalue, which is roughly proportional to T c , and the relation ∂k is the Fermi velocity, and Z α (k) is the mass-enhancement factor. Here, α and β are the indices of the folded FSs with the SOI shown in Figs. The pairing interaction V SC in the present beyond the Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) formalism is shown in Fig. Figure To clarify why the s ++ -wave state is realized, we show in Fig. The improvement of the self-energy beyond the FLEX approximation is one of the important future issues. We note that the enhancement of s-wave T c in the Hund's metal state was discussed by a recent DMFT study In summary, we discussed the pairing mechanism in the heavily e-doped bulk compound Li 1-x Fe x OHFeSe. At x = 0, the ferro-orbital order without magnetism in FeSe is reproduced. With increasing x, the orbital order quickly disappears, and the spin fluctuations remain weak for 0 < x < 0.20. Interestingly, small spin fluctuations cause large orbital fluctuations due to the AL-VC X AL for a wide doping range. Therefore, the orbital-fluctuation-mediated s ++ -wave state appears for 0.05 < x < 0.2, consistent with experiments. Therefore, the orbital fluctuations will be the main pairing glue in both e-doped FeSe and H-doped 1111 systems. [Supplementary Material] Doping effects on electronic states in electron-doped FeSe: Impact of self-energy and vertex corrections Youichi Yamakawa, Seiichiro Onari, and Hiroshi Kontani Department of Physics, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan We explain how we constructed the VCA tight-binding model. First, we perform the band calculation of Li 1-x Fe x OHFeSe using WIEN2k. Here, we employ the crystal structure of Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 OHFeSe In many Fe-based superconductors, the results of band calculations differ from the experimental results, especially for FeSe compounds Figure The density of states is shown in Fig. To estimate the value of η SOI , we make a comparison between the WIEN2k band structure with spin-orbital interaction and the present tight-binding model band structure with η SOI l • s. The obtained value is η SOI = 52 ± 2 meV, which is very consistent with η SOI = 50 meV Here, we present the analytic expressions for the vertex corrections (VCs) used in the main text. In the SC-VC theory, the charge susceptibility is given by χc (q) = Φc (q) 1 -Û c Φc (q) -1 , where Û c is the charge-channel Coulomb interaction, Φc (q) ≡ χ0 (q) + Xc (q) is the charge-channel irreducible susceptibility, and where b s = 3 2 and b c = 1 2 . The three-boson coupling Ĉ in Fig. and Ĉ′ is defined as C ′ m,m ′ m1,m2;m3,m4 (q, p)≡ C m,m ′ m1,m2;m3,m4 (q, p) +C m,m ′ m1,m3;m2,m4 (q, -p -q). (S3) Next, we present the formulations of the U -VC. The U -VC is given as where ΛMT,c(s) is the Maki-Thompson (MT) term, and ΛAL,c(s) is the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) term, both of which were introduced in Refs. Here, Λ AL,c and X c have the following relation, In Refs. Finally, we introduce the crossing-fluctuationexchange term V SC cross Here, we explain the reason why the orbital order without magnetism can be realized for x < x c as shown in Fig. Based on the SC-VC theory, when χ s (Q) ∼ 1/(T -T N ), the predicted orbital susceptibility is χ orb (0) ∼ 1/[1 -C(T ) 2 T χ s (Q)], where C(T ) is the three-boson coupling in Fig. To summarize, because of the (i) T -dependence of the three-boson coupling C(T ) and (ii) the poor-nesting caused by the sign-reversing orbital order, the relations T S > 0 and T N < 0 can be satisfied in the present theory. Here, we discuss the charge (orbital) order based on the density-wave (DW) equation The DW equation is given as k)f q m3,m4 (k ′ ), (S8) where λ q is the eigenvalue and l, m are orbital indices. The diagrammatic expression of the irreducible vertex Î is shown in Fig. Figure λ q for x = 0.25 is shown in Fig. Here, we make a comparison between the results of DW equation and SC-VC theory. The peaks at q ∼ 0 for x = 0 and x = 0.25 are consistent with the ferro orbital fluctuations of SC-VC theory. On the other hand, the peak at q ∼ Q ′ for x = 0.25, which does not exist in the SC-VC theory, is the bond fluctuation, in which k dependence of f DW q (k) is essential. We will discuss it in SM. E in detail. To understand the two pairing interactions in Fig. Its diagrammatic expression is shown in Fig. Here, the kernel is well approximated as I c q (k, k ′ ) ≈ gf q (k)f q (k) * , where f q (k) is the form factor of the DW equation. Then, the effective interaction V c q (k, k ′ ) is expressed as which takes huge value when 1 -λ q 1. Here, we divide V c q into V c(1) q and V c(2) q : The former is the set of the reducible diagrams with respect to U c in Fig. Here, we briefly discuss the superconductivity for x ≤ x c . For x < x c , both the spin fluctuation-mediated s ±wave state 