Superparamagnetic tunnel junctions (SMTJs) have emerged as a competitive, realistic nanotechnology to support novel forms of stochastic computation in CMOS-compatible platforms. One of their applications is to generate random bitstreams suitable for use in stochastic computing implementations. We describe a method for digitally programmable bitstream generation based on pre-charge sense amplifiers. This generator is significantly more energy efficient than SMTJ-based bitstream generators that tune probabilities with spin currents and a factor of two more efficient than related CMOS-based implementations. The true randomness of this bitstream generator allows us to use them as the fundamental units of a novel neural network architecture. To take advantage of the potential savings, we codesign the algorithm with the circuit, rather than directly transcribing a classical neural network into hardware. The flexibility of the neural network mathematics allows us to adapt the network to the explicitly energy efficient choices we make at the device level. The result is a convolutional neural network design operating at ≈ 150 nJ per inference with 97 % performance on MNIST-a factor of 1.4 to 7.7 improvement in energy efficiency over comparable proposals in the recent literature. Magnetic tunnel junctions are poised to make significant contributions to new computer chips, most immediately from non-volatile memory applications However, if the energy barrier is decreased by a factor of ten (to ≈ 4 kT ) The low energy, truly random behavior, ease of control, and established compatibility with complementarymetal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) circuitry has led to the use of SMTJs as the basis for a number of novel computing schemes Some of these schemes encode information in the switching rates Many of these previous applications can be classified as types of probabilistic computing. The specific (and ambiguously named) subfield of probabilistic computing we consider in this paper is called stochastic computing Ideally, stochastic computers operate on long chains of non-repeating, uncorrelated bitstreams that are cheap to produce from an area and energy efficiency standpoint. The conventional way of producing bitstreams is based on a circuit called the linear feedback shift register (LFSR), which comprises a series of flip-flops and simple combinational circuits. LFSRs operate by cycling through all of their internal binary states, each producing a pseudorandom bit, before returning back to the initial state. When LFSRs are used to generate a vast number of pseudorandom bitstreams, those bitstreams are both periodic and cross-correlated. Such correlations are usually undesirable from a computational perspective Stochastic bitstreams with neither periodicity nor cross-correlation can be generated by SMTJs. The thermal nature of their switching behaviour makes bitstreams generated by SMTJ circuits aperiodic and truly random Using SMTJs to generate stochastic bitstreams becomes useful only when the statistics of those bitstreams can be controlled. Previous works have focused on using current biasing to realize a steady-state spin-transfer torque on the free layer of the junction. This modifies the effective energy landscape of the device so that one of the configurations is tunably preferred over the other. The use of spin-orbit torques in a similar context has also been explored. In this paper, however, we demonstrate how statistical control can be readily accomplished by traditional circuit design; moreover, we show that such digital control has superior energy efficiency over current control for a large range of reasonable material parameters. We discuss the challenges to be overcome, and the contexts to be used, wherein spintronic probability control may become an efficient option. To make this demonstration concrete, we develop the circuits and architecture to use SMTJs as the basis for a neural network designed to recognize hand-written digits. This allows us to compare, in an application, digitally programmable SMTJ-sourced stochastic bitstreams against spintronically controlled versions. Considering a full scale stochastic computing application also lets us compare SMTJ-sourced stochastic bitstreams against the performance of digitally generated pseudorandom bitstreams. The interplay between high level design requirements for the neural network and the capabilities of the low level devices (SMTJs) leads to modifications in the design of both the networks and the circuits that connect with the devices. Such engineering across the computational hierarchy, or stack, plays an important role throughout this paper. In traditional computational systems, cross-stack engineering is not necessary because clean abstraction layers have been identified between different levels of design to allow optimization of each layer by itself. Computer programmers do not need to know the details of circuits in order to write code, and electrical engineers do not need to know the details of device physics in order to layout useful circuits. These clean abstraction layers break down when using novel devices or novel architectures. In our case, for example, implementing the neural network with stochastic bitstreams requires uncorrelated bits that can be generated at low energy, a requirement at the device and circuit level driven by the architecture. At the same time, the use of simple primitives, AND and OR gates, to implement pieces of the neural network dictates changes to the high level structure of the neural network. Similar engineering across the computational stack is important for the many bio-inspired or other alternative computing approaches that aim to take advantage of materials and devices wherein the native dynamics manifest the behavior of neural processes. Because the algorithmic operation depends on the physics (but not vice versa), bottom-up approaches like ours, which choose interesting or energy-efficient physical systems at the foundational level, demand that we pay attention to whether and how the high-level computation can effectively utilize the physics. In Sec. II, we propose a circuit based on a precharge sense amplifier (PCSA) to read the states of SMTJs to generate a stochastic bitstream. Including a set-reset latch with the PCSA fixes the output to a form useful for stochastic computing. This modified PCSA avoids controlling the state of the SMTJ by write currents; these currents are much higher than the currents needed to read the state, and give rise to ohmic losses that can dominate the energy consumption of the device. Since the expected value of the bitstream is fixed in the absence of tunable write currents, multiple such bitstreams must be combined to produce variable expected values. In Sec. III, we show how to use digital logic to combine these low energy SMTJ-based stochastic oscillators into programmable bitstream generators. These circuits operate at lower energies than LFSRs and other approaches based on SMTJs. In Sec. IV, we design and simulate a deep convolutional neural network based on LeNet5 Most previous uses of SMTJs use current biasing to vary the duty cycle of the generated bitstream, which can lead to sizeable leakage currents (typically on the order of microwatts). In large scale architectures that require many SMTJs, the resulting ohmic losses can dominate the energy consumption of the computation. An alternate approach using a pre-charge sense amplifier (PCSA) has been proposed in the literature Others have used the PCSA method successfully to generate random bits Fig. The problem with the above process is the pre-charge phase, when the clock signal is low and the whole circuit is brought to V dd . The state of the system in that phase does not represent the last measured state of the SMTJ; it is simply preparing to perform the next measurement. This can be seen in Fig. To address this, we attach a circuit called a set/reset (SR) latch to the PCSA design, Fig. Fig. The SMTJ model was implemented in Verilog-A as described in Ref. It is not obvious that SMTJ output sampled at a given time is decorrelated from the output sampled on the same device a single clock cycle later. If the SMTJ is read too frequently, the state of the device has no time to change, and the generated bitstream will have strong autocorrelation. This autocorrelation can suppressed by increasing the sampling interval. In Fig. Establishing an appropriately large clock cycle is crucial. In many stochastic computing applications, autocorrelation can introduce not only energy inefficiency but functional incorrectness. In the application we present in Sec. IV, for instance, we will purposefully delay If the continued development of SMTJ technology could engineer a sufficiently small autocorrelation time for the thermally-induced magnetic dynamics-that is, a speed comparable to the switching speed of the CMOS gates-then the integrated ohmic power loss will be similar to losses in the CMOS itsef, and it may then become reasonable to place a static read current across the devices, as proposed in Refs. Since the SC-PCSA is charge based, the dwell time of the SMTJ does not change the energy expenditure of the circuit (so long as the mean dwell times are not faster than the equilibration time of the PCSA, about 1 ns). Ideally, then, we would like the SMTJs to fluctuate as quickly as possible; in general, we would also hope for uniformity of dwell times and operation ranges. Measured dwell times range between 1 μs and 0.1 s depending on the operating regime The resistance and magnetoresistance of the tunnel junction are the same as those developed for memory applications and so should have margins sufficient for effective circuit design There has been considerable work in the recent literature to use MTJs or SMTJs as the fundamental units for truly random number generators In this work, we do not subject our SC-PCSA to these randomness tests, as they are not necessary for our application space. Stochastic computing aims to encode values in the expected value of random bitstreams. It is traditionally implemented with low bit-resolution pseudorandom number generators that have poor randomness properties; some stochastic computing has even been done with entirely deterministic bitstreams In order to generate arbitrary bitstreams with n-bit precision, we develop a composite cell that can be programmed based on values stored in static random access memory (SRAM) cells. If the programmed value is 1/2, we need only tap the output of one of the SC-PCSA cells discussed in Sec. II. Otherwise, we perform a sort of binary search on the unit interval. Given a stochastic signal carrying the probability value k/2 n-1 , it is synchronously fed into a NAND gate together with a 1/2 probability signal from a new SC-PCSA cell to produce a signal with probability 1 -k/2 n . A simple multiplexer (MUX) can then optionally route the signal through an inverter, allowing us to access values of both 1 -k/2 n and k/2 n . Iterating this recursive subdivision operation allows us to access all multiples of 1/2 n using n SC-PCSA cells. Values for zero and unity can be trivially implemented on the end of the circuit by replacing the stochastic signal with a constant voltage. In our simulations of a neural network later in this paper, we restrict ourselves to the 4-bit case, as illustrated in Fig. Though strict tests of randomness are not necessary for our purposes, careful attention to correlation is. Statistical correlations can arise in many ways in a stochastic computing circuit. We distinguish between two types: graph correlation, and source correlation. To understand the former, suppose a circuit designer makes a simpli-fying assumption that the inputs to a particular circuit node represent statistically independent stochastic processes. This may not be true, depending on whether the computations producing those inputs overlapped at some point earlier in the circuit. If they are not statistically independent, the circuit output statistics will differ from the value expected by the designer. We call the correlations leading to such errors graph correlations, as they arise due to reconvergent fanout in the computational graph of the circuit. One method for alleviating these correlations is called isolation, and has recently been discussed in Ref. The programmable bitstream generator described above addresses a more insidious form of correlation that can arise when the original bitstreams are not random. In typical implementations of stochastic computing, the LFSRs and other commonly used sources of pseudorandom bitstreams are periodic. Overusing the same LFSR design at multiple instances in a circuit can lead to correlation-induced errors that are difficult to predict Energy numbers for our approach at various bitprecisions and power supply voltages are shown in Fig. Fig. We note that several proposals address the cost of LFSR-based pseudorandom number generator by extracting combinatorial subsets of the bits in a large LFSR Several related configurations for using magnetic tunnel junctions have been proposed that could be used for generating stochastic bitstreams. Most fall into two broad categories, those based on nominally stable magnetic tunnel junctions that are brought into an unstable state by a current We estimate the ohmic losses for pulsed destabilizing of stable MTJs in Appendix B. The circuits reported in Ref. To estimate the ohmic losses (see Appendix C for details) for p-bit style current-biased SMTJs, we assume a supply voltage of V dd = 1 V and favorable resistances of R AP = 100 kΩ and R P = 50 kΩ, and find ohmic losses of about 500 fJ per bit for the 150 ns clock cycle we consider; the clock period is set by the autocorrelation time of the SMTJ. In the SC-PCSA-based approach described above, the energy per bit of 10 fJ for the whole circuit is roughly independent of the clock cycle. Note that, for the current controlled approach, the energy per bit decreases linearly as the clock cycle decreases, decreasing the advantage of the SC-PCSA-based approach. We cannot expect the manufacturing margins of real SMTJ devices to be ideal. The fabrication of magnetic tunnel junctions has been optimized in commercial fabrication facilities Real devices will have distributions of all of their properties. Three important ones are variations in barrier heights (and hence characteristic dwell times), variations in biasing around the perfect p = 1/2 that we have assumed above, and variations in the device resistances. The insensitivity to a distribution of barrier heights in addressed in Fig. Having an expected value of 0.5 for the output of the bitstream generator requires that the energies of the parallel and antiparallel states are the same. Such equality in turn requires that the fringing fields acting on the free layer be close to zero. It is difficult to fabricate devices with precisely these fields and there will naturally be a distribution of relative energies and hence dwell times. Fig. Finally, we address whether the distributions of resistances would adversely affect the performance of our bitstream generator. We have avoided the use of spintronic control over the random telegraph noise, so resistance variations do not directly affect the probability of our bitstreams. The main failure mode would arise from resistance variations, that is, if the reference resistor R ref , selected before devices are grown and tested, were to not fall between the resistances R P and R AP of the parallel and antiparallel states. Recent data from fabrication facilities The data we cite above is for high-barrier magnetic tunnel junctions developed for magnetic random access memory (MRAM) but manufacturers are pushing toward the superparamagnetic regime; recently announced Artificial neural networks, initially inspired by the structure of the brain powerful classes of algorithms in machine learning. These neural networks are composed of two fundamental units: neurons, which sum inputs and apply a nonlinear activation function to the resulting sum; and synapses, which multiply the output of one neuron by a real-valued weight and pass the result to a downstream neuron. Traditionally, the numerical values that propagate through neural networks correspond to rates at which neural spikes propagate through an actual biological brain. The origins of stochastic computing lie in the observation that time series data of stochastic spike trains in the brain could be modeled by stochastic jumps from ground to V dd in a logic circuit A crucial synergy involved in this scheme is the inherent parallelism of both neural networks and stochastic computing. Whereas the many mathematical operations involved in a neural network layer would need to be computed serially in a traditional computing environment, the physical nature of the stochastic computer means that these operations are all run simultaneously. There is a sizeable body of recent work that uses this principle to build efficient, stochastic-computing-based neural networks. The first stochastic computing implementation of a deep convolutional neural network, a particularly im-portant neural network topology with broad applications to image processing, was proposed by Ren et alia A common approach in the stochastic computing neural network literature is to construct a neuron unit from multiplexer-based addition composed with a statemachine-based nonlinearity. These operations are costly in terms of CMOS transistor counts. We take a simpler approach: our entire neuron is a single logical OR gate. In our approach, a single multi-input logical OR gate simultaneously, approximately, and inseparably performs both the summation and non-linear activation. Though for small input magnitudes an OR gate performs addition of probabilities p 1 + p 2 + O(p 2 ), nonlinear corrections become important as the input probabilities increase. Utilizing this property to our advantage, we harness that nonlinearity directly as our neuron's nonlinear activation function. This approach was originally proposed in The probabilistic response of an OR gate in stochastic computing is analogous to its Boolean response; the output probability is given by where p is the vector of input probabilities. Eq. ( The inputs to a neuron are multiplied by real numbers often called synaptic weights. We represent each weight using a programmable bitstream generator, and each multiplication using an AND gate. The OR-gate neuron, together with AND-gate synapses, form the fundamental unit of our proposed neural network architecture. This is an extremely energy efficient primitive cell, and we have to accept multiple constraints in order to use it. The most striking constraint is that, since all values in our neural network are represented by probabilities between zero and one, our network nominally lacks any form of inhibition (classically implemented with negative numbers) as reflected in the fact that the activation function in Fig. Without making changes at the algorithmic level to accommodate the lack of inhibition, the OR-gate neuron would be largely useless. To facilitate the use of this neuron, we replace the standard weight matrices by two sets of weight matrices, one for inhibition, w I , and one for excitation, w E , that are merged to provide a form of inhibitory activation for the network. The inhibitory subneuron uses a NOR gate rather than an OR gate so that large inhibitory input supress the neuron output. The binary output y ∈ {0, 1} of each neuron is given by where the outermost multiplication is implemented with a single AND gate. The use of both excitatory and inhibitory subnetworks introduces a higher dimensional symmetry, which the network can break to accomplish dynamical inhibition (or excitation) and successfully learn correct weights for classification. More details are discussed in Appendix E 2. Since the OR gate neuron is unusual, the network training algorithms must adapted to it. We derive the backpropagation equations for this neuron and the inhibitory/excitatory subnetworks for use in training, and adapt standard training algorithms to accommodate the hard constraints on allowed weights. The details of this codesign process are elaborated upon in Appendix E. One important note is that Eq. ( To demonstrate the effectiveness of our stochastic neuron and synapses, we implement a stochastic approximation of LeNet5 To evaluate our implementation of LeNet5, we train and test our neural network on the MNIST dataset. The MNIST dataset comprises 60000 training images and 10000 test images of 28 × 28 pixel images. First, we perform offline training on an analytic model based on probabilities rather than stochastic representations of probabilities, that is, on a traditional software model using the unusual topology, constraints, and activation functions of our proposed network. Though the network does train, we find the process to be significantly noisier than train- ing of classical LeNet5 models under the same hyperparameters. We speculate that the noise arises from the unfactorability of the summation-nonlinearity approximated by Eq. 1, as well as the hard constraint that all weights must be between zero and one. Among successfully trained networks, we find that we frequently achieve around 98 % test set accuracy with the analytic model applied to MNIST, within 1 % of the 98.9 % accuracy achieved by the original LeNet5 authors To deal with residual graph correlations induced by reconvergent fanout of the signals into and out of each neural network layer, we insert what we call an isolator mask-an array of randomly chosen (but static) pixelwise temporal delays-after each network layer. We discuss in more detail in Appendix E 4 how isolators can be used to achieve decorrelating effects by shifting signals relative to each other in time. Each pixelwise, integer-valued delay is chosen uniformly at random from the interval [0, δ], where δ is the maximum delay. In our LeNet5 architecture, this leads to a total of L = 6 decorrelation layers. The maximally delayed route from input to output, then, has delay length W = Lδ, which is the amount of time we must wait before collecting N usable data points at the output. In the upper black curve on Fig. To compute the energy efficiency of our proposed architecture, we extract the mean activity factors from weights and neurons in the network over an inference pass on the MNIST test data set. As our simulation is purely logical (that is, it works at the level of clocked bits rather than dynamical voltages), we find it unwieldy to extract the expected activity factors from inside the circuit-level composite gates of the OR gate neuron. Instead, we convert the activity factors from the logical model into the worst case activity factors for the realistic architecture. To produce our worst-case analysis, we assume that every switch in the voltage signal causes a maximal number of switches in the AND gate synapse and the downstream OR gate neuron. We apply this assumption to the activity factors found in our stochastic model, together with circuit power estimates based on predictive technology models Random bitstream generation and isolator-based decorrelation are more expensive than the computational graph. For these estimates we again use worst-case activity factors. In the full LeNet5 architecture, the pre-charge sense amplifier circuits generating network weights and inputs account for about 113 nJ for a full inference. The programmable isolator buffers are each relatively expensive, but fewer were needed compared to the weights. The total cost for the isolator circuits is around 26 nJ. We also test the behavior of our architecture at a reduced supply voltage. For voltages below 0.7 V, the PCSA performance begins to degrade, causing errors in the output bitstream. At 0.8 V, the total energy consumed by the entire architecture drops from 147 nJ to 135 nJ. These energy estimates are also displayed in Table I. One likely source of network inference error that remains after accounting for latency and isolator length is the quantization of weights from the analytic model to discrete values allowed by the bitstream generator. Codesign of hardware with deep neural networks has made the study of low-precision neural networks a topic of considerable recent interest With that said, the robustness of our stochastic model after rounding the weights of our analytic model expresses a robustness to error characteristic of neural networks. We speculate that, since network performance was robust with respect to rounding weights to multiples of 1/16, it should be equally robust had the weights been rounded to values slightly different than the multiples of 1/16. If that is indeed the case, then systems like ours would enjoy a degree of robustness against variation of the type shown in Fig. Although some designs for modern neural networks can work at four bit (or sometimes lower) precision, it does not necessarily follow that one could successfully use an N = 16 stochastic computing network. Stochastic computers have two types of precision that are intrinsically linked: representational precision, and sample precision. Collecting N time steps means that N different values are representable on the output, but it also means that our certainty (standard deviation) that the measured value matches the true value of the output distribution scales as N -1/2 . Therefore the expected length of a computation itself influences the meaningful representational precision of the inputs; we found that our 4-bit programmable bitstream generator gave sufficient resolution at N = 128. The link between these two types of precision is subtle In Fig. The question remains as to whether 97 % is a useful recognition accuracy. The answer is conditionally yes, as long as one chooses the correct application. Though our network addressed the Hello, world! task of handwriting recognition, one might imagine a similar convolutional neural network used for face recognition. Presumably, our implementation would not perform as well as what can be done in mainstream neural networks. For mission critical applications like biometric identification, this would be an unacceptable drop in performance. But for, say, automatic face detection in a power-constrained edge context like a mobile devices camera application, the drop in performance may be well worth the considerable energy efficiency advantages. We introduce a hybrid approach to classical stochastic computing, based on truly stochastic, low energy bitstreams generated by SMTJs. We introduce energy efficient primitive circuit elements (SC-PCSAs) that can be used to interface SMTJs with standard stochastic circuits. To test their effectiveness and explore the relaxed design space constraints afforded by true randomness, we simulated a neural network with OR gate neurons driven by SMTJ-based bitstream generators. Stochastic simulations of the network give 97 % classification accuracy on the MNIST dataset and circuit simulations of the circuit elements show that the energy usage should be about 150 nJ per inference, several times less than other stochastic implementations of LeNet5. The energy efficiency we find in this case study is made possible in large part by true randomness, which eliminates the source correlations that would arise from the use of periodic pseudorandom number generators. Timing-based decorrelators called isolators address but do not entirely eliminate graph correlations, which arise due to reconvergent fanout of stochastic bitstreams. We analyze the energy and power usage of our neural network and discuss, in particular and in general, how SMTJbased stochastic computing will scale with the progress being made in materials science. From the neural network perspective, our case study of LeNet5 was not optimized over all potential hyperparameters, so we expect that it should be possible to achieve higher classification accuracy and greater energy efficiency with more research. Non-neuromorphic stochastic computing designs a brief description of the activity in the circuit in Fig. We described in Sec. II how nodes e and f are brought to either 01 or 10 after the clock signal goes to 1, the socalled evaluation phase. It seems that the state of node f is a good representative of the current state of the SMTJ, but unfortunately node f goes to a high voltage state in the pre-charge phase when the clock goes back to 0. Therefore f carries artifacts of the circuit operation, and does not faithfully represent the physical state of the SMTJ at the time it was previously read. We fix this by adding the SR-latch in Fig. First, consider the conclusion of the evaluation phase for the case e = 1 and f = 0, as illustrated in Fig. Both nodes e and f are brought to a high voltage state in preparation for the RC race that will occur when the clock goes high again. Now that node f is high, the top and bottom transistors change state on the f branch of the latch, in the far right of Fig. The two parallel transistors above node g act like a OR gate; if either of their gate voltages is low, then a current path exists between V dd and node g. The series transistors below node g act like an AND gate; a current path exists from g to ground only if both gate voltages are high. This logical analysis will lead one to the standard presentation, but for our purposes it is sufficient to see that a change in state of f does not cause a change of state in the output node, so the unwanted comb structure from Fig. A popular method in the literature for random number generation based on magnetic nanotechnology is the use of stochastic switching phenomena in non-volatile MTJs To compare our method with this one, we refer to Ref. Though the energy per bit is orders of magnitude higher than what we have presented in Fig. Appendix C: Comparison with p-bits A common application of SMTJs is the p-bit Generally speaking, ideal p-bits are in a different class of device than what we propose here. In particular, they operate on analog voltage inputs. One could in principle build an analog probabilistic computer out of these units, whereas our proposed circuit is purely digital. Here, we do not compare the relative computational ability of digital versus analog computing but evaluate how well p-bit circuits would work for stochastic computing. To make a fair comparison of device power and energy, we assume the supply voltage is again V dd = 1 V. The voltage division provided by the inverter and SMTJ in the p-bit swings between two values which must be distinguished by the CMOS inverter. In order to center the p = 1/2 response of the p-bit at an input voltage of V = 0.5 V, the effective resistance of the transistor at that input voltage should be √ R P R AP to maximize the sensitivity of the circuit to both the high and low resistance states. In that configuration, we essentially have a 1 V voltage drop across a series resistor of effective resistance √ R P R AP + (R P + R AP )/2. The current running through the structure is therefore For R AP = 100 kΩ and R P = 50 kΩ, this amounts to a 3.4 μA current, or 3.4 μW of ohmic dissipation per device. Neglecting the energy cost associated with generating independently controllable analog voltage sources for each p-bit, the ohmic loss is about 500 fJ per bit at the 150 ns clock cycle we consider, substantially greater than the ≈ 10 fJ for our PCSA-based approach. However, as the clock speed of the circuit is increased, the PCSAbased approach has constant energy cost per bit while the p-bit approach scales roughly linearly to lower energies with increasing speed. In order to achieve 10 fJ per bit performance, the autocorrelation time of the stochastic fluctuations in a p-bit would need to be reduced to 3 ns. Recent work has attempted to push the theory of SMTJs toward this limit where the analog behavior can be harnessed more energy efficiently. Ref. Suppose that the probability for a device to be in the on-state is itself a random variable P. We choose to model P as a beta distribution with unnormalized probability density The normalization is given by an Euler integral of the first kind. A convenient parametrization of the beta distribution is to specify its mean μ and a shape parameter φ > 0, which is related to the variance of the distribution by First, consider the case where μ = 1/2 but φ is greater than zero. We plot three different distributions with standard deviations σ ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15} in Fig. A similar idea for producing a discretely-specified probability bitstream from a collection of LFSRs, called the weighted binary generator (WBG), has been discussed in Refs. In a convolutional layer, we spatially multiplex the kernel applications. This means that each weight, which is being generated as described in Sec. II, is fanned out to a large number of input pixels at the same time. This massive weight sharing will cause neighboring pixels in the layer output to be strongly correlated, making the use of a graph decorrelator especially important here. Today, most neural network designers implement the max operation as their pooling function, though averagepooling and min-pooling are also used. Ref. In this paper, we use unipolar encoding to represent values in the stochastic circuit. To use unipolar encoding as such is to identify the probability of a wire being in the on state with the value that wire is said to encode. A disadvantage of this approach is that only numbers between zero and one can be encoded by the network. An alternative is bipolar encoding, where a wire turned on with probability p is said to encode the value 2p -1 Inhibitory behavior is generally believed to be a crucial aspect of neural networks To address this issue, we use a variation on a method proposed in Refs. We build two kinds of models for our architecture: an analytic one and a stochastic one. The analytic model provides a representation of the network in terms of probabilities rather than the more complicated stochastic representation of random processes, allowing it to run faster than the stochastic model. The analytic model verifies the functional correctness of our network structure and provides a baseline against which to compare our stochastic simulations. The stochastic model is a logic-level simulator, which allows us to determine the effects of correlation and to estimate activity factors needed for energy estimates. It uses input bitstreams that are generated from statistics consistent with the known properties of SMTJs. To train our network, we use the standard backpropagation algorithm applied to our nonstandard network functionality given by Eq. (2) (that is, Eqs. ( In order to train our neural network efficiently, we use backpropagation and gradient descent. In practice, backpropagation is implemented as a local learning rule; the gradient of the cost function is determined at each node in the network as a function only of that node and its nearest, connected neighbors. This locality is essential in keeping backpropagation algorithmically efficient, and therefore necessitates the use of a local analytic description that assumes all inputs are statistically independent. Such an analytic description, however, will necessarily fail to capture most graph correlations. In the specific case of a neural network, then, we need additional functionality for addressing graph correlations. Because of the massive fan-in required in neural network systems, the algorithm from Ref. 