3D integrated circuit (3D-IC) technology gained acceptance due to the ability to achieve extremely high level of integration, where hundreds of ICs are stacked vertically. Such level of integration can result in local power dissipation of more than 50 kW/cm 2 . This will lead to instant evaporation of the IC, unless an effective cooling technique is employed. Liquid cooling may be one of the most effective techniques for this task. To investigate the effectiveness of this technique, we designed, built and tested a testing platform. The platform includes a testing chip and a cooling module. The test chip contains heaters to provide the power and sensors to measure the local temperature. The study shows that the proposed cooling modules can reduce the temperature for a 420W/inch square circuits to a normal operating range of ICs of 39-50 ̊C, using 2 phase R22 liquid coolant. 3D integrated circuit (3D-IC) chips consist of multiple thinned-active 2D integrated circuits that are stacked, bonded, and electrically connected with vertical vias formed through silicon or oxide layers IC cooling can be passive or active. Passive cooling such as thermal conduction (e.g. metal lines), natural convection (e.g. finned heat sinks), or radiation (e.g. coating paints), are simple and inexpensive, but cannot handle such high thermal energy. Active cooling requires input power since it uses external components such as forced convection (using fans or nozzles), pumped loops (using heat exchangers or cold plates) and refrigerators (using Peltier/thermoelectric or vapor-compression). Active cooling can be an adaptive or non-adaptive system. Adaptive system incorporates a closed loop feedback of the temperature to create a temperature aware cooling system Current 3D IC cooling are mostly based on air cooling using heat-sink-fan or macrofluidics where the chip is immersed in liquid with MEMS macrochannels to remove heat Microfluidics liquid cooling techniques are still in their early stages of development. Although there are many design concepts in the literature, they require practical implantation and rigorous testing. Testing on a real 3D IC is prohibitively costly. Using a platform or test bed is a viable alternative. In this paper, we present the design, fabrication, and testing results of a test chip and a microchannel fluidic cooling block to test the cooling of 500W/cm 2 local hot spots in a 420W/inch-square IC. The cooling block is bonded to the test chip as shown in Fig. The physical parameters and dimensions for the heaters and sensor are shown in Table Since each chip has 36 heaters, we designed 36 cooling blocks, one for each heater, as shown in Fig. Current was applied to the heater terminals to generate specific heat flux. The corresponding temperature was then obtained from the change in the sensor resistance with heat. The testing results for a 10 W heater at the center of the wafer are shown in Table R22 refrigerant was next used to test the cooling efficiency of the block. Individual chips are diced, packaged and tested. Therefore, the cooling effect of the wafer is eliminated. R22 liquid is applied to the inlet at 46 psi to ensure two phase operation (liquid & gas), since the boiling point is dropped to 25 ̊C. Increasing the inlet pressure, e.g. 100 psi, would increase the boiling point to 60 ̊C. This would, in turn, restrict the cooling process to the less efficient one phase process. The liquid is supplied from the cylinder and pushed into the cooling block. The resulting liquid and gas are collected from the outlet at atmospheric pressure. Table III maps the measured temperature for each heater. As can be seen from the table, the temperatures of columns 1-5 (10 W-heaters) are 41-43 ̊C. The temperatures increase to 52 ̊C for the 20-W heater (column 6). This shows that the cooling system was able to reduce the temperature of a 420 W IC (microprocessor-like) to the normal operating temperature 25-60 ̊C for Si technology. This work was supported by Tezzaron crop, Naperville, IL USA