We use a Luttinger-Ward functional approach to study the problem of phononmediated superconductivity in electron systems with strong electron-electron interactions (EEIs). Our derivation does not rely on an expansion in skeleton diagrams for the EEI and the resulting theory is therefore nonperturbative in the strength of the latter. We show that one of the building blocks of the theory is the irreducible six-leg vertex related to EEIs. Diagrammatically, this implies five contributions (one of the Fock and four of the Hartree type) to the electronic self-energy, which, to the best of our knowledge, have never been discussed in the literature. Our approach is applicable to (and in fact designed to tackle superconductivity in) strongly correlated electron systems described by generic lattice models, as long as the glue for electron pairing is provided by phonons. Our microscopic knowledge of superconductivity relies on the monumental theory laid down between the end of the Fifties and the beginning of the Sixties by Migdal and Eliashberg Interest in the Migdal-Eliashberg theory, which represents one of the first applications of quantum field theory to condensed matter physics, arose out of the need to transcend the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean-field theory From the Sixties to the present days, many researchers have invested a truly considerable energy in studying superconductivity in an extremely large number of situations and materials. In what follows we provide a largely incomplete list of past and contemporary research subfields in the realm of superconductivity: i) Unconventional superconductors. Huge efforts have been devoted to investigate unconventional superconductivity ii) Non-adiabatic effects in the theory of superconductivity. Since the theory by Eliashberg Here, ω D is the Debye frequency and E F is the Fermi energy. iii) The Migdal-Eliashberg theory for real materials. For understanding phononmediated superconductivity in real materials, the Eliashberg equations need to be supplemented by first principles calculations of the electronic band structure and EPIs. For a recent review of this vast research field, we invite the reader to consult Ref. v) Superconductivity in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. The discovery of superconductivity and correlated insulating states in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) This work is mainly motivated by the experimental systems mentioned at points iv) and v) above. We pose the following simple question: What is the fate of the Migdal-Eliashberg theory in materials where EEIs play a dominant role? More precisely: Is it possible to construct a theory of conventional, phononmediated superconductivity in materials where EEIs require a nonperturbative treatment? In this work we answer this question affirmatively and present such theory. Our main result is that, in order to produce a consistent theory of EEIs to all orders, a building block which has so far been overlooked needs to be taken into account: the irreducible six-leg vertex related to EEIs. Under certain approximations discussed below, we derive a set of extended Eliashberg equations. We here summarize the key features of our theory, which will be detailed in the remainder of this work. We consider an electron-phonon Hamiltonian (written for an arbitrary set of basis states) where EEIs are included in all generality, while EPIs are assumed to be linear in the ion displacements from their equilibrium positions, as in the Fröhlich EPI Hamiltonian (Sect. 3). By using Matsubara path integrals, in Sect. Sect. 8 is specific to the problem of phonon-mediated superconductivity. Here, we apply the previously developed general formalism to derive a set of extended Eliashberg equations. Our aim is to provide a way to compute the anomalous components of the electronic self-energy, accounting as much as possible for the EEI effects derived in Sections 3-6. This task requires some approximations. Most importantly, we need to adopt a tractable, explicit expression for the electronic self-energy functional; this cannot be done exactly, because the functional corresponding to the EEI self-energy is not known analytically (and even if it was, it would be overwhelmingly complicated). In Sect. 8 we therefore: 1) neglect the EEI vertices appearing in the EPI self-energy functionals and 2) confine ourselves to the regime of temperatures close to the critical temperature, where the expressions can be linearized in the anomalous self-energy. We then assume that the EEI self-energy functional in the normal state can be obtained via other theoretical/computational means A brief set of conclusions and future perspectives are reported in Sect. 9. Numerous technical details are reported in Appendix A-Appendix G. We consider a system of electrons and phonons, in the presence of EEIs and EPIs. The Hamiltonian has the following general form where the independent-electron (IE) term is the electron-electron interaction (EEI) is the independent-phonon (IP) term is and the electron-phonon interaction (EPI) is In the above equations, we have denoted electron and phonon creation operators by ĉ † α and b † κ , respectively. Greek indices denote sets of quantum numbers for both electron and phonon single-particle basis functions. For the sake of concreteness, electronic indices are given explicitly by α = (i α , σ α ) in a lattice representation, where i α is the lattice site and σ α is the spin-orbital index. The latter accounts for the component of the spin along a given direction, as well as for an orbital index in the case where two or more orbitals reside on a given lattice site (this also includes the case where the unit cell contains two or more atoms). For phonons, we have κ = (i κ , s κ ), where i κ is, again, a lattice site, while s κ is a branch index. The full derivation of the EPI Hamiltonian, including the microscopic definition of the coefficients, is given in Appendix A. Without loss of generality, we assume that , and U α,β,δ,γ = U * δ,γ,α,β , guarantees that the Hamiltonian is Hermitian. Equations ( The phonon displacement operator Qλ in ( where -κ is the composite index that results after applying spatial inversion to the position index i κ of the composite index κ (see Appendix B). The parameters t, U , and f have dimensions of energy, Although Eq. ( where we have introduced a dimensionless displacement operator as well as the renormalized EPI parameters I ≡ {I α,β } given by with dimensions of energy, where N is the number of lattice sites; then We assume that the matrices t and f are diagonal in the spin-orbital or branch indices, respectively: They are diagonalized with respect to the lattice index by the Fourier transform matrix, i,j where ǫ k,σ is the electronic spectrum and ω k,s is the phonon dispersion. The operators are then transformed according to Because of the complete generality of the notation introduced in Eqs. ( The LWF for a purely electronic system was derived in Ref. We start by introducing a number of useful quantities, and the corresponding notations. The grand potential of the system at temperature T is where the partition function is μ being the electron chemical potential and N the total electron number operator; the symbol "tr" denotes the trace over the Fock space associated with the Hamiltonian Ĥ(t, U , f , I). In the framework of a path-integral formulation, we introduce the action where the fermionic and bosonic field operators appearing in the Hamiltonian Ĥ(t, U , f , I) have been replaced by the corresponding Grassmann numbers (c, c) and complex numbers (b * , b, q), respectively. Moreover, ω n = (2n + 1)πT is a fermionic Matsubara frequency, Ω n = 2nπT is a bosonic Matsubara frequency, and [79] Finally, where we have used Eq. ( The partition-function path integral is written as The fully-interacting one-body electron and phonon Green's functions (GFs) are given, respectively, by and We also introduce the free one-body electron GF, and the free one-body phonon GF, which are obtained from Eqs. ( The following important identity holds: where the notation TrX ≡ n α e iωn0 + X α,α (iω n ) was used. The property and We introduce the following functionals: and The above quantities are functionals of the matrices G -1 0 and P -1 0 , which ought to be considered as free variables. They should not be confused with the quantities G -1 t,0,f ,0 (iω n ) and P -1 t,0,f ,0 (iΩ n ), which have a precise physical meaning. If the substitution G -1 0 ; P -1 0 → G -1 t,0,f ,0 ; P -1 t,0,f ,0 is made, then follows by construction (this explains the adopted notation). We now define the following functional, where G -1T 0 denotes the transpose [80] of the matrix G -1 0 . The functional G U ,I has the following property: Analogously, we introduce the functional with the property Importantly, the functionals G U ,I and P U ,I do not depend on the parameters t and f , characterizing the independent-particle system. The functionals introduced above depend on the variables G -1 0 , P -1 0 . We now make two variable substitutions, choosing G, Σ, P , and Λ in such a way that and These two relations can be used to define the following functionals of the new independent variables Σ and Λ, When the substitution and follow by construction. We now introduce the functional which is written in terms of the other functionals introduced above. The following important properties hold: and The proof of Eqs. ( By construction, Φ U ,I [G; P ] is independent of t and f . It has the following properties: 1) When the replacement [G; P ] → [G t,U ,f ,I ; P t,U ,f ,I ] is made, the grand potential of the electron-phonon system is obtained as 2) The functionals corresponding to the self-energies are obtained from the LWF via functional differentiation, i.e. and The proof of Eqs. ( 3) From the definitions of Σ and Λ, we have Σ t,0,f ,0 = 0 and Λ t,0,f ,0 = 0. Therefore, in the non-interacting case we have Substituting Eq. ( We now study the dependence of the LWF on the parameters I, by means of a perturbative expansion in the EPI, close to I = 0. We expand the LWF in powers of I, up to second order: (1) It should be noted that the LWF depends on I via the parametric dependences of Σ U ,I , Λ U ,I , and Ω U ,I -see Eq. ( where Σ U [G] is the universal self-energy functional for a system of electrons interacting via the Hamiltonian defined in (3). The zeroth-order term is At I = 0, we have where is the partition-function functional for the system of interacting electrons alone. We now apply the identity ln det = tr ln, as well as Eq. ( which is the LWF for the system of interacting electrons, completely decoupled from the phonon system. This is equivalent to the LWF for the electronic system derived in Ref. We observe that Therefore, the first derivative of Eq. ( At I = 0, this functional vanishes. In fact, it is proportional to the ensemble average of q λ (τ ), which is linear in the bosonic fields [see Eq. ( Starting from Eq. ( where the partition-function functional at I = 0 can be factorized as shown in Eq. ( We now perform the functional integration over the bosonic fields in Eq. ( Replacing this result into Eq. ( where we have introduced the electronic action functional in the absence of phonons, Eq. ( where is the reducible four-leg vertex, a functional of G, which depends parametrically on U . By inserting this expansion into Eq. ( (2) It is now convenient to make a change of variables: from now on, instead of (I, P ), we will use (M , D), where and the M parameters are the EPI parameters introduced in Section 3. The following property holds, The quantity in the first line of Eq. ( When evaluated at the physical non-interacting phonon GF [see Eq. ( Eq. ( where we have used the Fourier coefficients defined in Eq. ( which motivates our notation. The second-order term of the LWF is finally written as where we have separated a Fock term, and a Hartree term, Functionals analogous to ( In our case, this is the universal reducible four-leg vertex for a system of electrons interacting via the Hamiltonian defined in (3). In the case of Ref. We now derive the electronic self-energy by applying Eq. ( where 6.1. Hartree and Fock terms: simplifications Eqs. ( We hasten to emphasize that the quantity Γ By applying the functional derivative in Eq. ( The result is given in Appendix F. Applying it to Eq. ( of the two-particle reducible vertex, we obtain the Fock self-energy where we have introduced the renormalized EPI vertex, The same treatment, applied to Eq. ( For simplicity, in all diagrams we remove the ... symbols over the functionals, so we write, e.g., M for M and Γ for Γ. It is useful to look at the diagrammatic representation of the quantities that we have just derived. In Fig. It should be emphasized that the expansion of the LWF and self-energy functionals up to the second order in the EPI matrix elements effectively produces infinite-order approximations for the corresponding physical quantities. In fact, the physical self-energy depends on the physical GF, which should be inserted in the place of the independent variable G into Eqs. (80), φ,θ (iωn)-see Eq. Our approach is different, as we write a single electronic GF (and the corresponding Dyson equation) for the fully interacting problem, and our partition of the self-energy results from an expansion of the LWF in powers of the EPI matrix elements. Therefore, our electronic self-energy term Σ (E) , given by Eq. (80), does not coincide with the quantity Σ cn introduced in Ref. We now derive the phononic self-energy, by applying Eq. ( The corresponding phononic self-energy functionals are given by where The following properties hold: We now derive the extended Eliashberg equations for the anomalous components of the electronic GF and self-energy. We consider the particular case of a crystal with a single orbital per unit cell. In this case the spin-orbital index σ introduced for fermions reduces to the spin index, σ = ±1. We neglect magnetic impurities and relativistic effects (such as spin-orbit and magnetic anisotropies). We then choose a basis of real single-electron wave functions for the definition of the Hamiltonian parameters. For the sake of simplicity, in this Section we drop the functional notation that we have adopted in the previous Sections. It is intended that self-energies and vertex functions are functionals of the GFs. For the derivation of extended Eliashberg equations, we use the Gor'kov-Nambu (G-N) representation for the fermionic sector of the Hamiltonian. As discussed in detail in Appendix G, the G-N Hamiltonian can be directly obtained from our general formulation provided that the following choices are made: and Therefore, our derivation of the LWF and related self-energies holds in the G-N representation as well. GFs and self-energies acquire a 2 × 2 matrix structure in spin space; the non-zero solutions of the equations for the non-diagonal matrix elements signal the onset of the superconducting phase. Although we will keep using, for the sake of brevity, the word electrons (as well as terms such as EEI and EPI), it should be kept in mind that the fermions appearing in this derivation are actually Nambu fermions. In the G-N formalism, it is natural to introduce a 2×2 matrix representation for the spin sector. We denote such matrices by means of double-underlined symbols, i.e., where the matrix elements G (i,σ),(j,σ ′ ) (iω n ) and Σ (i,σ),(j,σ ′ ) (iω n ) are shorthands for the quantities G t,U ,f ,I;α,β (iω n ) and Σ t,U ,f ,I;α,β (iω n ) introduced earlier, respectively, where α = (i, σ) and β = (j, σ ′ ). We switch to the reciprocal lattice representation, by applying various Fourier transforms (see Section 3). Namely, the transformations from direct to reciprocal lattice for the GF and the self-energy read, respectively, as We expand the matrices in Eq. (99) over the set of standard spin-1/2 Pauli matrices: The electronic Dyson equation reads as where ξ k = h k -μ, and h k is an eigenvalue of the matrix h i,j introduced in Eq. (97). For the electronic self-energy, we take Eq. ( where "E" refers to the purely electronic contribution in Eq. (80), while "H" and "F" label the Hartree and Fock terms due to the EPI, respectively. Finally, "EP" labels the total term due to the EPI. The self-energy terms are decomposed similarly to what is done in Ref. and The total self-energy therefore reads as following where The quantities introduced above can be expressed in terms of the self-energy components as follows: We now insert Eq. ( where The quantity in Eq. ( The Eliashberg equations are obtained by inserting the expansion (108) into Eq. (79). In principle, this procedure yields a self-consistent set of eight equations that determine the eight unknown quantities listed in Eq. (107). To make further progress, we need to adopt an explicit expression for the self-energy Σ k (iω n ) as a functional of the (fully interacting) electronic GF. Historically, the work of Scalapino, Schrieffer and Wilkins We start by separating the self-energy according to Eq. ( In this work, in order to derive Eliashberg-type equations, we make the simplest approximation: we neglect all the EEI vertices terms appearing in the Hartree and Fock self-energy terms. (This is analogous to the approximation made in Ref. and where we have used the Fourier representation of the EPI matrix elements, as discussed in detail in Appendix A [see, in particular, Eq. (A. Eqs. ( We now substitute Eq. ( and where the term q,iωm appears only in Eq. ( For temperatures larger than the critical temperature, T > T c , the anomalous terms of the self-energy and GF vanish. For T → T - c , the anomalous terms are very small, and the Eliashberg equations can be linearized in the quantities φ k (iω n ) and φ k (iω n ). Namely, we put where The superscript "N" denotes quantities that are evaluated in the normal state. The anomalous correction δΣ k (iω n ) vanishes for T > T c ; for T < T c it includes, in general, both finite off-diagonal and diagonal terms. For T → T - c , the change in the self-energy in going from the superconducting to the normal phase can be approximated as where δG q;σ,σ ′ (iω m ) denotes the term of the GF which is linear in the anomalous components of the self-energy. We now express this quantity in terms of δΣ, by using the following relations, which are consequences of the Dyson equation: where we have used a compact notation. We obtain where we have used the fact that G (N) q (iω m ) is diagonal. We should now derive an expression for δΣ k (iω n )/δG q;σ,σ (iω m ). Referring to the partition of the self-energy given in Eq. (102), and using the approximations (110) and (111), we obtain and Next, we consider the EEI self-energy functional, for which we write the Ward identity where k,q;μ,σ;σ ′ ,μ ′ (iω n , iω m ) is the irreducible four-leg vertex related to EEIs [see Eq. ( Substituting all these expressions back into (121), and using the identity we obtain Regarding the four-leg EEI vertex, it holds that The previous result stems from the fact that in the normal state all interaction vertices conserve spin and, therefore, the spin indices along the same propagator line must be equal. The self-energy corrections δΣ q;μ,μ (iω m ) and δΣ q;μ,-μ (iω m ) are then decoupled: the diagonal terms satisfy while the nondiagonal terms satisfy Note that the normal solution, corresponding to δΣ k;μ,μ ′ (iω n ) = 0 for every choice of μ, μ ′ , is always possible. Moreover, we can choose δΣ k;μ,μ (iω n ) = 0, while the off-diagonal components must be non-zero. These choices correspond to setting which conveniently allows to identify the full correction δΣ k (iω n ) with the anomalous (off-diagonal) components of the self-energy. We adopt Eq. ( and Eqs. ( k,q;↓,↑ (iω n , iω m ), Eqs. ( thus forming a system of two coupled matrix equations in two unknown functions. An identical system is obtained for the τ 2 components of the self-energy, with the replacements φ (E) → φ (E) , φ (EP) → φ (EP) , and φ → φ. Therefore, the τ 1 components of the self-energy are equal to the τ 2 components up to a constant, which can also be zero. It is possible to set φ (E) = φ (EP) = 0 = φ, while retaining a nonzero solution for φ In the present framework, the remaining ingredients for the total determination of the self-energy are Eqs. ( To summarize, we put together all the above results, and present a set of six equations-not eight, because of the gauge choice φ (E) = φ (EP) = 0-that allow to determine the anomalous corrections to the self-energy in the linearized regime that applies for T ≈ T c : In all of the above, The equation for the total anomalous component of the electronic self-energy is obtained by summing Eqs. ( The inclusion of the four-leg irreducible vertex U [4] formally allows for a part of the EEI effects that are not captured in widely used approximation schemes, such as the Tolmachev-Morel-Anderson method In summary, in this work we have derived the Luttinger-Ward functional for a system of electrons in the presence of both electron-electron and electronphonon interactions-see Eqs. ( As emphasized throughout this work, much more work is needed to shed light on the physical implications of our theory, especially in the realm of phononmediated superconductivity in strongly correlated electron systems (SCESs). In this case, approximations such as DMFT We believe that the theory presented in this work could provide tools for the study of EPIs and phonon-mediated superconductivity in materials where the applicability of Migdal theorem is disputed because of features such as, e.g., large phonon frequencies, van Hove singularities, and strong EEIs. Relevant modern examples of these materials include hydrates Displacements of the nuclei with respect to the equilibrium positions are denoted as Q i,n ≡ R -R i,n . If they are assumed to be small, then the Hamiltonian can be expanded in powers of Q i,n up to the second order. Denoting with μ, ν the Cartesian coordinates, we obtain where m n is the mass of the nucleus at position B n within a unit cell (due to the lattice periodicity, it does not depend on the unit cell i). In the right-hand side of Eq. (A.3): 1) the first line is the Hamiltonian for the electronic subsystem alone, including the kinetic energy, a spatially-periodic external potential given by the interaction with the lattice, and the EEI; 2) the second line is the EPI, including a linear and a quadratic term in the nuclear displacements (we neglect the latter, as is usually done); 3) the third and fourth lines constitute the Hamiltonian for the phonon subsystem alone, in the harmonic approximation; 4) the fifth line is a constant with respect to the dynamical coordinates associated with the fixed equilibrium configuration. The first line can be written in second quantization as the sum of the terms (2) and (3) of the main text, for a general single-electron basis set of wave functions labelled by the index α = (i α , σ α ). The displacement operators are quantized as where s is the branch index, and the polarization vectors satisfy η q,s,n = -η -q,s,n . The polarization vectors and the mass, in general, depend on n, as they might be different for different atoms within the same unit cell (so, they depend on the basis vector B n , although not on the lattice vector R i ). The quantity ω q,s = ω -q,s is, at this stage, introduced as a mere parameter. When Eq. (A.4) is replaced into Eq. (A.3), the third and fourth lines of the latter are transformed into the second-quantized IP Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( The linear term of the EPI [second line of Eq. (A. 3)] becomes: r,(j,n) We now write the EPI Hamiltonian in second quantization. Let σ = (n, τ ), where n denotes the orbital within a unit cell, and τ denotes the electron spin. Let ψ iα,nα (r) be the spatial part of the single-electron basis wave function corresponding to the composite index α. We introduce the quantity and the operator Using these, we turn Eq. (A.5) into its second-quantized expression, ĤEPI = q,s α,β M (q,s) We turn to the position representation by applying the Fourier transformation, with the coefficients defined in Eq. ( where Switching to the Greek-indices notation, we immediately turn Eq. (A.9) into Eq. ( Let us investigate Eq. (A.10) further. We write the Fourier representation of where q ′ belongs to the first Brillouin zone, while K is a reciprocal lattice vector. Substituting this into Eq. (A.10), we obtain We now represent the single-electron wave functions as where ψ k,n (r) is a Bloch state, whose Fourier decomposition is written explicitly in the last equality (G is a reciprocal lattice vector). This allows us to perform the integration over r, which yields a factor where V cell is the volume of a unit cell. We obtain The Kronecker delta allows to eliminate k ′ as k Since the vector -G ′ + G + K belongs to the reciprocal lattice, we have . We end up with the following (exact) expression: (A.17) We briefly mention two approximations which are often applied to the expression for the EPI matrix elements. The first possible approximation consists in neglecting the Umklapp processes, i.e. in keeping only the term with K = 0an approximation which relies on the fact that V eN (q + K) decays quickly with increasing |K|. The resulting expression depends on the scalar product η q,s,n •q. Therefore, in this approximation, only longitudinal phonon modes couple with the electrons (see also the discussion in Ref. in Eq. (A.13). This yields For the purposes of our derivation, we do not need to apply these approximations, and we can just use Eq. (A.17). We write it as emphasizing its Fourier representation. The definition of M (q,s) k;nα,n β can be determined by comparison with Eq. (A.17); in the case of a single orbital at each lattice site, it bears no dependence on n α and n β , and we write it as M (q,s) k , as we have done in Section 8. From Eq. ( i-j (s) , and we obtain: Ql,s = Using Greek indices, this can be rewritten as in Eq. ( We now go through the derivation by employing Feynman diagrams. First, we represent Eq. (F.1) by means of Feynman diagrams, obtaining Fig. F.5, where we explicitly label the internal vertices as well as the external vertices (it is intended that internal indices are summed over). In the following steps, we will omit the dummy labels of the internal vertices. Moreover, to avoid cluttering the figures with redundant information, we will indicate only one frequency argument for each fermionic oriented line, with the understanding that it applies to all the connected segments that form that line. The first step of the derivation consists in applying a Γ diagram from the left, by attaching it (via two GFs) to the μ and μ ′ vertices in Fig. We then use the Bethe-Salpeter equation, Eq. ( where the quantities K i,s are constants that will be determined shortly, and the fields âi,s are bosons. When this transformation is done, the first term in the third line of Eq. (G.3) generates an additional purely electronic term, while the second term in the first line generates both quadratic and linear terms in the new bosonic fields. By imposing that the terms which are linear in the bosons (and do not involve fermionic fields) cancel out, we determine the values of the parameters K i,s : This is mathematically equivalent to the initial Hamiltonian (1) of the main text, provided that the fields are renamed and the parameters are specified as in Eqs. (97), (96), and (95). The transformation (G.4) is equivalent to a fixed displacement of the lattice ions, dependent on the lattice position and on the phonon mode. It can be interpreted as an effect of the interaction between the phonon system and the vacuum of the Nambu fields: when the state of the system contains zero Nambu fermions, the equilibrium positions of the ions are different with respect to those characterizing the state with zero electrons (i.e., the lattice sites). An analogous transformation was discussed in Ref. 