Hole concentration in the CuO 2 plane largely controls all the electronic properties in the normal and superconducting states of high-T c cuprates. The critical current density, J c , is no exception. Previous hole content dependent studies have demonstrated the role of intrinsic depairing current density in determining the observed critical current density in copper oxide superconductors. It is also widely agreed upon that the temperature and magnetic field dependent vortex pinning energy plays a major role in determining the J c of a system. This pinning energy depends directly on the superconducting condensation energy. Superconducting condensation energy, on the other hand, is proportional to the Cooper pair density (superpair density), which is found to be highly dependent on the hole concentration, p, within the CuO 2 plane. We have calculated the Cooper pair density, ρ s , of YBCO (Y123), a typical hole doped cuprate, as a function of p, in this study. A triangular pseudogap (PG), pinned at the Fermi level, in the quasiparticle spectral density has been considered. The low-temperature critical current density of a number of Y(Ca)BCO superconductors over wide range of compositions and hole concentrations have been explored. The normalized values of the superpair density and the critical current density exhibit a clear correspondence as the in-plane hole content is varied. This systematic behavior provides us with strong evidence that the critical current density of hole doped cuprates is primarily dependent on the superpair density, which in turn depends on the magnitude of the PG energy. The agreement between the estimated p-dependent superpair density and the previously experimentally determined superfluid density of Y(Ca)BCO is quite remarkable. The phenomenon of superconductivity is now a considerable focus of attention to the scientific community as one of the most promising technologies that can address the global energy crisis by facilitating energy utilization with minimal loss and high degree of efficiency. The possibility of every large scale practical application of superconductivity depends primarily on the maximum current density which superconductors can carry (the critical current density, J c ), in some way or other. The value of losses incurred within the superconductors, the maximum magnetic field strength in which superconductors can be used, etc are the other important factors all intimately linked with J c . All these factors are directly related to the pinning ability of the quantized magnetic flux lines (magnetic vortices) of superconductors in the superconducting state. Maximizing J c and the magnetic field under which the superconductor can perform, as well as minimizing losses, have been important goals of scientists working in the field of applied superconductivity. High-T c cuprates discovered more than three decades back Due to its comparatively high superfluid density and the lowest level of structural and electronic anisotropy, YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7- (Y123 or YBCO) remains among one of the most promising high-T c cuprates for potential applications. In this study we will focus on the zero-field critical current density at zero temperature, as a function of hole content for YBCO and Y 1-x Ca x Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- (Y(Ca)BCO) over a wide range of compositions. Zero-field and zerotemperature critical current density is expected to be dominated by the intrinsic effects as maximally developed superconducting (SC) energy gap and order parameter mask extrinsic effects to a large extent. Ca substituted compounds have been used because fully oxygenated ( ~ 0) YBCO is slightly overdoped (OD) and full oxygen loading is difficult; deeply OD regions can be accessed when trivalent Y 3+ is replaced by divalent Ca 2+ It is known that the supercurrent circulates due to phase angle twist (measured through ) of the SC order parameter. This twist, in turn, depends on the phase stiffness of the SC compound. The phase stiffness, on the other hand, varies linearly with the superfluid density A number of prior studies revealed that a pseudogap (PG) correlation, competing with superconductivity, depletes superfluid density most effectively Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 comprises of the description of the methodology used to calculate the superpair density within a simple triangular PG model. Section 3 deals with the correspondence between ρ s (p) and J 0 (p). Results are discussed and finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4. The PG is a suppression of electronic density of states (EDOS) near the Fermi level. One of the distinct features of this gap in the QP energy spectrum is that it has states non-conserving character A clear understanding of the nature of the spectral gaps remain as one of the most challenging problems in hole doped cuprates. Contrary to conventional Fermi-liquid superconductors where the gap in the QP spectral density around the Fermi level vanishes at the SC critical temperature, as described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory It has been observed from a variety of experimental probes To be specific, the EDOS profile centered at the Fermi energy as shown in Fig. where N 0 is the EDOS in the flat region outside the spectral gaps. By definition, the superpair density can be expressed as, where 〈N(E F )〉 is the normal state average electronic density of states pinned at the Fermi-level. It should be noted that, for the conventional superconductors with weakly energy dependent EDOS around the Fermi energy, this quantity is almost identical to the N(E F ). Due to the symmetrical nature of the EDOS above and below E F within a window of energy of width ± Δ sc , one may write, In the UD side, where the PG amplitude can be greater in magnitude compared to the SCG, we get (using the triangular PG model as described by Eqn. 1), For the second condition, E g  Δ sc , of the model gap, as shown in Fig. The characteristic pseudogap temperature, T * can be expressed as, T *  E g /k B ρ (p) = N k (2.14T - * ( ) It follows from Eqns. 5 that within the proposed scenario, the hole content dependence of the superpair density arises from the p-dependent PG energy scale. We have used Eqns. 5 to calculate the doping dependent superpair density of YBCO and Ca substituted YBCO. It should be noted that reliable independent estimate of N 0 does not exist in the literature. Therefore, we have calculated the normalized superpair density. A large body of experimental studies has demonstrated that ρ (p) becomes maximum at p ~ 0.19 The T * (p) values for pure YBCO and Ca doped YBCO compounds are taken from prior published sources J c can be enhanced by increasing the vortex pinning force per unit volume. However, J c cannot be increased indefinitely even if it were possible to prevent vortex motion completely. There is an intrinsic limit to the maximum achievable supercurrent density. This limiting value is termed as the depairing current density, J dp For high-T c cuprates J dp is approximately 10 A/cm The critical current density varies strongly with temperature. As temperature increases the extrinsic effects associated with defects of different nature within the compound start to dominate the temperature dependent J c . The extrapolated zero-temperature J c at zero magnetic field, J 0 , gives the true reflection of the intrinsic depairing contribution where, t = (T/T c ), is the reduced temperature and J c0 is the zero-field critical current density obtained from the M-H hysteresis loops via the modified critical state formalism Figure In the preceding section, we have shown that a simple model based on a triangular PG in the QP spectral density pinned at the Fermi level can be used to estimate the superpair density quite easily. The normalized values of ρ (p) closely follows the normalized J 0 (p) extracted from the experimental critical current density data over a substantial region of SC composition of Y(Ca)BCO. By definition, the superpair density should have the same physical significance as the superfluid density, n s . As far as experimental studies are concerned, two of the most direct methods to obtain n s (actually n s /m * ) are the magnetic penetration depth measurement and measurement of the muon spin resonance (μSR) depolarization rate We have plotted the results of p-dependent normalized n s /m * of Y(Ca)BCO together with our results of normalized ρ s in Fig. Figure The observed correspondence between the normalized ρ s (p) and the normalized J 0 (p) as illustrated in Fig. <N(E F )> sc 2 . This expression for U 0 establishes a direct link between vortex dynamics with a characteristic energy scale U a , and the superpair density ρ s (p) (= 〈N(E F )〉Δ sc ). The arguments presented here are quite general in nature and do not depend significantly on the precise nature of the mechanism leading to Cooper pairing in a particular type of superconductor. For example, we have shown recently that the variation of the critical current density of heavy fermion superconductors (HFSCs) Within the proposed scenario, both J 0 (p) and ρ s (p) are maximized at a hole content (p ~ 0.19) where the PG vanishes, as found experimentally As far as the estimation of ρ s (p) based on the triangular PG model is concerned, there are a few points which needs some further We have used a single, p-independent value of the SC energy gap given by  sc = 2.14k B T c0 (with T c0 = 93 K) for the calculations over a range of hole content from p = 0.10 -0.19. This approximation is reasonable for the hole contents p > 0.12 It is instructive to point out that the p-dependent superfluid densities of Y(Ca)BCO, Tl 0.5-y Pb 0.5+y Sr 2 Ca 1-x Y x Cu 2 O 7 , Bi2212, and LSCO demonstrate almost identical features To summarize, we have employed a simple PG model to calculate the superpair density of high-T c cuprates. The estimated normalized superpair density shows clear correspondence to the experimental critical current density as a function of number of added holes in the CuO 2 planes of Y(Ca)BCO over a wide range of compositions. This strongly supports that the overall pdependent behavior of the zero-temperature and zero-field critical current density is set by the depairing contribution. To check the efficacy of the model estimate of ρ s (p), we have compared it to the experimentally measured n s /m * ab (p) of Y(Ca)BCO. A very good agreement has been found.