Atomic 4f states have been found to be essential players in the physical behavior of lanthanide compounds, at the Fermi level EF as in the proposed topological Kondo insulator SmB6, or further away as in the magnetic superconductor system RNi2B2C (R=rare earth ion) and in Y1-xPrxBa2Cu3O7, where the 4f shell of Pr has a devastating effect on superconductivity. In hole-doped RNiO2, the R=Nd member is found to be superconducting while R=La is not, in spite of the calculated electronic structures being nearly identical. We report first principles results that indicate that the Nd 4f moment affects states at EF in infinite-layer NdNiO2, an effect that will not occur for LaNiO2. Treating 20% hole-doping in the virtual crystal approach indicates that 0.15 holes empty the Γ-centered Nd-derived electron pocket while leaving the other electron pocket unchanged; hence Ni only absorbs 0.05 holes; the La counterpart would behave similarly. However, coupling of 4f states to the electron pockets at EF arises through the Nd intra-atomic 4f -5d exchange coupling K ≈ 0.5 eV and is ferromagnetic (FM), i.e. anti-Kondo, in sign. This interaction causes spin-disorder broadening of the electron pockets and should be included in models of the normal and superconducting states of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2. The Ni moments differ by 0.2μB for FM and antiferromagnetic alignment (the latter are larger), reflecting some itineracy and indicating that Heisenberg coupling of the moments may not provide a quantitative modeling of Ni-Ni exchange coupling. I. The discovery of superconductivity up to T c =15 K in Sr-doped NdNiO 2 (Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 ) Early comparison of the electronic structures of CaCuO 2 and NdNiO 2 identified similarities but substantial differences, Detailed analyses of the LDA electronic structure have been provided by Botana and Norman There are other fundamental questions to be considered. Experimentally, undoped CaCuO 2 orders antiferromagnetically with a high Neel temperature of 442 K, Finally, LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 are reported as conducting (albeit poorly), whereas CaCuO 2 is insulating. Lack of Ni ordering is a central question to address; however, both in calculations and experimentally the nickelates are conducting. We note that magnetic order disappears in cuprates when they are doped to become conducting. The model treatments mentioned above would suggest that doped LaNiO 2 should be superconducting as is doped NdNiO 2 . Since this is not the case, we pursue the viewpoint that a more fundamental question is what features may account for this difference between two highly similar nickelates. La and Nd are very similar chemically, with tri-positive ionic radii only slightly larger for La than for Nd. Although small size differences in lattice constants or strains can influence states in correlated insulators, itineracy and screening by carriers strongly reduce such effects. An obvious difference between these nickelates is that La 3+ is closed shell and nonmagnetic, whereas Nd 3+ , with Hund's rule ground state S = 3 2 , L = 6, J = 9 2 , has a (free ion) Curie-Weiss moment of nearly 4 μ B . Superconductivity appears in Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 in the midst of these large disordered local moments, which should compete with superconducting phases, directly or by introducing disorder into the electronic structure. In several YBCO-type cuprates, however, replacing a nonmagnetic rare earth ion (La or Y) by a magnetic lanthanide from Dy to Tb does not affect the superconductivity, because the small 4f orbital is not involved in the electronic structure. Surprisingly, PrBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 was found to be non-superconducting, Another related system is the rare earth nickel borocarbides RNi 2 B 2 C where R can be one of many of the rare earth atoms. This system displays strong interplay and competition between the R 4f magnetic moment and the conduction states with heavy Ni character, with the R 5d playing an important role in coupling the local moments to the itinerant states. The question of possible impact of the 4f shell has not been addressed in NdNiO 2 . While direct 4f -nickelate hybridization may be small, there is an intra-atomic exchange coupling between the 4f spin and the 5d states around E F that, as mentioned, does not occur in LaNiO 2 . Since the 5d bands cross E F , carriers will be affected. Specifically, with disordered Nd moments, the 5d on-site energies will be spin-split, with a projection along any given direction that is distributed randomly. A carrier in a 5d band will be subjected to a random potential, resulting in band broadening and magnetic scattering that is absent in LaNiO 2 . The presentation is organized as follows. The computational methods and material configurations are described in Sec. II. In Sec. III results are presented for four assumed types of magnetic order in NdNiO 2 . The electronic bands and Fermi surfaces for non-magnetic Ni are discussed in Sec. IV. A few results relating to the occupied Nd 4f orbitals are presented in Sec. V, followed by a discussion of hole doping in Sec. VI. Some observations about the effects of magnetic order and relation to other 4f -containing superconductors are made in Sec. VII, which is followed by a brief summary in Sec. VIII. We have studied the electronic and magnetic properties of NdNiO 2 using the precise, all-electron, full potential linearized augmented planewave method as implemented in wien2k The strong local 4f moment requires magnetically ordered calculations. We find that Ni prefers a moment of the order of 0.5 μ B without any U N i , which increases to ∼1 μ B for the values we have used. The Nd moment always assumes the spin value of 3 μ B characteristic of an f 3 Hund's rule ion, plus minor exchange polarization of the 5d orbitals. We have studied four magnetic configurations: AFM0: antiferromagnetic (AFM) Nd layers with nonmagnetic Ni layers; AFM1: both Ni and Nd layers have antialigned moments; AFM2: ferromagnetic (FM) Nd layers and AFM Ni layers; and FM: all Nd and Ni moments aligned. Note that it is the AFM1 and AFM2 cases in which Ni is antiferromagnetically ordered. Note also that AFM0 is done with U N i d =0, so its energy cannot be compared with the other cases. The SM provides additional information about the electronic structures. An insulating band structure is never obtained, which is a great difference compared with cuprates. It was shown earlier that increasing U on Ni in NdNiO 2 never leads to a Mott insulator, instead a 3d z 2 orbital becomes unoccupied and forms a peculiar intraatomic singlet with the d x 2 -y 2 orbital. Although it is expected that Ni 1+ d 9 ions will tend to order in antiferromagnetic (AFM1 or AFM2) fashion through superexchange as does CaCuO 2 and several other d 9 cuprates, we begin with FM alignment within both Ni and Nd layers, as it enables identification of the intra-atomic exchange splitting between the occupied Nd 4f and conduction 5d z 2 orbitals. A magnetic Ni ion leads to a 120 meV energy gain compared to non-magnetic. This exaggerated tendency toward magnetic ordering and the magnitude of the magnetic moment are a known deficiency of (semi)local density functional methods, with much of the problem attributed to the lack of effects of spin fluctuations in the functional. The energies can be compared for those cases with magnetic Ni (AFM1, AFM2, FM) for which the same functional is used. The energy of AFM2 (FM Nd) is slightly lower than that of AFM1 (AFM Nd), by 7 meV for U N i =0 and by only 1 meV (at the edge of computational precision) with U N i =5 eV, reflecting a slight tendency toward FM ordering of the 4f moments. The energy difference between FM and AFM2 provides the difference between AFM and FM Ni moment alignment; AFM is favored by 116 As shown in Fig. Low energy models of oxides including superconducting possibilities are based on non-magnetic Ni, with an on-site repulsion added to provide correlated electron behavior and a potential pairing mechanism. We have obtained a DFT+U solution with non-magnetic Ni (U N i d =0, U N d f =8 eV), our case AFM0. The Nd 4f moment that must remain fully spin-polarized has AFM alignment, so the Brillouin zone is correspondingly folded back. The Ni moment for AFM alignment is 1.2μ B , compared to 1.0μ B for FM alignment. For U =0 (just GGA) the calculated moments are 0.52μ B (AFM) and 0.35μ B (FM); i.e. there is about 0.2μ B difference in the moments, and the associated Hund's energy would be an important contribution to the lower energies for AFM alignment. The bands, density of states (DOS), and fatbands near E F for AFM0 alignment are shown in Fig. The bands crossing E F giving the FSs are those that are fit to few band models. The corresponding FSs are shown in Fig. We now consider briefly the Nd 4f contributions to the electronic and magnetic structure. The S = 3 2 spin configuration is strongly enforced by Hund's first rule, and the energy difference between FM and AFM order of the Nd moments is very small; ∼ 7 meV/Nd ion for Ni treated in GGA, and only 1 meV/Nd ion for Ni treated in GGA+U. The three occupied bands lie at -7 eV with some small dispersion due to the direct overlap of 4f and O 2p orbitals, which is small but provides crystal field splitting of the 4f orbitals. The occupied states that we obtained are combinations of m l = -3, -2, +1, each with lesser admixtures of +1, +2, -3 states, respectively, with total orbital moment m orb =4.47 μ B . When spin-orbit coupling is included, the occupied orbitals are those with j = 5 2 , m j = -5 2 , -3 2 , + 1 2 . (See SM for further information on these occupations.) The four unoccupied 4f bands are centered 3.5 eV above E F but are spread by the anisotropy of the orbitals and mixing with Nd 5d states over a range of 3 eV. NdNiO 2 becomes superconducting upon hole doping by 0.2 hole/f.u. The exchange splitting of the Nd 5d band at Γ (near E F ) reflects the intra-atomic 4f -5d exchange on Nd of K ≈ 0.5 eV. The S = 3 2 spin moment on Nd drives this exchange splitting, which will follow the orientation of the 4f moment, which is disordered. With the very weak 4f -4f exchange coupling noted in Sec. III, the Nd moments will be randomly oriented and quasi-static on an electronic time scale. In spite of the disorder broadening on the electron Fermi pockets and resulting strong spin scattering driven by stable, essentially classical but disordered 4f moments, superconductivity survives in Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 . This situation bears some similarity to that of elemental Eu with its 4f 7 moment: pressure kills magnetic order around 82 GPa but not the local moment, and there is a first order electronic but isostructural transformation to a superconducting phase at 1.7 K. A related, and commonly modeled, spin-scattering process will occur on the (locally) magnetic Ni ion (as treated for the Cu ion in cuprates), an effect that can be modeled by any of a variety of spin fluctuation formalisms applicable to transition metal oxides. The resulting strong scattering in the electron pockets is a potential contributor to the resistivity of "conducting" NdNiO 2 , where the resistivity ρ ∼ 1mΩcm varies little between 300 K and the lowest temperature measured. The inferred mean free path in a Fermi liquid inspired Bloch-Boltzmann treatment would be atomic size, meaning incoherent transport and a washed out FS. A dynamical mean field approximation treatment of Ni 3d fluctuations In this work we have focused on a primary distinction between NdNiO 2 and LaNiO 2 . When the 4f moment on Nd is relegated to the core in nonmagnetic fashion, the electronic structures are nearly identical. Yet the Nd compound becomes superconducting while the sister La compound remains non-superconducting, when 20% hole-doped. We find that the strong Nd 4f moment is intra-atomic exchange-coupled to the Nd 5d orbitals by a coupling of roughly K=0.5 eV, giving anti-Kondo coupling between the Nd local moments and the lower conduction band. The disordered 4f moments will give rise to a broadening of 5d bands of the order of K, affecting transport and perhaps becoming implicated in pairing, either as a participant or a disruptive agent. The calculated Ni moments are larger by 0.2μ B for antiferromagnetic alignment than for ferromagnetic alignment. The associated Hund's rule energy provides a tendency toward AFM alignment that lies beyond the usual Heisenberg exchange coupling picture. An important feature of this system is that the Γ-centered Nd 5d Fermi surface pocket accepts most of the doped holes, leaving Ni 3d charge changed only by 0.05 holes for 20% doping. The Pk2 spherical Fermi surface pocket that remains intact after doping, and rather strong k z fluting of the Ni Fermi surfaces, suggests the importance of k z dispersion (three dimensionality). Our results indicate that several aspects of the Nd ion arising from the open 4f shell require attention for understanding both normal and superconducting state properties. Note Added: A useful reference has just appeared on the APS Condensed Matter Physics Journal Club postings. Our calculations with wien2k were based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) In wien2k, the basis size was determined by R mt K max = 8; checking R mt K max =9 gave no noticeable difference. The APW radii were chosen as Nd 2.50, Ni 1.98, and O 1.70, in atomic units. Convergence was checked with dense k-meshes up to 29 × 29 × 34 to treat the highly localized 4f orbitals carefully. Fermi surface of Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 in rigid band approximation FIG. We provide here and below fatband plots indicating band character for all Ni 3d and Nd 5d orbitals, for both FM and AFM1 magnetic alignments (fully aligned moments; both Ni and Nd moments antialigned). The differences, also compared to the information in the main text for non-magnetic Ni, indicate how the various characters are shifted by relative magnetic alignment. Although ordering does not occur down to the lowest temperature measured, the differences give an indication of the effects of spin fluctuations. Some of the points to notice are included in the captions. The spin-resolved fatband plots of separate Ni 3d and Nd 5d orbitals in the range of -4 eV to 4 eV for FM alignment of all moments are displayed in Fig. For the electron pocket at A = (π, π, π) there is admixture of Ni 3d xz /3d yz character with the Nd 5d xy orbitals. The hole bands at the M and A points have the primary d x 2 -y 2 character as occurs in cuprates. Figure In GGA+U, similar to the FM cases, the magnitude of the local spin moments are 3 μ B for Nd and around 1.2 μ B for Ni. In AFM2, the FM ordered Nd moment induces a very small difference between up and down Ni moments of 0.03 μ B , indicating the weakness but non-vanishing of the magnetic Nd-Ni coupling as noted by others. Figure In GGA, a magnetic Ni ion leads to a 120 meV energy gain compared to non-magnetic Ni. This exaggerated tendency toward magnetic ordering and the magnitude of the magnetic moment is a known deficiency of (semi)local density functional methods, with much of the problem attributed to the lack of effects of spin fluctuations in the functional. The energies of AFM1, AFM2, and FM, obtained with the same functional, can be compared. The energy of AFM2 (FM Nd) is slightly lower than that of AFM1 (AFM Nd), by 7 meV for U =0 and by only 1 meV (at the edge of computational precision) with U =5 eV on Ni, reflecting a slight tendency toward FM ordering of the 4f moments. The energy difference between FM and AFM2 provides the difference between AFM and FM Ni moments; AFM alignment is favored by 116 (25) meV/Ni in GGA(+U). This energy difference contains information about Ni-Ni in-plane exchange coupling, and would give a value of the nearest neighbor coupling if all others were negligible. Liu et al. have derived values of coupling for a few neighbors, concluding that the values depend strongly on the value of U N i that are used. We display the simpler band structure of AFM1, with the fatband plots of Ni 3d and Nd 5d presented separately in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. The flat band at the Fermi level is seen to be very strongly Ni d z 2 in character. The corresponding orbital-projected DOSs are given in Fig. We also considered the effects of SOC in the GGA+U+SOC to analyze the Nd 4f configuration, leading to the Nd orbital moment of -4.45 μ B . Figure 