We systematically investigate the effect of strain and doping on the polar metal phase in lithium osmate, LiOsO 3 , using first-principles calculations. We demonstrate that the polar metal phase in LiOsO 3 can be controlled by biaxial strain. Based on density functional calculations, we show that a compressive biaxial strain enhances the stability of the polar R3c phase. On the other hand, a tensile biaxial strain favors the centrosymmetric R3c structure. Thus, strain emerges as a promising control parameter over polar metallicity in this material. We uncover a strain-driven quantum phase transition under tensile strain, and highlight intriguing properties that could emerge in the vicinity of this polar to non-polar metal transition. We examine the effect of charge doping on the polar metal phase. By means of electrostatic doping as well as supercell calculations, we find that screening from additional charge carriers, expected to suppress the polar distortions, have only a small effect on them. Rather remarkably, and in contrast to conventional ferroelectrics, the polar metal phase in LiOsO 3 remains robust against charge doping up to large doping values. Ferroelectrics are an important class of insulating materials with a spontaneous polarization, which can be switched by an external electric field Motivated by these discoveries, there have been several theoretical suggestions, employing first-principles calculations, to design systems exhibiting a polar metal phase. These include cation ordered ruthenate oxide Cao et al. have demonstrated a two-dimensional variant of the polar metal phase in tri-color superlattices LiOsO 3 undergoes a phase transition from a non-polar R3c structure to a polar R3c one (see Fig. The origin of the polar distortion has been theoretically investigated and has been variously attributed to an A-site cation instability Temperature-dependent second harmonic generation experiments have provided evidence for a continuous polar phase transition Over the years, owing to rapid experimental developments, strain has emerged as a very useful tool to engineer and tune the properties of a wide variety of oxide materials For instance, enhancement of ferroelectricity in barium titanate In this work, we demonstrate that the polar metal phase in the canonical Anderson-Blount material LiOsO 3 can be controlled by biaxial strain. Based on first-principles density functional calculations, we show that a compressive biaxial strain enhances the stability of the polar R3c phase. On the other hand, a tensile biaxial strain favors the centrosymmetric R3c structure. Thus, strain emerges as a promising control parameter over polar metallicity in this material. Further, we uncover a strain-driven quantum phase transition at around 2.5% tensile strain. We highlight intriguing properties that could emerge in the vicinity of this polar to non-polar metal transition. Next, we examine the effect of charge doping on the polar distortions in LiOsO 3 . By means of electrostatic doping and supercell calculations the depth of the energy well, eventually eliminating the minimum. Here u is the atomic mass unit. Charge density for structures at (d) 3% compressive strain, (e) zero strain and (f) 3% tensile strain. The asymmetry of charge density around the Li atoms increases with increasing compressive strain, while for increasing tensile strain the charge density becomes more symmetric, signaling a non-polar phase. An iso-surface value of 0.005 was chosen for all plots. with O and Li vacancies, we find that screening from additional charge carriers, which are expected to suppress the polar distortions, have only a small effect on them. In contrast to conventional ferroelectrics, where charge doping suppresses ferroelectricity, we find that the polar metal phase in LiOsO 3 remains robust against charge doping up to large doping values. Density functional theory calculations were carried out using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Biaxial strain was applied to the pseudo-cubic axes of the conventional 30 atom cell. In this case the Brillouin zone was sampled using an 8 × 8 × 4 k-point grid. All structures were relaxed until the forces were less than 0.001 eV/ Å. Biaxial strain was imposed by fixing the in-plane lattice parameters, while allowing the out-of-plane lattice parameter and all internal coordinates to relax. For doping under electrostatic condiditons, we added extra charge (holes or electrons) to the primitive 10 atom unit cell. A compensating background charge was incorporated to maintain charge neutrality. We used a 12 × 12 × 12 k-point mesh. For supercell calculations, we used a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell comprising of 80 atoms. We removed either O or Li atoms to create structures with vacancies, which were then relaxed till the forces were below the threshold of 0.001 eV/ Å. To compute the phonon properties, we used the frozen-phonon approach as implemented in the phonopy code We begin by presenting the phonon frequencies in the R3c high symmetry phase. In the absence of strain we find that the A 2u mode, which is the polar soft mode leading to the ferroelectric-like distortion, is unstable. The calculated frequency is -4.29 THz (here negative sign indicates an imaginary frequency), which is in good agreement with previous calculations Next, we freeze-in the A 2u mode in the high symmetry structure while varying the phonon mode amplitude. The energy as a function of the mode amplitude is presented in Fig. To check if any electronic transitions accompany our prediction of this strain tuning of the polar metal phase, we compute the density of states at different values of strain, as shown in Fig. In fact, the densities of states are almost identical at different strains. This confirms that the metallic nature of LiOsO 3 remains robust under the application of strain. We further calculate the orbital occupations by integrating the charge density over the volume of a sphere, which is centered at the position of the ions. These are shown in Fig. Using different substrates to grow thin films of LiOsO 3 could be a potential way to apply tensile and compressive strains and experimentally pursue our predictions. Different oxide materials could prove to be useful in this regard. For instance, PbO 2 and SiO 2 could be used as substrates to apply compressive strains of 2% and 1.7%, respectively. On the other hand, ternary oxides CdMoO 4 , LiAlO 2 , CaWO 4 and YAlO 3 would yield tensile strain values of 1.9%, 2.1%, 2.6% and 3.5%, respectively. A possible reason why a compressive strain favors the low symmetry R3c structure, while a tensile strain promotes the high symmetry R3c phase can be the volume effect, which has been very recently put forth by Paredes-Aulestia et al. After examining the role of strain in the polar metal phase of LiOsO 3 , we next move on to study the effect of doping on this phase. Usually one expects addition of charge carriers to screen the dipolar interactions and thereby suppress the polar distortions. To investigate this effect in LiOsO 3 , we begin by calculating the full phonon spectrum in the high symmetry R3c structure under different charge doping conditions. We consider doping values of up to 0.5 electrons or holes per formula unit. The obtained phonon dispersions are presented in Fig. To further explore this robustness of the polar metal phase under charge doping, we next Here we have focussed on analysing the effect of oxygen and lithium vacancies on the charge doping. More generally, vacancies can introduce a variety of other important effects. For instance, vacancies can act as trapping centres for electrons or holes, which can then be effectively tuned using strain Our work highlights strain as a promising control parameter over the polar metal phase in LiOsO 3 , as well as the robustness of this phase against charge doping. The tuning to a critical state between a polar and a non-polar metal under tensile strain is particularly exciting. In proximity to criticality, materials tend to be susceptible to fluctuations and one expects intriguing phases to emerge in Mo x Nb 1-x Te 2 system tuned to the polar to non-polar phase boundary V. SUMMARY By using first-principles density functional calculations, we demonstrated that the polar metal phase in the prototypical Anderson-Blount material LiOsO 3 can be effectively controlled by biaxial strain. Compressive strain allows increasing the stability of the polar metal phase, while a tensile strain favors the non-polar structure. We showed that under experimentally-accessible values of tensile strain, a quantum phase transition from a polar to a non-polar metal can be achieved. Next, we examined the effect of electron and hole doping on the polar metal phase. By means of electrostatic doping as well as supercell calculations with vacancies, we found that screening from additional charge carriers, expected to suppress the polar distortions have only a small effect on them. Rather remarkably, and in contrast to conventional ferroelectrics, polar metal phase in LiOsO 3 remains robust against charge doping up to a large doping value of 0.5 additional charge carriers per formula unit. In conclusion, our hope is that these findings stimulate further theoretical and experimental explorations into control over polar metals and their intriguing properties.