We propose a single-site mean-field description, an analogue of Weiss mean field theory, suitable for narrow-band systems with correlation-induced hybridisation at finite temperatures. Presently this approach, based on the notion of a fluctuating on-site density matrix (OSDM), is developed for the case of extended Falicov-Kimball model (EFKM). In an EFKM, an excitonic insulator phase can be stabilised at zero temperature. With increasing temperature, the excitonic order parameter (interaction-induced hybridisation on-site, characterised by the absolute value and phase) eventually becomes disordered, which involves fluctuations of both its phase and (at higher T ) its absolute value. In order to build an adequate finite-temperature description, it is important to clarify the nature of degrees of freedom associated with the phase and absolute value of the induced hybridisation, and correctly account for the corresponding phase-space volume. We show that the OSDM-based treatment of the local fluctuations indeed provides an intuitive and concise description (including the phase-space integration measure). This allows to describe both the lower-temperature regime where phase fluctuations destroy the long-range order, and the higher temperature crossover corresponding to a decrease of the absolute value of hybridisation. In spite of the rapid progress in the studies of excitonic insulators, a unified picture of this kind has not been available to date. We briefly discuss recent experiments on Ta2NiSe5 and also address the amplitude mode of collective excitations in relation to the measurements reported for 1T -TiSe2. Both the overall scenario and the theoretical framework are also expected to be relevant in other contexts, including the Kondo lattice model. Interaction-induced pairing commonly occurs in many different contexts including excitonic and Kondo insulators and superconductivity. This can involve either particle-hole or particle-particle pairs, and gives rise to an induced hybridisation or to a superconducting pairing amplitude, both of which can be viewed as scalar products between formerly orthogonal many-body states, i.e., as off-diagonal elements of some density matrix. The corresponding systems are characterised by the ratio of the induced spectral gap (or pair binding energy) to the bandwidth energy scales. The case of small binding energy (weak interaction) corresponds to the well-known BCS picture, where the crucial rôle is played by restructuring of the quasiparticle spectra in the vicinity of the Fermi level only. Broadly speaking, this case is amenable to a long-wavelength perturbative treatment, leading to the familiar results. The opposite limiting case, which is commonly referred to as that of BEC (Bose-Einstein condensation), is typically realised in the narrow-band systems and continues to command much attention from experimental and theoretical standpoints. It has been suggested that this BEC physics might be relevant for Kondo lattices and heavy-fermion compounds In the BEC regime, there are two distinct energy scales, corresponding to the energy of strongly-bound excitons or pairs and to their interaction with each other. This gives rise to a peculiar evolution of the system with increasing temperature, as will be further discussed below. Importantly, the BEC pairing is not a phenomenon which concerns only the carriers in the vicinity of the Fermi level, and new theoretical tools are needed (and were indeed suggested, see, e.g., Refs. 1,4,5,11) in order to study the behaviour of a system in this regime. Owing to a small spatial size of an exciton or a pair, it appears highly desirable to construct a simplified local mean-field description of a single-site type, an analogue of an elementary Weiss mean field approach familiar from the theory of magnets. Hitherto, this important benchmark appears to be missing, and our present objective is to begin filling this gap. Arguably, the simplest situation where this BEC regime arises is that of the excitonic insulating state in an extended spinless Falicov-Kimball model (EFKM). In this paper, we develop a single-site mean-field description for this case, while adaptation of the method and of the insights to other systems is relegated to future work. It should be noted that Falicov-Kimball model throughout its history attracted a massive research effort The spinless Falicov-Kimball model proper where E d is the bare energy of the localised band. We are interested in the case where U is, broadly speaking, of the same order of magnitude as the bare hopping amplitude t, and we choose the units where t and the period of the (d-dimensional hypercubic) lattice are equal to unity. We also set h = k B = 1. In order to stabilise the state with a large on-site hybridisation at T = 0, one must extend the Falicov-Kimball model by adding a perturbation of general form where t ′ is the d-band hopping and V 0 , bare on-site hybridisation. V 1 (V 2 ) is the spatially-even (odd) nearestneighbour hybridisation, as appropriate for the case where the two original bands have the same (opposite) parity. R i is the radius-vector of a site i, and Ξ = d α=1 xα , sum of Cartesian unit vectors. For t ′ = 0, the net Hamiltonian, Eqs. ( In a broad range of values of parameters of Eq. ( The absolute value of the corresponding perturbation parameter must be larger than a certain critical value (|t ′ cr |, etc.). Depending on the parameters of the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( The behaviour of the system at finite T is crucially dependent on the two energy scales characterising the ordered excitonic state at T = 0. The first one is the hybridisation-induced energy gap, notably the indirect one, which in cases where U is not very large can be roughly estimated as (see Sec. II; note that the bandwidth of the unhybridised itinerant band equals 2d, twice dimensionality of the system), and can be an order of magnitude smaller than the direct gap, While the value of G at T = 0 determines the crossover temperature T * , a much smaller scale of the low-lying collective excitations ,cr ), etc., when hybridisation 23 dominates δH]. While the excitonic long-range order is lost already at T = T cr (where the phases φ i become disordered), the average value ∆(T ) of |∆ i | remains finite, and the state of the system can be termed disordered electronic insulator. It is also variously called "excitonic liquid" or "excitonic gas" (as opposed to "excitonic condensate" at T < T cr ), as the relatively stable excitons persist in equilibrium without a condensate. Since this state is not associated with a symmetry breaking, it fades away via a smooth crossover with increasing T beyond T * , when the thermal fluctuations of |∆ i | become comparable to ∆(T ). Above T * , excitons can no longer be considered stable, as they are being formed and destroyed rapidly in the course of fluctuations. Historically, the investigations of EFKM at finite temperatures started with extending the pioneering Hartree-Fock decoupling approach of Ref. 13 to finite T . However, this method misses the lower energy scale altogether (also at T = 0), yielding a second-order phase transition at a certain T * ∼ G, above which ∆(T ) vanishes (see, e.g., Ref. 21). On the other hand, qualitative picture outlined in the previous paragraph is substantiated by a more advanced self-consistent treatment of Ref. 11. Still, it appears that due to the restrictions of a specific mean-field approach used in the latter reference (involving functional integrals technique with certain topological complications stemming from the nature of the phase variable φ i ), its conclusions imply a distinct transition at |T * |, as opposed to a smooth crossover expected on symmetry grounds. As already mentioned, it appears highly desirable to try and construct a more intuitive treatment of a singlesite type. In addition, one expects that the behaviour of the system in the most interesting crossover regime around T * is strongly affected by the short-range fluctuations, which might not be dealt with accurately within the long-wavelength (continuum) approach of Ref. 11. Finally, one can anticipate that once an adequate singlesite mean-field scheme is developed for the EFKM, it can be adapted for the entire family of related systems, as discussed in the beginning of this section. In constructing our finite-temperature single-site mean field approach, we make use of the known properties of the conventional Hartree-Fock solution The actual application of the technique introduced in Secs. II-IV begins in Sec. V with the analysis of the low-temperature behaviour, including the ordering transition at T cr . While in this case one does not expect any single-site approach to yield an accurate description, we do find a second-order phase transition with the value of T cr controlled by the parameters of the perturbation, Eq. ( The behaviour of the EFKM in the high-temperature phase-disordered state, including the crossover region at T ∼ T * , is considered in Sec. VI. It appears that the results obtained there are both reliable (except when the approach fails due to the underlying Hartree-Fock approximation becoming invalid, Sec. VI A) and new, providing the first quantitative description of the crossover region in the EFKM. This description of the phasedisordered state appears rather workable from the point of view of, e.g., prospective calculation of the transport properties. In Sec. VII, the emerging picture is discussed in the context of the ongoing experimental search for excitonic insulators. While the experimental situation is still uncertain (see, e.g.,, a brief review of recent literature on Ta 2 NiSe 5 in Sec. VII A), this is likely to change in the near future, enabling a more meaningful comparison with the theoretical insights. We also include a rather qualitative treatment of collective excitations (amplitude mode, Sec. VII B) in light of recent experiments One can expect that potential applications of the technique developed in this paper extend beyond those rather limited aspects considered in Secs. VI and VII, both for the EFKM and in the context of other systems. This issue is, among others, discussed in Sec. VIII. The reader interested mostly in our results for the behaviour of the EFKM at finite temperature might want to skip the description of the formalism in Secs. III-IV. On the other hand, those interested specifically in the OSDM-based mean-field technique could, at a first reading, proceed directly from Sec. IV to Sec. VIII. Overall, the discussion in the paper is rather selfcontained, as the Appendices supply necessary technical details for Secs. III, V, and VI. While some preliminary considerations were reported earlier in Ref. 25, the technique used there is largely inadequate. Hence, Ref. 25 is completely superseded by the present paper. An ordered excitonic insulator state at T = 0 is characterised by the uniform values of n c,i , n d,i , and (real positive) ∆ i . At a finite temperature, these begin to fluctuate, and as long as T is not too low, can be treated as classical fluctuating quantities (see further discussion in Sec. IV below). Given any distribution of local phases φ i , we can perform a gauge transformation, which yields real c † i di while leaving the unperturbed Falicov-Kimball Hamiltonian (1) invariant. The perturbation (3) now reads as We now proceed with the standard Hartree-Fock decoupling of the interaction term in Eq. ( with the double occupancy on-site, given by the mean-field expression, This yields a quadratic Hamiltonian with fluctuating local parameters. While these fluctuations will be taken into account later in a self-consistent way, presently we make use of virtual-crystal approximation, averaging both Eqs. ( where and the subscript T in ... T denotes averaging over the local thermal fluctuations. The resultant uniform virtual crystal will play the rôle of our mean-field background. The net virtual crystal Hamiltonian [including the perturbation, Eq. ( Here, μ is the chemical potential, N is the number of sites in the lattice, and n d T ≡ n d,i T , average double occupancy n d,i on-site. The mean-field energies are given by and renormalised relative energy of the localised band. The Fourier component of effective bare hybridisation is given by (17) (depending on the relative parity of the orbitals). The value of the indirect gap G in the virtual-crystal spectrum is obtained as a difference between ǫ 2 at k = 0 and ǫ 1 at the corner of the Brillouin zone. Neglecting the perturbation δH, we find which in the limit of |E rd |, U ∆ ≪ d yields Eq. ( The original fermionic operators, are expressed in terms of the mean-field quasiparticle operators f 1, k and f 1, k with the help of where We now readily find the average values over the canonical ensemble of mean-field fermions (i.e., over the Fermi distribution of the mean-field carriers), denoted ... F : where Together with Eq. ( Let us consider a single site (located at origin) in the virtual-crystal background. There are four quantum states |s n available on-site: including two singly occupied states, vacuum state |0 , and the doubly occupied state, |cd . In the absence of thermal fluctuations of the on-site parameters, the thermal on-site density matrix (OSDM) is given by Here, the summation is over all basic many-body eigenfunctions |Ψ of the averaged Hamiltonian. Presently, we can choose these to be eigenfunctions of both the virtualcrystal (i.e., averaged Hartree-Fock) Hamiltonian (13), and of the net particle number operator, N . The matrix is the regular quantum-mechanical OSDM calculated for the state |Ψ , and is the canonical probability of this state. Z is the partition function. Each eigenvector |Ψ can be represented as a sum of four mutually orthogonal terms, where |Φ i are |Ψ -dependent normalised wavefunctions defined on all the N -1 sites away from our central site 0, and Owing to the different net electron numbers on these sites, we have Therefore multiplying A 0 , A cd , or both A c and A d by a phase factor does not affect ρ(0) -only the relative phase of the first and second terms on the r. h. s. of Eq. (30) appears in the OSDM. An obvious equality allows to perform the decomposition (30) explicitly by writing etc. Indeed, each term in Eq. (32) projects upon a single local state |s i , and the r. h. s. of Eq. ( Substituting Eq. (30) into Eq. ( Here, the subscript "F" again implies canonical average over all virtual-crystal eigenstates |Ψ . In the Hartree-Fock approximation, the states |Ψ are merely products of operators acting on the overall vacuum |vac of the system, and Eqs. (36-40) are readily verified with the help of Eqs. (19-21), (22-24), and (34-35). It is equally easy to obtain the standard Hartree-Fock result, In writing Eq. ( Since the Hartree-Fock quasiparticles form an ideal Fermi gas, the fluctuations of all the on-site quantities over the canonical distribution of the many-body eigenfunctions |Ψ vanish in a large system (i.e., for N → ∞; see Appendix A). Hence, at least in the Hartree-Fock approximation, we can use Eqs. (36-40) to substitute in Eq. ( Here, our choice of relative phases, which corresponds to a real Φ c |Φ d F , is a matter of convenience and reflects the choice of phases of the states |Φ i . Once the latter are fixed, this also fixes all the relative phases of A i . This is because the Hamiltonian, H+δH, is a non-local operator (unlike the OSDM). We will see that varying the phases of A i generally affects the average energy. From Eqs. (36-40) we observe that single-site thermal fluctuations (distinct from the Fermi-distribution fluctuations discussed in the previous paragraph), i.e., deviations of the OSDM from ρ(0) of Eq. ( While obviously |ab ≡ a † b † |0 = exp (iφ 0 )|cd , the singly-occupied part of the decomposition ( where the last equation implies that |Φ a and |Φ b are orthogonal "on average" (again with vanishing canonical fluctuations), which is precisely what is needed. Finally, the first two terms on the r. h. s. of Eq. ( [cf. Eqs. (34-35)], resulting in The vectors |Φ a,b (Ψ) on the r. h. s. can be expressed directly via Eqs. ( A single-site fluctuation (a fluctuation of OSDM at site 0) corresponds to a change of coefficients in Eq. (51), as detailed in Appendix B. For every state |Ψ this yields a perturbed state | Ψ , characterised by the parameters β, φ, θ i , and γ i : Here, we will be interested for the most part in the case of half-filling, considering only fluctuations | Ψ that preserve the site occupancy, n = n c + n d = 1 (see Sec. IV for further discussion). This implies |A 0 | = |A cd | for both |Ψ and | Ψ , i.e., sin θ 2 = tan θ 3 . In this case, Eq. ( where 0 and 0 ≤ θ 3 ≤ π/4. As explained in Appendix B, Eq. ( with the expression for the operator Ŝ given in Appendix C. The operator Ŝ is unitary "on average," Ψ| Ŝ † Ŝ|Ψ F = 1, which can be verified directly. The values of parameters β, φ and θ i are the same for all unperturbed eigenstates |Ψ . For the n = 1 case of Eq. ( We readily find that the form of OSDM, corresponding to Eq. ( Here, the average ... T ′ includes, in addition to the Fermi distribution averaging ... F , also taking the average value over thermal fluctuations of the background, i. e. over thermal fluctuations on all sites other than our central site. In addition, it is convenient to add to the ... T ′ also an averaging over the phase φ 0 , which is random and obeys Eq. ( (52-53) via |Φ a,b (see Appendix C for details). Note that Eq. ( In the important case when the fluctuation does not change the values of the three angles θ i , i.e., when θ i = θ (0) i , the operator Ŝ is unitary not only "on average" (see above), but also precisely 27 : Ŝ † Ŝ = 1. In this situation, Eq. ( Furthermore, in this case Ŝ both commutes with the interaction term in H, Eq.( In the opposite case of Ŝ † Ŝ = 1 (when the thermal fluctuations of θ i are taken into account), taking the average over thermal fluctuations of the background in Eq. ( where the average is taken only over the thermal fluctuations of the phases φ i at all sites and over the Fermi distribution. We recall that the phases φ i are detached from the fermionic degree of freedom of the Hartree -Fock quasiparticles [see Sec. II, beginning with Eq. ( Let us pause and briefly discuss the meaning of equations (52-57). It will be expedient to consider first the case of a half-filled EFKM (n = 1) at a relatively low temperature, T ≪ G [see Eq. ( which can be decomposed according to Eq. ( To summarise, our results in this section establish a one-to-one correspondence between the local fluctuations (i.e., thermal fluctuations of the OSDM) and the deformations of the many-body wavefunctions. This allows to calculate the energy cost δE of a given fluctuation, and hence the probability of such fluctuation, w ∝ exp(-δE/T ). However, we still need to know the phase volume corresponding to each fluctuation, or, in other words, the integration measure in the space of parameters β, φ, and θ i . This issue will be addressed in the following section. Our objective is to construct a single-site mean-field description for the EFKM at finite temperatures. To this end, in the previous section we analysed the fluctuations of the on-site density matrix in the mean-field background. In order to proceed with the calculation of the average values, we need to determine the corresponding integration measure. In other words, we must learn to integrate over fluctuating variables, when these variables are elements of a density matrix, i.e., form a peculiar mathematical object. In Sec. III we also saw that the local fluctuations of the many-body wavefunctions, and hence of the OSDM, can be described in terms of angular parameters β, φ, and θ 1,2,3 (additional wavefunction parameters γ 1,2,3 do not affect the OSDM). Here we will arrive at exactly the same parametrisation of the OSDM, Eqs. ( Taking into account that this is not a very familiar subject, we will first mention some general notions and results where Λ is a diagonal matrix of positive eigenvalues λ i (i = 1, ..., N ), and Û is an SU(N ) unitary matrix. While the question how to perform an integration over the elements of Û in principle has a ready answer, due to the existence of a well-defined Haar measure dΩ H N in SU(N ), integration over the eigenvalues λ i does present a difficulty. It is immediately clear that the corresponding integration measure must show a non-trivial dependence on the eigenvalues λ i , vanishing whenever any two eigenvalues coincide, λ m = λ n . This is due to the fact that the matrix Λ (and hence M) will then be invariant under the action of the corresponding SU(2) subgroup of the SU(N ) (acting on these two eigenvalues only; this corresponds to an invariance of a 2 × 2 unity matrix under unitary transformations). The presence of these "inefficient" (in terms of varying M) transformations should then be compensated by the measure of the λ i integration vanishing at the point λ m = λ n . The appropriate Bures measure dΩ B for integration in the space of matrices M is constructed based on an assumption that an infinitesimal distance ds B between two matrices M and M + δ M is given by the Bures metric (62) Here, the quantities dx jk and dy jk are real and imaginary parts of the matrix element U jk in Eq. (61) for the case of an infinitesimal unitary transformation, and the basis j, k is chosen in such a way that M is diagonal. If we also add a requirement that the trace of the matrix M should be equal to unity, i λ i = 1 (which merely introduces the delta function in the following equation In our case, the density matrix ρ is a 4 × 4 one, built on the local states |c , |d , |0 , and |cd (in this order). Furthermore, our Hamiltonian preserves the total number of electrons, and we are using the basic wavefunctions of the whole system, which diagonalise the particle number operator (unlike, e.g., the BCS wave functions). In this case, those off-diagonal elements of ρ which involve at least one of the states |0 and |cd , being also off-diagonal in the electron number on-site, must vanish. Hence, the only off-diagonal elements of ρ which may be present are ρ 12 and ρ 21 = ρ * 12 . Therefore the matrix Û in Eq. ( with an SU(2) matrix (omitting the additional phase parameter which cancels out in the final expression for ρ) in the upper left quadrant. The Bures distance then reads as (65) and the first product on the r. h. s. of Eq. ( We then parametrise the four eigenvalues according to Substituting these into Eq. ( (67) The five angles in Eq. (67) vary within the ranges and in writing Eq. ( The angles θ 1,2,3 , β, and φ will be treated as fluctu-ating classical variables, akin to Euler angles in the fa-miliar spin-coherent states technique For given values of the angles, the quantum average value of an on-site operator Ô can be read off Eq. ( For example, etc. Thermal fluctuations of the OSDM lead to fluctuations of the band occupancies on-site, and the tilde accents on the l. h. s. of Eqs. (71-72) serve to distinguish these fluctuating quantities from their average values [see Eq. ( It can be assumed that local fluctuations of the net carrier occupancy on-site, ñ = ñc + ñd , are suppressed by a strong electrostatic interaction (not explicitly included in our model), hence we only need to consider those fluctuations which do not disturb the value of n, with the integration measure We find that the total number of states on-site available for a given n is (74) Throughout the rest of this paper we shall restrict ourselves to the half-filled case, n = 1. Then, the value of θ 2 in the integrand should be substituted according to sin θ 2 = tan θ 3 . (75) whereas the integration measure, dΩ ≡ dΩ B (1), can be obtained by performing the integral over θ 2 in Eq. ( The integration should be performed over the range (77) for a small but finite value of τ > 0, which then should be taken to zero in the final expressions for thermal average values. This procedure is required due to a logarithmic divergence arising from the singularity of the measure dΩ at θ 3 → 0; the latter in turn reflects the logarithmic singularity of the quantity I(n) [Eq. (74)] at n = 1. The measure in Eq. ( and hence for the (fluctuating) local physical quantities at n = 1: Should one desire to consider only those fluctuations which respect the Hartree-Fock condition, ñd = ñc ñd -∆2 , an additional restriction is introduced, fixing the value of θ 3 : The integration measure, Eq. ( We are finally in a position to complete our meanfield scheme, as outlined in Sec. II. At a fixed density n = 1, there are only three 26 independent mean-field parameters, ∆, cos κ, and n d (with n c = 1n d ). We first note that the three phases γ i in Eq. ( (see Appendix B). Writing the probability of a local fluctuation of the OSDM as [see Eqs. ( Self-consistency is ensured due to the dependence of ∆ (0) and n d [as well as δE, which is affected due to the structure of wave functions in the averaging procedure in Eq. ( We shall now turn to implementing this approach and studying the properties of resultant mean-field solution in two different temperature regimes. In the simplified treatment which follows, we will be interested only in the thermal fluctuations of the phase φ and of the angle β (the latter affecting in turn the quantity n cn d and the absolute value ∆ of the hybridisation), while assuming that all other variables are frozen at their respective virtual-crystal values, θ i = θ (0) i and (except in Sec. VI A) γ i = 0. Formally, this corresponds to multiplying the integration measure by the appropriate delta functions. Since the values θ (0) i lie somewhere in the middle of the integration range (i.e., away from any singularities) and the measure of integration over γ i , Eq. ( We begin with the low-temperature regime of T < ∼ T cr . In this region, only fluctuations of the phase φ i are ex-pected to be appreciable (and therefore there are altogether three self-consistency equations to solve, for n d , ∆ and φ). Nevertheless, in order to provide connexion with the discussion of the high-temperature regime we will also allow for small fluctuations of β [which in turn lead to fluctuations of the absolute value ∆ of hybridisation c † 0 d 0 , see Eq. ( where δβ ≡ ββ (0) is assumed small. In writing the (small) second and third terms in Eq. ( ∆ , and m are defined as [see Eqs. ( We begin with discussing the first term in Eq. (90), i.e., the δβ = 0 case. The expression in square brackets is of the first order in parameters t ′ , V 0 , and V 1 , and of second order in V 2 . The latter is so because in the expression for m the quantity ∆ k is even in momentum at V 2 = 0 [see Eq. ( [see Eq. ( We also note that the first term in Eq. ( and is the "external field". This similarity is an expected one, given the U(1) nature of the order parameter φ, yet we note that the direct correspondence between the EFKM and an XY magnet, as outlined above, occurs in the single-site treatment to leading order in δH, but not necessarily beyond that. Analysing Eq. ( The self-consistently conditions of the mean-field theory are given by Eqs. ( [where the pre-factor includes also the constants originating from the integration measure (76)], etc. We find an expected linear (in T ) behaviour. At H = 0, an ordering transition takes place at T cr = J/2 (see Fig. At H > 0, the phase transition is replaced by a smooth crossover, with cos κ asymptotically vanishing at high temperatures: (note the similarity to the Curie-Weiss law). More generally (but still to leading order in δH), cos κ throughout the T ≪ T * range solves the equation and should be found numerically (see Fig. At H = 0, it suffers a negative jump of ∆C = -2 at T cr , whereas at H > 0 and at temperatures T ≫ J, H, Numerical results for C are shown in Fig. The numerical results shown in Fig. A more exact solution to the mean-field equations would require taking into account the subleading terms in powers of δH, which in turn depend on cos κ both directly and self-consistently. However, such treatment is unwarranted here, in view of the obvious limitations of our approach at low T . In reality, the results obtained in this section are in any case only as good as a single-site description of an XY model in the lowtemperature and critical regions would be (note also that the competition Indeed, for the values of U and E d used in Fig. Physically, the reason for these inaccuracies is that in this regime an important rôle is played by the low-energy, long-wavelength collective excitations 14 (phase mode, as opposed to the amplitude mode discussed in Sec. VII B below), which cannot be treated adequately within a single-site approach. Furthermore, the actual behaviour may depend on the dimensionality of the system (as it does for the XY model, with 2D being a special case due to the possibility of vertex formation However, we expect that these complications are restricted to the low-temperature range of T < ∼ T cr , whereas at higher T (where short-range fluctuations become more prominent) one can hope to obtain a more faithful picture. Presently, we will consider the high-temperature regime of a fully phase-disordered excitonic insulator at T ≫ T cr . In this case, cos κ → 0 [see Eq. ( We further note that even if the perturbation is not sufficiently strong to stabilise a uniform ordered excitonic insulator at T = 0 and additional charge ordering appears at low temperatures (i.e., if the value of the corresponding perturbation parameter is less than the critical one), the analysis in this section is still likely to be relevant for the behaviour of the system at higher T , when both phase and charge orders melt. While this issue merits further study, it also falls beyond the scope of this work. As we already mentioned in the Introduction, the phase-disordered excitonic insulator state does not break any symmetry, and therefore increasing temperature further should result in a decrease of ∆ = 1 2 cos 2θ 3 cos θ 1 sin β T [see Eq. ( We also assume that the values of phases γ i in Eq. ( By construction, the value of δE vanishes at β = β (0) (unperturbed virtual crystal). The quantities l c and l ∆ obey the self-consistency conditions, (105) Here the integration measure, sin βdβ, again comes from Eq. (76). As the temperature is lowered toward T cr , the fluctuations of β small, and one can expand Eq. ( matching the last term in Eq. ( Standard deviations of ∆ and n d from their average values, can be evaluated in a similar way. The mean-field scheme is closed by substituting (107-108) into Eqs. (25). The four resultant self-consistency equations [including also Eqs. (103-104)] are readily solved numerically. Typical results, obtained for a two-dimensional system at n = 1 are shown in Fig. (the fluctuation-induced increase of the interaction energy from T = 0 to T = T * ) gives a perfect estimate for T * . On the other hand, it is actually negative for the weakly interacting case of U = 0.5, where the net energy change is dominated by the effects of Fermi distribution smearing, and hence the single-particle gap G yields a rather accurate estimate for T * . The values of ∆(T ) and n d (T ), obtained within our single-site mean-field approach, are illustrated by the solid and dashed lines, respectively, with the value of ∆(T ) showing a smooth downturn in a broad region around T * . In the U = 0.5 case (Fig. Yet, it is clear that this "high-temperature limit" with ∆ → 0 and σ ∆ → 0 is an artefact of our assumption that the fluctuations of θ i can be omitted. Indeed, we observe that the case of n c = n d and ∆ = 0 corresponds to θ Interestingly, the increase of n d (T ) and decrease of ∆(T ) at T < T * lead to the value of n (0) d (T * ) being about the same, n (0) d = 0.21 ± 0.01, in all three cases of U = 0.5, U = 1, and U = 2. At T > T * , the intermediate region of increasing ∆(T ) is absent at higher U (Fig. We note, however, that our results for higher U (especially for U = 2) become quantitatively unreliable in this region due to strong fluctuations of γ i (see Sec. VI A below). The specific heat is calculated as C = ∂ E T /∂T . Here, the average energy per site, [see Eqs. (91)], is the sum of the virtual-crystal contribution and the average fluctuation energy δE T . The calculated values of C (solid lines in Fig. It seems reasonable to expect that this unimportance of Eqs. (103-104) is a general property. While presently we had no difficulty carrying out the full self-consistent calculation, this would have been problematic had we included also the fluctuations of θ i (see Sec. III for discussion). However, if the error introduced by substituting l tify the use of a simpler Eq. (59) in place of a difficult Eq. (57). To summarise, our single-site mean-field approach yields a physically transparent description of the phasedisordered state of the EFKM above the low-temperature ordering transition. This includes, at least for the case of weak to moderate interaction strength, the crossover region of T ∼ T * (see Sec. VI A regarding larger values of U ). It appears that previously such a description has been lacking, at least in the context of the EFKM. Further discussion of results obtained in this section will follow in Secs. VII and VIII. The quantities γ i are additional phase variables of the SU(4) rotation (see Appendix B), which affect the wave function | Ψ [Eqs. (52-53)], but not the corresponding OSDM [Eqs. (69) and ( Importantly, the fluctuations of γ i cannot be incorporated into our self-consistent scheme, which relies on the underlying virtual crystal [Eq. ( On the other hand, there is no difficulty in calculating the energy cost of a local fluctuation of both β and γ i at site 0, provided that all γ i vanish elsewhere. In addition to δE(β) [Eq. ( In Fig. The situation is different for the strong-coupling case of U = 2 (shown in Fig. Finally, we note that although the phases γ i do not directly affect the OSDM (including the fluctuating values of n d and ∆), taking into account the fluctuations of γ i does modify the probability distribution for the angle β, and hence does affect the average values ∆(T ) and n d (T ) (as well as those of l c,∆ ). In the region where our theory is applicable, this effect is not very strong, reaching up to 10% for ∆(T ), and about 1 % for n d (T ). The difference is most pronounced in the region where the fluctuations of ∆(T ) are largest, thus falling well within the "error bars" on Fig. A. Experimental situation: The case of Ta2NiSe5 Experimentally, specific heat C was measured 37 in an excitonic insulator candidate Ta 2 NiSe 5 . In this compound, a phase transition is observed at T = 326 K, accompanied by a symmetry change and by a peak in the C(T ) dependence; below the transition, the (direct) interband gap has a flattened momentum dependence In is generally considered as plausible that the feature 37 seen in C(T ) at 326 K corresponds to this increased value of T cr (excitonic condensation); the transition is still second order, although modified (in comparison to the one discussed in Sec. V) by a strong involvement of the lattice. The apparent absence of hybridisation above the transition Another scenario would have the (lattice) transition at 326 K accompany (and perhaps sharpen) the excitonic crossover [hence, T * ≈ 326 K, cf. the peak of C(T ) at T ∼ T * in Fig. Finally, if hybridisation is dominated by the lattice effects at all temperatures, with excitonic pairing providing a perturbative correction at low T , the system should not be termed an excitonic insulator. The experimental results We note that the value of excitonic order parameter directly influences the electrostatic properties of the system. In the case of Ta 2 NiSe 5 , the gap is direct, and uniform ( k = 0) measurements of the appropriate electrostatic moment (possibly quadrupole rather than dipole one, in contrast to a simpler case considered in Refs.9,15,47) and of the corresponding response should be performed in order to identify the correct scenario. Dynamical measurements might allow to distinguish between the lattice (slow) and excitonic (fast) contributions, as suggested also in Ref. 40. In addition, further assistance in assigning the value of T cr and (if distinct) of T * can be drawn from studying the spectra of phase and amplitude collective modes. The presence of a non-zero absolute value ∆ of the on-site hybridisation implies the existence of a collective mode, corresponding to its oscillations. Presently, this subject receives much attention both in the framework of general interest in such "Higgs mode" in solid state physics If one neglects thermal fluctuations of the OSDM (including those of the phases φ i ; this is the "pure Hartree-Fock" case discussed above, corresponding to the dotted lines in Fig. [see Eq. ( [see Eqs. ( Eq. ( For a relatively small U = 0.5, the value of ω closely follows that of u (see Fig. Above T * the phase mode must disappear (as there is no corresponding symmetry breaking), whereas the amplitude mode is expected to recover to higher energies (see below). However, it can no longer be represented as a linear combination of particle-hole excitations and hence cannot be calculated within the approach of Ref. It is unclear whether this approach can be extended to include the thermal fluctuations of the OSDM, and whether the time-independent treatment of these, as constructed in this paper, would be sufficient. At all events, the energy scale of the amplitude fluctuations can be deduced from the value of susceptibility χ = ∂∆/∂F with respect to a fictitious external scalar field F, coupled to the absolute value of the hybridisation. If the amplitude mode is present, its energy squared, ω 2 , can be expected to be roughly proportional to 1/χ, with the unknown Tdependent coefficient affected by the quantisation of the fluctuations of ∆ and by the precise form of the excitation wavefunction. In order to calculate χ, one must add the term [cf. Eq. ( [see Eq. ( (3)], vanishes in the phase-disordered regime above T cr , hence, δH can be dropped altogether. We first consider the purely Hartree-Fock case when the thermal fluctuations are neglected When the thermal fluctuations of the OSDM are included, the average ∆ remains finite at all temperatures. Accordingly, the zero of 1/χ at T = T * is replaced by a broad minimum (see the dashed lines in Fig. Note that both curves merge in the limit of low T . This illustrates the fact that, to leading order in δH, the value of χ is unaffected by the phase ordering arising below T cr . The effect of the exciton condensation on χ is therefore confined to a small correction (subleading term), which vanishes above T cr . In terms of collective excitation energies in the presence of thermal fluctuations, these results add up to a rather coherent qualitative picture. While the phase mode softens at the low-temperature ordering transition, T = T cr , and is absent anywhere above T cr , the amplitude mode is only weakly affected by the excitonic condensation taking place at T cr . The phase-mode spectrum at T < T cr crucially depends 14 on the perturbation, Eq. ( We are now in a position to compare these expectations to the experimental results for 1T -TiSe 2 , reported in Ref. 8, and to their suggested interpretation. The plasmon mode described there is identified as the amplitude mode of an excitonic insulator, whereas the phase mode is either absent or not detectable. When the temperature increases towards T C ≈ 190K, the amplitude mode energy gradually decreases toward that of the lowenergy phonon and possibly vanishes 51 at T = T C (the error bars are relatively large). At higher temperatures it rebounds and becomes larger than in the low-T region below T C . The suggested interpretation 8 is that T C corresponds to a phase transition, specifically -to exciton condensation. This implies the BCS (as opposed to BEC) scenario, and appears plausible indeed, especially assuming that the effective masses of the two bands are not too different However, positive identification of the excitonic condensate based on its excitation spectrum requires detecting a phase mode, which in this case would exist only below T C , softening and vanishing at the transition point. As this mode was not observed, it appears possible that the excitonic transition, while lying low in energy, is preempted by a Peierls one. We further note that the observed amplitude mode spectrum may also suggest another possibility, viz., that of the BEC scenario as discussed in this work. Then, the broad minimum of the mode energy around T C would correspond to the higher-temperature crossover (our T * ), and not to the excitonic condensation (which might or might not take place at lower temperature T cr , below which the phase-mode energy would increase sharply). The superlattice reflections observed below T C (see discussion in Ref. 8) would then be due to a structural change, perhaps with additional contribution from the stable exciton gas (as opposed to condensate), which arises at T < T * (see discussion in Sec. I). If the excitonic condensation temperature T cr is indeed below T C , the former would again correspond to a smeared transition (see Sec. VII A above; in this situation, one does not expect the phase mode to completely disappear above T cr , nor would its energy exactly vanish at T cr ). Although the present discussion of the amplitude mode is clearly of a preliminary character, we expect that our conclusions are solid at the qualitative level. This applies both to the overall temperature dependence of the mode energy and to the need for further measurements in order to clarify the experimental situation reported in Ref. 8. Our mean-field treatment of the EFKM yields a physically transparent description of the excitonic insulator in a broad range of temperatures and fully supports the general expectations discussed in Sec. I. In particular, we were able to characterise the phase-disordered state, including the crossover region, T ∼ T * , and such a quantitative description appears to represent a new development in the general context of correlated electron systems with interaction-induced pairing in the BEC regime. While at the low-temperature region around the ordering transition (exciton condensation) the theory has at best a rough qualitative accuracy due to shortcomings expected of any single-site treatment at low T , there is ample reason to expect higher reliability at larger T , except in the high-temperature region for the case of strong interactions. We therefore suggest that these results provide a sound base for a more detailed description of the phasedisordered excitonic insulator, including susceptibilities and transport properties. Presently, our results lead to two conclusions, and we suggests that these should be checked for those compounds which are suggested as possible narrow-band (i.e., BEC rather than BCS) excitonic insulators. First, in the phase-disordered state above the phase transition at T cr there exists a crossover temperature T * , corresponding to a smooth decrease of the induced hybridisation ∆(T ) and to an equally smooth peak in the specific heat C(T ). The order-of-magnitude estimate of T * is given by the value of indirect energy gap G at T = 0 [Eqs. (18) or ( In recent years, both theoretical Importantly, we anticipate that the formalism, developed in Secs. III and IV, can be generalised to other systems with interaction-induced pairing. This includes both bulk systems (such as Kondo lattice and related models for the heavy-fermion systems) and lattice impurity models. While the latter are typically amenable to much more refined theoretical treatments, constructing an OSDM-based mean-field approach still can be expected to yield new insights into the properties of the method and possibly into those of the physical system as well. Therefore, comments are in order concerning some aspects of the newly developed OSDM-based mean field formalism. Presently, we implemented it in Secs. V and VI in a rather truncated form, only for the halffilled (n = 1) two-dimensional case and omitting fluctuations of the eigenvalues of the OSDM (parameters θ i ) and (aside from a brief qualitative discussion in Sec. VI A) those of the phases γ i [the three SU(4) phases which affect the wave function (53), corresponding to a single-site fluctuation]. The dimensionality of the system is hardly important at the mean-field level, and especially in the phase-disordered state, where the shortto medium-range correlations are expected to dominate. Regarding the value of n, it appears that studying a system with any carrier density (as long as it supports pairing) should not present a difficulty, at least in principle. The same apparently applies to treating the fluctuations of θ i and γ i in the case of correlated impurity (Kondo, Anderson, etc.) problems. On the other hand, fully including fluctuations of γ i (or unrestricted fluctuations of θ 3 ) in a bulk system would require going beyond the underlying Hartree-Fock approximation, and it is presently unclear whether and how this could be performed. The question of including fluctuations of θ i which preserve the Hartree-Fock condition, n d = n c n d -|∆| 2 in the case of EFKM [see Eq. ( where n k is the Fermi distribution function, and likewise Since the occupancies for different momenta are statistically independent, the non-zero contribution comes only from the k = p terms [where one obtains the well-known formula (A2) and vanishes in the N → ∞ limit. Generalisation for a two-band case and for higher-order local operators F is straightforward. We emphasise that Eq. (A2) applies to finitetemperature fluctuations in a canonical ensemble, and not to quantum-mechanical fluctuations of an observable in a given state |Ψ . ) is additive with γ 2 in Eq. (B4) and can be set to zero, whereas φ and β vary in the ranges 0 < φ < 2π, 0 < β < π. Substituting Eqs. (B7-B8) into (B4), we finally obtain Eq. ( As noted in the Introduction, the issue of the integration over the space of quantum states is cumbersome. However, in the specific case of phase factors in Eq. (B4) symmetry considerations dictate that the three quantities γ 1 + γ 2 , γ 1γ 2 , and 2γ 1 + γ 3 should all vary between 0 and 2π (the values differing by 2π are equivalent) with the uniform integration measure [agreeing with the results for the Haar measure of the SU(4) transformation, Eq.(B3) (see Ref. 25)]. In this way, we arrive at Eq. (84). This expression for Ŝ should be substituted in Eq. ( i , when one may use a simpler expression (58). Since the latter involves averaging over the Hartree-Fock wave functions |Ψ , average values of the products of Fermi operators in each term of the resultant expression decouple into pairwise averages, some of which contain operators at different sites, viz., at our central site 0 and at one of the neighbouring sites a. When the operator at site a is either c a or c † a , the corresponding average does not involve the phase φ a of the operator d a , and we