Recent development of the magnetic material engineering led to achievement of the systems with a high interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI). As a result, the formation of non-collinear magnetic soliton states or nonreciprocal spin wave dynamics is achievable. Typically used materials are based on bi-layers Heavy Metal/Ferromagnet, e.g., Pt/Co. These layers are characterized not only by a strong DMI, but also by the spin pumping effect and the resulting relatively large damping. Here, we show that the considerable interfacial DMI can be also present in bi-layers based on Ru/Co, characterized with low spin pumping effect and low damping. It is therefore a good candidate for the dynamical studies and implementations of chiral DMI. It is demonstrated by theoretical calculations that the value of DMI can be strongly affected and controlled by the strain of the lattice. We show a systematic experimental and theoretical comparison of magnetic material parameters between Pt/Co and Ru/Co bi-layers as a deserving candidate for spintronic and spin-orbitronic applications. Demand for further improvements in the speed and storage capacity of magnetic storage devices and decrease of their power consumption leads to continued interest in spintronic phenomena such as the spin transfer torque The IDMI can be induced by the large spin-orbit coupling of a heavy metal (HM) in contact with ultrathin ferromagnetic material (FM) where the inversion symmetry is broken at the surface. If the IDMI is strong enough, it can change the static as well as the dynamic properties of the system. Indeed, it converts the magnetostatically favorable Bloch wall into a chiral Néel wall and induces chiral canting of spins which leads to stabilization of noncolinear magnetic states, e.g., magnetic skyrmions Recently, the promising solutions for a formation of non-collinear spin configurations are trilayer structures HM1/FM/HM2, where HM1 and HM2 are bottom and top layers of heavy metals, respectively, with the enhanced spin-orbit effects, including the IDMI. The IDMI is usually characterized by its effective (Deff) or surface (DS) constants. The precise determination of the sign and value of the IDMI constant is interesting for both fundamental research and applications. It is possible to tune the total IDMI constant by choosing suitable HM1/FM and FM/HM2 interfaces. Since IDMI arising on the top and bottom interface can have the same or opposite sign, either enhancement or cancelation of the total IDMI constant can appear. It is also known that quasi-symmetrical trilayers, like Pt/Co/Pt, possess a non-zero IDMI due to the different quality of the top and bottom interface In our approach, we studied Ru/Co/Cu/Ru structures, where we focused on spin-orbit coupling (SOC)induced interfacial effects arising mainly from the bottom HM1/FM interface, while a Co/Cu interface is considered as a negligible contribution in both the magnetic damping and the IDMI evaluation The magnetic damping in these structures has not been well studied yet. In Ref. The structural and interfacial properties were studied by X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurement technique at CuKα radiation with a wavelength of 1.54 Å. Magnetic properties of the films were investigated with vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) at room temperature. The ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements were carried out at room temperature using a coplanar waveguide (CPW) with a broad frequency range up to 25 GHz. Brillouin light scattering (BLS) spectroscopy measurements were performed in the Damon-Eshbach (DE) geometry in order to define the sign and value of IDMI. First-principles (ab initio) calculations and atomic spin-model simulations were performed to explore competing exchange interactions in ultrathin film systems. All polycrystalline films presented here were deposited on a silicon wafer by both direct current and rf magnetron sputtering in a UHV system at room temperature. Argon gas (∼2 × 10 -3 mbar) was used during the sputtering process with a background pressure between 1 × 10 -7 and 10 -8 mbar. The full film stack was as following, Si/SiO2 substrate/Ta(4)/Pt(3) or Ru(3)/Co(tCo)/Cu(4)/Pt or Ru, where the numbers in parentheses represent the layer thickness in nm. The nominal Co thickness tCo was standardly set to 1, 2, or 3 nm. The lowermost Ta layer is a seed layer used to enhance the crystallinity of the films, and the uppermost Pt or Ru layer is a protective layer used to prevent oxidation. The in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) magnetic hysteresis loops were measured by VSM and all samples studied revealed an IP magnetic anisotropy. A broadband FMR spectrometer based on the vector-network analyzer (VNA-FMR) technique was used to obtain the FMR absorption profiles of multilayers in the IP geometry with an external magnetic field applied in the same plane. An IP microwave field with a frequency up to 25 GHz was applied to the sample using a grounded CPW with a 240 μm wide central stripe. The samples were placed face down on the CPW so that the substrate was always the furthest layer in the investigated multilayer structures. The drive-field frequency is varied at a fixed static field and the FMR absorption profile is extracted from standard S21 parameter measurements of the transmission line. The FMR spectra are measured at different magnetic fields to determine the magnetic damping constant α. The BLS, which detects light inelastically scattered by excitations, is currently a suitable technique for evaluating the DMI parameter. The influence of IDMI on the spin wave (SW) spectrum is wellknown, both theoretically Using the relativistic screened Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (SKKR) method In order to investigate the magnetic structure of the Co layers in the above-described interfaces a generalized classical Heisenberg model was used following the sign conventions of Ref. After the sputtering process the cross-sectioned sample was firstly imaged in the high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) mode of a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM). This is shown in Figure The continuous Co layers with the thickness of 1 nm are clearly visible in the image. We assumed that similar structure is for all samples presented here, including Ru/Co-based samples. To extract magnetic parameters of the thin films, we carried out magnetic characterization of Ru/Co(tCo)/Cu/Ru samples by using a VSM PPMS magnetometer. The normalized magnetic hysteresis loops of the two multilayers (tCo = 1 and 3 nm) at room temperature are shown in Figure Using XRR spectra, we deduced the thickness and density of each layer as well as the roughness of interfaces. In the case when an extracted value of thickness was close to the nominal value, we used the nominal value within the paper. From the fitting of the XRR data we obtained the root mean square roughness of the most interfaces between 0.25 and 0.30 nm. The critical Co layer thickness was determined in Ru/Co(tCo)/Cu/Ru structures from the variation of the anisotropy field as a function of thickness. Figure The FMR frequency f and linewidth ΔH were extracted from the measured transmission spectra as described in Ref. where Hres is the applied magnetic field at resonance, Meff is the effective magnetization, and γ = gμB/ħ is the gyromagnetic ratio which is proportional to the Landé factor g. The FMR frequency is varied at a fixed static field and the absorption profile is extracted from the standard S21 parameter measurements of the transmission line. The dependence of the FMR frequency on the applied magnetic field for the Ru/Co(3)/Cu/Ru film is shown in Figure The resonant field and the linewidth were determined from Lorentzian fits of the transmission spectra. The Landé g-factor and effective magnetization were obtained from the fit of the resonant frequency dependence on the resonant field. The intrinsic magnetic damping α in a dimensionless form can be estimated from the frequency dependence of the half-width at half-maximum ΔH of the resonant absorption as where the ΔH0 is the inhomogeneous zero-frequency broadening that contributes to the FMR linewidth. It is expected that inhomogeneity in our samples may come from a wide variety of origins including lattice defects and magnetic impurities, nonuniform stresses, or from surface anisotropy with film thickness random variations In Figure In this study, we investigated propagating spin wave dispersion by performing a BLS spectroscopy. As a result, IDMI energy density can be extracted from the two different SW frequencies (Stokes and anti-Stokes). In the systems with no IDMI, the SW frequencies of Stokes and anti-Stokes peaks are at the same position or slightly different due to the PMA energy difference between top and bottom interfaces of the ferromagnet. However, the propagating SWs with opposite wavevectors (±k) can be significantly different due to IDMI interaction and the resulting frequency difference (Δf) is measurable by the BLS technique. Here, the DC external magnetic field was applied parallel to the film surface and perpendicular to the scattering plane. We used an applied magnetic field (H = 0.4 -1 T) with the fixed kx = 0.011 nm -1 for magnetic field dependence and an incident angle of light θ (15° -80°) corresponding to kx = 0.006 -0.023 nm -1 with the fixed magnetic field of 0.2 T for dispersion relation measurements. The typical BLS spectra of a Ru/Co(3)/Cu/Ru sample is shown in Figure where, fS, fAS, γ, Ms, k = 4πsinθ/λ, and Deff are Stokes, anti-Stokes SW frequencies, the gyromagnetic ratio, the saturation magnetization, the SW in-plane wave vector, and the effective IDMI constant, respectively. Deff = DS/tFM, where DS is the surface IDMI constant and tFM is the ferromagnetic layer thickness. From Eq. 2 one can see that the Δf is invariant on an applied magnetic field, thus the Δf uncertainties can be minimized by the field-dependent measurements. The measured SW frequencies as a function of the magnetic field for a Ru/Co(3)/Cu/Ru sample are depicted in Fig. Fig. The magnetocrystalline anisotropy Keff is also shown in Fig. The dipole-dipole magnetic interaction on the magnetic anisotropy prefers IP orientation of the spin moments. We found that the dipole-dipole interaction is small for very thin Co layer, but it increases by increasing the number of magnetic layers Beyond the effective nearest neighbor magnetic interactions, the intra-and interlayer effective isotropic and DM couplings were also determined, and the calculated values are summarized in Table Relevant for realistic samples, intermixing and disordered interface effects on the IDMI were also reported IV. In summary, two important parameters such as the magnetic damping and IDMI constant have been studied in HM1/FM/HM2 systems by means of the FMR and BLS technique, respectively. Here HM1 is Ru or Pt, HM2 is Cu, and FM is a polycrystalline Co layer of various thicknesses. Our experiments show that the magnetic damping in Pt/Co-based structures increases inversely with the Co layer thickness, and for tCo ≤ 1 nm it is not measurable by our FMR system. On the other hand, the value of the magnetic damping in Ru/Co(tCo = 1 nm)-based multilayers is measurable. In Ru/Co(tCo = 2 nm)based sample, it is approximately three times lower than in the case of Pt/Co(tCo = 2 nm). The spectroscopic measurements have showed that the IDMI value in Ru/Co(tCo = 1 nm)-based structure is reduced by a half compared to the Pt/Co one. We can conclude that the IDMI values around 0.65 mJm - 2 are still reasonable for specific dynamical spintronic applications. Moreover, our study revealed that the sign of the IDMI for Ru/Co is matching the negative sign for Pt/Co-based samples. Theoretical calculations based on DFT explained the experimentally observed magnetic anisotropy trend and the sign of the IDMI, and provided insights into the composition of intralayer and interlayer magnetic interaction contributions. The effect of the dipole-dipole magnetic interaction on the magnetic anisotropy for thick Co layers was highlighted. It was also demonstrated that applying strain on the magnetic layers can reverse the sign of the IDMI, thus the chirality of the preferred spin rotations. Since choosing a thin film system consisting of a FM and HM layers with a low magnetic damping constant is a promising direction for efficient skyrmionic operations and nonreciprocal SW dynamics, we believe that Ru/Co-based structures are suitable candidates.