Using an ab initio approach, we report a phonon soft mode in the tetragonal structure described by the space group I4122 of the 1 K 5d superconductor Cd2Re2O7. It induces an orthorhombic distortion to a crystal structure described by the space group F 222 which hosts the superconducting state. This new phase has a lower total energy than the other known crystal structures of Cd2Re2O7. Comprehensive temperature dependent Raman scattering experiments on isotope enriched samples, 116 Cd2Re2 18 O7, not only confirm the already known structural phase transitions but also allow us to identify a new characteristic temperature regime around ∼ 80 K, below which the Raman spectra undergo remarkable changes with the development of several sharp modes and mode splitting. Together with the results of the ab initio phonon calculations we take these observations as strong evidence for another phase transition to a novel low-temperature crystal structure of Cd2Re2O7. Superconductivity in materials with non-centrosymmetric crystal structures currently attracts broad attention The ternary oxide Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 (CRO) containing the 5d transition metal Re is the first discovered pyrochlore oxide superconductor with T c 1 K Both currently known LT tetragonal space groups (phase II and phase III) are subgroups of the RT cubic space group, see Fig. Whereas the SPT at ∼ 200 K leads to pronounced anomalies, e.g. in the specific heat, the electrical resistivity, the Pauli susceptibility, or the thermal expansion, the SPT at ∼ 120 K is barely perceivable in the bulk properties The structural distortions induced by the SPTs of CRO are particularly very minute and difficult to detect by x-ray or neutron scattering techniques Clearly there is a need for further investigation, but regardless of softening and hardening of phonons and the appearance of new Raman modes below 200 K and 120 K supports symmetry reduction due to SPTs. The Raman spectra indicated the structural changes at 200 K and 120 K to occur in the Re-O(1) network, with O(1) being the oxygen atoms at the apices of the ReO 6 octahedra Our DFT calculations were performed using the projector augmented-wave method The phonon dispersions and phonon density of states (PDOS) for the possible structures of CRO were calculated using the direct method Surprisingly, in the tetragonal phase III we found the soft modes close to the Γ point. The irreducible representation of the lowest imaginary mode is here B 2 . Group theory analysis shows that this mode breaks tetragonal symmetry and generates the orthorhombic noncentrosymmetric structure (space group F 222), called phase IV. We obtained its crystal structure using the polarization vectors of the B 2 soft mode and optimized its crystal structure parameters, see the Appendix. The orthorhombic distortion is very weak with the difference between the a and b lattice parameters about 0.004%. The total energy of this structure is lower than that of the tetragonal phase III by only -0.06 eV and it is very close to phase II (-0.00005 eV). Even though these differences are very small, modern implementations of the DFT method assure reliability of such results The contribution of particular atoms to the phonon spectra can be analyzed using the PDOS, see Fig. Oxygen and cadmium isotope-substituted single crystals of CRO have been prepared by chemical vapor transport Raman spectra of 116 Cd2Re2 18 O7 in four characteristic temperature regimes (shifted along the y-axis for clarity). In each regime the red/lower (blue/upper) curve is at the highest (lowest) temperature, and the gray curves show the evolution in steps of 10 K. The arrows mark regions where subtle changes are found in phase III. The upper inset displays a comparison of two Raman spectra collected in Phase IV at 25 K of a crystal with the natural oxygen isotope (99.8% 16 O) abundance, and of a crystal of 116 Cd2Re2 18 O7 at 20 K. plete 18 O substitution in the final product. This was confirmed by measuring the shift in the frequency of oxygen phonon modes where ω o is the laser frequency, ω σ is the Raman shift, ω s is the absolute frequency of the scattered light, and is the Bose-Einstein factor for thermally excited oscillators. The Raman spectra of 116 Cd 2 Re 2 18 O 7 are displayed for four characteristic temperature regimes in Fig. The transition to the tetragonal I 4m2 phase below 200 K results in other significant changes to the phonon spectrum including a splitting of the mode near 640 cm -1 , and additional modes appearing below 175 cm -1 . This is consistent with the prediction of a number of additional Raman active modes according to the factor group analysis. We observed only very subtle changes at the temperature of the second SPT from tetragonal I 4m2 to I4 1 22 (II → III) near 115 K as shown by the arrows in Fig. Here we focus on the low frequency Raman scattering in the novel phase IV. As the temperature is lowered from 80 K there are further prominent changes at Raman shifts lower than 250 cm -1 (see Fig. Further evidence for T 80 K being a characteristic temperature for a SPT from phase III to phase IV, comes from the behavior of the E mode near 210 cm -1 in Fig. It remains puzzling why, so far, we could observe clear evidence for the SPT from phase III to phase IV only in oxygen isotope substituted samples, possibly indicating that the SPT at ∼80 K can only be induced or stabilized by increasing the mass of the oxygen atoms. A similar observation has been made for SrTiO 3 where in crystal containing only 16 O the transition to a ferroelectric FIG. phase is suppressed by quantum fluctuations, whereas 18 O substitution induces ferroelectric phases with T c 's up to ∼25 K Summarizing, we have presented remarkable agreement between the ab initio calculations of phonon dispersions and the experimental observations which indicates the existence of a novel orthorhombic noncentrosymmetric phase IV in Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 at T < 80 K. We believe that our findings will shed new light on the understanding of the peculiar metallic properties and the occurrence of the superconducting phase in Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 . Low-Temperature Phase: Ab initio Phonon Calculations and Raman Scattering In Section I of this Supplemental Material, we present some additional information on the structural and on the superconducting phase transitions in 116 Cd 2 Re 2 18 O 7 obtained from experiment. In Section II we present the structural data of Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 superconductor as obtained from experiment In this Section we present detailed results of the characterization of the isotope substituted crystals, 116 Cd 2 Re 2 18 O 7 , used in the Raman investigation with emphasis on the structural phase transitions (SPTs). Figure The heat capacity measurements also revealed the anomaly at the T c ∼1 K shown in Fig. Figure In Table 