Germanium-Tin (GeSn) alloys have emerged as a promising material for future optoelectronics, energy harvesting and nanoelectronics owing to their direct bandgap and compatibility with existing Si-based electronics. Yet, their metastability poses significant challenges calling for indepth investigations of their thermal behavior. With this perspective, this work addresses the interdiffusion processes throughout thermal annealing of pseudomorphic GeSn binary and SiGeSn ternary alloys. In both systems, the initially pseudomorphic layers are relaxed upon annealing exclusively via thermally induced diffusional mass transfer of Sn. Systematic post-growth annealing experiments reveal enhanced Sn and Si diffusion regimes that manifest at temperatures below 600°C. The amplified low-temperature diffusion and the observation of only subtle differences between binary and ternary hint at the unique metastability of the Si-Ge-Sn material system as the most important driving force for phase separation. The Si-Ge-Sn semiconductor system has sparked a great deal of interest among scientists because of its unique properties within group IV materials. The demonstrated fundamental direct bandgap of this truly silicon-compatible material can pave the way for numerous new applications in the field of opto-and nanoelectronics One of the main challenges posed by (Si)GeSn alloys is maintaining their structural integrity during thermal treatment in order to preserve their intrinsic material properties. For example, thermal budget must be specifically kept low enough to avoid Sn diffusion out of the material and associated segregation There is even less certainty for the case of ternary SiGeSn alloys. Fundamentally, phase separation in ternary alloys should differ from the binary case, since a larger possible number of intermediate phases can be formed In this work, we investigate the diffusion and lattice relaxation of both pseudomorphic GeSn binary and SiGeSn ternary alloys upon thermal annealing, to identify the behavior of each one of those systems and reveal possible differences between them. Epitaxial growth of thin films were conducted at temperatures below 400°C in a commercial AIXTRON Tricent reduced-pressure chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactor employing a reactive gas source epitaxial process using the precursors digermane (Ge2H6), disilane (Si2H6) and tin tetrachloride (SnCl4) Reciprocal space maps (RSM) of the former, obtained from X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments around the asymmetric (224) reflection, are shown for different annealing temperatures in Figure By examining the XRD data recorded on the pseudomorphic Si0.10Ge0.81Sn0.09 layers (Fig. Diffusion of Sn in samples can be easily made visible from secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) profiles, which are displayed in Fig. No Gaussian shape of the composition profiles, as expected from a composition-independent diffusion coefficient, can be seen in our experiments. In general, the observed gradual diffusion of Sn in pseudomorphic layers stands in distinct contrast to the recorded behavior in partially relaxed material. In the latter, thermal annealing leads to an abrupt transition to the two equilibrium phases For diffusion experiments, 30 nm thin Ge0.94Sn0.06 and Si0.040Ge0.895Sn0.065 samples were grown coherently on top of Ge-buffered Si(001) wafers. To investigate diffusion into the surrounding Ge matrix and suppress surface segregation, which will influence the former as for the samples in figure depicts the diffusion of Sn atoms in the GeSn structure after annealing for different periods between 3 and 10 minutes at temperatures between 500°C and 800°C, as no distinct effect was observed at lower temperatures. In the as-grown sample, Sn atoms exhibit a rather rectangular distribution, hinting to a good GeSn layer quality with sharp interfaces. Up to 600°C annealing, the Sn profiles look flat and with steeper sides than one would expect for a constant diffusion coefficient. Annealing above 600°C transforms the profiles into a more Gaussian-like shape. Thereupon, Sn content in the layer is strongly reducedmore than a factor of two after annealing at 600°C for 10 minutescompared to the as-grown case. A qualitatively similar behavior can be seen for Sn diffusion in a SiGeSn ternary, as shown in Figure The distinct diffusion behavior of Sn in the binary and ternary (Si)GeSn materials are summarized in Figure with a constant pre-exponential factor D 0 , activation energy E A and Boltzmann constant k B . An overview on the obtained parameters can be found in Table In the low temperature regime below ~650°C an interesting change in diffusion behavior becomes apparent. The temperature dependence is less pronounced and cannot be described by the same activation energies anymore. Reduced activation energies of 1.81 ± 0.09 eV (GeSn) and 1.13 ± 0.10 eV (SiGeSn) indicate strongly enhanced diffusion in that regime. Such enhancement may be predominantly driven by different physical origins, such as the concentration gradient or strain. Importantly, those can manifest in the thermal behavior only due to the absence of dislocations, which would otherwise overshadow their effects. The individual impact of those driving forces will be reconsidered in the Discussion section. Again, it consists of two different regimes above and below ~700°C, as demonstrated by the diffusion coefficients in Fig. An important observation in our experiments is that only isolated Sn diffusion occurs during thermal annealing in both binary and ternary alloys. In literature, also strain relaxation upon thermal annealing via defect formation was observed for both initially relaxed GeSn material Generally, diffusion in a multi-component system is driven by a minimization of the Gibbs free energy. Therefore, concentration gradients between the solute and the surrounding matrix will strongly impact interdiffusion, which was shown for example in the Si-Ge system The emergence of two clearly separated temperature regimes of the Sn diffusion coefficient in our work is in stark contrast to previous studies reported in literature. We attribute the presence of the low-temperature regime to the metastability of the Si-Ge-Sn material system, which is unique among the group IV alloys. Above the transition temperature of roughly 650°C (see Fig. In the low-temperature regime, however, different physical effect are possible origins of the enhanced diffusion. Material strain, for example, is known to reduce the formation energy of point defects, which mediate diffusion processes. In case of compressively strained SiGe, the formation energy of vacancies is decreased, leading to enhanced Ge interdiffusion Therefore, the metastability of Sn-based alloys, i.e. the gradient in chemical potential, is the main driving force, which triggers the diffusion enhancement in both binary and ternary. Since the solubility of Sn inside SiGe is even smaller than in elemental Gemaking SiGeSn ternaries even more metastable alloys The drop of activation energy for Si diffusion in the low temperature regime, which has never been reported for diffusion in an elemental Ge matrix, may also be linked to the presence of Sn atoms. From atomistic-level analysis it is known that a repulsive interaction between Si and Sn atoms is present in ternary SiGeSn alloys, leading to deviations from a random distribution Another factor, which role is not fully understood yet, is the expected presence of vacancies inside (Si)GeSn alloys. Those are inherently present due to the low temperature epitaxy of thin films and have recently been directly observed using positron annihilation in GeSn alloys In this work, we investigated the effect of thermal annealing on pseudomorphic GeSn binary and SiGeSn ternary alloys. In the absence of dislocations, strain is relaxed only via thermally-activated interdiffusion of Sn atoms. The qualitatively same behavior for binaries and ternaries was found in systematic annealing experiments, revealing an additional strongly enhanced Sn diffusion regime at low temperatures (<650°C). Similar behavior, albeit less pronounced, was found for diffusion of Si atoms, pinpointing the unique metastability of the group IV Si-Ge-Sn material system as the most important driving force for interdiffusion. Our results underline the importance of carefully handling the thermal budget of (Si)GeSn layers to maintain their pristine material properties during (thermal) processing in order to obtain highly efficient group IV-based opto-and nanoelectronic devices.