This article aims at giving a general presentation of spintronics, an important field of research developing today along many new directions in physics of condensed matter. We tried to present simply the physical phenomena involved in spintronicsno equations but many schematics. We also described the applications of spintronics, those of today and those expected to have an important impact on the next developments of the information and communication technologies. Spintronics is generally defined as a new type of electronics manipulating electrons by acting not only on the charge of the electrons but also on their spin. Its development started with the discovery The dependence of the electrical conduction in ferromagnetic metals on the orientation of the electron spin with respect to the direction of the magnetization can be understood from the typical band structure of a ferromagnetic metal shown in Fig. Let us consider resistivity measurements on ferromagnetic metals doped with two types of impurities In the mid-eighties, with the development of techniques like the Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), it became possible to fabricate multilayers composed of very thin individual layers and one could consider trying to extend the experiments on ternary alloys to multilayers. In addition, in 1986, Peter Grünberg and co-workers After the early years spent to extensively study GMR, spintronics became a broader research domain after the successive discoveries of several physical effects, all relying on the role of spin on electronic transport. In this section, we review the most important steps, in this classical spintronics phase, and their impact on applications. As the first magnetic multilayers were made of metallic magnetic or non-magnetic materials, the first GMR experiments were carried out in a straight forward experimental configuration where current is flowing along the plane of the layers (CIP geometry). From 1991, it has been possible to investigate GMR when the current is flowing perpendicularly to the layers (CPP Geometry), first by using superconducting electrodes In a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) where an ultrathin tunnel barrier is separating two ferromagnetic electrodes, TMR refers to the change of junction resistance, depending on the magnetic configuration of the electrodes (parallel or antiparallel magnetizations). Early observations of TMR were reported in 1975 by Jullière Other research directions have been followed in order to further increase TMR ratios such as the replacement of conventional ferromagnetic electrodes by 100% spin polarized half metals made of oxide materials STT relates to the manipulation of the magnetic moment of a ferromagnetic element without applying any magnetic field but only by transferring spin angular momentum by a spin polarized current. The concept was first introduced theoretically by Slonczewski In classical spintronics, during the first decade of its development, magnetic materials were used to spin-polarize the current. An important change, a few years after 2000, came from the possibility of creating spin-polarized current and pure spin currents by using the spin-orbit coupling (SOC, relativistic correction to the equations of quantum physics coupling spin and momentum). In magnetic materials, the SOC is known to be at the origin of properties as the magnetocrystaline anisotropy, the Anomalous Hall Effect (AHE), the Anisotropic Magnetoresistance (AMR). In nonmagnetic conductors, the SOC generates the Spin Hall Effect (SHE), which appeared to be very efficient to convert charge currents into spin currents and vice-versa, which is the basic operation in any spintronic devices. Today, the SHE of heavy metals having a large SOC is used in several spintronic devices. We will present successively the SHE, then the similar but more efficient effects obtained by exploiting SOC effects in bidimensional electron gas at the surface of topological insulators or at Rashba interfaces, and finally the fast development of the physics of the topological magnetic solitons called skyrmions. For currents flowing in non-magnetic materials, the SHE results from the SOC-induced deflection of electrons of opposite spins in opposite direction, as represented in Fig. As shown in the preceding section, the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) can be harnessed for the conversion between charge and spin currents by using the SHE or ISHE of heavy metal layers. More efficient conversions between spin and charge by SOC can be obtained in the bidimensional (2D) electron gas (2DEGs) at the surface/interface of topological insulators (TI) or at Rashba interfaces. Such 2DEGs are characterized by Fermi contours with helical locking between the spin and momentum degrees of freedom. Figure The spin/charge conversions by EE and IEE can be characterized by the conversion coefficient qICS = Js /Jc (inverse of length) for the EE A magnetic skyrmion is a topological swirling configuration of the spins of neighbor atoms in a magnetic material ∫ m ⋅ (∂ x m  ∂ y m)dxdy = ±1, (Eq. 1) and equals + or -1 for the configuration types of the figure. This peculiar topology of skyrmions gives rise to a topological protection of the structure: the spin configuration cannot be twisted continuously to obtain a configuration of different S, a ferromagnetic configuration for example; there is a topological barrier stabilizing the skyrmion. Finally, a crucial property of magnetic skyrmion is their solitonic nature: they behave as particles and, for example, can be put into motion by an electrical current. As the skyrmions combine mobility and non-volatility, they are of high interest for new types devices that we describe in more details hereafter. The specific chirality of the spin configuration in a skyrmion, in most systems, is given by the existence of chiral interactions of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya type (DMI) Here S1 and S2 are neighbour spins and d12 is the DMI vector. The DMI is a chiral interaction lowering or increasing the energy of the spins depending on whether the rotation from S1 to S2 around d12 is clockwise or counter-clockwise. If S1 and S2 are initially parallel in a ferromagnetic material, the effect of a sufficiently strong DMI interaction is to introduce a relative tilt around d12. SOC induces such DMI interactions in systems without inversion symmetry. DMIs exist in magnetic compound of non-centrosymmetric crystal lattice and when the breaking of inversion symmetry is due to disorder or to the presence of an interface between different materials. For non-centrosymmetric crystal lattices, the DMIs have been introduced in 1958 and 1960 by Dzyaloshinskii and Moriya as a term of the super-exchange interactions to explain the magnetic properties of insulating magnetic oxides such as α-Fe2O3 We will describe only one of the most largely discussed applications of today, the skyrmionbased race track memory. The massive storage of information today, in data centers for example, is based on the use of hard disk drives in which the information is stored by "magnetic bits" fixedly written in the magnetic film covering the disk. Finding a given bit of information is done by rotating the disk under the arm of the write/read head (Fig. In this article, we have described a part of the story of spintronics, from its foundation in pure physics of the electronic properties of the ferromagnetic metals to the discovery of GMR, TMR, STT and some very recent developments with topological materials and skyrmions. Unfortunately, in a review of limited length, some other recent developments of spintronics could not be included. Remarkable breakthroughs have also been achieved in spintronics with oxides, a field of research that is generally called oxitronics 