We present a detailed study of the growth of the tetragonal polymorph of antiferromagnetic CuMnAs by the molecular beam epitaxy technique. We explore the parameter space of growth conditions and their effect on the microstructural and transport properties of the material. We identify its typical structural defects and compare the properties of epitaxial CuMnAs layers grown on GaP, GaAs and Si substrates. Finally, we investigate the correlation between the crystalline quality of CuMnAs and its performance in terms of electrically induced resistance switching. The tetragonal phase of the antiferromagnetic CuM-nAs A favorable property of CuMnAs is the high degree of structural compatibility to common semiconductor materials, specifically to GaAs, GaP and Si. This makes it possible to employ molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) as the growth technique and to take full advantage of its precise control over the growth parameters. In this work we focus on the investigation of the growth conditions and material characterization of thin films of CuMnAs. We provide results from atomic force microscopy (AFM), superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transport measurement techniques, and use them to identify the optimal growth conditions of stoichiometric CuMnAs. Using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) we also identify two dominant types of crystallographic defects. Finally, we relate the resistive switching performance of CuMnAs microdevices to the studied growth conditions and crystalline quality of the films. The crystal structure of tetragonal CuMnAs Our typical sample structure is shown in Fig. The AFM micrographs in Fig. Owing to low growth temperature, the epitaxial growth of CuMnAs does not require flux overpressure of any of the elements to compensate for an incongruent reevaporation. However, arsenic incorporation turns out to be, to a certain extent, self-controlled. We have verified that the growing crystal tolerates As flux overpressure up to a factor of 2 (relative to Cu and Mn flux intensities) without any significant effect on the crystalline quality measured by, e.g., surface morphology, defect density or electrical performance. On the other hand, these parameters sensitively depend on the ratio of the Cu and Mn fluxes. Given the limited accuracy of the independent flux calibrations and considering the unknown sticking coefficient of these elements, we have adopted the sharp minimum of the RMS surface roughness in a series of samples with varying Cu:Mn flux ratio as a sign of the 1:1:1 stoichiometry. We have verified that the composition of the corresponding layer measured by the electronprobe microanalysis (EPMA) and energy-dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDX) is correct within the 2% accuracy of the methods, and we will show further in the text that the optimal stoichiometry point is consistently confirmed by several other parameters. A general trend in the surface morphology as a function of the Cu:Mn flux ratio is shown in Fig. For 1:1 Cu:Mn samples grown on GaP, we extract the vertical lattice constant c = 6.278 ± 0.001 Å in the fully tensile-strained lattice, i.e. fully pseudomorphic growth where the lattice constant a CuM nAs matches a GaP / √ 2. This value increases when the flux ratio deviates from the stoichiometry point and the lattice relaxation sets in, as shown in Fig. We have prepared thin lamelae from various 50 nm thick CuMnAs samples by focused ion beam (FIB) technique in order to study the atomic structure of the defects. The high-angle annular dark field -scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) analysis revealed two characteristic types of defects which were present in all studied samples. The first type is visible in the [110] projection of CuMnAs, as shown in Fig. The second type of the characteristic defects can be seen on lamelae cut along the (100) planes of CuMnAs. Their typical structure is shown in Fig. This type of defect may also be related to the formation of the holes present in the thin CuMnAs films. As apparent from Fig. The anti-phase boundary defects were present with similar density in all samples investigated by STEM. In essence, the anti-phase boundaries appear at the bottom interface about every 30 nm. Their density is lower in the upper part of the layer due to annihilation of anti-phase boundaries with opposing tilt. We did not observe any dependency on the growth parameters within the established growth temperature window. Post growth heating experiments in the STEM have shown that the defect structure remains unchanged up to temperatures comparable to the growth temperature of optimized samples. Details are shown in the Supplemetary material Epitaxial growth of CuMnAs is also possible on (001) GaAs and Si substrates and within a similar growth temperature window. However, the surface roughness is significantly higher for films grown on GaAs and Si substrates. This is shown in the AFM images in Fig. XRD analysis of 105 and 002 reciprocal peaks shows that there is a significant amount of mosaic tilt present in CuMnAs grown on Si and GaAs, as shown in Fig. The CuMnAs/substrate interface was further investigated by STEM as shown in Fig. The CuMnAs crystal is even more disturbed when grown on a Si substrate. An example of incoherently compensated surface step is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. Despite the difference in lattice mismatch, CuMnAs films thinner than 20 nm tend to form layers with holes and/or isolated islands on all three substrates, as demonstrated in Fig. In general, unprotected CuMnAs films tend to degrade at ambient conditions due to surface oxidation, which affects the electrical properties. This is illustrated in Fig. The conductance of CuMnAs films scales linearly with thickness, as shown in Fig. The resistivity of stoichiometric CuMnAs films grown on GaP substrates is ρ = 1.0×10 -4 Ω.cm and this value is virtually independent of the growth temperature in the range from 150 to 280 • C, see Fig. The temperature dependence of the conductivity shows a clear metallic behavior on all substrates, see Supplementary information In order to correlate the investigated growth parameters to the material performance in terms of currentinduced resistive switching Let us note that the simple cross geometry is suitable for comparison with previous studies, since the measured signal contains both the weaker spin-orbit-torque induced anisotropic magnetoresistance contribution to the switching signal The dependence of ∆R max on the growth temperature for the 1:1 Cu:Mn stoichiometric CuMnAs is shown in Fig. The dependence of ∆R max on the Cu:Mn ratio is shown in Fig. We have demonstrated that epitaxy of tetragonal CuMnAs is possible on GaP, GaAs and Si substrates. Exploring a range of growth parameters, we found a growth temperature and a material flux setting which result in a smooth surface morphology, the lowest defect density and best electrical switching performance of the CuMnAs films. We have shown that the trends of these three material properties coincide. Of the three substrates, GaP was found to result in the superior quality of the epitaxial layer. We have identified two characteristic types of structural defects present in thin film CuMnAs. The microtwin defects clearly correlate with the growth parameters and leave a characteristic imprint on the surface of the films and also in the reciprocal space. The occurrence of these defects can be largely suppressed in layers grown on GaP. Density of the second type of defects, the antiphase boundaries, seems insensitive to fine adjustment of the growth conditions. This defect type is likely related to the 90-degree ambiguity in the orientation of nucleation islands of the epitaxial layer. The observed defects may locally disturb the antiferromagnetic ordering in the material and provide potential pinning centers for magnetic domain formation The CuMnAs layers presented in this study were grown on undoped (001) GaP, GaAs and Si substrates. Oxide layer on the GaP and GaAs substrates was desorbed at temperature of 650 • C, and 50 -100 nm thick buffer layers of GaP or GaAs were grown at 550 • C and 570 • C, respectively. The native oxide on the Si substrate was removed by etching in 3% HF solution for 45 s immediately before loading into the MBE system. The Si substrate was then heated up to 800 • C and degassed for 1 hour (maximum achievable temperature in our Veeco Gen II system). In this case, the growth of CuMnAs followed directly onto the substrate without any buffer layer. Growth of CuMnAs After the growth of GaP or GaAs buffer layers (or after thermally treating the Si substrate) a fine adjustment of the beam-equivalent pressures (BEP) of Cu and Mn fluxes were performed. In our case the Cu:Mn BEP ratio of 0.53 was found by the exsitu EDX and EMPA techniques to correspond to 1:1 stoichiometry in the resulting CuMnAs layer. We estimate that the relative long-term accuracy of the BEP-based flux adjustment is approximately ± 3%, which explains the observed scatter in the parameters of the grown layers. After the flux adjustment the substrate temperature was stabilized at the desired growth temperature, measured by the band-edge spectrometry in all cases. The samples were grown betwen 210 • C and 220 • C, if not specified otherwise in the main text. After initiation of the CuMnAs growth the substrate temperature overshoots by ∼ 10 • C due to the increasing heat absorption in the growing layer Al Cap deposition After CuMnAs growth, the samples were cooled down to ∼ 0 • C and 3 nm of Al were deposited with rate of 0.036 ML/s. This results in deposition of slightly granular, but homogeneous layer, that covers the whole sample surface after oxidation at ambient environment. AFM measurements The topography of the samples was characterized on Bruker Dimension Icon Atomic Force Microscope in PeakForce mode. The silicon Bud-getSensors Multi75Al-G cantilevers (k = 3 N/m, f = 75 kHz, normal tip radius = 8nm) were used. All samples were measured at the same settings of AFM (scan velocity was 1 μm/s, PeakForce setpoint ∼ 1 nN and PeakForce frequency 1 kHZ). The collected data were processed in the Gwydion software The structure of the samples was analysed by high-resolution X-ray diffractometer equipped with PhotonMax high-flux 9 kW Cu rotating anode and Ge(002x2) monochromator providing a monochromatic CuK α1 beam, while using the D/teX Ultra 250 detector. The data were processed using xrayutilities Python package SEM characterization The samples were characterized in Raith E-line SEM. The surface lines associated with the defects were typically visible above 10k magnification, at 10kV with 20 μm aperture and the in-beam SE detector. Lamellae preparation and STEM characterization The cleaved parts of the samples were adjusted onto standard pin stubs by means of silver lacquer and coated with 10 -15 nm of carbon using Leica ACE600 coater. The scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) lamellae were then fabricated in FEI Helios 660 G3 FIB/SEM following the commonly used protocol, utilizing electron and ion beam deposited tungsten as protective cap. Final polishing was done at 2 kV at 25 pA. The lamellae were investigated by High resolution (scanning) Transmission Electron Microscope FEI Titan Themis 60-300 cubed at 300 kV acceleration voltage and by FEI probe corrected Analytical Titan at 300 kV. Crystal modeling The models of the crystal structures were done in free crystallographic software Vesta Conductivity measurements The conductivity was measured in the van-der-Pauw geometry either on 5x5 mm samples with In contacts soldered in the corners, or on lithographically patterned cross-shaped samples with bonded contacts. The anisotropy in conductivity was evaluated from the measured values using finite element method simulation of the given sample geometry in COMSOL Multiphysics Device fabrication The as grown samples were patterned by standard optical lithography, where 5% C 4 H 13 NO was used to remove the Electrical switching of CuMnAs We note that the values for maximal transversal resistivity change were averaged from series of 10 pulses. The surface line defects associated with the micro-twin defects are also visible with SEM. The surface of stoichiometric CuMnAs sample and sample with 10% excess Mn are shown In Fig. In addition, multiple magnetic inclusions are visible at the surface of the Mn rich sample, with spacing on the order of μm. Their nature is confirmed in Fig. As mentioned in the main text, it is possible to identify the tilt of the micro-twin defects within the CuMnAs thin films by AFM. An example is shown in Fig. It is shown in the main text, that the presence of the micro-twin defects is related to tilt visible in the recip-rocal space maps. This tilt could be related to strain induced into the CuMnAs layer by presence of the defects, as shown in Fig. As referred to in the main text, there is a difference in the temperature dependency of CuMnAs grown on GaP, GaAs and Si substrates. An example is shown in Fig. arXiv:1911.01794v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 5 Nov 2019