Magnetic sensing is present in our everyday interactions with consumer electronics, and also demonstrates potential for measurement of extremely weak biomagnetic fields, such as those of the heart and brain. In this work, we leverage the many benefits of the micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) devices to fabricate a small, low power, inexpensive sensor whose resolution is in the range of weak biomagnetic fields. The sensor works at room temperature, and is suitable for consumer electronics integration. At present, such biomagnetic fields can only be measured by expensive mechanisms such as optical pumping and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs). Thus, our sensor suggests the opening of a large phase space for medical and consumer applications. The prototype fabrication is achieved by assembling micro-objects, including a permanent micromagnet, onto a post-release commercial MEMS accelerometer. With this system, we demonstrate a room temperature MEMS magnetometer, whose design is only sensitive to gradient magnetic fields and is generally insensitive to the Earth's uniform field. In air, the sensor's response is linear with a resolution of 1.1 nT cm -1 and spans over 3 decades of dynamic range to 4.6 μT cm -1 . In 1 mTorr vacuum with 20 dB magnetic shielding, the sensor achieved 100 pT cm -1 resolution at resonance. The theoretical floor of this design is 110 fT cm -1 Hz -1/2 with a resolution of 13 fT cm -1 , thus these devices hold promise for both magnetocardiography (MCG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) applications. Magnetic sensing spans many scientific applications, from consumer electronics to cutting edge biomagnetic research. Smartphones utilize the Earth's magnetic field for navigation. Automobiles leverage non-contact magnetic sensing to determine position of components, such as in the crank shaft and braking systems. And, more recently, the highest resolution magnetic sensors have been used to measure biomagnetic fields of the brain and heart Our sensor is a marriage of two recently matured technologies: the capacitive accelerometer and permanent micromagnets. The accelerometer is a sensing platform fit for adaptation to other measurands because it inherently senses the position of a movable polysilicon plate. Fig. The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. the center of the x-y plane. This is the deformation we would expect from a uniform magnetic field in x-y plane, but not oriented along magnet's dipole axis (see Methods, Eq. 7). Since we are imposing a magnetic field with no uniform component and a constant gradient along the X-axis, we are primarily interested in the effect seen at the translational mode, and we can disregard the higher, torsional mode. Based on this electrostatic characterization, we can simplify our mechanistic understanding of the sensor to a one-dimensional, underdamped harmonic oscillator model (Methods), the free body diagram of which is illustrated in Fig. The magnetometer's performance is dynamically characterized in three conditions: air (case 1), air with magnetic shielding (case 2), and vacuum with magnetic shielding (case 3). In all cases, the frequency of a gradient field sine wave, symmetric about zero, is swept as the magnetometer output signal is processed by a lock-in amplifier. The magnetometer output voltage is proportional to gradient magnetic field by Eq 9 (Methods). Fig. the sensor (Table In Fig. The mechanical modes of our magnetometer are characterized by electrostatic actuation in Fig. The magnetic characterization in Fig 3c The sensor is characterized in three conditions (Table Fig Permanent micromagnets are a sintered mix of rare-earth element powders and are typically coated for protection or passivation The magnetometer is fabricated in two stages. First, a subassembly is made that resembles a magnet on a table (Fig. The experimental setup comprises a custom PCB coil, custom vacuum chamber, MuMetal shield (Magnetic Shields Corp.), and an instrument drive system (Fig. Governing Mechanics A simplified, one-dimensional mechanical model is shown in Fig. (2) The system may be thought of as one-dimensional because the ADXL 203 has low cross-axis sensitivity (1.5%) between X and Y 10 and out-of-plane forces are minimized by centering the magnet on the proof-mass using the table subassembly. The magnet, table, and proof-mass are all considered one rigid body. Together, their mass is found to be 160 μg from the relationship between resonant frequency and mass shown in Eq 3. The resonant frequency is found from an electrostatic frequency sweep, shown in Fig. The constant, c, in Eq 2 represents damping. Vacuum decreases damping and is shown to increase the quality factor in Fig. The applied force, F applied , is proportional to the gradient field The main sources of noise are mechanical, Fn,mech, and gradient magnetic, Fn,mag, but these are insignificant for large fields and so are analyzed in Discussion as resolution-limiting terms. The effect of gravity is ignored since the magnetometer is held upside down and any gravitational forces would be outside of the sensing plane. This simplified model is only relevant to the fundamental mode in Fig T M × B (7) Sensor Transduction The ADXL 203 directly measures a differential capacitance, which is inversely proportional to a displacement of the proof-mass (in either X or Y directions, see Fig. S = γd (8) S mag = γ mag ∇B (9) Noise and Theoretical Resolution Using the understanding of mechanics and effect of magnetic fields on the sensor output, the noise floor can be calculated. The theoretical resolution is assumed to be limited by the noise floor of the sensor. The ADXL data sheet reports a noise density, ρ, of 110 μV Hz -1/2 (ref. 10). This accelerometer noise density can be scaled by the magnetic sensitivity, γ mag , in Eq 10 to find magnetic noise density, ρ mag . This yields a magnetic noise density of 110 fT cm -1 Hz -1/2 . Finally, Eq 1 earlier related noise density to sensor resolution when using a lock-in amplifier. This experimental setup, then, would reach a theoretical best measurement of 13 fT cm -1 in 1 mTorr vacuum and at room temperature. ρ mag = γ mag ρ (10) The purpose of this work was threefold: 1) to build a magnetic sensor that is only sensitive to gradient magnetic fields, 2) to demonstrate the wide field and frequency space of this new class of magnetic sensors, and 3) to achieve 1 and 2 in a small, low-cost, and commercially available platform. We have demonstrated the performance of a gradient magnetometer by achieving a resolution of 100 pT cm -1 in shielded vacuum, and a range spanning over 3 decades in ambient conditions (1.1 nT cm -1 to 4.6 μT cm -1 ). Compared to existing designs of magnetic MEMS resonant sensors, our resolution surpasses the best found in literature 14 by a factor of three experimentally and by over a factor of fifteen theoretically (110 fT cm -1 Hz -1/2 ). More sensitive accelerometers, such as the ADXL 354, would theoretically be able to improve this sensitivity by a factor of ten 