In this paper, we deploy a full-wave FDTD paradigm to investigate the effect of reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) -switchable frequency-selective surfaces (FSS) -on generic massive MIMO uplink channel's eigenspace structure. We place an RIS based on two switchable FSS layers in the vicinity of a 64-element massive MIMO base-station (BS) array, serving a cluster of four fixed user equipment (UE) units. Utilizing an electromagnetic tool based on time-averaged Poynting flow developed recently by the authors, we demonstrate how the illumination of BS-array aperture can be controlled by the intentional deployment of various switching states in the RIS placed near the BS. We show that such supplementary RIS structures may assist the wireless link engineer in deterministically "customizing" the uplink channel behaviour by selectively enhancing/suppressing certain channel eigenvalues. Massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) systems have demonstrated promising performance in terms of spectral, energy and hardware efficiency, which has established it as one of the key underlying technologies for the sub-6 GHz and mm-wave wireless networks (5G/6G) of future generation We consider FDTD framework based on Cartesian coordinate system with cubical spatial grids (∆x = ∆y = ∆z = ∆ = 12 mm) and time-step ∆t = 18.4 ps which satisfies the CFL criterion Note that we deal with the UE-to-BS uplink channel H = H uplink for the time-being, implying that the BS-array operates in the receiving mode, i.e. all the exciter dipoles are maintained at matched load termination where modulating signal frequency f 0 is 2.5 GHz, with parameters t 0 = 70∆t and σ 0 = 15∆t. When one UE is excited, the others are terminated by matched load. To make the transient effects die down completely, the FDTD time-marching simulation is run for T max = 400∆t. Note that, the distance d 1 along x-axis between the UE-assembly and the massive MIMO BS-array is chosen at 70∆ = 7λ 0 , where λ 0 = c/f 0 and c is the speed of EM wave in free-space. To visualize the EM-wave propagation from the UEs to the illuminated massive MIMO BSarrays, we plot the 2D profiles of time-averaged Poynting vector magnitude |S avg | given by: where the Poynting vector S = S (r, t) = E (r, t)×H (r, t) is computed via standard grid-interpolation techniques using local electric and magnetic fields (i.e. E (r, t) and H (r, t)) generated by FDTD simulations The RIS as shown in Fig. To quantify the effects of RIS we compute eigenvalue difference (similar to Considering a fixed assembly of 4 UEs, the present paper uses a full-wave FDTD simulation approach in uplink channel modelling for an RIS-enabled 64 element massive MIMO BS-array of reflectorbacked dipoles. The eigenvalue difference results of Fig. Note that, here we consider the UE and BS antenna-elements to beam same z-directed polarization, but other possible combinations can be easily explored in the FDTD simulation paradigm. Furthermore, we only consider only a few possible switching states (see Fig. Debdeep Sarkar (Corresponding Author) and Yahia Antar are with the Royal Military College, PO Box 17000, Station Forces Kingston, Ontario, K7K 7B4, Canada (Emails: debdeep1989@gmail.com; antar-y@rmc.ca). Said Mikki is with University of New Haven, West Haven, Connecticut, Boston Post Rd, 06516, USA (Email: said.m.mikki@gmail.com).3 c 20XX IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works." This is conceptually similar to classic reflectarrays One can find discussions on practical realization of such structures by utilizing thin microstrip-lines printed on low-loss substrates or by capillaries filled with liquid-metal technology (See