Basic understanding of the driving forces of ion conduction in solids is critical to the development of new solid-state ion conductors. Physical understanding of ion conduction is limited due to strong deviations from harmonic vibrational dynamics in these systems that are difficult to characterize experimentally and theoretically. We overcome this challenge in superionic AgI by combining THz-frequency Raman polarization-orientation measurements and ab-initio molecular dynamics computations. Our findings demonstrate clear signatures of strong coupling between the mobile ions and host lattice that are of importance to the diffusion process. We first derive a dynamic structural model from the Raman measurements that captures the simultaneous crystal-like and fluid-like properties of this fast-ion conductor. Then we show and discuss the importance of anharmonic relaxational motion that arises from the iodine host lattice by demonstrating its strong impact on ion conduction in superionic AgI. Solid-state ion conductors (SSICs) are promising materials for replacing liquid ion conductors used in many important technological applications such as batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors, because they are typically non-flammable and could enable higher energy densities Recent computational and experimental work does indeed indicate that the host lattice impacts the ionic conductivity of SSICs in ways not yet captured by traditional theories In this letter, we demonstrate an approach to overcoming these challenges in α-AgI. We employ Raman polarization-orientation (PO) measurements to reveal unexpected signatures of order in the vibrational dynamics of α-AgI. This finding enables the development of a novel microscopic description of the vibrational spectrum of this SSIC, providing a coherent interpretation of the origin of its features. Our Raman measurements also reveal the presence of strongly anharmonic, relaxational atomic motions. Through ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) computations, we show that these relaxational motions involve the iodine host lattice and are coupled to Ag + diffusion. This discovery signifies that anharmonicity plays an important role in the functional properties of this material. α-AgI exists at ambient pressure between 420-831 K. α-AgI has a cubic structure with time-average space group Im3m where I atoms occupy BCC lattice sites and Ag atoms occupy interstitial tetrahedral sites (Fig. In materials with broken translational symmetry, optical vibrations are localized and lack well-defined wavevectors We now contrast the disorder-induced scattering picture with measurements from a method typically employed to characterize fully crystalline samples: PO Raman (Fig. The discovery of crystal-like periodicities in PO motivates development of a new structural model for α-AgI. First, we identified and fitted each feature by employing the symmetry filtering effect of PO Raman (fit methodology in SM [39]); see Fig. Conventional Raman analysis fails to explain these observations: On the one hand, ascribing the Raman scattering to purely disorder-induced scattering as discussed above cannot explain the crystalline-like symmetries observed. On the other hand, standard crystal symmetry analysis Instead, we propose a 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model of vibrations that straddles the boundary between crystalline and disordered materials. The critical innovation of our model is that the symmetry observed in the PO response is established locally rather than through the long-range order of a phonon model of vibrations. In our model, when an Ag + hops to a tetrahedral site of the BCC lattice, a transient, orientationally-ordered The most interesting feature identified from the PO Raman response is the central component (Fig. The PO response of the OI element is distinctly 'liquidlike', a behavior not previously observed in a solid, to our knowledge. Like in a fluid, this element has no orienta-tion dependence and is depolarized since it has a high ratio of perpendicular to parallel intensity (compare to central component of Figure The OD element of the central component is identified by its symmetry as one of the fundamental modes of the 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model (Figure Stimulated by these observations, we investigate via AIMD the relationship between iodine relaxational motion and Ag + diffusion. Our approach is to temporally and spatially resolve atomic motions in the AgI 4 tetrahedra of the 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model. Specifically, we investigate dynamically changing tetrahedral geometries by computing trajectories of the I-I-I bond angle θ (Fig. A pair of AIMD-enabled gedankenexperiments establishes the coupling between the iodine host lattice and Ag + motion. First, stipulating Ag + to be fixed with zero velocity at tetrahedral sites, we find that the large amplitude oscillations of θ at low frequency disappear (black curve, Fig. We suggest that a broad central component and corresponding relaxational motion of the host sublattice may be indicators of a good ion conductor. While a broader survey of materials is needed for confirmation, we do note that several other highly-conductive SSICs also show signs of a broad central component in their Raman response In conclusion, using PO Raman measurements and AIMD calculations, we developed a new understanding of the vibrational dynamics of α-AgI. We introduced the 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model in which the α-AgI vibrational dynamics are localized to an AgI 4 tetrahedral configuration. The success of our model demonstrates the value of a local picture of vibrational dynamics in materials with dynamic structural disorder. Within that picture we have identified the presence of anharmonic relaxational motion in our Raman measurements and the AIMD simulations, which demonstrated an anharmonic relaxational component in the iodine host lattice. Our AIMD computations indicate that iodine relaxation is causally connected to Ag + motion, and vice versa Ag + diffusion is strongly impacted by iodine vibrations. These results show that anharmonic motion of the host lattice is a critical component of the ion transport process in α-AgI. We hope our findings revitalize the efforts to understand the deep connection between vibrational dynamics and ionic conductivity, and thereby may lead to new SSIC design principles. Fast Ion Conduction in Superionic AgI hopping events Raman spectra illustrating the low frequency response of several compounds. GaAs, which has no significant anharmonicity and has no ionic conductivity, shows no central component. β-AgI, which has very low ionic conductivity (∼1 × 10 -5 S/cm) shows a very sharp optical mode at 17 cm -1 , but no central component. α-AgI, with very high ionic conductivity (∼1 S/cm) shows a strong central peak, similar to the central peak displayed by liquids like chloroform (CHCl3). The residual Rayleigh scattering in the region between -7 to 7 cm -1 has been removed for clarity. FIG. Crystals were prepared according to a published procedure Preparation of α-AgI Crystals from β-AgI Single Crystals α-AgI crystals were prepared from β-AgI single crystals according to the procedure of Mills et al. PO employs polarized light to probe the components of the Raman polarizability tensor in a single crystal, providing identification of mode symmetries The Raman crystallography measurement setup is shown in Figure A 1064 nm laser (Coherent Mephisto) was used for the Raman excitation. This proved critical as shorter wavelength lasers caused a photographic effect during measurement, ruining the long-time scale measurements required for Raman crystallography. The laser was filtered for any amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) using volume holographic ASE filters (Ondax). The beam shape was optimized by a pinhole spatial filter. The laser was polarization filtered by a calcite polarizer (Thorlabs), and the polarization was rotated with respect to the sample with a monochromatic half-wave plate (Thorlabs). The polarized beam is directed into the microscope and to the sample via a 90/10 volume holographic beam splitter (Ondax). A 20x NIR objective (Zeiss) was used to focus the laser onto the sample. An excitation power of 5 mW was used, measured just before the objective. The backscattered Raman signal and Rayleigh reflection are collected by the objective and passed back to the beam splitter, where 90% of the Rayleigh is eliminated and the Raman signal is transmitted. An achromatic half-wave plate is used to rotate the signal polarization back to the polarization of the laser before the monochromatic half-wave plate (parallel configuration) or perpendicular to it (perpendicular configuration). Another polarizer (called the analyzer) filters the polarization of the signal. The remaining Rayleigh component of the signal is then attenuated by two volume holographic notch filters (Ondax). The signal is then directed to a one meter spectrometer (Horiba) and detected by a 1D InGaAs detector array (Horiba). Due to fixed-pattern dark noise in the InGaAs detector, a dark spectrum is subtracted from each spectrum. We found the system could achieve an extinction ratio (I ⊥ /I ) between 0.001 and 0.01 depending on the orientation of the 1st 1/2-λ plate. To accumulate a Raman crystallography dataset, we rotated the polarization orientation of the incident laser beam (of polarization e i , see Figure To aid the reader in following our PO fitting procedure, a flow chart is provided in Figure To prepare the raw data for fitting, a small constant background was removed from each spectrum for measurements at 443 K and 583 K (step 1 Figure We fit each spectrum in the PO Raman dataset with a sum of damped Lorentz oscillators, a single Debye relaxor, and a baseline correction (<2% of total intensity). The Debye relaxor is used to fit the central component, according to previous treatments [S9 where I is the Raman intensity, b is a constant baseline correction, ν is the Raman shift, the ν i are the resonance We fit the complete set of PO spectra using two guiding principles. The first principle is that since all spectra in a Raman crystallography data set are taken under the same conditions of temperature, pressure, laser power, etc., all spectra reflect the same fundamental set of features whose widths and positions are fixed with respect to polarization orientation and analyzer configuration. The second principle is that features with different symmetry respond differently to the orientation of the polarized light and the analyzer configuration, allowing isolation of particular features according to their symmetry. We used the symmetry-filtering effects of the polarized light to obtain the widths and positions of each feature by performing pre-fits (steps 2 & 3 in Figure The shoulder at 40 cm -1 (Peak 1) proved difficult to fit uniquely. The width and position of this peak can be fit with a range of values that all yield equally good fits. We have chosen a value yielding good fits in both parallel and perpendicular, but we emphasize that there is significant uncertainty in this value. However, the polarization/orientation dependencies and symmetries reported in the main text are obtained regardless of the exact position and width of Peak 1, within the uncertainty window. Once width and position parameters for all four features were obtained from the prefits performed at 120 • (steps 2 & 3 in Figure In a single crystal, the intensity of a Raman mode i (S i ) can vary with polarization orientation angle θ (see Figure where the sum over j accounts for the degeneracy of the mode, and e i , e s, , and e s,⊥ are the incident and scattered light (selected for parallel and perpendicular polarization configurations), respectively, as indicated in Figure S9 The symmetry of a particular mode can be identified from the periodicities in its intensity response (S i (θ)), making Raman crystallography a powerful tool in the identification of modes. Additionally, the crystal orientation can be TABLE Raman Tensors for Each Irreducible Representation (Ri,j) . Two other features of S i, (θ) and S i,⊥ (θ) can serve to confirm mode assignment. First, all modes share the same phase in θ, meaning if a particular mode requires a phase shift ∆ (i.e. S i, (θ + ∆), S i,⊥ (θ + ∆)) compared to the other modes to fit the data, then that mode has been incorrectly identified. Second, the ratio S i,⊥ (θ)/S i, (θ) must also agree with the theoretical calculation, meaning the intensity in the perpendicular must be at the proper ratio compared to the parallel. This serves as a check on both mode identification and the quality of the optical alignment. Both the phase and intensity checks have been confirmed for the mode assignment presented in this manuscript. Using Equation S10 and Equation S11 discussed in the 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model below and the experimental configuration of Figure First-principles (ab-initio) molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations were performed using the VASP code where ... denotes the average over atoms and R(t) is the position of an atom at time t. From it the diffusion constant can be obtained via: M SD(t) = 6Dt. To calculate the tetrahedral angles (Θ i ), first the I atoms forming one AgI 4 tetrahedron were identified. Then, we calculated atomic distances d ij (t) = R i (t) -R j (t) from the trajectories R i (t), where the indices i and j address the I atoms of the tetrahedron. Finally, from the atomic distances, the angles have been calculated as: where i, j and k address I atoms of the tetrahedron. From the 12 possible angles, we selected one representative case and showed it in the main text, since the qualitative behavior of all angles was similar (see Figure In our analysis, we have Fourier-filtered the nuclear trajectories according to III. THE 'LOCAL TETRAHEDRAL OSCILLATOR' MODEL Our model is motivated by an analysis of whether a phonon picture of vibrations can extend to the vibrations of mobile Ag + in α-AgI. To propagate a phonon in this system, a stable ordered state of atoms is required, and a correlation length for the phonon is established by the residence time of Ag + (τ ≈ 2 -3 ps) [S4, S16-S18]. The decay time for Ag + ordering at the unit cell level, assuming four Ag atoms in the unit cell that hop independently, is τ ≈ 500 fs. Ordering beyond the unit cell has an even shorter decay time. While correlated Ag + motion may increase this value somewhat, it is clear from this estimate that crystallographic order does not exist in this material on the time scales required for substantial phonon propagation. A phonon-like picture of vibrations is therefore unlikely to be useful, and a local view is needed. Considering the above, we propose the vibrational dynamics to be localized to a sub-unit cell structure. As the Ag + are tetrahedrally coordinated by I -, it is natural to consider a tetrahedral model for the vibrational dynamics. As stated in the main text, we propose the fundamental unit of vibration is the orientationally ordered AgI 4 tetrahedron. We note that other tetrahedral structures, like IAg 4 , could also serve as the fundamental unit of vibration, and more work is needed to discern exactly what structure is observed. When Ag + hops, one tetrahedral unit is lost followed by the formation of a new unit at the new site. We assume these tetrahedra vibrate independently, being localized by the strong dynamic structural disorder. A similar tetrahedral model was proposed to explain the Raman spectrum of RbAg 4 I 5 , but the large number of tetrahedral orientations in this structure prevented a full assignment of mode symmetries In our 'local tetrahedral oscillator' model, α-AgI does not possess a space group because of the lack of translational symmetry of Ag + discussed above. However, the symmetries observed in optical vibrations depend only on the point group, which does not include translational symmetries. Only a preservation of orientational symmetry is required to detect point group symmetries in our PO measurement, and this is preserved by the iodine sublattice. Therefore, we employ a point group model for the Raman mode symmetries. Tetrahedral configurations in a BCC lattice have D 2d point group symmetry. This symmetry is not cubic and is the point group for certain tetragonal space groups. The tetrahedron is distorted from the ideal, isotropic T d tetrahedral point group. We have confirmed from our MD simulations (Fig. We assume that at any given time, the crystal is inhabited by many D 2d 'local tetrahedral oscillators' occupying the tetrahedral sites, of which there are several different orientations within the crystal. We expect the overall PO Raman response to be an average over all those orientations. To calculate the PO Raman response, we first calculate the PO response for each of the irreducible representations of the D 2d point group from their Raman polarizability tensors (Table We then sum the response over all orientations in the BCC unit cell, with equal weight on each orientation. The resulting response is: where R j i is the Raman polarizability tensor (given in Table The average over orientations generates a polarization dependence such that modes that had distinguishable symmetries no longer do (such as B 2 and E, see Figure The average over orientations also generates a polarization dependence for the B 1 , B 2 (z), and E(x, y) modes that resembles a higher tetrahedral symmetry, namely T d . This, combined with the fact that we could not separate some pairs of modes by energy, gave the impression that the tetrahedral structure may be of higher symmetry than expected. However, we did detect one feature distinguishing the D 2d model from the T d : the polarization dependence of the A 1 mode. In the T d model, no polarization dependence is expected for the A 1 . However, in the D 2d model a polarization dependence is expected (Figure 