We have studied a spin-1/2, ABA, Ising trilayer system with two different types of interactions, inplane ferromagnetic and out-of-plane anti-ferromagnetic, among the lattice sites, on different layers. In the pure case, devoid of any impurity, we employed Monte-Carlo method with single spin-flip Metropolis algorithm to find out the anti-ferromagnetic critical temperature (Néel temperature) and another lower temperature, called the compensation temperature, both with total magnetisation zero, in accordance with already established results for square lattice. Then non-magnetic impurities, (spin value= 0) were implanted on each layer at randomly picked sites and their concentration was increased in steps from 5% to 20%. The ratio of inter-planar anti-ferromagnetic to mid-layer ferromagnetic coupling strength as well as the ratio of top and bottom layer ferromagnetic to mid layer ferromagnetic coupling strength were also varied and Néel and compensation temperatures, both were observed shifting towards lower temperature values with increase in concentration of impurities in the lattice for any fixed ratio of different coupling strengths, in absence of any external magnetic field. In addition, the magnitude of the residual magnetisation i.e. the ratio of the peak value of the magnetisation in between Néel and compensation points and the saturated value of magnetisation, was also observed to vary with different values of controlling parameters. Magneto-caloric effect (MCE) in magnetic systems, is rigorously investigated due to its potential for applications in cryogenics and construction of energy efficient devices Magnetic multilayers have attracted significant attention recently from technologists and theoreticians alike for the fact that the properties of the multilayer system as a whole can significantly be different from those of any of its component layers. This is the motivation behind the study of them from both the schools. Thus we've witnessed many interesting observations and unusual phase diagrams from both the communities for a magnet when it is composed of materials with different interactions, e.g. ferromagnetic and anti-ferromagnetic. Due to advancement of experimental techniques the properties of the multilayer may be tailored as per need by preparing the multilayer structures synthetically. To meet desired macroscopic characteristics we can vary the microscopic structure, e.g. by implanting impurity in the layering pattern. Ferrimagnetic layered materials are exciting for the existence of compensation points, i.e., temperatures below the anti-ferromagnetic critical point or Néel temperature for which the total magnetization is zero while each of the individual layers still remain magnetically ordered This article uses an already established model and its thermodynamic description We performed our numerical investigation of the magnetic and thermodynamic properties on a spin-1/2 Ising trilayer system containing three magnetic layers with the following constructional details: (c) The layers can be stacked, distinguishably, in two ways as (i) ABA stacking and (ii) AAB stacking (Fig. where summation indices t, m and b denote respectively the lattice site indices for the top-layer, mid layer and bottom-layer. In equation ( We performed Monte Carlo simulations where ∆E is the change of energy due to the change of the orientation of the spin projection from S i to -S i . We set the Boltzmann constant, k B to 1. Similar 3L 2 random updates of spins are defined as one Monte Carlo sweep per spin (MCSS). Corresponding to a high-temperature, we started from an initially random configuration of the trilayer and equilibrated the system till 12 × 10 4 MCSS and calculated thermal averages and fluctuations from further 4×10 4 MCSS. So, the total MCSS in the simulation for a fixed temperature, T is 16×10 4 . Moving forward we decrease the temperature and use the last spin configuration at the previous higher temperature as the initial configuration for the new lower temperature. This procedure simulates a cooling that is closer to equilibrium compared to starting at each temperature with a random spin configuration. The CPU time needed for 16 × 10 4 MCSS is approximately 18 h on an Intel Core TM i5-6500 CPU @ 3.20 GHz×4, for a trilayer with 128 × 128 sites on each layer. We are interested in tracking down the changes in residual magnetisation, of the system as a whole for different parameter values with changes in temperature from 3.1 to 0.1. We have chosen to vary the following parameters in the ways described below for each fixed value of temperature: 1. We have chosen three values of J 11 /J 22 as 0.20, 0.35, 0.50 and set J 33 = J 11 , J 23 = J 12 . 2. For each value of J 11 /J 22 , we varied the ratio of J 12 /J 22 to -0.1, -0.4, -0.7. For each of the values of J 11 /J 22 and J 12 /J 22 , we've calculated the ensemble averages of the following quantities at each of the temperature points: (1) Sublattice magnetisations for top, mid and bottom layers, denoted by M t , M m , M b by the following formulae: where q ∈ {t, m, b} and the sum extends over all sites in respective planes as x and y denote the coordinates of a spin on a plane and runs from 1 to L = 128, after completion of one TMCS. • • • denotes an average over time i.e. after completion of MCSSs, after equilibration. We assume ergodicity has been reached so an ensemble average equals the time average. (2) Total magnetisation of the trilayer: From the plot of M vs. temperature, we find the values of residual magnetisation and study the effects of controlling parameters on it. 5. Then we repeated the above procedure for randomly implanted non-magnetic impurity concentrations (spin value = 0) of 5%, 10%, 15% and 20% and observed the variation of residual magnetisation on impurity concentration. We studied the spin-1/2, ABA, Ising trilayer, with MC simulations with single spin-flip Metropolis algorithm, first without any impurity to find out the residual magnetisation decreases as the ratio of intra-planar ferromagnetic coupling strengths of top layer to mid-layer increase with a fixed value of inter-planar antiferromagnetic to mid-layer ferromagnetic ratio. Similar trend in residual magnetisation is observed while we kept decreasing the value of inter-planar antiferromagnetic to mid-layer ferromagnetic ratio, after fixing the ratio of intra-planar ferromagnetic coupling strengths of top layer to mid-layer. Next we moved on with the same scheme but implanted random, non-magnetic impurities (spin value = 0) to observe decay in the value of residual magnetisation with increasing impurity concentration from 5% to 20%, for both the above scenarios i.e. two types of variation of ratios of coupling strengths. We found out that for fixed ratios, increase in impurity concentration results in gradual decrease in the value of residual magnetisation.