We synthesize a series of CVD h-BN films and perform critical infrared spectroscopic characterization. For high-temperature (HT, Temp = 1400 • C) grown h-BN thin film only E1u-mode infrared phonon is activated demonstrating highly aligned 2D h-BN planes over large area, whereas low-temperature (LT, Temp = 1000 • C) grown film shows two phonon peaks, E1u and A2u, due to stacking of h-BN plane at tilted angle. For CVD graphene transferred on HT h-BN/SiO2/Si substrate, interband transition spectrum σ1 shifts strongly to lower energy compared with that on LT h-BN/SiO2/Si and on bare SiO2/Si substrate, revealing that residual carrier density n in graphene is suppressed by use of HT h-BN layer. Also the interband transition width of σ1 defined by effective temperature is reduced from 400 K for G/SiO2/Si to 300 K for HT h-BN/SiO2/Si. The behaviors of n and effective temperature show that HT h-BN film can decouple CVD graphene from the impurity and defect of SiO2 leading to large scale free-standing like graphene. Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a graphite-like layered material characterized by wide band gap ∼ 6 eV. Recently large area h-BN thin films are synthesized by CVD technique. In this work we perform infrared transmission measurement on the CVD h-BN and graphene/h-BN films. For the h-BN film infrared-active phonon peaks are probed. A correlation of the phonon profile with the growth condition is found, providing a knowledge about the lattice structure of the films. For graphene/h-BN interband transition of Dirac carrier in graphene is measured using the infrared spectroscopy. From the electronic transition we are able to determine Fermi energy, carrier density, and defect-related interband transition width of graphene. We grew multilayer h-BN thin films using CVD method on Al 2 O 3 substrate at two different temperatures (Temp) 1000 • C and 1400 • C. The details of the film synthesis were reported elsewhere. To better understand the phonon behavior we performed angle-tilted IR transmission measurement using single crystal h-BN. Here 100 nm-thick h-BN crystal is tilted from θ = 0 to 30 • with respect to the incident IR as sketched in Figure We discuss briefly about the phonon frequency of our samples. For HT h-BN film the phonon frequency agrees with that of the single crystal for both A 2u peak and E 1u peak. However, for LT h-BN film, the A 2u (E 1u ) phonon frequency is notable lower (higher) than HT h-BN. When the substrate temperature is lower than the optimal temperature during the growth (HT = 1400 • C for our case) the B and N atoms cannot crystallize into fully relaxed, equilibrium lattice due to insufficient migration energy, causing some strain or tension in the film. We propose that the lattice strain may be one possible reason for the phonon frequency shifts. Also LT h-BN film may contain atomic vacancy and defects, which may also cause the phonon shifts. To study the role of h-BN thin film as substrate for large scale graphene we transfer monolayer CVD graphene sheet on three different substrates, HT h-BN(2.5 nm thick)/SiO 2 /Si, LT h-BN(40 nm thick)/SiO 2 /Si, and bare SiO 2 /Si. Figure where E F and T (=Temp) stand for the Fermi energy and sample temperature respectively. For Temp = 0, Eq.( In conclusion we performed infrared measurement on large scale CVD h-BN thin film and CVD graphene/h-BN heterostructure. For CVD h-BN sample, HT (Temp = 1400 • C) -grown thin film shows only E 1u optical phonon like single crystal h-BN flake, demonstrating that 2D h-BN planes are highly aligned over the entire area of the film. On the other hand, LT (1000 • C)grown film shows two phonon peaks, E 1u and A 2u , due to tilting of the h-BN plane by θ = 20 ∼ 40 • . For G/HT h-BN samples, interband transition spectrum σ 1 shows that residual carrier density of graphene is strongly suppressed to n = 5 × 10 11 cm -2 , from n = 2.9 × 10 12 cm -2 of G/SiO 2 and becomes comparable to n of single crystal graphene on single crystal h-BN. Also the interband transition width of σ 1 is reduced from Temp * = 400 K for G/SiO 2 to the theoretical value Temp * = 300 K by using the HT h-BN film as substrate. The behaviors of n and Temp * show that HT h-BN can decouple large scale graphene from SiO 2 leading it closer to ideal, undoped Dirac semi-metallic state. Substrate