We discuss the possibility of a gravitional Nieh-Yan anomaly of the type ∂μj μ 5 = γT 2 T a ∧ Ta in topological Weyl materials, where T is temperature and T a is the effective or emergent torsion. As distinct from the nonuniversal parameter Λ in the conventional (zero temperature) Nieh-Yan anomaly -with canonical dimensions of momentum -the parameter γ is dimensionless. This suggests that the dimensionless parameter is fundamental, being determined by the geometry, topology and number of the number of chiral quantum fields without any explicit non-universal UV scales. This conforms with previous results in the literature, as well as spectral flow calculations using torsional magnetic field at finite temperature. In non-relativistic topological matter, quasi-relativistic description of low-energy quasiparticles with linear spectrum phenomena may emerge where the e i a = ∂ pi H(p)| pW are the linear coefficients of the Hermitean Pauli matrices σ a , close to the Weyl node at p W . The net chirality pW sgn(det e i a ) vanishes. For slowly varying parameters in the Hamiltonian operator i∂ t -H W , the semi-classical fields e μ a (x) = {δ 0 a , e i a } are promoted to background spacetime tetrad fields with dimensions of unity for temporal indices e 0 a and velocity for spatial e i a . The shift of the Weyl node p W acts as an emergent (axial) gauge field with emergent Lorentz symmetry to the linear order. If the fermions are charged, the fermions can couple to the electromagnetic vector potential via minimal coupling. These background fields imply the chiral anomaly for the low-energy massless quasiparticles. For the applications of the chiral anomaly in Weyl semimetal and Weyl superfluids/superconductors, see e.g. In particular, the non-trivial coordinate dependence (torsion) related to the tetrads e μ a (x) in (1) can lead to the gravitational Nieh-Yan anomaly For spacetimes with torsion (and curvature), Nieh and Yan where e a μ dx μ is the local tetrad field and T a = de a + ω a b ∧ e b and R ab = dω a b + ω a c ∧ ω c b , in terms of the tetrad and spinconnection ω a b = ω a μb dx μ . This invariant can be written as using the associated Bianchi identities, which says that N is a locally exact 4-from independent from tr(R ∧ R) and dual of the scalar curvature R in the presence of non-zero torsion. It can be associated with a difference of two topological terms, albeit in terms of an embedding to five dimensions where j μ 5 is the axial current (tensor)density and the nonuniversal parameter Λ has dimension of relativistic momentum (mass) [Λ] = [1/L] = [M ] and is determined by some ultraviolet energy scale. There has been several attempts to consider the Nieh-Yan anomaly in condensed matter systems with Weyl fermions like In terms of effective low-energy effective actions, it seems that the fully relativistic analogs work unambiguously only for terms in the effective action with dimensionless coefficients. Perhaps the most well-known example being the 2+1dimensional topological Chern-Simons (CS) terms describing the Quantum Hall effect. Gravitational Chern-Simons terms similarly are quantized in terms of chiral central charge which has relation to thermal transport and the boundary conformal field theory , which allows to have topological terms of the type E ∧ A ∧ dA with quantized dimensionless coefficients Another such example is the temperature correction to curvature effects, with δS eff = T 2 R in the low-energy action The same universal behavior takes place with the terms describing the chiral magnetic and chiral vortical effects in Weyl superfluid 3 He-A, where the coefficients are dimensionless It is quite possible that the same situation may hold for the temperature correction to the Nieh-Yan anomaly term For concreteness, we focus on the finite temperature Nieh-Yan anomaly in chiral p-wave Weyl superfluid (such as 3 He-A) with and check whether the dimensionless parameter γ can be universal. We now use the result obtained by Khaidukov and Zubkov We assume that this current can be covariantly generalized to the 4-current: ǫ μναβ e νa T a αβ . Then one obtains the divergence In the presence of curvature R(ω), this becomes the temperature correction to the full Nieh-Yan term in Eq. ( This result has been confirmed in Ref. Let us apply this equation to the chiral superfluid 3 He-A. The chiral anomaly for the Weyl quasiparticles leads to the anomalous production of the linear momentum This is consistent with the anomalous superfluid hydrodynamics: total momentum in the system is conserved. Thus Eq.( Let us express Eq.( Here c ⊥ ( m + in) = ∆0 pF ( m + in) is the order parameter in the p + ip chiral superfluid; l = m × n is the unit vector in the direction of the orbital angular momentum of Cooper pairs; c = p F /m and c ⊥ = ∆ 0 /p F are anisotropic effective speeds of light in Weyl equation ( The torsion (and curvature) tensors corresponding to this tetrad were calculated in Ref. Assuming that Eq.( We suggested that the temperature correction to the gravitational Nieh-Yan anomaly can be universal for chiral Weyl fermions. It is fully determined by the quasirelativistic physics in the vicinity of the Weyl node, and does not depend on the non-universal cut-off as distinct from the zero temperature term. We found the universal prefactor using the relativistic regularization scheme of Refs. We compared the result to chiral p-wave superfluid with Weyl points, where it is known that the hydrodynamics of 3 He-A experiences the chiral anomaly due to non-trivial order parameter textures and superflow. The simplest way to compute this is the spectral flow through the Weyl points One may conclude that the same UV-IR correspondence takes place for the finite temperature Nieh-Yan-anomaly. In this case, the temperature T 2 is an IR energy scale at which the quasi-relativistic fermions are well-defined, whereas Λ 2 is an explicit and non-universal UV cut-off 