For many applications, a method for controlling the optical properties of a solid-state film over a broad wavelength range is highly desirable and could have significant commercial impact. One such application is smart glazing technology where it is necessary to harvest near-infrared solar radiation in the winter and reflect it in the summer-an impossibility for materials with fixed thermal and optical properties. Here, we experimentally demonstrate a smart window which uses a thin-film coating containing GeTe, a bi-stable, chalcogenidebased phase-change material which can modulate near-infrared absorption while maintaining neutral-colouration and constant transmission of light at visible wavelengths. We additionally demonstrate controlled down-conversion of absorbed near-infrared energy to far-infrared radiation which can be used to heat a building's interior and show that these thin-films also serve as low-emissivity coatings, reducing heat transfer between a building and its external environment throughout the year. Finally, we demonstrate fast, sub-millisecond switching using transparent electrical heaters integrated on glass substrates. These combined properties result in a smart window that is efficient, affordable, and aesthetically pleasing-three aspects which are crucial for successful adoption of green technology. Maintaining pleasant indoor temperatures of industrial and residential buildings consumes large amounts of energy, accounting for 20% to 40% of the national energy budgets in developed countries Current static window solutions such as "Low-E" coatings can be used to reduce heat transfer Through photon-phonon energy down-conversion, we harvest near-infrared energy during the winter and re-emit it as far-infrared blackbody radiation. This down-conversion process enables additional benefits, such as anti-symmetric emission where absorbed energy is preferentially radiated into the building while preventing internal heat from escaping. Our unique design has significant implications for the future of smart windows and the design of energy efficient buildings. The concept of our smart window design is illustrated in Fig. To control the transfer of near-infrared solar energy through our smart window, we make use of the significant (and non-volatile) modulation of GeTe's complex refractive index when in the amorphous versus crystalline phase Annealing for a longer time (greater than 10 μs) at a temperature of 280 °C allows GeTe to recrystallize, significantly increasing the absorption of near-infrared wavelengths. This process is non-volatile and reversible, meaning that energy is only consumed during the actual switching process and no electric field is needed to maintain either the amorphous or crystalline state Optical images of our fabricated smart windows are shown in both states in Fig. In Fig. The optical response over the entire solar spectrum is visualized in Fig. As the transmission of the near-infrared is below 5% in both states, we attribute the observed change in reflection to increased absorption when the PCM is in the crystalline state. We calculate the absorption spectra of our smart glazing in both states (A = 1 -T -R, where A, T, and R are the absorption, transmission, and reflection spectra respectively) and plot them against the ASTM G173 solar irradiance standard Here we see that while the absorption is relatively high at visible wavelengths, the majority of absorption change occurs in the near-infrared. Crucially, the absorption in the near-infrared is low when the glazing is in the amorphous state which minimizes the amount of unwanted solar energy that is transferred to the building's interior during summer months. We plot the change in absorbed solar irradiance in Fig. To demonstrate that the absorbed near-infrared solar energy can indeed be downconverted to far-infrared thermal radiation, we designed an experiment to image the temperature increase of our smart window when the PCM is in the amorphous and crystalline states (see Fig. The uncoated sample provided a reference thermal emission by which to calibrate the thermal camera and was subtracted from the final results shown in Fig. An additional benefit gained from down-converting the solar spectrum to far-infrared radiation is the asymmetric transfer of absorbed near-infrared energy through our smart window as illustrated in Fig. In a final experiment, we demonstrated electrically-controlled switching of the smart glazing by depositing our thin film stack on patterned FTO/glass substrates. For these devices, an improved PCM alloy was used which has similar optical properties to GeTe, but with a lower amorphization temperature The switching energy was measured using an in-series 25 Ω resistor and oscilloscope. The left side of Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a thin-film smart glazing capable of controlling the transfer of near-infrared energy through a window using an ultra-thin phase-change active layer. This glazing provided a 130% modulation of near-infrared solar energy while maintaining a uniform transmission and colour at visible wavelengths. By down-converting near-infrared to thermal radiation, we were able to demonstrate efficient harvesting of solar energy during winter months while retaining a glazing with desirable low-emissivity properties regardless of the PCM state. We then demonstrate a possible route toward integration onto glass windows using transparent electrical heaters with an initial cyclability count of 1000 cycles. Our results provide a novel and aesthetically appealing alternative to current smart window technologies and could play a major role in reducing the carbon footprint of residential and commercial buildings in the future. Smart glazing films were deposited via RF/DC sputtering on double-side polished quartz wafers using a Kurt J. Lesker PVD 75 system. The base pressure was 5×10 -7 Torr while the working pressure was 3 mTorr during deposition. RF power was 100 W and 50 W for ZnS and GeTe respectively, while the DC power was 50 W for Ag. All targets were 2 inches in diameter. To ensure accurate deposition thicknesses, the film thickness was monitored in-situ using an optical monitor which was compared with a model of the optical stack, providing precise thickness control and repeatability. Transmission and reflection measurements from 400 nm to 2.5 μm were performed using a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/VIS spectrophotometer under ambient conditions. Amorphous spectra were taken of the smart glazing as deposited, while crystalline spectra were measured after a 270° C anneal on a hot plate for 15 seconds. Mid-to far-infrared absorption was measured using a Varian Excalibur FTS 3500 FTIR spectrometer operating from 3 to 25 μm. For thermal down-conversion characterization, a FLIR© ONE Pro camera was used to measure the temperature rise in the uncoated quartz versus the quartz with smart glazing in the amorphous and crystalline states. The samples were illuminated with an LOT, class ABA, solar simulator calibrated to 1 sun (1 kW/m 2 ) and an AM1.5g spectrum. A heat shield composed of plasterboard covered with thick aluminum foil was used to prevent unwanted thermal radiation from the simulator from saturating the FLIR© thermal camera. The transmission of the 1.3 μm thick sheet of PET was also calibrated using the PerkinElmer Lambda spectrometer and factored into the calculated total solar absorption.