Low efficiency is the main drawback of many MEMS thermal energy harvesters. Recently, energy harvesting micro-devices that operate using the pyroelectric effect gained attention due to their potential superior performance. Operation of these devices is based on the cyclic motion of a pyroelectric capacitor that operates between a high temperature and a low temperature reservoirs. In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of oscillations of a pyroelectric capacitor self sustained by thermally actuated bimetal micro-cantilevers, a topic which is so far underinvestigated. In addition to highlighting key thermodynamic aspects of the operation, we explore conditions for self-sustained oscillations and discuss the viability of operation at the mechanical resonance frequency. The analysis is presented for a new design inspired by the device proposed in Refs. It has been reported that a substantial amount of the consumed energy in the USA is wasted as heat It is worth noting that the efficiency of pyroelectric devices is greatly affected by their operation frequency. That is the closer the frequency to the mechanical resonance frequency, the higher the device efficiency. The operation frequency in bulk devices is expected to be in the order of 1-5 Hz, which is orders of magnitude below the resonance frequency. This is due to limitations in the diffusion-based heat transfer processes and/or others imposed by the actuation mechanism. In order to increase the operation frequency, heat exchange between the pyroelectric capacitor and the thermal reservoirs should be sufficiently fast. This can be accomplished by reducing the gap separating the capacitor and the heat source (sink) to the sub-micron length scale Self sustained oscillations (SSO) of piezo-electrically actuated micro-cantilevers have been widely used in many MEMS devices such as photo-detectors In this paper, we propose a new pyroelectric micro energy harvester. We use the proposed device to investigate the dynamics of thermally induced self sustained oscillations of bimetal micro-cantilevers using a physically-based reduced order, yet accurate, model that we developed for this purpose. The model accounts for the heat transfer between and within the different components, and for the various forces including the damping force induced by the squeeze gas film. We then employ this model within an optimization loop to arrive at nearly optimal dimensions of the proposed design over a range of the temperature difference between the high and low temperature reservoirs. The proposed design is inspired by the device proposed in Refs. The proposed device, which has a symmetric design, is presented in Fig. In addition, the proposed design of Fig. A pyroelectric material is a special type of piezoelectric materials where Π s is the spontaneous polarization, T is the temperature, T C is the Curie temperature, and E is the electrical permittivity of the pyroelectric. The current I π flowing to the external circuit, shown in Fig. where A is the area of the electrode plates. It should be noted that the effect of permittivity variation with temperature can be comparable to the spontaneous pyroelectric effect π s and can also be seen above the Curie point As the plate, shown in Fig. , where t c is the thickness of the pyroelectric element. (2) Process b → c is a constant voltage process during which heat is transferred from the pyroelectric element to the LTR. The heat lost per unit volume is q → b→c = c E (T H -T L ), where c E is specific heat of the pyroelectric element. (3) Process c → d is an isothermal process during which the pyroelectric element, at T L , is pulled back toward the HTR by the bimetallic cantilevers as they unbend due to cooling. The heat lost by the pyroelectric element per unit volume during this isothermal process is ) Process d → a is a constant voltage during which heat is transferred from the HTR to the pyroelectric element. The heat gained per unit volume is The power production is then the product of W → cycle and the cycling frequency The thermodynamic efficiency is where the Carnot efficiency is η C = 1 -T L T H and Pyroelectric properties of high-quality (0001)AlN films grown on (111) Si were experimentally measured using the dynamic method in Ref. [22], the reported range of values of the pyroelectric coefficient, measured experimentally at room temperature (298 • K), is 10 -12 μC/(m 2 K) . Dependence of the relative permittivity on the temperature can be inferred from Ref. Upon inspecting Eqs. (4-7), we make the following observations. Assessing the efficiency of the pyroelectric device as a heat engine is dependent on the nature of the HTR as an energy source, given that the LTR is an infinite sink; i.e. it maintains its temperature. If the HTR is an infinite source, i.e. it maintains its temperature at all times as it exchanges heat with the pyroelectric element, then the frequency of operation is more important than how close the efficiency is to the Carnot efficiency. For given T H , T L , and pyroelectric material properties (π and c E ), the ratio of η/η C can be increased by increasing E f 2 -E f 1 . AlN possesses a relatively high dielectric strength 0781 and η = 0.66η C . For given T H , T L , pyroelectric material properties (p and c E ), and E f 2 -E f 1 , the power production (Eq. ( Note that T H and T L are the maximum and minimum average temperature of the pyroelectric capacitor over a cycle. Reduced order modeling where F tip (∆T, z tip ) is the thermo-mechanical force imparted by the bimetal cantilevers, F torsion is the torsion force imparted by the tethers, and F damping is the damping force imparted by the surrounding gas. The thermo-mechanical force imparted by the bimetal cantilevers on the capacitor takes into account the deformation due to thermal expansion (contraction) caused by temperature changes. Next, we present models for calculating these forces along with the temperature distribution in the device. Numerical solution of the model equations require spatial discretization of the different elements, as depicted in Fig. In this section, we present an expression for the force exerted by the bimetal cantilevers on the pyroelectric capacitor. We choose the tethers to be sufficiently compliant so that the horizontal force is small compared to the vertical force. This requires the bending stiffness of the tethers in the horizontal x-direction to be small compared to the bending stiffness in the vertical direction z-direction, i.e. (b/t) t << 1. The distance between the tethers and the pyroelectric capacitor must be sufficiently large to provide the needed room for bending. The vertical force exerted by the beams on the pyroelectric capacitor is a function of their temperatures and tip deflections. The (downward) force at the tip of the bimetal cantilevers is the sum of a linear spring component and a thermal expansion component , where the curvature, K, of the bimetal cantilever due to thermal expansion can be found in Ref. (EI) eq is the equivalent flexural rigidity and ∆T is the change in temperature of the bimetal cantilevers from a reference value, T 0 , for which K 0 = 0. The various dimensions in Eq. ( where c, the location of the common neutral axis relative to the axis of the lower beam, is Since the heat transfer in the bimetal cantilever is slow compared to that in the pyroelectric capacitor, the temperature distribution along the bimetal cantilever is non-uniform. In this case, the beam is discretized into a number elements each of which assumes a uniform temperature. The tip deflection, arising from thermal expansion, is obtained as where the curvature K i of element i calculated from Eq. Since the bimetal cantilever is connected to the plate through the tethers, it is necessary to factor in the impact of the tethers on the force at the tip of the bimetal cantilever. The contribution of the tethers to this force can be divided into two independent components: torsion and bending of the tethers. Torsion of the tethers occurs due to the bending of the bimetal cantilever while the pyroelectric plate stays horizontal (due to symmetry) as it shuttles back and forth between the two thermal reservoirs. At the same time, the tethers experience bending in the x-direction caused by the thermal expansion/contraction of the bimetal cantilever. Since the tethers are designed so that this bending compliance is large, we neglect the associated horizontal force component on the bimetal cantilever tip, as discussed at the beginning of this section. The tethers torque, T , is transformed to a bending moment on the tip of the bimetal cantilever element. The equivalent vertical force at the tip of the bimetal cantilever that yields the same tip displacement as that due to the moment, assuming small deflections, is where G is the shear modulus, L t is the length the tether, θ is the angle of twist at the tip of the tether and J tb (Ref. In order to realize the desired damping force for optimal performance of the device, the HTR and the LTR are patterned with trenches, as shown in Fig. The motion of the pyroelectric capacitor is such that it remains parallel to the thermal reservoirs. In addition, the gap (g) separating the capacitor and each of the reservoirs is much smaller than the plate length (L c ) and width (b c ). At an operation frequency of f = 60Hz, the average plate speed is V c = 2H f = 0.0024m/s. The average speed at which the air is pushed as the plate squeezes the air film is then is the plate perimeter. The Reynolds number of the flow is Re = V H/μ = 0.01, where μ = 1.48 × 10 -5 m 2 /s is the kinematic viscosity of air at atmospheric conditions. Since Re << 1, the flow can be modeled as inertia free. In addition, the flow is assumed to be isothermal. This assumption is justified on the grounds that viscous dissipation does not lead to any appreciable temperature rise and that, in non-insulated micro-devices, the heat generated will be lost quickly due to the large surface to volume ratio. The fact that the squeeze film thickness (the gap separating the pyroelectric plate from either reservoir) is much larger than the mean free path, λ , of air (at the thermodynamic state corresponding to the enclosure pressure and ambient temperature) implies that the flow is in the continuum regime, i.e. Kn = λ /H << 1. The only exception is when the pyroelectric plate gets too close (a few mean free paths) to either reservoir. Under the assumptions of isothermal and inertiafree flow in the continuum regime, we can use the lubrication theory whereby the pressure, p(x, y,t), of the air film between the pyroelectric plate and either reservoir is governed by the Reynolds equation where g(x, y,t) is the gap separating the pyroelectric plate and the thermal reservoir (see Fig. ??), and μ is the effective viscosity The damping force acting on the plate is then computed by integrating, over the area of the pyroelectric capacitor area, the difference in pressure between the bottom and top surfaces Since pyroelectric plate travels the entire distance separating the two reservoirs, solutions based on the linearized Reynolds equation The heat model is based on dividing the device into three different zones as depicted in Fig. The pyroelectric capacitor temperature, T c (z,t), is assumed to be uniform in the (xy) plane of the capacitor. Its variation along the z direction is captured by discretizing the capacitor into layers in the xy plane, where the energy balance for layer i of thickness ∆z is governed by where ∆V i = L c b c ∆z. For the interior nodes, the rates of heat transfer into and out of the layer are t t , i * refers to capacitor element i in contact with tether with intersection area A ii * , δ is the Kronecker's Delta, and the thermal resistance and for i = 1, where R H and R L are the thermal resistances of the gas film between the capacitor and the high and low temperature reservoirs respectively. Referring to Fig. where χ is the fraction of the capacitor area that is exposed to trenches and g = Hg. In this section, we investigate the dynamic behavior of the device using Ansys simulations. Understanding the dynamic operation of the device is essential for identifying the key design considerations which will in turn enable tightening the ranges of design parameters used in the design optimization procedure presented in Section 6 . The properties of the materials comprising the bimetal cantilever layers, tethers, and pyroelectric capacitor for all the designs considered in this work are presented in Table The gap separating the reservoirs and the temperature difference between the two reservoirs are selected to be H = 20μm and T H -T L = 24 • C. For the Ansys simulations of the thermo-mechanical dynamical behavior, thermal contact with the reservoirs is modeled by setting the temperature of the pyroelectric capacitor to that of the reservoir during contact. The speed of this heat transfer is in accordance with that predicted by the time scale analysis, Eq. ( In order to further understand the thermo-mechanical behavior of the bimetal cantilevers underpinning the actuation mechanism, simulations were carried out without imposing any mechanical boundary condition on the displacement of the capacitor at contact with the thermal reservoirs. Upon contact with the HTR at state d (Fig. Figure To observe the natural structural oscillations and the impact of damping, two simulations were carried out, one without damping (Fig. As discussed earlier, the x-bending stiffness of the tethers cause the operation cycle to be asymmetric, where the capacitor spends more time traveling from the LTR to the HTR than from the HTR to the LTR. The operation frequency in this case is ∼ 30Hz. Increasing the operation frequency is a key design objective, since the power output is the product of the work produced per cycle (Eq. ( In the simulation results presented next for the modified design, the contact between the pyroelectric capacitor and the thermal reservoirs is modeled by imposing the corresponding limits on the displacement of the capacitor. Figs. In this section, we discuss design considerations based on the time scales characterizing heat transfer and structural dynamics. We also discuss the necessary conditions for sustained oscillation of the device, and answer the question of whether these sustained oscillations can take place at the mechanical resonance frequency. Based on the discussion, we present in Appendix B a simple design procedure that yields preliminary dimensions which serve as starting values for the optimization algorithm wrapped around the model presented in Section 4. Crucial to sustained oscillations of the pyroelectric capacitor is designing for the relation between τ c , the time it takes the capacitor to store internal energy by heat transfer from the HTR, and τ s , the time it takes the bimetal cantilevers to pull the capacitor away for the reservoir. For sustained oscillations, the capacitor must store a sufficient amount of internal energy before it detaches from the HTR. After separation, the thermal energy stored in the capacitor continues to heat the bimetal cantilevers which, in turn, exert a force on the capacitor that pushes it toward the LTR. The energy stored in the capacitor must be such that the heat gained by the bimetal cantilevers is sufficient to push the capacitor all the way to the LTR. Similar arguments can be made for detachment from the LTR and subsequent travel to the HTR. The time scale τ c is estimated by relating the capacitor's change in internal energy with the heat transferred by conduction through the thickness of the capacitor where t c is thickness of the pyroelectric capacitor, and α c ≡ k c ρ c c c is the thermal diffusivity of the pyroelectric material. In order for the capacitor to detach from the thermal reservoir, the force exerted by the bimetal cantilevers on the capacitor should switch its direction so that it pulls the capacitor away from the reservoir. How quickly this force reverse its direction depends on the change in the bimetal cantilevers temperature. In estimating τ s , the time scale required for such a change to take place, we assume that the bimetal cantilevers force needed to detach the capacitor from the thermal reservoir develops over the time it takes the heat from the capacitor, flowing through the tethers, to diffuse along a fraction of the bimetal cantilever length, L * b . The resulting change in average temperature of this portion (of length L * b ) of the bimetal cantilever is ∆T * . The time scale τ s can then be estimated from the balance where are respectively the thermal resistances of the tethers and bimetal cantilevers of length L * b . Note that introducing the tethers adds to the degrees of freedom so that we can adjust τ s by changing L t /(k t A t ), provided that (b/t) t << 1 and (b/L) t << 1. The tethers may be thought of as thermal resistors that can be designed to regulate the flow of heat between the pyroelectric capacitor and the bimetal cantilevers. Hence, in order to maintain the device's oscillations the following condition should be satisfied: For the materials listed in Table b is such that thermal resistance of the tethers is much less than that of the bimetal cantilevers of characterisitc length L * b , then a necessary condition for the sustained cyclic operation of the device to be sustained is Note that L * b /L b is primarily dependent on ∆T and on Ht c , the travel distance of the pyroelectric capacitor between the two reservoirs. We point out when condition R t << R * b is satisfied, the time scale limiting the cycling frequency of the device is τ b ; the time scale of thermal diffusion along the bimetal cantilever, For the dimensions listed in Table As previously mentioned, structural mechanics considerations require the tethers to have a small torsional stiffness and a bending stiffness in the x-direction that is much smaller than that of the bimetal cantilever. This can be satisfied by choosing the tether width b t to be as small as possible and selecting its length and thickness such that b t /L t < 0.15, t t /b t > 4, and t t (b t /L t ) 3 b b (t b /L b ) 3 . In order for the pyroelectric capacitor to travel the entire distance separating the two reservoirs, the thermal expansion contribution to the force acting on the capacitor must be larger than the restoring elastic component. Referring to Eq. ( Referring to Eq. ( where t b = t 1 + t 2 is the total thickness of the bimetal cantilever in μm, and V b and V c are respecively the volumes of the bimetal cantilever and the capacitor. It can then be shown that the resonance frequency, which in this case is the same as the operating frequency, is related to the length (L b (μm)) of the bimetal cantilever as In Appendix B, we present a design procedure to estimate the device dimensions so that it operates at the mechanical resonance frequency for a given T H -T L and H. This procedure, along with the design considerations discussed above, were used to explore and explain the qualitative dependence on T H -T L of the bimetal cantilevers length (Fig. We conclude by pointing that that the trends presented in Figs. ?? -?? are only qualitative since the design procedure is not based on the dynamic solution of Eq. ( Validation of the reduced order model was carried out in three phases. In the first phase, the heat transfer and the bimetal cantilever tether force models were validated by comparing with Ansys simulations. Refer to Appendix A for details. In the second phase, validation of the coupled thermo-mechanical model was carried out by comparing with Ansys simulations the dynamic behavior of the device of dimensions listed in Table The simple design procedure presented in Appendix B serves to provide the dynamic solver with initial guesses of the various dimensions. The solver, which is based on the model presented in Section 4, simulates the thermo-mechanical dynamic operation, accounting for the heat transfer between the reservoirs, capacitor, and bimetal cantilevers, and for the thermomechanical, torsion and damping forces imparted on the capacitor respectively by the bimetal cantilevers, the tethers, and the surrounding fluid. Eq. ( As shown in Fig. increases linearly with T H -T L , with the ratio ∆T p /(T H -T L ) being nearly a constant of ∼ 0.6. The power produced per cycle, ω→ / f , is plotted against T H -T L in Fig. Figure Next, we investigate impact of H, the separation between the HTR and the LTR. The temperatures of the HTR and the LTR are kept at 37 and 7 • C respectively. The thickness of the pyroelectric capacitor is selected to be t c = H -2 μm. Other dimensions are listed in Table attributed to the combined effect of a thicker capacitor and shorter bimetallic beams. As H increases from 15 to 21 μm, the peak to peak change in the average capacitor temperature over a cycle decrease by ∼1. Figure In this study, a new design of a MEMS pyroelectric energy harvester is proposed. During cyclic operation of the device, the pyroelectric capacitor plate remains parallel to the thermal reservoirs, which not only increases the rate of heat transfer across the gap, but also ensures nearly uniform temperature within the capacitor. This operation is enabled by the use of tethers of low torsional stiffness to connect the bimetal cantilevers to the plate. Investigation of various times scales key to thermo-mechanical operation of the device uncovered the conditions for self-sustained oscillations, and the conditions for these oscillations to take place at the mechanical resonance frequency (in the absence of gas damping). The physically-based reduced order model was employed to identify the length of the bimetal cantilever beams as a key design parameter. When embedded within an optimization algorithm, the model was The proposed design along with the design methodology presented fill a gap in the underexplored area of MEMS pyroelectric energy harvesters, which brings us one step closer to realization of these devices. H -T L . For all the designs, the width of the capacitor, minimum gap size, trench width were fixed: b c = 50 μm, g min = 0.5 μm, b tr = 25 μm, X = 1b tr /a, t c = H -2 μm. Note that the smallest dimension is the tether width b t , with 0.75 μm ≤ b t ≤ 1 μm. All dimensions are in μm and temperatures in • C.