ABSTRACT: Individual carbon nanotubes (CNTs) possess extremely high thermal conductivities. However, the thermal conductivities and their anisotropy of macroscopic assemblies of CNTs have so far remained small. Here, we report results of directional thermal transport measurements on a nearly-perfectly aligned CNT film fabricated via controlled vacuum filtration. We found the thermal conductivity to be 43 ± 2.2 W m -1 K -1 with a record-high thermal anisotropy of 500. From the temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity and its agreement with the atomistic phonon transport calculation, we conclude that the effect of intertube thermal resistance on heat conduction in the alignment direction is negligible because of the large contact area between CNTs. These observations thus represent ideal unidirectional thermal transport, i.e., the thermal conductivity of the film is determined solely by that of individual CNTs. Thermal management in electronics is becoming more and more important as the degree of device miniaturization has reached a truly nanometer scale where the level of power dissipation is also extreme. Therefore, thermally conducting electronic nanomaterials are strongly required for more efficient heat dissipation. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are one of the most promising candidates, since individual CNTs have exhibited thermal conductivities (  ) over 10 3 W m -1 K -1 1-5 . There have also been many thermal conductivity studies of CNT assemblies. In particular,  has been measured for aligned CNT samples prepared either by direct chemical vapor deposition growth In addition to the general need for materials with high thermal conductivity, there is also a specific demand for materials with anisotropic thermal conductivity that can direct heat flow only in a certain direction. For example, when spreading the heat from a chip on a circuit board, such directional heat flow can prevent heat-sensitive components from being damaged by excess heat conducted from heat-generating parts Here, we demonstrate a record-high value of thermal conductivity anisotropy in macroscopic films of aligned and packed CNTs prepared by the recently developed controlled vacuum filtration (CVF) method Although the  in the alignment direction ( ||  ) is lower than the highest reported values , further theoretical analysis reveals that the ||  is determined only by the  of the constituent CNTs and is not limited by intertube thermal resistance. The CNT used in this study was unsorted arc-discharge CNT purchased from Carbon Solutions, Inc., and the highly aligned CNT films (Film 1) were prepared by the CVF method In addition, a poorly aligned CNT film (Film 2) and a randomly aligned CNT film (Film 3) were also prepared for comparison. Film 2 was prepared by filtrating the CNT dispersion with additional 6 mM of NaCl at a filtration speed four times higher than that in the case of Film 1. These changes alter the interaction between the CNTs and the filter membrane Top-view Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of each sample are shown in Figure The alignment degrees of Films 1 and 2 were evaluated by measuring the reduced linear dichroism (LD r ) with a 660 nm laser beam Film 1 (Highly aligned) Film 2 (Poorly aligned) Film 3 (Randomly aligned) The  measurements of the three films were conducted over a temperature range from 50 to 300 K. First,  values of different samples at R.T. were compared to see any thermal property differences caused by the morphological differences, and are summarized in Table ) at R.T. was higher than those of Film ) and Film 3 ( ). On the other hand, the  of Film 1 in the perpendicular direction ( ,1  ⊥ ) was as low as 0.085 ± 0.017 W m -1 K -1 , which is three orders of magnitude smaller than  . This reveals that Film 1 had an extremely large thermal anisotropy ( /  ⊥ ) of 500, which is the largest reported value among aligned CNT films Model in Fig. To further verify this suggestion, the internal thermal conductance of a CNT in the axial direction (G||) and intertube thermal conductance at an aligned CNT-CNT contact (g) were calculated using the atomistic Green's function (AGF) method The This equation can be further transformed to where k ind represents  of each CNT constituting the Film 1. This shows that, when phonon transport is ballistic (i.e., G|| is constant), , not because of the intertube thermal resistance. Note that it makes sense that the five-fold difference in the length results in the five-fold difference in  as thermal conductivity increases linearly with the length when heat conduction is ballistic It is also worth noting that the temperature dependence of  increases sharply in the low temperature regime, while it becomes almost constant above 180 K. It is tempting here to discuss the result in terms of the peak temperature shift as the peak temperature of CNT materials is known to appear between 300 to 400 K, resulting from the competition between the increase in heat capacity and decrease in the phonon mean free paths due to Umklapp scattering with increasing temperature. However, as the constituent CNT material of Film 2 is exactly the same as that of Film 1, it is unlikely that their Umklapp scattering rates or the heat capacities significantly differ. Instead, this temperature dependence of | |, 2  can be explained by the stronger role of intertube thermal resistance at CNT-CNT cross contacts in Film 2 as shown in the simple model (Figure ) can be estimated by the following equation: . Here, g' represents intertube thermal conductance at a CNT-CNT cross contact. Since the contact area is as small as the bottom area of CNT, the area ratio A S is not included in Eq. ( (4), and the temperature dependence of  is expected to follow that of g'. The temperature dependence of g' has been investigated by both simulations  shown in Figure  arises from the difference in leading mechanism of thermal resistance. In conclusion, the  of a highly aligned CNT film synthesized by the CVF method was measured both in the alignment direction and perpendicular direction. The  value at R.T. was 43 ± 2.2 W m -1 K -1 and 0.085 ± 0.017 W m -1 K -1 in the alignment and perpendicular directions, respectively, yielding a thermal anisotropy of 500, the highest ever reported. Further analysis of the temperature dependence of ||  revealed that the effect of intertube thermal resistance, which is known to be large in pervious CNT films with weaker alignment, has a negligible influence on the T is the temperature of sample at the contact with the wire. From the solution of Eq. (S1), we can obtain the average temperature of the wire () Tx. Then the average electrical resistance R can be calculated using the TCR value  as The thermal measurements were conducted over the temperature range from 50 to 300 K. While there was a temperature distribution along the wire, the positional dependence of m  was ignored since m  had little temperature dependence in the measured temperature range (i.e., 50 -300 K, see Figure The measurement of Film 3 was conducted by suspending the film directly. , and the in-plane  was calculated from KCNT ). A thin PET film with a thickness of 12 μm was used to ensure a sufficiently large KCNT/KCNT/PET ratio and to maximize the measurement sensitivity. The dimensions of the samples such as the length and width were determined using an optical microscope, while the thicknesses of Films 1 and 2, which were on the order of 100 nm, were measured by atomic force microscopy. The cross-plane  of Film 1 was measured using the time domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) The environment temperature was strictly controlled by Mercury iTC (Oxford Instruments) and the temperature fluctuation for each measurement was kept below 0.1 K to suppress deviation of the signal. We used the atomic Green's function (AGF) method to calculate the thermal properties of a perfectly aligned CNT bundle both in the alignment direction and in the cross-sectional direction. Details of the AGF method are described in Reference 8 . As the average diameter of consisting CNT is 1.4 nm, a hexagonal unit cell consisting of (10,10) single-wall CNTs (diameter=1.36 nm) was used as a representative atomic scale model for the calculations. As shown in Figure 