Cooper pairs in chiral superfluids carry quantized units of relative orbital angular momentum (OAM). Various predictions of the intrinsic OAM density or the macroscopic OAM of a two-dimensional chiral superfluid differ by several orders of magnitude, which constitute the so-called Angular Momentum Paradox. Following several previous studies, we substantiate the semiclassical Bogoliubov-de Gennes theory of the single-particle edge current and OAM in two-dimensional chiral superfluids in the BCS limit. The analysis provides a simple intuitive understanding for the vanishing of OAM for a non-p-wave chiral superfluid (such as d + id) confined in a rigid potential. When generalized to anisotropic chiral superconductors and three-dimensional chiral superfluids, the theory similarly returns an accurate description. We also present a detailed numerical study of the chiral phases in the BEC limit. Our study suggests that, in both BCS and BEC phases the relative OAM of the individual Cooper pairs contribute to the total OAM additively, and that in both phases the corresponding macroscopic OAM density distribution is localized at the boundary. A chiral superfluid is one in which each Cooper pair carries a quantized relative orbital angular moment (OAM) where ξ k = k 2 /2m -E f is the normal state band dispersion, θ k denotes the direction of the wavevector k, and the gap function ∆ k = ∆e iνθ k = ∆(k x + ik y ) ν /k ν encrypts the chirality of the pairing. Note that the pairing is a spin-triplet for ν odd and a spin-singlet for ν even. One natural question is whether a chiral superfluid exhibits an overall OAM, and if yes, how such a macroscopic quantity relates to the relative OAM carried by the individual Cooper pairs. The question was originally raised for the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel phase (A-phase) of 3 He 1-3 -which is a chiral p-wave superfluid in the BCS limit with |∆| E f , and it has been a subject of long-standing controversy A separate, and important, aspect of the theory of the BCS chiral superfluids is their nontrivial topological property, FIG. which is classified by an integer topological invariant Multiple pioneering studies on the front of chiral p-wave have appeared since the turn of the century Later, two simultaneous and somewhat differently formulated studies within the BdG framework showed unambiguously that the total edge current and OAM must effectively vanish for any 2D non-p-wave BCS chiral superfluids in sharp confining potentials The relation to topology was also further elucidated in Refs. 32,33. In essence, due to U (1) symmetry breaking, the spontaneous current and the OAM are not topologically protected quantities and thus are not directly related to the Chern number, a fact which should have already been anticipated by accounting for the lack of a genuine Chern-Simons action Finally, in contrast to the BCS limit where the average Cooper pair size is much larger than the interparticle spacing, the BEC limit with E f < 0 is routinely portrayed as a macroscopic coherent state of tightly-bound Cooper pair molecules (see Fig. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we revisit the semiclassical analysis of the edge current and the OAM in the BCS limit and in the presence of rigid confining potentials, supplementing rigorous derivations for some important details. The same analysis is extended to 2D chiral superconductors on a lattice, and then in Sec. III to 3D chiral superfluids, along with extensive numerical BdG calculations in support of the conclusions. In Secs. II C and II D, we comment on two parallel theories, i.e. the Gingzburg-Landau theories of the spontaneous current and the spectral flow argument for the OAM, and briefly discuss the scenario with soft confining potential and comment on the significance of the non-topological Chern-Simons-like action. Going to the BEC limit in Sec. IV, numerical calculations show that the OAM is also confined to the boundary as in the BCS limit, which runs contrary to common beliefs. The paper is briefly summarized in Sec. V. In this section, we revisit a semiclassical analysis which intuitively explains the vanishing of edge current and OAM in non-p-wave chiral superfluids and the suppression thereof in anisotropic chiral p-wave superconductors. Spirits of what follows have appeared in a number of previous literature In the following derivation, it turns out beneficial to remove the k-dependence in the denominator of the gap function in Eq. (1). We hence take where k f represents the Fermi wavevector. Although this changes the gap amplitude, the global topological nature of the pairing, henceforth the essential properties of the chiral edge modes, are retained so long as the relation ∆/E f 1 is satisfied, as has been demonstrated in previous literature In a half-infinite geometry with an ideal sharp boundary parallel to the y-axis, the edge dispersion, e.g. for chiral pand d-waves, acquires the following form (see App. A and Fig. with the wavefunction given by, Here N is a normalization factor, k f = (k f x , k f y ) the Fermi wavevector, v f = k f /m, and importantly, (u ky , v ky ) T = (1, -i) T / √ 2 for p-wave and (u ky , v ky ) T = (1, ±1) T / √ 2 for d-wave where the plus and minus signs are associated respectively with its two chiral branches. As we elaborate in App. A, the equal-weight particle and hole composition of the edge modes in chiral p-wave is a consequence of a chiral symmetry. The non-p-wave superfluids, however, lacks such a symmetry, and u ky 's and v ky 's typically exhibit a correction of order O(∆/E f ) (App. A). In the BCS limit with ∆/E f 0, these edge states, described by operators γ ky = (u ky c ky,s + v ky c † -ky,s ), are nonetheless essentially 'charge-neutral' (importantly, they nevertheless carry a finite amount of current. See below). We note that the matrix in Eq. ( Lattice generalization of this expression is separately verified in our numerical BdG calculations on both chiral p-and dwave models, up to a O(∆/E f ) correction when it is present (see App. B). We checked that the correction (when present) has nothing to do with the group velocity of the edge mode, but is purely a consequence of the above stated correction to the quasiparticle wavefunction (u ky , v ky ) T . The particle current generates a mass current, i.e. linear momentum, of k y /2. It is straightforward to evaluate the total edge state contribution (per spin species, same hereafter), FIG. J e = 1 2π j ky dk y , where the prime indicates integration over the occupied edge modes. Inspection of the edge dispersion in Fig. where ρ represents the particle density (per unit area), which remains constant throughout the system except for some inessential short-wavelength Friedel oscillations near the boundary. The total edge current is then given by, In a disk geometry with large radius R, such edge current generates a net OAM where N = πR 2 ρ is the total number of particles in the disk. This result coincides with the intuitive expectation for chiral p-wave superfluids. Noteworthily, although the spatially integrated current vanishes for non-p-wave states, counter flowing local currents distribute within a region comparable to a coherence length from the edge The same line of argument also explains why anisotropic chiral p-wave superconductors on lattices, when exhibiting multiple accidental zero-crossings in the edge spectrum, may support a much reduced current compared to that of a simple isotropic p-wave superconductor. This is demonstrated in Fig. We stress that the reduction of the spontaneous current is not solely determined by the Chern number, as it can happen even for the case of C = 1 in Fig. As is well understood within the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau theory The phenomenological coefficient K xy sets the scale of this contribution. Following a standard free energy gradient expansion, where ... F S designates an average over the Fermi surface. The coefficient therefore is determined by both the microscopic details of the gap function and the underlying band structure A parallel spectral flow argument focuses on the generalized angular momentum Despite Ltot z and N individually not commuting with the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Following Refs. 20,32, we shall remark on the case of soft boundary potentials. Although a genuine Chern-Simons action is absent, a non-topological Chern-Simonslike term emerges in the phenomenological hydrodynamic action Note that, in comparison to the standard Chern-Simons action, this action lacks the term i0j A i ∂ 0 A j . It nevertheless generates a Hall-like spontaneous current perpendicular to the direction of spatial scalar potential variation, where A 0 (r) is the confining potential. In the second equation, the gradient of the scalar potential has been translated to that of the particle density, which is valid in 2D models. The action therefore effectively describes a current-density correlation, unlike the Chern-Simons action which is associated with a current-current correlation. A semi-quantized OAM L tot z = νN /2 is then recovered for a chiral superfluid confined by a circularly symmetric soft potential Following the above semiclassical analyses, we now turn to 3D chiral superfluids. For convenience, we dissect the 3D Brillouin zone into individual k z -planes, as sketched in Fig. To set the stage, we consider a sharp yz surface. The spontaneous current, if any, shall flow along y. Following the above analyses, the edge states carry a total current, Note the k z -integration is restricted to |k z | ≤ k f , because beyond this regime no Fermi surface cross-section exists and hence contribution from those k z -planes is negligible in comparison. Employing the conclusion that the bulk state contribution satisfies J c = -J e /2, we obtain the total current, where ρ = k 3 f /(6π 2 ) is the particle density (per unit volume). This is consistent with our lattice BdG calculations when approaching the continuum limit, as we demonstrate in Fig. where N = ρπR 2 L is the total number of particles in the cylinder. This is the same as that obtained for a 2D chiral pwave. We note that, by contrast, the thermal Hall conductivity does not follow such a simple generalization going from 2D to 3D Since Cooper pairs in BEC superfluids are usually conceived as tightly-bound molecules (Fig. the OAM density shall vanish in the bulk. Here, we extend the study to higher-order chiral states. The BEC phase is acquired by setting E f < 0 in Eq. ( Main results of some representative calculations for chiral p-and d-wave models are presented in Figs. Note that, within the above formulation, the OAM each Cooper pair generates with respect to the disk center equals the relative OAM this pair carries. Since the relation L tot z = R 0 L z (r)dr = νN /2 is exactly satisfied (see Fig. Importantly, unlike in the BCS limit where the particle density remains roughly constant at the boundary while the spontaneous current decays over several coherence lengths, the BEC limit sees the particle density and the edge current varying over comparable length scales. More interestingly, in (c) contrast to that in non-p-wave pairings, the current in chiral p-wave appears to follow the gradient of the particle density ∂ r ρ(r)/4 as indicated in Fig. Based on the semiclassical BdG theory, we studied the spontaneous edge current and OAM of chiral superfluids in finite geometry. Within this theory, the spontaneous current and OAM are both single-particle quantities closely tied to the quasiparticle scattering at the system boundary. Following several previous studies, we substantiated the semiclassical analysis which provides an intuitive explanation for the vanishing of OAM in 2D non-p-wave BCS chiral superfluids. The same analysis also describes well the physics in anisotropic chiral superconductors as well as 3D chiral superfluids and superconductors. Going to the BEC limit, the current and OAM density are also found to be confined to the boundary, in contrast to the naïve expectation for uniformly distributed tightlybound Cooper pair molecules. In brief, our study brings new understanding of the enigmatic Angular Momentum Paradox in chiral superfluids. unaltered. The short-wavelength component in the wavefunction can be integrated out by taking [u 0 (r), v 0 (r)] T = e ik f •r [u (r), v (r)] T . Keeping only the leading order terms in each matrix element on the LHS of Eq. (A1), we arrive at the Andreev equation, (A2) where v f = k f /m and k f = (k f x , k f y ). Note that the terms carrying ∂ 2 in the diagonal elements and those carrying ∂ x/y in the off-diagonal elements are dropped to a good approximation, because both u (r) and v (r) contain only longwavelength components which vary at length scales much longer than k -1 f . We stress that this approximation is valid as long as the superconducting coherence length is much larger than k -1 f , i.e. when ∆/E f 1. In a half-infinite geometry with an ideal sharp edge parallel to y-axis, the translation symmetry along y allows us to write [u (r), v (r)] T = φ(x) T = [u(x), v(x)] T , therefore, where, for chiral p-wave, and for chiral d-wave, At each k y ≡ k f y , Ĥ⊥ in Eq. (A4) [and separately in Eq. (A5)] constitutes an effective 1D Dirac domain wall problem x e ik f y y . (A6) Note that the choice of a particular eigenstate of Ĥ has to comply with the boundary condition, or alternatively, with the Chern number of the chiral pairing as manifest in the number and chirality of chiral branches. For chiral d-wave, the eigenvector is (1, ±1) T / √ 2 with energy dispersion E ky = ±∆(k 2 f x -k 2 f y )/k 2 f for the two chiral branches in Fig. For completeness, we write down directly the chiral edge dispersion in the chiral f-wave state as follows (Fig. We see from above that the bound states are charge-neutral with equal-amplitude particle and hole composition. However, since the bound state solutions were obtained under the approximation ∆/E f → 0, it is not obvious that the chargeneutrality is protected by symmetry. To this end, we turn back to Eq. (A1) to look for exact properties. It is instructive to perform a partial Fourier transformation along the y-direction, which yields the following matrix, In the case of ν = 1, the matrix can be similarly decomposed into Ĥ⊥ and Ĥ , which anticommute with each other and where Ĥ = -∆ ky k f σ 2 has no x-dependence. Hence the solution of the chiral edge modes in a chiral p-wave superfluid is given by an eigenvector of σ 2 , and the charge neutrality is thus protected by an exact chiral symmetry. By contrast, for ν > 1, the corresponding Ĥ⊥ generically does not exhibit any chiral symmetry and it does not anticommute with the x-independent Ĥ , thus the charge-neutrality of the bound states we obtained above is not exact. The correction turns out to be order ∆/E f as one may infer from our preceding approximation. The same conclusion applies to all higher chirality pairings. Following the same analyses, in the lattice chiral p-wave models where each of the individual component has both k x and k y dependence, such as ∆ k ∼ sin k x cos k y + i cos k x sin k y , the edge modes similarly receive some order ∆/E f corrections, as we verify in the next section. t is considered, this term in momentum space follows as ξ k = -2t(cos k x +cos k y )-μ. The pairing term must acquire the k x + ik y symmetry in chiral p-wave and k 2 x -k 2 y + 2ik x k y in the chiral d-wave model, etc. For example, in the simplest chiral p-wave model with ∆ k = ∆ 0 (sin k x + i sin k y ), it is realized by, where x and ŷ are vectors of unit length in the x-and ydirections. In this expression the phase factor i is responsible for the π/2 phase difference between the x-and y-components of the p-wave pairing. The particle current of the spin-σ fermion flowing from site n to site m is given by 32 , J mn,σ = id mn t mn (c † m,σ c n,σ -c † n,σ c m,σ ) (B4) where d mn is the length of the bond connecting m and n. Notice this current operator can be obtained from a standard Peierls substitution. The actual calculation is performed on a cylindrical geometry with open boundaries in the x-direction and a periodic boundary condition in y-direction. Hence momentum k y is a good quantum number. We hence perform a Fourier transformation in the y-direction and keep the real space site indices along x. The BdG Hamiltonian and the current operator can then be written for each value of k y . We numerically diagonalize the Hamiltonian at each k y and compute the expectation value of the current. The current carried by any individual Bogoliubov quasiparticle mode can also be evaluated. Figures Appendix C: BdG calculations in the BEC limit We consider the two-dimensional chiral superfluids confined in a circular well with a specular wall, in the framework of BdG Hamiltonian. The d-vector has no variation near the boundary and takes the form d = (0, 0, d z ) everywhere. We consider the mean-field Hamiltonian Ĥ = d 2 xψ † σ [(p 2 x + p 2 y )/2m+V -μ]ψ σ + d 2 xψ † ↑ ∆(p x +ip y ) ν /|p| ν ψ † ↓ +(H.c.), where p j = -i∂/∂x j , m is the fermion mass, and μ is the chemical potential. The confining potential V (r) is chosen to be V (r < R) = 0 and V (r > R) = ∞ with a radius R for infinite circular well. We evaluate the ground state expectations of the physical quantities. The particle density is given by ρ(r) = ψ † (r)ψ(r) , and the particle current by j = [ψ † (-i∇ψ) + (i∇ψ † )ψ] /2m. Note that the continuity equation ∂ρ/∂t + ∇ • j = 0 is satisfied. Since no current flows in the radial direction in a disk geometry, the current can be re-expressed as j θ (r) = [ψ † (-i ∂ ∂θ ψ) + (i ∂ ∂θ ψ † )ψ] /(2mr). The distribution of the orbital angular momentum is given by L(r) = ψ † (r)(-i ∂ ∂θ )ψ(r) , which implies L(r) = mrj θ (r). In other words, the OAM originates entirely from the spontaneous current.