The layers of a high-temperature novel GaAs:Fe diluted magnetic semiconductor (DMS) with an average Fe content up to 20 at. % were grown on (001) i-GaAs substrates using a pulsed laser deposition in a vacuum. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy investigations revealed that the conductive layers obtained at 180 and 200 oC are epitaxial, do not contain any second-phase inclusions, but contain the Fe-enriched columnar regions of overlapped microtwins. The TEM investigations of the non-conductive layer obtained at 250 oC revealed the embedded coherent Fe-rich clusters of GaAs:Fe DMS. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy investigations showed that Fe atoms form chemical bonds with Ga and As atoms with almost equal probability and thus the comparable number of Fe atoms substitute on Ga and As sites. The n-type conductivity of the obtained conductive GaAs:Fe layers is apparently associated with electron transport in a Fe acceptor impurity band within the GaAs band gap. A hysteretic negative magnetoresistance was observed in the conductive layers up to room temperature. Magnetoresistance measurements point to the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy of the conductive GaAs:Fe layers related to the presence of the columnar regions. The studies of the magnetic circular dichroism confirm that the layers obtained at 180, 200 and 250 oC are intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductors and the Curie point can reach up to at least room temperature in case of the conductive layer obtained at 200 oC. It was suggested that in heavily Fe-doped GaAs layers the ferromagnetism is related to the Zener double exchange between Fe atoms with different valence states via an intermediate As and Ga atom. Fe-doped diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs) are considered as promising materials for semiconductor spintronics since the recent synthesis of the (Ga,Fe)Sb Apparently the ferromagnetism in (III,Fe)V DMSs is not carrier-mediated Obtained results raise the question of creating the ferromagnetic layers of a practically important GaAs semiconductor by introducing a large amount of Fe atoms (> 10 at. %) during an epitaxial growth. There are a few papers from the early 2000s about the formation of the (Ga,Fe)As layers by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with a relatively low Fe content (up to 3.5 at. %). In The GaAs and GaAs:Fe layers were grown by a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) in a vacuum on semiinsulating (001) GaAs substrates The surface of the structures was examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The structural properties of the samples were investigated by an analytical transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The distribution of constituent elements was obtained by an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) during microscopy investigations. The chemical composition of the structures was also studied by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). To excite photoemission, the Al Kα emission line with the energy of 1486.7 eV was used. The diameter of the analysis region was 3 mm. The profiling of the composition over the depth of the sample was carried out by a surface etching with the 1 kV Ar + beam. The concentration of chemical elements was determined by the method of relative sensitivity factors (RSF) Optical reflectivity spectra were obtained at RT in the spectral range of 2.4 -6 eV. The dc magnetotransport measurements were carried out in the van der Pauw and Hall bar geometry in a closedcycle He cryostat. The investigations of the magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) were performed in the cryostat in the spectral range from 1.37 to 2.03 eV using a monochromatized emission of a xenon arc lamp as a light source. In this study we present results for the structures are listed in Table Figure The analysis of the Fe 2p3/2 photoelectron line did not reveal the presence of Fe-Fe bond (within the error of the method about 1 at.%), but the presence of Fe-As and Fe-Ga bonds was detected. It is not possible to reliably separate Fe-As and Fe-Ga bonds within the method used, only the summary concentration of Fe-As and Fe-Ga chemical bonds can be detected. Figure For the structures 200-17, 180-25, 200-25, 250-25 and 350-25 the E1 peak has a clear blueshift (the inset of Fig. The resistivity of the GaAs:Fe layers with Tg = 200 oC decrease with the Fe concentration increase. Note that the resistivity value at a given temperature for the structure 180-25 is much lower (about an order of magnitude) than that for the structure 200-25 (Fig. For the structures 200-8, 200-17, 180-25 and 200-25 the Seebeck coefficient at room temperature corresponds to the n-type conductivity which is consistent with earlier works on the paramagnetic GaAs:Fe layers In general, the resistivity of GaAs:Fe layers is relatively high. The consequence of this is that the measured Hall resistance dependences on an external magnetic field (RMeasH(B)) are completely determined by the magnetic field dependences of the longitudinal resistivity (magnetoresistance) due to the nonideal Hall measurement geometry of the samples (both for the Hall bars and van der Pauw geometry). For our samples the true Hall resistance dependences on an external magnetic field (an odd function with respect to the B polarity) cannot be correctly extracted from the RMeasH(B) dependences. The insets of Figures To confirm that the ferromagnetic properties of the obtained layers are related to the intrinsic ferromagnetism of GaAs:Fe DMS, the studies of a magnetic circular dichroism were carried out for the structures 180-25, 200-25, 250-25 and 350-25. The MCD investigations were performed for B applied perpendicular to the sample plane. The light from a xenon arc lamp, after passing through a grating monochromator, was circularly polarized by the combination of a linear polarizer and an achromatic quarter-wave plate. This light was incident on the sample surface and reflected from it into the measuring system (fotodetector). The MCD value was defined as ((I + -I -)/(I + +I -))×100%, where I + and I - are the intensities of circularly polarized light with the right and left circular polarization incident on the sample's surface. Figure The fabricated GaAs:Fe layers have the rather high resistivity but for the structures 180-25, 200-25 and 200-17 the conductivity is also observed at low temperatures (Fig. Based on the results of our XPS studies (Fig. It is known, that for the high concentration of an impurity the formation of an impurity band (IB) is possible. In particular, 3d elements such as Mn and Ni form the acceptor IB in GaAs The mobility of the carriers localized within IB should be small (about or less than 1 cm 2 /V•s). Also, as it was shown by TEM, STEM and EDS studies, the periodic vertical structure with difference in the Fe concentration is observed within the conductive GaAs:Fe layers of the structures 180-25 and 200-25 (Figures Taking into account the effective mobility in the range of about 0.1 -1 cm 2 /V•s and the resistivity of 0.5 Ohm•cm (the resistivity at 300 K for the structure 180-25, Fig. The relatively low carrier concentration indicates that, as in other Fe doped III-V DMSs, the ferromagnetism in the GaAs:Fe system apparently is not carrier-mediated. As was mentioned above, the relatively large spatial expansion of the Fe wave function and the high Fe concentration allow the overlapping of the wave functions of neighboring Fe atoms which permits the direct exchange interaction between Fe atoms. The feature of the GaAs:Fe system is also that Fe atoms act as an electrically active impurity (at least FeGa atoms) and can be in two valence states with the different occupation of the d shell (the neutral and ionized acceptor states). Since the nearest Fe atoms are separated by the As and Ga atom (with which Fe atoms have a bond via overlapping the d (Fe) and p (As and Ga) shells), the electron transfer between the acceptor states with different valency is possible which allows the realization of ferromagnetic ordering via the Zener double exchange mechanism In summary, conductive n-type GaAs:Fe layers with an average Fe content up to 20 at. % were obtained by the PLD. The TEM, STEM and EDS investigations of the conductive GaAs:Fe layers with the maximum Fe content obtained at 180 and 200 oC revealed that the layers are epitaxial, do not contain any second-phase inclusions, but contains the columnar Fe-enriched regions of overlapped microtwins. These layers can be characterized as a vertical periodic system consisting of nano-columnar regions of a GaAs:Fe DMS with an above-average Fe concentration separated by regions of a GaAs:Fe DMS with a below-average Fe concentration, similar to what was previously observed for MBE (Ga,Fe)Sb layers The conductivity of the GaAs:Fe layers is apparently associated with the formation of the Fe acceptor impurity band within the GaAs band gap. A hysteretic negative magnetoresistance was observed in the GaAs:Fe layers up to room temperature. Magnetoresistance investigations point to the out-ofplane magnetic anisotropy of the GaAs:Fe layers which is related to the presence of the columnar Feenriched GaAs:Fe regions. The investigations of the magnetic circular dichroism confirm that the GaAs:Fe layers with the maximum Fe content obtained at 180, 200 and 250 oC are intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductors with the Curie point up to at least room temperature for the conductive layer obtained at 200 oC. Heavily Fe-doped doped (up to ~ 20 at. %) GaAs layers are resistant to the formation of metallic ferromagnetic second-phase ferromagnetic inclusions for the growth temperatures up to about 250 oC. The growth temperature increase up to 350 oC leads to the formation of metallic ferromagnetic second-phase inclusions. It was suggested that in heavily Fe-doped GaAs DMS layers the ferromagnetism is related to the Zener double exchange between Fe atoms with different valence states (the neutral and ionized acceptor states) via an intermediate As and Ga atoms. Thus, the possibility of synthesis of conductive GaAs:Fe DMS layers with the intrinsic ferromagnetic properties and high Curie temperature has been shown.