Dielectric measurements on insulating materials at cryogenic temperatures can be challenging, depending on the frequency and temperature ranges of interest. We present a technique to study the dielectric properties of bulk dielectrics at GHz frequencies. A superconducting coplanar Nb resonator is deposited directly on the material of interest, and this resonator is then probed in distant-flip-chip geometry with a microwave feedline on a separate chip. Evaluating several harmonics of the resonator gives access to various probing frequencies, in the present studies up to 20 GHz. We demonstrate the technique on three different materials (MgO, LaAlO 3 , and TiO 2 ), at temperatures between 1.4 K and 7 K. The dielectric properties of various insulating materials are highly interesting and topic of ongoing research. Planar superconducting microwave resonators play an important role in solid state research, including cryogenic spectroscopic studies. In Fig. The distance h and the coupling length l c are of crucial importance regarding the microwave coupling and thus functionality and performance of the distant-flip-chip geometry. There are some challenges with this approach, especially concerning control of the coupling into the resonator, certain sample requirements, and the mounting of the resonator chip. The signal may not couple sufficiently into the resonator to excite the fundamental and higher harmonic modes since the permittivity of the sample is unknown, and therefore the impedance of the resonator cannot be adjusted correctly. Furthermore, the mounting of the chip influences the coupling into the resonator. The distance must be set appropriately to optimize the coupling into the resonator. Additionally, the sample needs to be flat with a polished surface and size of at least a few mm to apply the distant-flip-chip geometry. The distant-flip-chip geometry is checked with simulations for its suitability using CST Microwave Studio, and the results can be compared to theoretical predictions obtained with the conformal mapping theory. f r e q u e n c y ( G H z ) FIG. CPW is split into partial regions and the electric field is assumed to fill each of them homogeneously. Then the capacitance of each part is found and the sum gives the total capacitance. The effective dielectric constant eff is then calculated by the ratio of the total capacitance of the CPW and the capacitance in absence of all dielectrics. Assumptions for this technique are that the conductors have perfect conductivity, the structure is lossless, the dielectrics are isotropic, and the electric field fills each partial region perfectly. In Fig. with n being the number of mode, c the vacuum speed of light, l the length of the resonator and eff the effective dielectric constant of the resonant design. Since the distant-flip-chip geometry utilizes a λ/4-resonator, only odd multiples (n = 3, 5, ...) of the fundamental frequency (n = 1) can be excited. The simulated results, marked in Fig. Three different dielectric materials are used to test the approach: MgO, LaAlO 3 , and TiO 2 . The dielectric response of each of them at cryogenic temperatures and GHz frequencies is basically constant as a function of temperature and frequency, peratures. Coplanar Nb resonators are deposited onto the three substrate materials, and they are then mounted with vacuum grease in distant-flip-chip geometry above the feedline chip. Three different resonator lengths are chosen for the LaAlO 3 and TiO 2 substrates, respectively, and one length for the MgO substrates. All resonators have a center conductor width of W = 120 μm and a gap width of S = 50 μm. Microwave transmission spectra are then obtained using a vector network analyzer (VNA) for frequencies up to 20 GHz while the resonator is cooled in a These identified resonance dips are then tracked in temperature-dependent measurements up to a temperature of 9 K. In Fig. by the temperature-dependent superconducting properties of the Nb thin film. This can be modeled based on the London equations, which give an expression for the so-called London penetration depth. with λ 0 the penetration depth at zero temperature. The temperature-dependent λ(T ) affects the impedance of the coplanar resonator, with the shifted resonance frequency ν, the resonance frequency ν 0 of the unperturbed CPW for temperature T = 0, a geometrical factor Γ, the characteristic impedance Z 0 , and the penetration depth λ 0 at T = 0. Both, Γ and Z 0 are fixed parameters and calculated with the conformal mapping theory. The fit to the measured data in Fig. The fits following equation ( After this correction for the influence of the Nb, the permittivity of the substrate can be calculated with the conformal mapping formula which gives the results shown in Fig. In Fig. This study presents a new resonant approach for characterizing dielectric bulk samples and is termed distantflip-chip geometry. With this method multiple discrete frequencies in the microwave regime up to 20 GHz can be measured. Furthermore, the distant-flip-chip method is compatible with cryogenic temperatures. We use superconducting Nb resonators to ensure optimized measurements since Nb reduces losses at low temperatures and it needs only slight experimental preparations. Furthermore, its properties for microwave resonators are well understood. However, the Nb sputtering was not optimized for these substrate materials. To establish this approach, reference measurements on known dielectrics were performed. The samples are between 300 and 500 μm thick and the absolute values of the permittivity are between 8 and 160. In addition, anisotropic dielectrics can be characterized, as demonstrated for the case of TiO 2 . This new method can now be directly transferred for measuring samples with unknown dielectric properties. Moreover, the presented geometry can be easily used for measurements at mKtemperatures and in magnetic fields.