Solid state ionic approaches for modifying ion distributions in getter/oxide heterostructures offer exciting potentials to control material properties. Here we report a simple, scalable approach allowing for total control of the superconducting transition in optimally doped YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO) films via a chemically-driven ionic migration mechanism. Using a thin Gd capping layer of up to 20 nm deposited onto 100 nm thick epitaxial YBCO films, oxygen is found to leach from deep within the YBCO. Progressive reduction of the superconducting transition is observed, with complete suppression possible for a sufficiently thick Gd layer. These effects arise from the combined impact of redox-driven electron doping and modification of the YBCO microstructure due to oxygen migration and depletion. This work demonstrates an effective ionic control of superconductivity in oxides, an interface induced effect that goes well into the quasi-bulk regime, opening up possibilities for electric field manipulation. Many of the properties of the high-temperature copper oxide superconductors are strongly influenced by charge doping. We find that Gd capping layers of up to 20 nm thickness deposited on 100 nm thick YBCO films can dramatically alter the oxygen distribution throughout the underlying film in the as-deposited state, without the need for a post-deposition annealing step. As the Gd layer thickness (t Gd ) is increased, the YBCO layer becomes progressively more oxygen deficient, demonstrating how appropriate tuning of t Gd can precisely control the remaining oxygen content of the underlayer. The extraction of oxygen from the YBCO suppresses the T c and broadens the superconducting transition. Differences between the superconducting transitions observed in resistivity and magnetometry suggest the formation of a percolative network of oxygen deficient regions interspersed within the nominally stoichiometric YBCO. Both the electron doping and structural changes induced by Gd-driven oxygen migration contribute to the suppression of superconductivity. These results demonstrate an effective solid-state ionic means to tailor superconductivity in cuprates and other systems, including the potential to use an electric field to tune superconductivity. Commercially available epitaxial films of pulsed-laser-deposited c-axis oriented YBa2Cu3O7-δ (100 nm) grown on (001)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrates were used for this study. An X-ray diffraction (XRD) scan of the as-grown film (Fig. family of peaks, corresponding to a lattice parameter of c =11.678 Å, similar to the bulk value of 11.699 Å. direction and shifts to lower L, consistent with an expansion in the c-axis lattice parameter discussed above. The effects of Gd deposition on the YBCO superconducting properties were investigated by magnetometry, as well as resistivity measurements in the van der Paw geometry. For magnetometry measurements, each sample was zero-field cooled to 5 K and measured on heating from 5 K to 100 K in a 1 mT magnetic field. Temperature dependence of the magnetization of the as-grown YBCO film shows a sharp superconducting transition at T c ≈ 84 K (Fig. While transport measurement probes a contiguous superconducting path, magnetometry is sensitive to the Meissner effect with contributions from the entire sample. The different temperature dependence observed in magnetometry and resistivity therefore reflects the inhomogeneities in the YBCO film, with magnetometry probing superconducting regions with any T c , and resistivity measurement being most sensitive to regions of the film with the highest T cso long as a superconducting path is maintained. The observed transitions can be explained by the presence of an oxygen-deficient phase with lower T c , stabilized alongside the optimally doped YBCO phase. For the t Gd = 3 nm sample much of the film possesses the as-deposited YBCO structure and the optimal stoichiometry of YBa2Cu3O7-δ; thus a contiguous path exists through the optimally doped phase, and the resistive transition is observed close to the T c of the as-grown film, even though the sample-averaged Meissner effect shows a much lower Tc with a more gradual transition. For the t Gd = 7 nm sample, an even broader transition is observed in the magnetometry, but no complete suppression of resistivity is observed. Therefore, this sample contains some oxygen deficient regions which are still superconducting at lower T c , as seen in magnetometry, but these phases are below the percolation threshold to form a contiguous superconducting path, as evidenced by the absence of a resistive transition. Finally, for the thickest t Gd = 20 nm sample the absence of a transition in either the resistance or magnetization suggests few, if any, regions undergo superconducting transition in the sample. The distinctly different superconducting properties of the oxygen deficient phases may be the result of structural changes or electron doping, both of which are consequences of the oxygen leaching. The Gd capping layer is expected to extract oxygen from the YBCO, resulting in the structural changes that were observed in XRD patterns. Cross-sectional high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) images of the as-grown film at the STO/YBCO interface obtained in an aberrationcorrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) show flat, epitaxial c-axis oriented YBCO growth consistent with XRD patterns (Fig. The extraction of oxygen was further probed by polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) at 6 K, which provides a depth-resolved mapping of the nuclear scattering centers within the film (neutron reflectivity data are shown in Supporting Information). The converged depth profiles show that the nuclear scattering length density (SLD, ρ N ) of the as-grown film is around the bulk value for YBa2Cu3O7 of 4.7 × 10 -4 nm -2 (Fig. Commensurate with the progressive increase in t Gd , the amplitude of the Kiessig fringes in the reflectivity decreases, indicating a reduction of contrast of the YBCO vs. the STO, which results from their nuclear SLDs converging. Indeed, the fits confirm that as t Gd increases, ρ N decreases, particularly near the STO/YBCO interface (Figs. The PNR results are consistent with the extraction of oxygen from the YBCO, and fluorescence yield (FY) XAS measurements performed at the Cu L2,3-edges directly confirm a change in the Cu valence induced by the oxygen extraction. The XAS results show a shift in the absorption resonance to lower energies with increasing t Gd (Fig. this absorption peak was previously reported in oxygen deficient bulk YBCO, and expected to be absent for samples with optimal oxygen stoichiometry. The removal of oxygen from YBCO by the Gd capping layer can be understood primarily by considering the change in Gibbs free energy associated with oxidizing the Gd and reducing the YBCO. At room temperature (300 K), the Gibbs energy of formation ΔG for the constituent Y2O3, BaO, BaO2, and CuO oxides are -1817 kJ/mol, -520 kJ/mol, -588 kJ/mol, and -130 kJ/mol, respectively, Magnetometry shows that for t Gd =3 nm and 7 nm, the superconducting transition broadens across a range of temperatures, indicating regions with a distribution of T c coexist within the same film. The second mechanism involves the disruption to the film microstructure. The crystal structure of optimally doped YBCO contains both CuO2 planeswhere superconductivity residesand CuO chains, which act as doping centers for the planes. As oxygen is removed from the film, the chains become progressively more oxygen deficient, In summary, thin Gd capping layers deposited onto optimally doped YBCO thin films have been shown to remove oxygen from deep within the underlying film via an interfacial redox reaction, with the extent dependent on capping layer thickness. This redox-induced oxygen migration, although initiated at the Gd/YBCO interface, results in a percolating oxygen deficient phase throughout the entire film thickness that does not support superconductivity. As measured in magnetometry and resistivity, the superconducting transition temperature is significantly reduced with increasing Gd thickness, and for a sufficiently thick capping layer of up to 20 nm, the transition is completely suppressed. Spectroscopic measurements reveal the loss of oxygen with the CuO chains as well as a decrease in the average Cu valence, indicating that oxygen leaching effectively acts to electron dope the YBCO and thus decreases T c . STEM images reveal the presence of defects associated with separate, oxygen-deficient phases, suggesting that both changes to the microstructure as well as a reduction in hole doping level may play roles in the suppression of superconductivity. Remarkably, the changes to the superconducting properties throughout the entire 100 nm thick YBCO films are induced by the migration of oxygen towards the YBCO/Gd interface, extending the viability of ionic control of superconductivity to the quasibulk regime. As ionic transport can be easily controlled by a bias voltage, our findings also show potential in electric field control of superconductivity in getter/oxide type of heterostructures. protective capping layer using Ar gas at 0.67 Pa working pressure in a chamber with a base pressure in the 10 -6 Pa range. XRD characterization, including both θ -2θ scans and reciprocal space maps, was performed on a X-ray diffractometer equipped with parallel beam optics and Cu 