Ordering of mobile defects in functional materials can give rise to fundamentally new phases possessing ferroic and multiferroic functionalities. Here we develop the Landau theory for strain induced ordering of defects (e.g. oxygen vacancies) in thin oxide films, considering both the ordering and wavelength of possible instabilities. Using derived analytical expressions for the energies of various defect-ordered states, we calculated and analyzed phase diagrams dependence on the film-substrate mismatch strain, concentration of defects, and Vegard coefficients. Obtained results open possibilities to create and control superstructures of ordered defects in thin oxide films by selecting the appropriate substrate and defect concentration. Ferroelectric and multiferroic materials are the object of much fascination in physics community, both due to the multitude of possible applications and broad spectrum of fundamental physical phenomena they exhibit. Applications such as ferroelectric memories, field effect transistors, and domain wall conductance have riveted attention of scientific community in the last two decades From the gamut of possible behaviors, in the last decade progressively more attention is focused on multiferroic materials, i.e. systems possessing two or more order parameters Examples of the former include the emergence of suppressed order parameter and associated topological defects at the domain walls, surfaces and interfaces, domain wall and vortex core conduction, incipient ferroelectricity and magnetism, and many others Additional degrees of functionality of nanosized multiferroics with the topological defects The vast majority of the research in the field explored the coupling between the primary physical order parameters including magnetization, polarization, and ferroelasticity Here, we develop an initial framework for mesoscopic theory of defect ordering-disordering transitions in thin oxide films. We explore whether chemically induced changes in Vegard volume can be used to trigger and control multiferroic orderings in thin strained films (see e.g. Ref. Here we consider the case of a thin oxide film on a substrate, taking into account the misfit strain Since the symmetry breaking may spontaneously occur along any in-plane direction, this model is able to describe, particularly, a possible oxygen vacancy ordering along the x1 or the x2 axis. Thanks to the model symmetry, it is sufficient to consider exemplary cases of ordering along the x1 axis, corresponding to the in-plane order parameter modulation, and along the x3 axis, corresponding to the order parameter modulation perpendicular to the film surfaces. The spatial scale of the defect concentration fluctuations, which can be correctly considered in a continuum approach, should be much larger than the lattice constant (so called long-range fluctuations). Thus, to describe the phase ordering process, we introduce a dimensionless long-range order parameter η, related to the degree of ordering of point defects (oxygen or cation vacancies, or impurity atoms) and given by a disbalance of occupations δn a and δn b of the two sub-lattices: η = C C 0 (δn b -δn a ). Here c is the concentration of defects related with the non-stoichiometry degree ; c 0 is a characteristic value that usually coincides with the solubility limit, meaning that the defect atoms do not affect essentially the host lattice force matrix at c < c 0 . As one can see, the scalar order parameter  is a normalized occupation degree of the sub-lattices, 0 ≤ |η| ≤ 1. For given , the relative occupation numbers for the two sub-lattices are δn a = c(1 -η) (2c 0 ) ⁄ and δn b = c(1 + η) (2c 0 ) ⁄ . The total occupation of two sub-lattices is constant, δn a + δn b = c c 0 ⁄ . Values η = ±1 correspond to the complete ordering of defects in either sub-lattice "b" or "a", while η = 0 corresponds to the complete disorder (with equal filling of two sub-lattices). Note that c 0 < N a , where N a is the stoichiometric concentration of host atoms. In the particular case of oxygen vacancies, c depends on the oxygen pressure p via the defect equilibria and for certain cases ) (e.g. see Fig. The defect ordering direction can be different with respect to the film surfaces. Below we will distinguish parallel [see the left side (a) in The -dependent free energy of a thin film is the sum of the surface and bulk energies: where h is the film thickness, and the first term is the surface/interface energy that is not negative under the condition α S ≥ 0. Hereinafter we will consider the case α S = 0, corresponding to the socalled natural boundary conditions. The bulk density, f, of the Helmholtz free energy dependence on the order parameter η has the form: The first term in Eq. (1b), proportional to η 2 , originates from the interaction between defects from the different sublattices. The term can be readily derived from the term δn a δn b where δn a and δn b are the relative occupation numbers for the two sub-lattices. Hereinafter we will consider both cases α < 0 and α > 0. For the former, defects may order spontaneously in a bulk material, while in the latter case the ordering in bulk is unfavorable, but can be induced by external factors (such as misfit strain). The second term in Eq. (1b) is proportional to the entropy of the system with a minus sign, -TS , The third and the fourth terms are the series expansion of generalized gradient energy in the derivatives ∂η ∂x i ⁄ of the order parameter. The gradient energy was introduced by Cahn and Hillard in 1958 (see e.g. Note that very often the higher gradient term is neglected (w = 0). Rigorously it is justified only if g > 0, assuming that its renormalization by the strain gradient energy is either positive or too small to change the positive sign of resulting effective gradient coefficient. Below we will show that w-term is mandatory to determine the threshold for emergence of the order parameter spatial modulation. The elastic energy q[η, σ ij ] includes the coupling between the order parameter and the stresses σ ij . Following the theoretical formalism of Vegard strains, proposed by Freedman Here we used the identity, arctanh(η) ≡ ). The boundary conditions to Eqs. (2a) are the following: The first term in Eq.(2c) originated from the variation of surface energy in Eq. (1a), and the socalled natural boundary conditions correspond to the case α S = 0 (surface energy is absent in this particular case). The second term in Eq. (2c) originated from the variation of the gradient energy in Eq. (1b), and the third term originated from the variation of the elastic energy Eq. (1c). Eq. ( The first condition, σ i3 = 0, means that the top surface of the film (x 3 = 0) is mechanically free; and the second condition, u 11 = u 22 = u m , means that the bottom surface of the film (x 3 = h) is clamped to a rigid substrate, where um is a misfit strain induced by the film-substrate lattices mismatch. Below we consider thicknesses h smaller than the critical thickness of misfit dislocation appearance The nonlinear boundary problem (2) contains a number of material-dependent constants, the majority of which are poorly known even for simple binary oxides, such as ZnO, MgO, SnO2, CeO2, HfO2, and even more so for complex ternary oxides, such as manganites (La,Sr)MnO3, paraelectric perovskites SrTiO3, EuTiO3, KTaO3, ferroelectric perovskites (Ba,Sr)TiO3, (Pb,Zr)TiO3, and orthoferrites PbFeO3, pristine and rare-earth doped BiFeO3, etc., which all can be deficient in oxygen. Hence, prior to solving the boundary problem ( To explore the phase evolution in the system described by the free energy, Eq. ( where the wave vector components k lmn = ( Following Landau theory, below we assume that only one principal mode k dominates near the order-disorder phase transition, where  is the phase shift and η 0 is the offset term. Next, we assume that the approximate equality is valid for the order parameter derivative in Eq. (1c), namely: Note that k is constant in the first harmonic approximation, but should be found in the self-consistent way in what follows. Substitution of Eqs. (3) in Eqs. (1b) and (1c) yields: where g ̃(k) = g ij k i k j , B ̃ij (k) = B ijmn k m k n and w ̃(k) = w ijmn k i k j k m k n . Symmetry of the gradient-striction tensor B ijkl is determined by the local site symmetry of defect with respect to the lattice. Below we assume the tetragonal symmetry of the tensor B ̃ij (k), with a tetragonal axis along x3 axis of the film. In the continuum approximation, the thermodynamically stable state of the film can be analyzed by the variation of the free energy (1) that acquires the form: Near the phase transition, arctanh(η) ≈ η + η 3 3 in Eq. (6a). Assuming that the anisotropic Vegard tensor is diagonal (or at least can be diagonalized), that is true for many cases Here we consider the case when the only nonzero component of wave vector is k3, meaning that the harmonic modulation of the long-range order parameter η~|η ̃| cos[k 3 x 3 + δ] looks like planes parallel to the film surfaces x3=0, h (see Fig. For the case the free energy density Eq. ( γ pr c 4 12 Where the coefficients α p = (2u m -V m c) , and B ̃22 = B 12 k 3 2 , g ̃= gk 3 2 and w ̃= wk 3 4 . We refer the case with subscript "pr". Omitting the -independent term α pr , the free energy density (8a) can be expanded in power series in  as The derivation of Eqs. ( The equilibrium values of the order parameter obtained from minimization of the energy (8b) and the corresponding free energy have the form: We further consider the case when the only nonzero component of the wave vector is k1, , meaning that the harmonic modulation of the long-range order parameter η~|η ̃| cos[k 1 x 1 + δ] looks like planes perpendicular to the film surfaces x3=0, h (see Fig. The free energy density f in Eq. (1b) of the oxide has the following form in this case: γ pp c 4 12 Where The equilibrium values of the order parameter obtained from minimization of the energy (9b) and corresponding energy have the form similar to Eq. (8c): Long-range order exists if β pp c + k B T < 0. The derivation of Eqs. ( Note that, in the ordered phases, elastic dipoles may become polar due to the surface-induced piezoelectric coupling that, in turn, originates from the inversion symmetry breaking near the film surfaces. At the same time, the out-of-plane polar phase is affected by the strong depolarization field originated from the sharp gradient of polarization decay away from the surfaces. The temperatures of transitions between defect-disordered and defect-ordered phases for parallel and perpendicular orientations of the planes of a constant order parameter can be determined from equations ). We further explore the equilibrium period of η-modulation, related to the wave vector k. In equilibrium the conditions + 4wk 3 2 ) = 0 for the constant η-planes parallel to the film surfaces. From these conditions the components of the modulation vector acquire the form: . Figure The conditions of the equilibrium between the ordered phases can be obtained from the equality of the corresponding free energy densities, Eqs. (8c) and (9c), namely allowing for the conditions of the long-range orders existence Note that the expressions Equation (13a) can be solved with respect to temperature in the following form: ). (14c) When a strong inequality |γ pp -γ pr | << γ pp takes place, the second term in parenthesis in Eq. (14c) could be either close to unity (sign "-") or much higher than unity (sign "+"). It is seen that in the case of sign "-" the solutions (14b)-(14c) will not satisfy both of relations (13b) simultaneously. The other root in Eq. (14a) deviates more significantly from the value [T pp (u m , c) + T pr (u m , c)] 2 ⁄ , thus, in this case, conditions (13b) will be satisfied. Using Eqs. ( The OP||-OP⊥ boundary is almost vertical, and its small slope weakly depends on the V m value. The OP⊥ phase exists for compressive misfit strain u m < 0 at B 11 + B 12 < 0, and for tensile misfit strain u m > 0 at B 11 + B 12 > 0. The OP|| phase exists for compressive misfit strain u m < 0 at B 11 + B 12 > 0, and for tensile misfit strain u m > 0 at B 11 + B 12 < 0. The color maps of the order parameter amplitudes [η(x 1 ) and η(x 3 )] and wave vectors (k⊥ and k||) calculated for α < 0, g > 0, B 11 + B 12 > 0 are shown in Figs. The change of  sign critically affects the phase diagrams, as is shown in Fig. The OP⊥ phase exists for high compressive misfit strain u m < -2.5% at B 11 + B 12 < 0, and for tensile misfit strain u m > +2.5% at B 11 + B 12 > 0. The OP|| phase exists for compressive misfit strain u m < -1.9% at B 11 + B 12 > 0, and for tensile misfit strain u m > +1.9% at B 11 + B 12 < 0. The color maps of the order parameter amplitudes [η(x 1 ) and η(x 3 )] and wave vectors (k⊥ and k||) calculated for α > 0, g > 0, B 11 + B 12 > 0 are shown in Note that the values of the order parameter η and the components of the wave vector, k 1 and k 3 , were calculated on the basis of numerical minimization of the more complex free energy functional [see Eqs. (8a) and (9a)], for which the series expansion was not used. It turned out that the differences between the approximate expressions (11) and the results of numerical calculations are insignificant for the wave vector. Also, to describe the phase transitions between the ordered and disordered phases, expressions Note that phenomenological parameters listed in the caption to Fig. Actually, the strain-induced singularity of the cycloid period and phase diagram with various spin cycloid orientations in BiFeO3 can be topologically analogous to the one considered in Fig. We have analyzed the ordering of defects (e.g. oxygen vacancies) in thin oxide films in the framework of the continuum Landau-type theory. We derived analytical expressions for the energies of various defect-ordered states and calculated and analyzed phase diagrams dependence on the film-substrate misfit strain and concentration of defects for different gradient, striction and Vegard coefficients. We have found that two defect-ordered phases, which are characterized by either parallel or perpendicular defect ordering in planes and corresponding wave vectors, can be stable. The stability conditions are determined by the misfit strain and the defect concentration at fixed values of the other parameters. The ordered phases border with the defect-disordered phase. Hence, we have shown that it is possible to control the defect ordering-disordering by changing their concentration and the film-substrate misfit strain (compressive or tensile). The solution for the misfit of thin film with its substrate is well known. For the film with normal along X3 one has the following relations for some of stress and strain components: Here u m is the misfit strain. For the sake of simplicity let us consider the case of only one zero component, k 2 = 0. Therefore, taking (A. (A.20) Note that the stabilization term proportional to fourth degree of order parameter is allowed by the symmetry and thus can be included in the free energy from the beginning. However, the material coefficient before the term is unknown and should still be defined. That is why we used the above way to re-derive the term with already defined coefficient from the entropy term. Actually, expansion on small η gives us that: , is related to the elimination of the elastic variables, namely elastic stresses and strains, from the initial free energy [given by e.g. above equations (A.20) and Eq.(5b)]. Mathematically, explicit dependences on the free energy coefficients and the order parameter η were obtained for stress and strains. These dependences were substituted into free energy (taking into account the Legendre transformation), which gave the renormalized energy (8b) and (9b). 2 ij . Using this approximation, elastic solution for a thin oxide film on a rigid substrate is derived for cubic symmetry far from the structural domain walls. Zero components are σ 33 = σ 13 = σ 23 = σ 12 = 0, u 12 = u 13 = u 23 = 0, and nonzero components are: 2 ) are included in Eqs. Omitting the -independent term α p , the free energy density (9a) can be expanded in powers of  as δf[η] ≈ (β pp c 2 + ck B T) pp , β pr ] = √ (β pp -β pr )