Many oil fires have resulted from the crude oil train derailments in recent years. Given the importance of crude oil shipping by rail to the energy security of the US, it is important to consider various methods that will decrease the likelihood of crude oil catching fire in case of a crude oil derailment. Present study examines the effect of polybutadiene polymer on the combustion properties and soot deposits of Bakken and Pennsylvania crudes. Treating these crudes as multicomponent liquid fuels and polybutadiene as an additive, droplet combustion experiments were conducted with sub-millimeter sized spherical droplets suspended on very fine support fibers. Polybutadiene polymer additive of two different chain lengths has been investigated. Results show that both polymer chain length and origin of crude oil have a significant effect on various combustion properties like combustion rate, ignition delay, total combustion time, and flame stand-off ratio. Polymeric additives also change the soot deposit structure and particle size compared to the base fuel. Present research is envisioned to aid in theoretical combustion modeling of complex multicomponent liquid fuels, as well as generate interest in investigating more polymeric additives for liquid fuels. The oil boom in the North Dakota Bakken formation has presented a logistical problem of having to ship the said crude to oil refineries. The proposed Keystone XL pipeline, meant to connect the Bakken oilfields to the already-existing Keystone oil distribution system However, this extra shipping load has placed an unprecedented stress on the aging US rail infrastructure. In recent years, many oil train derailments and crashes have occurred, which generally result in devastating oil fires and a loss of life and property It is an expensive and time-consuming proposition to upgrade US rail infrastructure to promote safer crude oil transport. This manuscript explores polymeric additives as a stopgap measure to control the burning behavior of crude in case of a crude train derailment and spillage. Previous research has investigated the addition of long chained polymers to diesel and its blends to suppress mist formation and splashing Very few systematic crude oil combustion studies are available currently, and those that are available generally explore pool fire properties of crude oils in relation to in-situ burning. Previous work by the authors has explored the droplet combustion properties of crude oils from various US oil production regions (Bakken, Colorado, Pennsylvania, Texas) A well-established, bench-top method has been used for present work, which has previously used to establish various combustion properties for isolated spherical droplets of liquid fuels such as combustion rate The crude oil used in present work was obtained from the Northeast oil production region (Pennsylvania) and the Rocky Mountain oil production region (Bakken) of the United States. Although significant variety exists in crude oil properties, Table The experimental apparatus has previously been previously detailed in the work presented by Singh et al. The high-speed camera is a black and white charge-coupled device (CCD) IDT X-StreamVision XS-3 (IDT Vision, Pasadena, CA, USA) camera operated at 1000 frames per second and fitted with a 105 mm lens (Nikon AF Micro-Nikkor-F/2.8, Tokyo, Japan). Back-lighting is provided by a single bright white LED at 3.3 V. The ignition and combustion process is simultaneously recorded through a magnifying concave mirror (4.0" diameter, 9.0" focal length) by a complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) Casio EXILIM Pro EX-F1 (Casio, Tokyo, Japan) high-speed camera operating at 600 frames/second. The CCD camera generates 8-bit grayscale image sequence with 948 x 592 pixels. The open-source digital image processing software ImageJ/Fiji Post-processing of CCD camera images yields the evolution of diameter dd (and therefore area ππdd 2 ⁄ ) with time ττ for a given droplet. After normalizing area and ττ with squared diameter of initial droplet dd 0 2 , the evolution of normalized area (dd dd 0 ⁄ ) 2 vs modified time ττ dd 0 2 ⁄ was determined. Moving average was used to reduce data, which was then further post-processed to determine combustion or burning rates. To set a base reference, pure crude was burned with no PBD added. Polymer was blended into the crude oil in 0.5%, 1%, 2%, 3% and 4% (w/w) concentrations using a standard lab stir plate for 24 hours. No heat was used, and the stir speed was kept consistent across all experiments. Once prepared, the fuel blend was immediately used, and was returned to the stir plate between experiments. This was done to keep the fuel blend homogeneous and to prevent any possible polymer strand agglomeration. At least 6 experiments were performed for each fuel blend, 5 with full LED backlight and 1 in low light conditions. CCD images from the low-light experiment were used to determine the flame stand-off ratio. CCD images from back-lit experiments were used for plotting time-dependent normalized area to determine combustion rate as outlined above. After post processing, the average of the combustion rates from these experiments yielded the combustion rate of that particular blend, with the standard deviation serving as the error. CMOS camera images for all 6 experiments for a given fuel blend, extracted as outlined in above paragraphs, were used to determine average ignition delay and total combustion time for each fuel blend with standard deviation serving as the error. Figure The following sections discuss combustion properties for crudes and their polymer blends such as combustion or burning rate, ignition delay, total combustion time, and flame stand-off ratio. Comparison of the soot deposits of these fuels, taken using a scanning electron microscope, is also presented. where dd 0 is the initial droplet diameter (mm), dd(tt) is the droplet diameter (mm), tt denotes the combustion time (sec), and kk is the burning rate (mm 2 /s). Zone IV and Zone V combustion rates are substantially different and show very different trends as polymer concentrations increase. Zone IV combustion rate is referred to as kk 1 and Zone V combustion rate is referred to kk 2 in this manuscript. kk 1 and kk 2 for different fuels and fuel blends has been compared in this section, but since both pure Pennsylvania and pure Bakken crudes lack a Zone V, in general only a comparison for kk 1 can be made across all fuels and all fuel blends. Therefore, burning or combustion rate in this manuscript, unless otherwise noted, refers to kk 1 . Figure Polymer combustion is a complex phenomenon. Subjected to the high heat and radiation of combustion, polymers inside the liquid droplet bulk can be expected to undergo cross-linking, scissoring, and thermal degradation Therefore, many factors such as increased thermal degradation and increased heat conductivity lead to PBD200k increasing overall combustion rates for its blends with either crude oil tested. PBD5k, due to its much shorter chain length, possibly suffers from smaller thermal degradation but is effective at decreasing diffusion of lighter crude ends through the liquid bulk, and decreasing surface evaporation rates from the droplet surface, leading to lower overall combustion rate for its blends with either crude. This is further substantiated in Section 3.4 of this manuscript, where a general decrease in flames stand-off ratio is observed at all PBD5k-Pennsylvania crude blends, which indicate a lowered flame speed resulting from a decrease in diffusion and surface evaporation. As remarked before, combustion regimes of pure crudes lack a Zone V, which is characterized by a sharp change in combustion rate from the preceding Zone IV. It is also seen that Zone V combustion behavior is quite uniform and shows similarities to that of a pure fuel (Figure Many factors influence ignition delay of fuels. There is a physical delay that is associated with the droplet heating to the point of giving off enough vapors to sustain combustion through evaporation, mixing and diffusion of combustible components through the droplet bulk, and a chemical delay Two main factors affect total combustion time. Aside from the obvious droplet combustion rate, microexplosions can cause liquid to escape from the droplet bulk. More intense and more frequent the microexplosions, less the total combustion time. Figure Generally, PBD5k causes an increase in Pennsylvania crude total combustion time, mainly because combustion rates decline when PBD5k is added to it. The greatest increase of 3.4% is seen at 3% PBD5k. Similarly, an increase in combustion rates as well as increase in microexplosions (the latter is especially pronounced at lager PBD200k concentrations) on addition of PBD200k generally causes total combustion to decline. The greatest average total combustion time decrease of 15% is seen at 4% PBD200k. Figure Soot residue can reveal important information about the combustion process, and determination of particle size can assist in selecting appropriate respiratory personal protection equipment for fire-fighting parties that respond to crude oil fires. Figure To take an SEM image, the fiber with the residue is mounted on a specialized tape with high electrical conductivity. The soot is gently tapped with a fine-tipped needle to break the soot deposit (Figure This work explored the experimental investigation of isolated single droplet burning behavior of two US crude oils sourced from Pennsylvania and North Dakota (Bakken), and the modification of this burning behavior using polybutadiene (PBD) polymer of chain length 5,000 (PBD5k) and 200,000 (PBD200k). Treating the crude oil as a multicomponent liquid fuel, PBD was added at different mass concentrations to make fuel blends. Sub-millimeter droplets of the fuels and fuel blends were burned to completion, and the process was recorded using a CCD high speed camera and a CMOS high speed camera. CCD camera photography with a single LED as a backlight revealed time evolution of droplet area, whereas low-light photography with the same camera revealed the flame stand-off ratio. CMOS camera photography revealed ignition delay and total combustion time. Scanning electron microscopy imaging of the soot deposits left behind by the burned droplets revealed the soot structure and soot particle size. Significant changes in all these combustion and soot properties were observed. These are summarized below: • A decrease in combustion rate is seen for Pennsylvania crude when PBD5k is added, with the largest decrease of 26% occurring at 3%w/w PBD5k. PBD200k generally increases the combustion rate in Pennsylvania crude, with a maximum increase of 27% noted at 3%w/w. A general decrease in combustion rate is noted for Bakken crude when PBD5k is added, with the largest decrease of 12% occurring at 2% w/w. PBD200k is noted to generally increase combustion rate in Bakken crude, with the largest increase of 140% noted at 3%w/w. Both PBD5k and PBD200k can be expected to decrease vapor pressure and inhibit diffusion of lighter components to the surface to decrease combustion rate, but faster thermal degradation and increased thermal conductivity of PBD200k result in an overall increase in combustion rate, thereby making PBD5k as a much more likely additive for crude oil transportation safety. • A decrease in ignition delay is noted for Pennsylvania crude when PBD5k is added, with the largest decrease of 26% occurring at 1% w/w. Generally, addition of PBD200k to Pennsylvania crude causes an increase in ignition delay, with the largest increases of 6% occurring at 1% and 3% w/w. This can be explained by a larger ignition delay associated with PBD200k because of its larger chain length. A large increase in ignition delay for Bakken crude is noted on addition of both PBD5k and PBD200k. A maximum of 52% increase in ignition delay is observed for Bakken crude at addition of 1% PBD5k. A maximum of 42% increase can be observed in ignition delay for Bakken crude at addition of 4% PBD200k. This can be explained by Bakken crude having a lower ignition delay compared to Pennsylvania crude, and the addition of both PBD5k and PBD200k resulting in an overall decrease in ignition delay because of decreased vapor pressure. Polymeric structure • PBD5k causes a general increase in Pennsylvania crude total combustion time, with the greatest increase of 3.4% seen at 3% PBD5k. This is caused by the decrease in combustion rate, as noted above. Addition of PBD200k generally causes total combustion to decline with the greatest average total combustion time decrease of 15% seen at 4% PBD200k. This is caused by high intensity microexplosions at high PBD200k concentrations, which cause loss of liquid fuel. PBD5k causes a general decrease in Bakken crude total combustion time, with the greatest decrease of 8% seen at 3% PBD5k. Adding PBD200k to Bakken crude greatly decreases total combustion time with the largest average total combustion time decrease of 28% noted at 4% PBD200k. This can be explained by increased microexplosion intensity in Bakken crude when both PBD5k and PBD200k are added. • Generally, a decrease in flame stand-off ratio (FSR) is noted when PBD5k is added to Pennsylvania crude. This is explained by the decrease in vapor pressure of crude oil with the addition of polymer, as noted above. • SEM imaging of the soot deposits revealed that PBD5k-Bakken blends leave behind a more densely packed structure compared to pure Bakken. Individual average soot particle for PBD5k-Bakken blends was found to decrease to ~40μm from ~70μm in case of pure Bakken crude. Additionally, imaging of the soot structure surface revealed globular polymeric structure embedded in the soot residue. Ultimately, soot structure of combustion residue is determined by the chemical make-up of the fuel. Properties such as burning rate are envisioned to be used for validation of computational and numerical modeling of multicomponent fuel droplet combustion process. Practically, decreased combustion rates achieved for PBD5k blends are expected to be useful for better crude transportation safety, whereas increased combustion rates achieved for PBD200k blends are expected to be useful for achieving better in-situ burning efficiency for crude oil spills. It is expected that present research will also aid in exploration of other polymeric additives to improve crude oil combustion safety. 