Magnetic skyrmions are novel topological spin textures on the nanoscale, and significant efforts have been taken to improve their zero-field density at room temperature (RT). In this work, we reported an approach of improving zero-field skyrmion density in [Pt/Co/Fe/Ir]2 multilayers at RT by using the first-order reversal curve (FORC) technique. Firstly, we investigated the nucleation and annihilation mechanism of magnetic skyrmions using polar magneto-optical Kerr effect measurement. Secondly, the FORC technique was used to obtain information on the irreversible or reversible behaviors in the magnetization switching process. It was found from FORC diagram that the magnetization reversal mechanism can be characterized into three stages: (1) reversible labyrinth stripe domains expanding or shrinking stage; (2) irreversible stripe domains fracturing stage; and (3) irreversible skyrmion annihilation stage. At the end, we demonstrated that the zero-field skyrmion density can be highly improved by choosing reversal field from the irreversible stages. Our results have established the FORC measurement as a valuable tool for investigating magnetic multilayers of high skyrmion densities. Magnetic skyrmions are topologically protected quasi-particles with non-trivial spin texture which could serve as information carriers in novel spintronic devices, such as magnetic racetrack memory, logic gates, spin-torque oscillators, and artificial synapses/neurons for instance, generating high density skyrmions from the labyrinth domains at zerofield in Pt/Co/Ta multilayers using an electromagnetic coordinated method The first-order reversal curve (FORC) technique has been proven to be an effective method in probing magnetization reversal mechanism In this work, we describe the magnetization reversal process during an out-ofplane magnetic field sweep from zero field to negative saturation field as three distinct stages. Firstly, a predominantly reversible behavior is observed due to the labyrinth stripe domains expanding or shrinking in width without changing their topology. Secondly, as the applied field increase, the stripe domains fracture into multiple skyrmions. Finally, an irreversible reversal process corresponding to the annihilation of skyrmions. More importantly, we present an effective approach to enhance the zerofield skyrmions density at RT by analyzing the characteristics of the FORC diagram, which is of great significance for the successful application of skyrmions for practical applications. The multilayer film stack of Ta(5)/Ir(2)/[Pt(1)/Co(0.5)/Fe(0.4)/Ir(0.9)]2/Ta(2) (the number in parentheses are the nominal layer thickness in nanometer) were deposited on a thermally oxidized silicon wafer using direct current magnetron sputtering techniques at RT. A base pressure of 1◊10 -7 Torr or better is reached before sputtering is initiated. Argon gas was used during the sputtering process at 2.0 mTorr for all materials except Co which was sputtered at 3.0 mTorr. The deposition rates for Ta, Pt, Co, Fe, and Ir were 0.62, 0.68, 0.26, 0.30, and 0.37 Å/s, respectively. The bottom Ta layer was used as an amorphous and adhesive underlayer. The additional Ir underlayer was added to provide a similar interface for the repeating layers. Additional capping layer of Ta was used as a protective layer against oxidation. The out-of-plane M-H loop and FORCs of the [Pt/Co/Fe/Ir]2 multilayers were measured by the MagVision Kerr microscopy system in the polar mode with the magnetization imaged simultaneously. To remove the non-magnetic background signal, differential imaging was performed. Due to the longer measurement durations needed for FORC, piezo motors were used to compensate for the sample drift. A full M-H loop under an out-of-plane magnetic field Hz was firstly measured using the polar magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) at RT as shown in Fig. To improve the skyrmion density at zero-field, the FORC technique was adopted to investigate the magnetization reversal characteristics of the [Pt/Co/Fe/Ir]2 multilayers. In particular, the details of the reversible and irreversible behaviors of the magnetization switching process with the history of the field Hz. The FORC measurement can be carried out along both the ascending branch and the descending branch of the M-H loop In summary, our MOKE and FORC measurements reveal three distinct magnetization switching mechanisms in our sample of [Pt/Co/Fe/Ir]2 multilayers: by analyzing the features of the FORC diagram, a region of reversal field is found, in which the corresponding value of ρ is maximum, and the density of skyrmion is highest, then reduce the applied field from the reversal field to zero, which is the state with the largest zero-field skyrmion density at RT. Our results also demonstrate that the FORC technique is a sensitive method to probe the detailed information during the magnetization switching process in perpendicular magnetic multilayers. 