We derived simple rules for the sign of 180 • superexchange interaction based on the multielectron calculations of the superexchange interaction in the transition metal oxides that are valid both below and above spin crossover under high pressure. The superexchange interaction between two cations in d n configurations is given by a sum of partial contributions related to the electron-hole virtual excitations to the different states of the d n+1 and d n-1 configurations. Using these rules, we have analyzed the sign of the 180 • superexchange interaction of a number of oxides with magnetic cations in electron configurations from d 2 till d 8 : the iron, cobalt, chromium, nickel, copper and manganese oxides with increasing pressure. The most interesting result concerns the magnetic state of cobalt and nickel oxides CoO, Ni2O3 and also La2CoO4, LaNiO3 isostructural to well-known high-TC and colossal magnetoresistance materials. These oxides have a spin 1 2 at the high pressure. Change of the interaction from antiferromagnetic below spin crossover to ferromagnetic above spin crossover is predicted for oxide materials with cations in d 5 (FeBO3) and d 7 (CoO) configurations, while for materials with the other d n configurations spin crossover under high pressure does not change the sign of the 180 • superexchange interaction. The mechanism of superexhcange interaction is well known for a long time The spin crossovers have been experimentally detected and investigated in a number of transition metal oxides. The aim of our work is to answer the question of how the 180 • superexchange interaction depends on the cation spin in transition metal oxides at the high pressure, and can simple changes in the crystal field without a spin crossover lead to a change in its nature from AFM to FM? In terms of the realistic p-d model that include d-electrons of cation and p-electrons of oxygen the superexchange interaction arises via cation-anion p-d hopping t pd in the fourth order perturbation theory over the t pd (see for example We start discussing the properties of the transition metal oxides with a model of the periodic lattice of cations in d n configuration in a center of oxygen octahedra with a set of states |n with energy ε n . The elec-tron addition (extra electron) results in the d n+1 states |e with energies ε e (n + 1). Similar electron removal (or hole creation) involves the d n-1 states |h with energies ε h (n -1). Thus, a partial contribution to the superexchange interaction involves 4 states: at site 1 creation of the electron excite the initial state |n ( we call this states neutral) into some |e state (we call these excitation by electronic) and at site 2 the hole creation excites the neutral state into the one of the states |h (we call them hole). These electon-hole excitations are virtual, after their annihilation back the final state is again two cations in initial d n configurations. This approach allows us to consider all partial contributions to the superexchange interaction including both the ground states as well as excited states in all three sectors of the Hilbert space: neutral N 0 (d n ), electronic N + d n+1 and hole N -d n-1 . Here we show that the sign of the partitial contributions J F M ij and J AF M ij to the total superexchange interaction is directly independent on the cation spin S (d n ), but is controlled by the spin ratio S d n-1 = S d n+1 (AFM interaction) or S d n-1 = S d n+1 ± 1 (FM interaction). The crystal field perturbations, without a reversal of the electron spin, does not change the nature (sign) of partial contributions J F M ij and J AF M ij , however they can lead to a change in their relative magnitudes, as a result, to a change in the sign of superexchange parameter J ij . A main factor for the comparison between the AFM and FM interactions is the type σ or π overlapping orbitals involved by the partial contributions. These characteristics is comparable in simplicity with the well known Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson rules, which are used many years by scientists in the analysis of the magnetic states of dielectric materials. For the readers convenience the theoretical details are placed in the Appendix below and in the main text will discuss the physical ideas. We will work within a framework of the cell perturbation approach where J ij (h, n 0 , e) = 2 t n0h,n0e ij 2 ∆ n0he and ∆ n0he = ε e + ε h -2ε n0 . All definitions of the multielectron spin Ŝin0 and number of quasiparticles n(e) in0 operators are in the Appendix. The second contribution in Eq.(1) differs from the generally accepted method of writing the superexchange interaction and coincides with the usual form that describes the creation and annihilation of the virtual electron (denoted by the operator α + iσ ) and hole (operator β + iσ ) pairs. Exactly the virtual excitations through the dielectric gap ∆ nhe to the conduction band and vice versa in Eq.( 1. The scheme of the superexchange interaction illustrating property of its additivity over virtual electron excitations involving all ground states J h 0 e 0 (dotted line, we call this contribution the main exchange loop) and the excited electronic d n+1 contribution J h 0 e (solid line, called the excited exchange loop). energy): for the material with magnetic cations in arbitrary d n electron configuration. Any Hubbard operator X r i = |p q| constructed in the full and orthogonal set of eigenstates |p is numerated by a pair of indexes which denotes the initial state |q and the final state |p of the excitation. (5) and where a root vectors r and r ′ run over on all possible quasiparticle excitations (e, n) and (n, h) between manyelectron states |n and |e (h) with the energies ε n and ε e(h) in the sectors N 0 and N ± of configuration space (Fig. This equality and its relationship with the spin S h(e) at the states |h (e) was obtained in the works ) can be represented by a double loop or the so-called exchange loop, marked by the same line (solid or dashed). In Fig. The new result of this paper is the classification of different contrubutions by the relation between spins S h and S e . If in exchange loop S h = S e ± 1 it will be FM contribution, in the other case S h = S e it is AFM contribution. These two relations exhaust all possible interrelations between spins for all nonzero contributions, i.e. in any other case, the contribution to superexchange from this pair of states |h and |e is simply not available. The sign of the total exchange interaction (FM or AFM) depends on a relationship between relative magnitudes of the contributions. The main difficulty is a great number of excited states in N ± sectors of the configuration space. Due to the smallest denominator ∆ n0h0e0 in the superexchange (1), the main exchange loop involving ground |h 0 (e 0 ) states can form a dominant J h0e0 contribution. However, the contributions J he from the excited states |h (e) in N ± sectors can compete with the main exchange loop due to the dominant nominator, if the excited exchange loop occurs by overlapping of states with e g symmetry, and the main exchange loop is formed by π bonding despite not the smallest denominator ∆ n0he in Eq.( between the electron states of the anion and the magnetic cation, where the radial part ρ (|∆R|) depends only on the anion-cation distance ∆R, and the angular part χ σ(π) depends on the angular distribution of the anions. The squared ratio (I π /I σ ) 2 of the overlapping integrals for e g and t 2g states involved in the superexchange through σ and π coupling in the same octahedral complexes is the following relation: (I π /I σ ) 2 = (χ τ /χ σ ) 2 = 1/3. Thus the fourth degree gives ratio of matrix elements ∼ 0.1, i.e., competition between the contributions with a participation of virtual t 2g electron hopping and the one through σ coupling is possible, when the denominator energy ∆ nhe for excited loop J he is no more than 9 times higher in energy than the main loop energy ∆ n0h0e0 . Otherwise the σ type contribution from exchange loop is dominant. In case of several competing contributions simple calculations of the multielectron energies below and above the spin crossover at the high pressure Working further in framework of the cell perturbation theory, we obtain in the second order the FM contribution J5 T , 3 A from the main exchange loop in Fig. ) from the virtual hoppings of e g electrons with participa-tion of the states 3 T 1,2 and σ overlapping (see Fig. - Here: iσ Calculation of energies of the different states below and above spin crossover allows us to obtain the energy denominators for the different contributions to superexchange interaction. For the main exchange loop J5 T , 3 A in Fig. Above spin crossover at 10Dq > 2J H the cation Co 3+ is at the LS state |n 0 = 2 E , and |h 0 = 1 A (see Fig. The AFM contribution from the exchange loop with the excited states has the large denominator than the FM one (Fig. (13) These conclusions can be obtained analogously to the previous Eq.( Taking into account that all contributions have the same σ bonding, we came to conclusion that resulting interaction in the LS state for materials with the cations in d 7 configuration will be FM. Let's compare our conclusions with the results for iron borate FeBO 3 at the high pressure. Under pressure P ∼ 60GP a in the iron borate with cations Fe 3+ in the configuration d 5 the spin crossover 6 A 1 → 2 T 2 occurs at 10Dq = 3J H . Given above criterion tells us that the sign of the exchange interaction in iron borate is changed from AFM to FM with increasing pressure in agreement with direct calculations. At the ambient pressure FM contributions from the exchange loops are missing (Fig. Oxides Superexchange Ambient pressure Superexchange High pressure configuration below spin crossover (experiment) above spin crossover (experiment) no crossover, FM up to with a pressure up to FM above the spin crossover is predicted. no spin crossover, no spin crossover *The critical temperature T N(C) of magnetic ordering in iron borate FeBO3 at the higher pressure was measured by Mossbauer spectroscopy, ∆5 E 5 T = U -10Dq + 4J H . Thus, the AFM exchange interaction at the ambient pressure may be estimated as J5 E 5 T ≈ t 2 σ (U + J H ). Crystal field increases with pressure, and at the critical pressure 10Dq (P c ) = 3J H there is spin crossover 6 A 1 → 2 T 2 . Above the spin crossover, the nature of the FM superexchange interaction is obtained from the competition of FM(J3 T , 1 A ) and AFM (J1 T , 1 A ) loops with the same type of π overlapping, where the FM contribution prevails (see Fig. ) Thus, spin crossover in oxide materials with d 5 cations not only changes the sign of exchange interaction, but also reduces its amplitude by the factor J H /U << 1 . Now, we can obtain the nature(FM or AFM) of the superexchange interaction for oxide materials with d 2 -d 8 cations under pressure, below and above the spin crossover in Tab.1, and also compare one with experimental data, where it is possible. In the oxide materials with another d n ions, where n = 2, 3, spin crossover is not possible, and ground states 3 T 1 and 4 A 2 is stable under high pressure. d 2 . Chromium dioxide CrO 2 , where chrome cation Cr 4+ has configuration d 2 with spin S n0 = 1, is the example of FM contribution J 2 T, 4 A from the main exchange loop involving the ground states of t 2g cation with the π overlapping at an arbitrarily pressure. FM ordering in chromium dioxide is known experimentally and persists in orthorhombic phase of the chromium dioxide up to P=56Gpa. d At the ambient pressure, in the wustite Mg x Fe 1-x O with cations Fe 2+ in the configuration d 6 there is a competition of two different contributions J AF M 4 T, d The sign of the partial contributions J he to the total superexchange interaction is directly independent on the cation spin S (d n ), but is controlled by the spin relation S d n-1 = S d n+1 (AFM interaction) or S d n-1 = S d n+1 ± 1 (FM interaction) provided that S (d n ) = S d n±1 ± 1/2 (see Eqs.(A.12) and (A.14)). Indeed the chromium dioxide CrO 2 and nickel monoxide NiO (S n0 = 1), or manganites LaMnO 3 and wustite Mg 1-x Fe x O (S n0 = 2), can have FM and AFM interactions respectively. The main factor for the comparison between the AFM and FM interactions is the type overlapping states involved by the contributions. The nature of the superexchange interaction with increasing pressure changes (AFM→FM) only in oxide materials with cations in d 5 (e.g. FeBO 3 ) and d 7 (e.g. CoO) configurations. Indeed spin crossover 4 T 1 → 2 E with generating Jahn-Teller cations Co 2+ 2 E in cobalt monoxide at P > 43 Gpa is accompanied by: (i) transformation of the cubic rock salt-type structure to mixed rhombohedrally distorted rock salttype structure without significant volume change structure; (ii) a resistance drop by eight orders of magnitude at the room temperature (43Gpa<P<63Gpa) while maintaining its semiconductor nature; (iii) Mott-Hubbard transition into the metal rock salt structure at more high pressure P >120Gpa. The results partially disagree with experimental data at the ambient pressure only for oxide materials with Jahn-Teller d 4 cations like LaMnO 3 , where the FM ab planes have AFM ordering. With increasing pressure, the spin crossover in manganite LaMnO 3 is accompanied by the transition of the magnetic Jahn-Teller Mn 3+ cation to the state 3 T . In according to our conclusions, the effects of orbital ordering should disappear, and the FM nature of the superexchange will manifest itself (see Tab.1). Indeed, below pressure 29 GPa the manganite is not metallic and consists of a dynamic mixture of distorted and undistorted MnO 6 octahedral. To derive Eqs.( Sn-η(σ)Me+ X Me,Mn=Me-σ i (A.3) and X Mn,M h =Mn-σ i (A.4) where top and below lines are for S e = S n -|σ| and S e = S n + |σ| respectively. The superexchange interaction appears in the second order of the cell perturbation theory with respect to the hopping processes Ĥ1 in Eq.(3), which corresponds to virtual excitations through the dielectric gap into the conduction band and back to valence band. These quasiparticle excitations correspond to the electron-hole excitations and are described by off-diagonal elements with root vectors r = (h, n) and (n, e). To highlight these contributions, we use a set of projection operators P h and P e , that generalized the Hubbard model analysis mn the hopping matrix elements; U d , U p and J H are one site Coulomb interactions and the Hund exchange interaction, V pd im is the energy of repulsion of cation and an- e e P e + e P e ĥij h P h is the intra-and interband contributions for Hamiltonian Ĥ1 = ij ĥij respectively. In the unitary transformation the Hamiltonian for (i, j) -pairs is equal to hij = e Ĝĥ ij e -Ĝ , where Ĝ satisfies the equation h P h ĥij e P e + e P e ĥij h P h + + Ĝ, hh ′ P h ĥij P h ′ + h P h ĥij e P e + e P e ĥij e P e ĥij h P h =