We set a shortcut-to-adiabaticity strategy to design the trolley motion in a double-pendulum bridge crane. The trajectories found guarantee payload transport without residual excitation regardless of the initial conditions within the small oscillations regime. The results are compared with exact dynamics to set the working domain of the approach. The method is free from instabilities due boundary effects or to resonances with the two natural frequencies. The concept of adiabaticity is ubiquitous in physics, but it is not fully exploited in mechanical engineering and control applications. Adiabatic theorems set the existence of approximate adiabatic invariants, such as the action integral in classical mechanics, when the control parameters of a given physical system vary slowly enough in time Adiabaticity is often used to drive systems in a robust manner. An example is a load hanging as a simple pendulum from a moving trolley on a bridge crane. If the trolley travels slowly enough between two points, the energy of the pendulum is an adiabatic invariant and stays constant for different smooth trolley trajectories for the same initial and final points. In particular, the minimum energy configuration, in which the oscillating mass stays at relative rest with respect to the suspension point, is preserved. More generally, for other initial states the final energy will not suffer excitations. However, the intrinsic slowness of such processes may be problematic, either because long operation times are impractical, or because during a long process time the ideal dynamics can be affected by the accumulation of random and/or uncontrollable perturbations that spoil the desired result. To overcome these problems, "Shortcuts To Adiabaticity" (STA) methods have been developed in the last decade. The idea is to reach the same results of an adiabatic protocol in short times STA methods have been succesfully applied to many different fields and processes in quantum systems, such as: quantum computation molecules Among the different STA approaches, dynamical invariant based inverse engineering is one of the most successful and is the one followed here. The essence of the method is to identify exact (rather than adiabatic) dynamical invariants, set boundary conditions to cancel final excitation, design the dynamics compatible with these conditions, and deduce the necessary controls from the dynamics thanks to the relations between dynamical invariants and Hamiltonian. For the moving double pendulum the STA consists on designing trolley trajectories x(t) from x = 0 to x = d so that the system ends up at final process time t f without excitations. From the point of view of STA process design, this system poses interesting, non-trivial challenges with respect to the single pendulum, as we shall see. The article is organized as follows. The physical model and Hamiltonian of the system are set in Sec. II, both in exact form and in the small oscillation regime. Dynamically decoupled normal modes are found in Sec. III, and then the STA protocol is designed in Sec. IV. Numerical results are presented in Sec. V and, finally, in Sec. VI we end with the conclusions and discuss some open questions. The physical model and relevant parameters are shown in Fig. In terms of the angles θ 1 and θ 2 , see Fig. so kinetic (T ) and potential (V ) energies are given by where the dots represent time derivatives. The Lagrangian of the system using θ 1 and θ 2 as generalized coordinates and dynamical variables and x(t) as a control parameter will be given by To avoid deformations or excessive tensions, cranes usually work in the small oscillations regime, in which θ i are small so that we may approximate sin θ i ≈ θ i and cos θ i ≈ 1 -θ 2 i /2. Angular velocities θ will be considered small as well. This approximation linearizes the dynamical equations of motion of the system. Results found with exact and approximate dynamics will be compared later to check the validity of the approximation and its limits. In this small oscillation regime and keeping up to second order quadratic terms in θ i and θi , kinetic and potential energies are given by where M denotes the total mass M = m 1 + m 2 . and the Lagrangian becomes where purely time-dependent and constant terms have been omitted since they do not affect the dynamics. To implement a Hamiltonian formulation, which is more convenient to treat the invariants and inverse engineering of trolley trajectories, we need the conjugate momentum of each θ i , These relations can be inverted to have the generalized velocities θi in terms of the generalized momenta p θi . The Hamiltonian is found from the Lagrangian as where μ = m1m2 m1+m2 is the reduced mass and where constant terms that do not affect the dynamics have been neglected. In matrix representation the Hamiltonian can be written as where Whereas the potential matrix K is diagonal, the kinetic matrix T is not, i. e., p θ1 and p θ2 momenta are coupled. We want to find a coordinate transformation, i. e., normal modes, where both the coordinates and momenta are uncoupled so that we can easily get the dynamical invariants to inverse engineer x(t). In the following section, these normal modes will be calculated following Normal modes for the double pendulum with fixed suspension point are known Let us first define a new set of coordinates u 1 and u 2 by the linear transformation where the A matrix is yet to be determined. The corresponding momenta transform according to where A -T = (A -1 ) T stands for the transpose of the inverse matrix. The Hamiltonian in these variables reads We now look for a transformation matrix A that diagonalizes simultaneously both the AT A T and A -T KA -1 matrices in the expression above. To do so it is useful to define the following matrix which is symmetric and positive definite and therefore can be diagonalized by an orthogonal matrix O. Without loss of generality, this orthogonal matrix O can be parametrized as and choosing the parameter θ (not to be confused with the angles θ i ) by we have that The eigenvalues ω 2 i are positive since T is a positive definite matrix, and have dimensions of (angular) frequency square. The explicit expressions are in agreement with the eigenfrequencies given in both quadratic terms in the transformed Hamiltonian Finally, the Hamiltonian (11) takes the uncoupled form B. Lewis-Leach family of Hamiltonians and second canonical transformation The Lewis-Leach (LL) family of Hamiltonians are of the form i. e., quadratic Hamiltonians with linear in position terms. For them quadratic invariants are explicitly known. By a suitable canonical transformation to some generalized coordinates {q i , p i }, we shall transform H u into this form. This can be easily achieved just by exchanging momentum and coordinate By using this canonical transformation, the new Hamiltonian is a sum of two independent forced harmonic oscillators that belong to the LL family, Taking into account the two canonical transformations, the explicit expression of the normal mode coordinates and momenta {q i , p i } in terms of the original variables where I 2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix and, using the explicit expression of A in ( IV. DESIGNING THE STA PROTOCOL We are now ready to define the invariants and design the driving function x(t). A dynamical invariant of a Hamiltonian system remains constant during the time evolution with {I i , H i } being the Poisson bracket. The sum of invariants I = I 1 + I 2 is invariant with respect to the sum of Hamiltonians The invariants for provided the functions α i satisfy the following Newton equations, These α i functions may be regarded as auxiliary, reference, special "displacements" in two forced harmonic oscillators. Let us underline that the actual motion for a specific transport process is described by the q i rather than by the α i (which represent just a particular case of all possible q i ). Note by the way that the q i satisfy the same Newton equations (with the same forces) as the α i . However, we shall impose to α i boundary conditions that will guarantee zero final excitations whereas the initial conditions for the q i are arbitrary. We shall assume a transport from x(0) = 0 to x(t f ) = d with additional smooth boundary conditions for the trolley velocity, ẋ(t b ) = 0 for t b = 0, t f . We shall further assume that the auxiliary functions α i , as well as their first and second time derivatives vanish at boundary times t b = 0, t f . We therefore have in principle a total of sixteen boundary conditions (BC), namely These boundary conditions guarantee that each invariant I i coincides with the corresponding Hamiltonian H i at initial and final times, see At these boundary times, and due to the ẋ(t b ) = 0 boundary condition, the Hamiltonian represents the total mechanical energy of the system, i. e. E(t b ) = H q (t b ). If a fast finite-time process is designed so that the auxiliary functions α i satisfy the imposed boundary conditions, the energy at final and initial times -regardless of the initial conditions of the hook and load, i.e., regardless of the initial conditions set for q i (0) and its derivatives-will coincide since Note that in principle the only conditions needed to guarantee I(t b ) = H(t b ) are the ones for α(t b ) and α(t b ). The others have a physical motivation as the desired boundaries for the trolley motion (on x(t b ) and ẋ(t b )) or are a consequence of the former ones (the ones on α(t b ) because of ( In the following subsection we will show how to construct the trolley trajectory x(t) so that the desired conditions in We start by proposing the following ansatz for the trolley velocity ẋ(t), symmetric with respect to t f /2, with three free parameters a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 that will be determined from the following three conditions (the second line involves two conditions, one for each frequency, as justified in the Appendix): for j = 1, 2. Different functional forms are possible, but this ansatz is chosen for simplicity and because of very useful properties discussed in the Appendix (it avoids resonance and boundary effects). It is also remarkable that an ansatz with only three free parameters satisfies the full set of sixteen boundary conditions in These parameters determine completely the velocity of the trolley by which gives an explicit but lengthy expression. See some trolley trajectories and velocities in Fig. This trajectory implies a maximal velocity v max = (15π/16)(d/t f ) at t = t f /2. In this asymptotic scenario there is only one acceleration time segment up to t f /2 and a subsequent braking segment. For short times compared to eigenperiods there are several segments of acceleration and braking. In any case this regime is less interesting in practice since the system deviates from the harmonic regime. Once the trolley trajectory is designed, the dynamical evolution of the system can be found by numerically integrating the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion using either the exact Lagrangian (3) or the approximate Lagrangian in the harmonic (small oscillations) approximation For rapid transport operations, the involved angles are larger and the harmonic approximation breaks down, see Fig. To quantify the excitation at final time in a way that is easy to understand and visualize, we measure the final energy ∆E in terms of a fictitious angle θ f . This angle is defined as follows: (i) the load and hook are initially in equilibrium (at rest in the vertical position); and (ii) the final energy is artificially interpreted as pure potential energy for a configuration where load and hook are at rest along a line with θ f = θ 1 = θ 2 . In other words: θ f is the final angle when the final energy is considered to be purely potential and the two suspension angles coincide. Using (2) we may write with E 0 = -m 1 gl 1 -m 2 g(l 1 +l 2 ) being the energy for the equilibrium configuration. In Fig. The stability of the proposed transport protocol can be studied by allowing some initial deviations of the angles θ 1 (0) or θ 2 (0) from the equilibrium positions. In Fig. We will compare the resulting excitation with that for a simple third order polynomial ansatz for the trolley trajectory, which satisfies the four BCs in (31) for x(t) but not those for the auxiliar functions α i . As shown in Fig. With this data, two transport protocols are compared in Fig. We have applied an invariant based inverse engineering STA method to design fast trolley trajectories of a double pendulum overhead crane. In the small oscillations regime these trajectories guarantee that the transport does not induce any energy excitation, regardless of the initial condition of the double pendulum. We have first found the normal modes and from them the dynamical invariants. Using these invariants, it is possible to inverse engineer STA trolley trajectories. We have performed the numerical simulations with the exact dynamics to see the parameter intervals where the protocol is accurate. Comparisons are also made with less sophisticated trolley trajectories that demonstrate the advantage of the STA approach. We have worked out a particularly simple design for the trolley speed with three sine terms, Compared to previous work on methods without feedback 