Coherent ranging, also known as frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) laser based ranging (LI-DAR) [1] is currently developed for long range 3D distance and velocimetry in autonomous driving A different principle is that of frequency modulation continuous-wave (FMCW) LIDAR , where -→ k is the wavevector and -→ v the velocity of the illuminated object. As a result, the homodyne return signal for a moving object is composed of two frequencies for the upwards and downwards laser scan, i.e. From the measured beat notes during one period of the scan, one can therefore determine both distance and relative velocity of an object (cf. Fig. Here we demonstrate a massively parallel coherent FMCW source based on a soliton microcomb integrated on a photonic chip. Specifically, we show that agile chirping of the pump laser ω p retains the soliton state and leads to simultaneous chirping of all comb teeth ω ±μ comprising the soliton. The principles of massively parallel coherent LIDAR based on soliton microcombs are illustrated in Fig. We demonstrate the principle of spectral multiplexing in coherent LIDAR employing a 99 GHz repetition rate DKS in a silicon nitride (Si 3 N 4 ) microresonator, which is fabricated using the photonic Damascene process We next perform numerical simulations based on the Lugiato-Lefever equation (LLE) The linear dependence D1 results in a spectral channel-dependent bandwidth and, hence, a constant rescaling factor of the measured LIDAR distance, which we can determine during calibration. Only nonlinear dependencies of the pulse repetition rate f rep on the detuning ∆, from either the Raman shift Next, we experimentally demonstrate he ability to faithfully transfer the pump laser chirp to the soliton microcomb sidebands (cf. Fig. Next, we perform a proof-of-concept demonstration of the massively parallel LIDAR system. The calibrated FM microcomb is split (90/10) into a signal path, which is spec- trally dispersed around the circumference of the flywheel by a transmission grating (966 lines/mm), and a local oscillator path. The spectral channels of the reflected signal and the LO are isolated using a bidirectional arrayed waveguide grating. The results of parallel distance and velocity measurement including standard deviations over 100 FM periods for the static wheel are displayed in Fig. Last, we demonstrate parallel 3D imaging of 30 channels spectrally dispersed with a transmission grating and concurrently illuminating a target composed of two sheets of white paper spaced by 11 cm with the "EPFL" logo cutout in the front plane (cf. Fig. In summary, we have reported a novel method for massively parallel coherent LIDAR utilizing photonic chip-based soliton microcombs. It enables to reproduce arbitrary frequency chirps of the narrow linewidth pump laser onto all comb teeth that compose the soliton at speeds beyond 10 17 Hz 2 , and has the potential to significantly increase the frame rate of imaging coherent LIDAR systems via parallelization. In contrast to earlier works in frequency comb-based LIDAR Integrated Si 3 N 4 microresonators are fabricated with the photonic Damascene process We set up a frequency-agile pump laser for soliton generation using a CW external cavity diode laser (ECDL) coupled into an electro-optical phase modulator (EOM) for measurement of the relative laser cavity detuning, and dual Mach-Zehnder modulator (SSB) biased to single sideband modulation, which is driven by a frequency-agile voltage controlled oscillator (VCO, 5-10 GHz) and an arbitrary function generator (AFG). The cw laser is amplified to 1.7 W and 1 mW is split off for chirp linearization in a separate imbalanced Mach-Zehnder fibre interferometer for chirp linearization purposes The detuning with respect to the Kerr shifted cavity resonance and the bistable soliton response is monitored using a vectornetwork-analyzer (VNA) driving a weak phase modulation via an inline electro-optical-modulator FM LIDAR requires perfectly linear chirp ramps in order to achieve precise and accurate distance measurements, Heterodyne characterization of the transduced modulation is carried out to avoid possible ambiguities of delayed homodyne detection and catch high frequency noise components obscured in low bandwidth detection. The spectral channels are isolated using a commercial telecom WDM demultiplexer based on planar arrayed waveguide gratings and superimposed on a high-bandwidth (10 GHz) balanced photoreceiver. The data is recorded on a high-bandwidth balanced photodetector and a fast realtime sampling oscilloscope. Modulation frequencies span from 10 kHz to 10 MHz in our study and are limited by the actuation bandwidth of the AFG and VCO. The total measurement duration is between 0.5 ms (10 kHz) and 30 μs (10 MHz). The instantaneous frequency is determined via short-time Fourier transform using a 4th-order Nut-hall window and in case of the pump channel (193 THz) is linearized by applying iterative predistortion of the VCO input (cf. Fig. By tuning the second ECDL close to the individual comb sidebands, we can separately measure the transduced frequency modulation patterns for each comb sideband within the bandwidth of the demultiplexer. The resulting time frequency maps for modulation frequencies 100 kHz and 10 MHz across 5 modulation periods are depicted in extended data Fig. The tuning nonlinearity of the comb sidebands is calculated as the RMS deviation of the measured tuning curve from a perfect triangular frequency modulation trace determined with least-squares fitting. We determine frequency-dependent transduction from the intensities of the 1 st to 9 th harmonic of the triangular FM spectrum, which we normalize with respect to the corresponding pump modulation amplitude (cf. extended data Fig. The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. The calibration of the channel-dependent frequency excursion bandwidth for the ranging experiments is performed using a second MZI (8.075 m, cf. extended data Fig. The optical setup is depicted in Fig. 