In this study, a radial analytical model for methane hydrate dissociation upon thermal stimulation in porous media considering the wellbore structure's effect has been developed. The analytical approach is based on a similarity solution employing a moving boundary separating the dissociated and undissociated zones. Two different heat sources are considered: i) line heat-source; and ii) wellbore heat-source with a specific thickness consisting of casing, gravel, and cement. The temperature and pressure distributions, dissociation rate, and energy efficiency considering various reservoir properties and different initial and boundary conditions are investigated. Direct heat transfer from the heat source to the reservoir without considering heat conduction in the wellbore thickness causes a higher dissociation rate and gas production in the line-heat-source model compared to those of the wellbore-heat-source model. Increasing the heat-source temperature or decreasing its pressure increases gas production. However, employing them simultaneously results in greater gas production but reduces energy efficiency. The dissociation rate has direct relation with reservoir's porosity, thermal diffusivities, and thermal conductivities, but it is not dependent on the reservoir's permeability. Gas hydrates are ice-like components known as clathrates Considering that the entrapped gas and water are bonded through physical interaction in MH, which is weaker than the chemical interactions, any change in MH equilibrium temperature or pressure would easily induce MH instability and dissociation. The main methods of MH dissociation that have been reported so far are as follows Despite several findings regarding the hydrate dissociation methods, further investigation is required to shed more light on the potential of different methods and their aspects. Mathematical studies of hydrate dissociation can be categorized into: i) analytical approaches with fast answers and a better mechanistic understanding of the phenomena; and ii) numerical methods, which are more comprehensive and complicated, requiring fewer assumptions. In 1982, a 3D numerical model was developed to study MH dissociation In 1990, Selim and Sloan The experimental setup size is reported as one of the major challenges in MH dissociation investigations using different methods, which significantly affects the test outcomes Nowadays, this field of investigation has attracted researchers' interest to perform more mathematical studies as well as real field or experimental works employing parameters from real reservoirs Ding et al. Studies over the past decades have provided substantial information about MH dissociation and the associated consequences in the reservoirs. However, it should be noted that the wellbore structure can play an important role in the dissociation process, such as the heat transfer mechanism during the thermal stimulation method. Recently, Roostaie and Leonenko The present work develops 2D analytical models assuming an infinite hydrate reservoir in radial coordinates and two different heat sources: i) line heat-source (no thickness); and ii) wellbore heatsource consisting of three main completion layers of casing, cement, and gravel. The energy efficiency, gas production, and temperature and pressure distributions are calculated and verified [Type here] against the previous experimental and mathematical studies. The results of this work shed more light on assessing the gas production from MH reservoirs upon thermal stimulation. Therefore, this study makes a major contribution to research on MH dissociation upon wellbore heating by analytically demonstrating, for the first time, the effect of wellbore geometry and structure on the MH dissociation in radial coordinates. The outcomes obtained using such conditions are closer to the real-condition tests, making them more valuable and reliable. Figure The geometry of the other case using a line heat-source is exactly the same as Figure [Type here] During dissociation, the temperature of Zone I is higher than that of Zone II inducing heat transfer from the Zone I to Zone II. Principally, heat input from the heat source is consumed in two different ways: i) the temperature increment of the matrix sediments and the produced water and gas in Zone I; and ii) hydrate dissociation and the temperature increment of the matrix materials in Zone II. Over time, Zone I becomes larger and absorbs higher amount of input heat (the first way mentioned above) reducing the dissociation rate and the moving interface speed. Figure The temperature and pressure distributions in Zone I (TI and P) are respectively s I i [Type here] The produced gas will be streaming towards the heat source according to Darcy's Law and induces a sudden change in density at the dissociation front. Other assumptions made in the models of this study, which are consistent with the previous analytical works [Type here] Basic equations which are the same for both types of heat sources (line heat-source and wellbore heat-source), are presented in the following formulas. The continuity equation of gas in Zone I is: where  is reservoir (matrix) porosity, g  is gas density (kg/m 3 ), g v is gas velocity (m/s), and r is the radial distance (m). The gas velocity in Zone I is calculated by using Darcy's Law: where k is gas permeability (m 2 ),  is gas viscosity (mPa.s), and P is pressure (Pa). Equations 3 and 4 show the energy balance in Zones I and II, respectively: The following equation evaluates the gas density in Zone I by using Ideal Gas Law: where m is gas molecular mass (kg/mol), and R is the universal gas constant (J/(mol.K)). The above equations represent the fundamental concept of the process. The heat sources' temperature and pressure are constant and equal to Ti and Pi, respectively. Equations 6 and 7 also state these conditions: Line heat -source: Equation 8 states the heat transfer equation through the wellbore thickness: () where Aw is the wellbore area (m 2 ), w R is the wellbore thermal resistivity (W/K), x k is the thermal conductivity (J/(s.m.K)), r is radius (m), the s, c, and g subscripts respectively stand for steel (casing), cement, and gravel, and the subscripts 1-5 are schematically shown on Figure () where H  is the hydrate density (kg/m 3 ), II k is the thermal conductivity (W/(m.K)) of Zone II, Hd Q is MH dissociation heat (J/kg), and c and d are constants. In equation 11, FgH is a constant that represents the methane gas mass ratio inside the hydrate (0.1265 kg CH4/kg hydrate) The following equations 17-19 are obtained respectively from equations 1, 3, and 11 by employing equations 2 and 5 to eliminate the gas velocity and density. The similarity solution using a dimensionless parameter (equation 20) is employed for transformation, simplification, and solution of the equations mentioned above. This method, which was first introduced by Neumann On the moving dissociation interface, equation 20 becomes: And, on the outer surface of the wellbore: The abovementioned equations are transformed by employing equations 20-22 and presented in the supplementary information. [Type here] By considering the procedure recommended by previous works Line heat-source: Wellbore heat-source: A, B, C, A1, B1, a, and b constants are defined in the supplementary information. The pressure distribution in Zone I for both heat sources can be calculated from the equation S7 as follows: ( ) Then, equations 26 and 27 show the pressure distributions for both heat sources by replacing and integrating TI from equations 23 and 24: Line heat-source: ( ) Wellbore heat-source: ( ) ) where () L  , () M  , () N  , and () K  are defined in the supplementary information. The obtained solutions for temperature and pressure distributions satisfy the basic equations and boundary conditions (equations 1-19) by direct substitution. The following formula calculates the heat flux from the wellbore (J/(s.m 2 )) as a function of time: Equation 28 can be transformed to an equal equation according to equation 20 (provided in the supplementary information). [Type here] Integrating equation 28 gives the total heat input into the reservoir from the heat source (J/m 2 ) up to time t as follows: The total volume of produced gas at standard temperature and pressure (STP) of dry gas can be calculated as follows: where rp V and rt n respectively are the total volume (m 3 /m 2 ) and total moles (mole/m 2 ) of produced gas per average moving-interface surface area up to time t at STP T and STP P as temperature and pressure of dry gas at STP conditions, respectively. Further details are provided in the supplementary information. The ratio of the energy that could be produced from the produced gas combustion to the energy input from the heat source during hydrate dissociation defines the energy efficiency ratio. The following formula evaluates the dissociation energy efficiency where f  is the energy efficiency ratio, and g Q is the gas heating value (J/m 3 ) at STP conditions. As equation Figure Temperature and pressure distributions for the two heat sources are calculated and presented in Zone II. The trends for temperature and pressure distributions reported by Roostaie and Leonenko Various researchers have experimentally investigated MH dissociation by hot water circulation in a reservoir. for instance, using this approach, Song et al. Taking a different approach, Bayles et al. Increasing the thermal conductivity of Zone I significantly increases the amount of heat input from the reservoir (Figure Ultimately, this stored heat is released and consumed by dissociation, increasing the dissociation rate (Figure Selim and Sloan Tsimpanogiannis and Lichtner [Type here] Table Porosity,  0.1 to 0.5 Permeability, k, μm 2 0.1 to 5 Zone I thermal diffusivity, I  , μm 2 /s 1×10 6 to 5×10 6 Zone I thermal conductivity, I k , W/(m.K) 3 to 7 Zone II thermal diffusivity, II  , μm 2 /s 4×10 5 to 8×10 5 Zone II thermal conductivity, II k , W/(m.K) 1 to 5 Gas viscosity,  , Pa.s 10 -4 to 10 -6 0.7 0.8 0.9 [Type here] Dashed lines and solid lines respectively represent the wellbore-heat-source and the line-heatsource models. 0.9 alpha II=8(10^(- Wellbore heat source Line heat source 0.8 0.9 Dashed lines and solid lines respectively represent the wellbore-heat-source and the line-heatsource models. The present study is a follow-up to our previous work on MH dissociation upon thermal stimulation These results further prove that the dissociation rate is not constant and depends on the temperature at the wellbore surface, which changes by the conduction heat transfer in the wellbore structure. The effect of the temperature increment of the wellbore's outer surface on the interface temperature becomes negligible as the dissociation progresses because over time; this temperature increment decreases (Figure Interface pressure (Figures The gas produced is higher for the line-heat-source case compared to that of the wellbore-heatsource case due to the interface location mentioned earlier (Figures Lastly, the previous studies (mentioned in the previous section) mainly investigated effects of reservoir characteristics on the produced gas and dissociation rate without assessment of the associated effects on the input heat from the wellbore (Figure Increasing thermal diffusivities causes higher gas production and lower input heat resulting in higher energy efficiencies. Furthermore, the effect of thermal diffusivity of Zones I and II on the energy efficiency is more pronounced respectively in lower and higher thermal conductivities of Zones I and II. Higher thermal conductivities always increase the input heat, but higher porosity decreases it, inducing a significant raise in the energy efficiency. The present research aims to clarify how the wellbore structure affects the hydrate dissociation upon wellbore heating by employing 2D radial analytical models. Two types of heat sources are considered: i) line heat-source; and ii) wellbore heat-source with external layers (casing, cement, and gravel). The effects of various reservoir parameters and boundary conditions on dissociation [Type here] are also evaluated. Dissociation interface position/velocity and energy efficiency are two main factors employed to assess the process. This project provided an important opportunity to advance the understanding of MH dissociation, as the analytical model introduced in this study appears to be the first work to investigate MH dissociation upon wellbore heating in radial coordinates, which is closer to the real conditions. Prior to this study it was difficult to make predictions about how the wellbore's properties and structure, through which heat transfer to the reservoir occurs, affect the dissociation. For example, the heat input and the resulted energy efficiency can be calculated, which are great assessments for the process. The results of the present study match with those of previous mathematical and experimental investigations. Taken together, the results make several contributions to the current literature as follows: -The dissociation rate and process efficiency are dependent on the wellbore structure, which is a design parameter. Using a wellbore heat-source causes a reduction in the dissociation rate and the produced gas compared to those of the other case with line heat-source. -Heat conduction through the wellbore's external layers changes wellbore surface temperature over time, which depends on the wellbore structure. -Dissociation front's pressure and temperature depend on the wellbore surface temperature. -Increasing the wellbore temperature and decreasing its pressure simultaneously increase the dissociation rate and produced gas while reduces the energy efficiency. Thus, more information on the initial and boundary conditions including wellbore structure (number of layers, thicknesses, and thermal properties) is essential to establish a greater degree of accuracy on this matter and to improve the energy efficiency of the process. -Only conductive heat transfer was considered during the dissociation process in the proposed parametric study. -Gas production, input heat, and energy efficiency of the process significantly depend on the reservoir's thermal diffusivity, porosity, and thermal conductivity. Inversely, different reservoir's permeabilities and viscosities do not affect the dissociation outcome. -There is a good agreement between the present results and previous experimental and mathematical studies, validating the assumptions made in the model development. wellbore outer surface is time-dependent, inducing variable s P and s T over time; however, the line heat-source temperature in the other case remains constant, inducing constant s P and s T . The [Type here] [Type here]