We report high-resolution neutron scattering measurements of the low energy spin fluctuations of KFe2As2, the end member of the hole-doped Ba1-xKxFe2As2 family with only hole pockets, above and below its superconducting transition temperature Tc (∼ 3.5 K). Our data reveals clear spin fluctuations at the incommensurate wave vector (0.5 ± δ, 0, L), (δ = 0.2)(1-Fe unit cell), which exhibit L-modulation peaking at L = 0.5. Upon cooling to the superconducting state, the incommensurate spin fluctuations gradually open a spin-gap and form a sharp spin resonance mode. The incommensurability (2δ = 0.4) of the resonance mode (∼ 1.2 meV) is considerably larger than the previously reported value (2δ ≈ 0.32) at higher energies (≥∼ 6 meV). The determination of the momentum structure of spin fluctuation in the low energy limit allows a direct comparison with the realistic Fermi surface and superconducting gap structure. Our results point to an s-wave pairing with a reversed sign between the hole pockets near the zone center in KFe2As2. In iron pnictide superconductors, it is widely believed that the interband interactions between the hole pockets at the zone center (Γ) and the electron pockets at the zone edges (M) play an important role in the electron pairing and superconductivity. This is supported by the observation of a resonance mode in the spin fluctuation spectrum at the wave vector (π, 0) connecting the hole and electron pockets, which is presumably due to the creation of a spin exciton when the superconducting gap function has a sign change between the nested electron and hole Fermi surfaces. This together with the fully gapped superconductivity revealed by various experiments suggests an s± wave pairing symmetry in iron pnictides With increasing carrier doping from the optimallydoped to the overdoped regime, the shifting of the electronic structure would alter the Fermi surface geometry and superconductivity. In the case of the electron-doped 122 family of iron pnictides, the resonance energy scales with T c and the resonance spectral weight decreases with growth of the mismatch of the electron (enlarged) and hole (shrunk) Fermi pockets In hole-doped 122 iron pnictide Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , the spin resonance mode also gradually vanishes in the overdoped regime when the mismatch of the hole and electron pockets becomes critical The pairing symmetry in over hole-doped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 has been the subject of intense debate both experimentally and theoretically. In particular, indication of a nodal superconducting gap was revealed by magnetic penetration-depth In this Letter, we report the results of inelastic neutron scattering studies of low energy spin fluctuations in KFe 2 As 2 single crystals. We show that the effect of superconductivity is to gradually open a low energy spin gap and also to induce a sharp resonance mode at energies above the spin gap energy at the incommensurate wave vector (0.5 ± δ, 0, L), (δ = 0.2). The low energy spin fluctuations exhibit L-modulation and are peaked at L = 0.5 in the superconducting state, indicating a nonnegligible inter-layer correlation. The resonance mode is also dispersive along the L direction, which is distinct from the nearly two dimensional resonance mode observed in the optimally-doped and slightly overdoped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 Magnetic susceptibility and resistivity measurements on pieces from the same batches as the neutron scattering crystals show a sharp superconducting transition at Fig. To elucidate the origin of the enhanced spin excitations in the superconducting state, we measured the constant-Q scans at the incommensurate wave vectors Q = (0.3, 0, 0.5) and (0.3, 0, 0) above and below T c . To eliminate the energy dependent background, the net enhancement is shown by the difference between 0.47 K and 4.5 K data in Fig. To further verify whether the enhanced spin fluctuation in the superconducting state is indeed associated with the superconducting transition, we carefully measured the temperature dependence of the spin fluctuation at Q = (0.3, 0, 0.5) and E = 1.2 meV [Fig. Finally we discuss the origin of the resonance mode and its implication for pairing symmetry in KFe 2 As 2 . Since the electron bands do not cross the Fermi level, the hole bands should be active in electron pairing. The Fermi surfaces of KFe 2 As 2 consist of three cylindrical hole pockets [α (inner), ζ (middle), β (outer)] at the zone center Γ, and four tiny clover-like hole pockets ( ) around M [Fig. If the pairing interaction comes from the intraband scattering within the middle pocket, then a d-wave pairing seems to be favored. However, a close inspection of the electronic structure reveals that the sign change between the Fermi surface sections nesting along the H direction within the middle pockets is inconsistent with a conventional d-wave symmetry, given that the line nodes are mainly along the diagonal directions on the squareshaped middle pocket It has been shown that the resonance energy E R and T c a universal relation of E R /k B T c ≈ 4.3 in iron pnictide superconductors It is interesting to compare the spin fluctuation spectrum of KFe 2 As 2 with that of the less overdoped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 . It has been shown that the spin resonance modes below the superconducting gap in underdoped and optimally doped Ba ducting gap at x ≥ 0.77 when the Fermi surface nesting is no longer present due to the vanishing electron pockets. This was interpreted as a reduced impact of magnetism on Cooper pair formation in the overdoped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 To conclude, we have performed inelastic neutron scattering experiments to study the low energy spin excitations in KFe 2 As 2 single crystals. For the first time, we have observed the superconducting spin resonance mode in a heavily hole doped iron based superconductor with no electron pockets. The resonance mode is dispersive along the L direction, which is consistent with the fact that the hole band shows strong 3-dimensionality. Our results imply an s-wave pairing symmetry with a signreversed superconducting order parameter between the hole pockets near the zone center. The persistence of spin resonance mode associated with the hole bands provides a natural explanation for the robustness of superconductivity in KFe 2 As 2 in the extremely overdoped regime. 