Molecular bridges covalently bonded to two ferromagnetic electrodes can transform ferromagnetic materials and produce intriguing spin transport characteristics. This paper discusses the impact of molecule induced strong coupling on the spin transport. To study molecular coupling effect organometallic molecular complex (OMC) was bridged between two ferromagnetic electrodes of a magnetic tunnel junction (Ta/Co/NiFe/AlOx/NiFe/Ta) along the exposed side edges. OMCs induced strong iter-ferromagnetic electrode coupling to yield drastic changes in transport properties of the magnetic tunnel junction testbed at the room temperature. These OMCs also transformed the magnetic properties of magnetic tunnel junctions. SQUID and ferromagnetic resonance studies provided insightful data to explain transport studies on the magnetic tunnel junction based molecular spintronics devices. with 79% Ni by weight. In the next step photolithography was performed to create a cavity with vertical side edges (Fig. To study the impact of OMC we conducted current-voltage (I-V) studies on MTJ testbed before and after transforming them into MTJMSDs. Generally, OMCs lowered the current below the bare MTJ's leakage current level via the ~ 2 nm AlOx tunneling barrier (Fig. We also observed that the application of alternating inplane and out of the plane magnetic field was effective in switching MTJMSD between high and low current state (Fig. We further investigated the suppressed current state. It is also noteworthy that due to the instrument limitation we were not able to capture exact transport properties of the MTJMSD in the suppressed current state during MR studies discussed in figure It is highly intriguing that ~10,000 OMCs along the MTJ edges produced a suppressed current state below the leakage current level through the planar area (Fig. In the prior study, we have provided insight regarding OMC induced impact on interferromagnetic electrode coupling and magnetic ordering of the ferromagnetic electrode itself It is noteworthy that only a small fraction of OMCs formed bridge across insulator. Most of the OMCs stick to the NiFe ferromagnetic electrode regions away from the tunnel barrier (top left inset of the Fig. At this point we are unsure about why the application of magnetic field produced the suppressed current state on MTJMSD (Fig. Based on the I-V study we estimated the effective barrier heights and barrier thicknesses using Brinkman tunneling models We investigated the effective density of states before and after transforming MTJ into an MTJMSD. According to prior literature density of state in the molecule affected regions depends on barrier height (φ) and the molecular coupling strength (ω) We estimated the relative increase in the strength of exchange coupling by utilizing the following equation ) . exp( According to the analysis of charge transport data, barrier thickness (d) decreased from ~2.2 nm to ~1.2 nm range. This effective barrier thickness of MTJMSD corresponded to alkane tether length of ~1.2 nm. The MTJMSD barrier thickness was comparable in the high and low current state. The barrier height (φ) can be utilized to obtain tunneling decay factor β according to the relation β =10.2 nm -1 √(φ/eV) Our magnetic studies provide clear evidences that OMC produced transformative exchange coupling on an MTJ We conjectured that strong OMC based coupling impacted the whole microscopic junctions and changed the spin polarization of the ferromagnetic electrodes. Recent studies shine light on molecule impact on the spin density of states on ferromagnets near interface regions According to our SQUID magnetometer study on an array of ~7000 MTJ OMC showed almost 100% increase in the magnetic moment (Fig. We discussed the observation of molecule induced dramatic changes in the magnetic and transport properties of the magnetic tunnel junctions. OMCs were chemically bonded to ferromagnetic electrodes to bridge them across the insulating spacer along the exposed edges. These molecules dominated the MTJMSD's spin transport and produced several orders gap in the high and low current state at room temperature. The estimation of transport data in the low and high current states indicated that molecules changed the spin density of states. Potential reason behind modification in the density of states is the molecule induced spin filtering effect. Transport studies are strongly supported by the experimental magnetic studies. It is also noteworthy that our experimental studies provide a platform to connect a vast variety of ferromagnetic leads to the broader array of high potential molecules such as single molecular magnets 