Silver is a metal which provides the highest reflectivity in the very broad wavelength range as well as the lowest polarization splitting. However, it is not very stable chemically and silver mirrors are easily damaged in a corrosive or oxidizing environment, leading first to the drastic drop in reflection followed by the complete disintegration of a silver layer. For this reason aluminum is much more in use. The problem of protection of silver layer is a very important one for number of applications, requiring the front side reflection, such as telescopes mirrors, reflective IR imaging optics, gratings, photovoltaic concentrator mirrors, etc. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water as precursors provides a very efficient way to protect a sensitive surface of silver from a corrosive and oxidizing environment, because ALD coatings can be deposited at rather low temperature. Moreover, ALD layer provides extremely high conformality (even when deposited over high aspect ratio features) and has high integrity, efficiently blocking foreign species diffusion to silver-overcoat interface. In our studies we tested the efficiency of the protection of silver mirrors by ALD-deposited Al 2 O 3 layers against oxygen plasma exposure by correlating the ellipsometric measurements with the absolute reflection measurements and Glow-Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy (GD-OES) data. We have found that for optimal protection the thickness of ALD deposited layer should exceed at least 15 nm (about 150 ALD cycles at 150 o C), as thinner layers do not provide reliable protection of silver surface against oxygen plasma. We have also demonstrated that the deposition of 15 nm of a protective ALD-deposited Al 2 O 3 layer does not affect the absolute reflectivity of a silver mirror in a spectral range 300 -2500 nm. Silver is an ideal metal for the front surface mirrors for optics in both visible and infrared wavelength ranges. In this range silver possesses the highest reflectivity, lowest emissivity and lowest polarization splitting of all known metals Atomic oxygen, which is the most abundant corrosion precursor on low earth orbit, is formed in the space in the process of photo dissociation of O 2 molecules by ultraviolet (UV) photons (< 243 nm) of solar radiation which has enough energy to break a 5.12 eV O 2 bond in an environment where the mean free path is sufficiently long and the probability of recombination or formation of ozone is quite small. Using Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) for the protection of silver-based front surface mirrors was first reported by In this article we report on the study of the resistance of RF magnetron sputtered front surface silver mirrors with the ALD-deposited Al 2 O 3 protective layers to the erosion in oxygen plasma, generated in high-density plasma (HDP) MDECR system. Accelerated aging tests in plasma systems (given the high active oxygen flux to the surface) can help to optimize protective coatings performance and are not uncommon Silver films with the thickness around 200 nm were sputtered onto 375 μm thick 100 mm in diameter (100) silicon wafers in Alliance Concept Dp650 RF magnetron sputtering system in the following conditions: RF-power 75 Watts using 90 mm in diameter silver target, Ar pressure of 3.5 mTorr at 250 °C (substrate holder temperature). Before loading into sputtering system the silicon wafers were dipped in 5 percent hydrofluoric acid solution in water for 30 sec in order to remove native oxide. It was found that such procedure produced films of consistently better quality. Base vacuum before the depositions was always below 5•10 -7 Torr. We have found that the conditions of sputtering are very important for mirrors to withstand subsequent ALD coating deposition and our standard conditions for silver sputtering had to be adjusted in order for Ag mirror to survive Al 2 O 3 deposition at 150 °C. Results of silver sputtering optimization are presented in Fig. After sputtering the mirrors were transferred into Picosun R200 Advanced deposition system where they stayed under constant N 2 flow for one hour in order to reach stable temperature. Thermal ALD depositions were carried out at 150 °C temperature using alternating 100 ms pulses of trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water at chamber pressure of 9 Torr with constant nitrogen purge flux of 1 SLM. Before and after depositing the protective ALD layers of different thickness, all mirrors were measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry and reflection spectroscopy. Additionally, some samples were analyzed with Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy (GD-OES) to establish the compositional profile of the coatings Optical properties of ALD-deposited Al 2 O 3 protective layers are broadly in line with those reported for the films deposited in similar conditions (Table Oxygen plasma treatment was performed in the MDECR plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) system As can be noticed, reflectance of silver film in the wavelength range above 320 nm is barely affected by the presence of Al 2 O 3 layer, while for shorter wavelength reflectance differs considerably (see Fig. After oxidation step the reflection of a non-protected mirror and mirrors with both 5 and 10 nanometer-thick coatings suffered significant deterioration (see Fig. Unprotected silver film is fully oxidized through with more or less constant concentration of oxygen all the way to the point where signal from silicon wafer appears (Figs. Front surface silver mirrors, depending on the way they are deposited, can be quite sensitive to the ALD process. Protective films of Al 2 O 3 deposited onto the silver mirrors by ALD provide an effective barrier against active oxygen erosion even at 15 nm of protective film thickness and can be deposited at the temperature of 150 °C, provided silver film withstands the conditions of ALD process. It is not yet clear, why the thicknesses below 15 nm could not prevent the deterioration of a mirror surface in oxygen plasma and further work is needed to clarify the details of degradation process. GD-OES technique provides fast and accurate way to investigate the degradation of mirrors after different sorts of corrosions tests. Funding: This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. and optimal (right) conditions. Figure 