We investigated the reduction of the spin stiffness and the appearance of the spiral spin density waves when the electric field is applied on the zigzag graphene nanoribbons for the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic edge states. For that purpose, we exploited the generalized Bloch theorem combined with a constraint method to keep the direction of the magnetic moment of the carbon atom at the edges. We found that the ground state of ferromagnetic configuration is unstable and leads to the spiral ground state while the ground state of the antiferromagnetic configuration is robust. We also showed that the spin stiffness in the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic configurations reduces as the electric field increases. Thus, we justified that not only the spin stiffness but also the ground state of the zigzag graphene nanoribbons can be controlled by the electric field. The series of experiments on graphene In general, graphene is a kind of nonmagnetic materials, so it is important to consider a magnetism scenario in graphene for the spintronic applications. A simple way to study a magnetism in graphene materials is to lower the dimensionality of graphene. The zigzag graphene nanoribbon (ZGNR), a one-dimensional version of the graphene material, shows many interesting magnetic properties. The magnetism in the ZGNR appears when the magnetic moments of the carbon atoms are arranged at the different edges Here, we focus on the spin stiffness in the ZGNR, which is a crucial indicator of the performance of ZGNR-based applications at the room temperature. Yazyev and Katsnelson showed that the critical temperature of ZGNR should be very low below the room temperature Previous investigations of the spin-wave excitations under the electric field have been done by Rhim and Moon The use of the GBT is of interest since the calculation can be efficiently performed with the primitive cell. Unlike Rhim and Moon The appearance of the SP state is of interest for the spintronic devices. Sabirianov et al. used the SP model to evaluate a magnetoresistance in a domain wall for the nanowires The applied GBT in this non-collinear calculation was implemented within a linear combination of pseudo-atomic orbitals (LCPAO) as basis sets and the norm-conserving pseudopotential where the localized orbital φ iα is generated by a confinement method will rotate to form a spiral configuration. The deviation of the cone angle θ from the collinear magnetic order will then create the spin-wave excitations with the magnon energy hω q along the q direction. The magnetic moment of the planar spiral configuration was established by setting the initial angles (θ 1 = θ 2 = π/2) and (φ 0 1 = φ 0 2 = 0) for the FM configuration, and (θ 1 = θ 2 = π/2) and (φ 0 1 = 0, φ 0 2 = π) for the AFM configuration, as shown in Fig. Note that our calculation follows Edwards and Katsnelson's prediction that the spin stiffness of the ZGNR should be higher than that of 3d ferromagnet metals The self-consistent calculation was carried out by using a 90×1×1 k-point mesh, the cutoff energy of 150 Ryd, and the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional for treating the electron-electron interaction Before starting the discussion, here, we make an abbreviation of a ZGNR with a ribbon width N as N-ZGNR. Then, by computing the total energy difference self-consistently for a set of q to calculate the magnon energy in Eq. ( Figure Figure For the last result, we show the reduction of the spin stiffness as a function of the electric field, as shown in Fig. When the electric field reduces the spin stiffness more significantly in the large ribbon width, it leads to the instability of the ground state for the FM configuration than that for the AFM configuration. Since the AFM configuration gives the lowest energy in the ZGNR, it is clear that the ground state of the AFM configuration is more robust than that of the FM configuration when the electrical field is applied. We can justify that the SP state can only appear for the non-stable configuration in the ZGNR when the electric field is taken into account. It can also be understood why the critical value of the electric field decreases as the ribbon width increases. This is also due to the decrease of the Jij between the two carbon atoms as the ribbon width increases, thus the ground state of the larger ribbon width changes more rapidly. As shown in Fig. In general, the change of spin stiffness under the electric field controls to the change of critical temperature. In our ZGNR case, the decrease of magnon energy/spin stiffness will also lead to the decrease of critical temperature, which causes the ZGNR worthless for spintronic devices. Although we cannot increase the spin stiffness by applying the electric field along y-direction, it can be possible to increase the spin stiffness with the other physical treatments, e.g., applying the electric field along the other directions. If it can be realized, we expect that the spin stiffness gives the critical temperature close to the room temperature, which provides the ZGNR useful for the graphene spintronics. Since the larger ribbon width also gives the higher spin stiffness, we can combine the ribbon width and the applied electric field to increase the critical temperature significantly. We show that the electric field can reduce the spin stiffness and change the ground state starting from the critical value of the electric field in the ZGNR. While the AFM configuration as the most stable state tends to maintain its ground state, the FM configuration changes its ground state from the FM state to the SP state. In addition, the reduction of spin stiffness and the position of q, at which the minimum energy is obtained, depend on the ribbon width as the electric field increases. This means that the ribbon width determines the strength of the exchange coupling Jij between the two carbon atoms to overcome the effect of the electric field. So, we justify that the electric field can be used either to control the spin stiffness or to generate the SP state.