Motivated by the recent observation and argument on a large half-quantum vortex (HQV) pair connencted by a Kibble wall in superfluid 3 He in nematic aerogels, we numerically study to what extent a huge HQV pair can intrinsically occur with no pinning effect due to the aerogel structure in the polar-distorted B (PdB) phase of superfluid 3 He. By fully examining the impurity-scattering induced pairing vertex, the emergence of Anderson's Theorem in the p-wave superfluid is verified in the two opposite limits, the isotropic and strongly anisotropic limits. Solving numerically the resulting Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy in the weak-coupling approximation and by taking account of the Fermi-liquid (FL) corrected gradient terms, the anisotropy dependence of the vortex structure minimizing the free energy is examined. It is found that, close to the transition between the polar and PdB phases, an interplay of the strong anisotropy and the FL correction makes emergence of a large HQV pair in the PdB phase possible, and that, nevertheless, such a large pair easily shrinks deep in the PdB phase, indicating that a pinning effect due to the aerogel structure is necessary in order to keep a large pair size there. The obtained result indicates the validity of the London limit for describing the vortex structure, and a consistency with the picture based on the NMR measurement is discussed. The recent observation of half-quantum vortices (HQVs) Recently, experimental investigation on the vortices in the nematic aerogel has been extended to lower temperatures In the present work, we start with reformulating the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) approach for describing the superfluid 3 He in anisotropic aerogels by extending the weakly anisotropic model The present paper is organized as follows. In sec.II, the vertex correction to the pairing process is explained in details together with the model of the impurity scattering used in this work. In sec.III, the resulting GL free energy affected by the impurity effects is explained. In sec.IV, it is explained how a HQV pair in the PdB phase is stabilized within the description in the London limit. Our numerical results and detailed discussions about them are presented in sec.V, and a summary and discussions are given in sec.VI. Details on the impurity-induced vertex correction and its effects on the O(|∆| 4 ) gradient terms are explained in two Appendices. Our microscopic analysis for deriving the GL free energy is based on a BCS Hamiltonian with the nonmagnetic and random scattering potential term of the form Here we focus on the case in which the scattering process is nonmagnetic, since the local surface of the aerogel is implicitly assumed to be entirely coated by 4 He so that the spin-flip scattering between the solid 3 He on the surface and the quasiparticles of the liquid 3 He is ineffective. Regarding the random averaging over u(r), the Fourier transform u(k) of u(r) is assumed to have zero mean and the mean-squared average In the original work where kz = k z /k F . The positive constant δ in eq.( In the weakly anisotropic limit where δ ≪ 1, this expression reduces to eq.( The factor √ δ in eq.( To derive a GL free energy incorporating the scattering processes via the anisotropic aerogel structure with any strength of the anisotropy, we need a renormalized pairing vertex Λ j replacing the bare pairing vertex pj = p j /k F , which depends not only on the relative momentum p but also on the center-of-mass momentum k and the fermion Matsubara frequency ε. The Bethe-Salpeter equation sketched in Fig. for Λ j can be solved in a closed form by assuming Λ j to take the expression where is the Matsubara Green's function with the self energy term including the impurity scattering, ξ p is the quasiparticle energy, and εp will be given by eq.( The general form of Λ j is involved and will be presented in Appendix. Here, just its limiting expressions will be explained. First, in the isotropic limit where δ → 0, C 0 → 1, and other coefficients except B 0 vanish. Then, Λ j reduces to where |ε 0 | = |ε|+1/(2τ ). As stressed elsewhere In the opposite limit where δ → +∞, i.e., the limit of strong anisotropy, the coefficients in Λ j have the following limiting values: and where p2 ⊥ = 1 -p2 z . We note that the second term of |ε ∞ | corresponds to the imaginary part of the self energy of the normal Green's function. The k 2 ⊥ term in eq.( are reflected in each term of the GL free energy which will be given in the next section and Appendices. We will use an appropriate GL free energy to numerically study the vortex solutions stable in anisotropic aerogels. As has been assumed in Ref. and the quartic term where Ω is the volume, and, for simplicity, F 4 was written here by assuming the order parameter to be spatially uniform. Up to the lowest order in the spatial gradient, one can separate F 2 +F 4 into the bulk energy contribution F bulk = r f bulk , where and the gradient terms. In the case of weak anisotropy where δ ≪ 1, the β (n = 1, • • •, 5) terms appear in O(δ), while β z term first appears in O(δ 2 ). Among the gradient terms, the free energy density corresponding to the contributions from F 2 consist of the following seven terms: General expressions on the coeffients in the GL free energy are involved and will be presented in Appendix. Here, their limiting behaviors in the limits of weak anisotropy, δ → 0, and of strong anisotropy, δ → ∞ will be explained together with their implication. In δ → 0 limit, up to O(δ), β z vanishes, and the remaining GL coefficients of f bulk reduce to those given in Ref. In contrast, in the δ → ∞ limit, the coefficients in f bulk have the following limiting values : (1) (1) 12345 + 2β (1) where It can be verified that β (1) n and β z vanish in the true clean limit where τ -1 = 0. The fact that α z approaches its result in the impurityfree bulk liquid is a consequence of the specular scattering along the polar axis (see eq.( 12345 + β z ) within the present GL treatment is also independent of τ As stressed elsewhere Due to the nonvanishing δ, as seen in eq.( Further, the coefficient of ∂ z A * μz ∂ z A μz which arises from the sum of the K 4 , K 5 , and K 6 terms approaches The divergent behaviors ∼ ε -2 in low T limit of eq.( To correctly understand the order parameter structures of a HQV pair obtained numerically, it is useful to have an intuitive image of a HQV pair by describing it in the London limit where the order parameter A μj is FIG. described in terms of the angle variables while keeping the overall amplitude fixed. Hereafter, we focus on the HQV lines extended along the polar axis ẑ. First, let us review how to describe a single HQV μν cosθ -ε xμν sinθ, the order parameter in the PdB phase in an environment with a uniaxially stretched anisotropy is expressed following the notation in Ref. where c (0 ≤ c ≤ 2/3) is the parameter playing the role of the order parameter of the PdB phase, δ μν = δ μν -xμ xν , and the over all phase Φ was introduced. A single HQV localized at the origin is expressed by choosing Φ = θ = φ/2. Then, the corresponding order parameter becomes where the unit vectors ê±μ = (ŷ ± iẑ) μ / √ 2, and ê′ ±j = (cŷ ± i 2(1 -c 2 )ẑ) j / √ 2 -c 2 were introduced. The fact that only A xx does not become a single-valued component upon circling the vortex center implies that, as sketched in Fig. where φ ± = tan -1 [y/(x ∓ a)]. Then, eq.( In this case sketched in Fig. In the polar limit where c → 0, this expression reduces to the order parameter of the polar phase with the d-vector d μ = ẑμ cosθ -ŷμ sinθ. Next, the dependence of the HQV pair's energy on the HQV pair size 2a will be considered using the gradient energy terms. The a-dependent contribution of the vortex energy will be denoted as ∆F L (a) = F (a) -F (ξ c ), where ξ c is a cut off length corresponding to the core size of a HQV over which the London limit may be used. Since only the vortex lines straight along the z-axis are considered, any gradient terms including the gradient ∂ z are neglected. If our attention is paid only to such terms in the quadratic gradient energy of eq.( in clean limit where τ -1 = 0, where ), and ξ 0 = v/(2πT c0 ). The corresponding results in the two limits of eq.( L (a) where the next order terms of O(c 2 ) were neglected. Here, ψ (2) (1/2) = -14ζ(3), and Γ s is the pressure-dependent constant of order unity with a Landau parameter F s 1 (> 0). Thus, the energy gain corresponding to an attractive force in a HQV pair is dominated by the FL correction term rather than the ordinary weak-coupling terms in the strongly anisotropic PdB phase with a low enough |c|-value. In the present PdB phase, we also have an energy cost due to the planar wall. This contribution due to the nonzero A xx is estimated like where ξ(T ) = ξ 0 (N (0)/|α|) 1/2 . The coefficient ∆F w (a)/a measures the line tension of the wall per unit length. By optimizing the sum ∆F L + ∆F L + ∆F w w.r.t. a, the pair size to be realized is given by In this way, It is expected in the London limit that the size of a HQV pair, a m , i.e., the longer radius of the elliptical core of the double-core vortex, is a microscopic scale in the bulk B phase, while, in a strongly anisotropic PdB phase close to T PB where |c| ≪ 1, the pair size may become a macroscopic one. This result will be used to explain the content of our numerical results in the next section. If, as in the conventional GL approach In our numerical study, the GL model we use consists of the three contributions to the free energy density, f bulk , f grad , defined in sec.III, and the additional O(|∆| 4 ) contributions f (4) grad . Before proceeding to discussing about our numerical results, comments on the O(|∆| 4 ) gradient terms Among the two terms composing f grad , the stability of HQVs in the polar and A phases is determined by the contribution arising from the repulsive channel of the interaction between the quasiparticles to f (4) grad . Hereafter, to simplify our description, we will use the Fermi liquid (FL) model of such an interaction contribution to f (4) grad for our numerical study. The corresponding gradient energy contribution f (4) FL , described in Fig. Another contribution to f (4) grad arises from the ordinary weak-coupling O(|∆| 4 ) term, the so-called "Gor'kov box", unaccompanied by a repulsive interaction between quasiparticles (see Fig. To numerically examine how the double-core vortex becomes stable as a HQV pair, we follow the previous work on the double-core vortex in the B phase in the isotropic aerogel on the a-value introduced as the intial condition below, this a can be identified with the half of the resulting size of the half-core pair. Here, ∆F (a) corresponds to ∆F L (a) introduced in the London limit. In the language of the vortices in the bulk B phase, the F (0) corresponds to the free energy of the so-called o-vortex Throughout the present study, the dipole energy is not taken into account. The neglect of the dipole energy is justified in the case of weaker anisotropy where the resulting size of the half-core pair is much smaller than the dipole length ξ D ∼ 10(μm). In contrast, a HQV pair resulting from a strong enough anisotropy may have a size of the order of ξ D over which the dipole energy affects spatial patterns of the θ-variable, defined in eq.( Hereafter,as our numerical results at some δ-values, we will present ∆F (a) data and x and y dependences of each component of the order parameter A μ,j of the vortex solution minimizing ∆F (a). The τ -1 -value will be fixed to 0.13(mK) hereafter. First, the δ = 0.05 case is discussed as a typical example of superfluid 3 He in a weakly anisotropic aerogel. Figure Figure in a narrow region near the origin so that ξ w ≃ 0.1(μm). In addition, the linear behavior ∆F (a) ∝ a is nicely seen in a > a m in Fig. Based on these features, in contrast to the δ = 0.05 case, the double-core vortex in δ = 4.4 is consistent with the description in London limit and can be well regarded as a HQV pair. However, the origin of this consistency with eq.( Further, in Fig. Figure In Table On the other hand, the c dependence itself of a m is not necessarily understood when comparing with the expectation from the London limit. In fact, the c dependence of a m is much weaker than that suggested by eq.( In this work, we have numerically examined the stability of a HQV pair in the PdB phase of the superfluid 3 He in a strongly anisotropic aerogel by assuming the weak coupling and based on the hypothesis that the double-core vortex in the bulk B phase corresponds to the HQV pair in the PdB phase. Due to the weak coupling approximation, the presence of the PdA phase in real systems is neglected, and the transition between the PdB and the polar phases becomes inevitably continuous in the present analysis. However, such a continuous transition is found at low enough pressures in real systems Our main result in the present work is that the doublecore vortex In Fig. Here, the present result will be compared with the ex-perimental result in Ref. PdB phase have been detected. To understand the structure of the resulting HQV pair better, we have estimated the width of the planar string ξ w (see Fig. The results on the vortex energy shown in Figs. In the experiment under rotation In this Appendix, details of the pairing vertex correction due to the impurity scattering and of the coefficient of each term in the resulting GL free energy are explained. The impurity scattering potential does not carry the Matsubara frequency, and consequently, the corresponding self energy term can be incorporated through the replacement of the Matsubara frequency |ε| with (|p| < 1), where p = p • ẑ/p F , p implies the average over the polar angle cos -1 (p). The coefficients composing the vertex part Λ are given in the form where and Further, Among these coefficients, the |ǫ| dependences of C 0 -1 and B 0 are presented in Fig. = -2β Here, possible effects of the pairing vertex correction, peculiar to the anisotropic scattering, on the O(|∆| 4 ) gradient energy arising from the Fermi liquid repulsive interaction will be discussed. In our previous work Since, in the present work, only a straight vortex line extending along ẑ is considered, the gradient does not have to include its z-component ∂ z in the gradient terms. Then, the only vertex correction in the FL-corrected gradient terms is the factor C 0 -1 accompanying A ρz in eq.( As can be seen in Fig. In another gradient terms stemming from the "Gor'kov box", i.e, the ordinary weak-coupling O(|∆| 4 ) term unaccompanied by a repulsive interaction between quasiparticles, the vertex corrections other than C 0 -1 are also present. As shown in sec.V of Ref. One of the authors (R.I.) is grateful to Vladimir Dmitriev and Bill Halperin for useful discussions. The present work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No.16K05444).