Cartilage degeneration in joints causing pain and various types of knee problems is a serious problem-affecting people in all ages. Degenerated articular cartilage is also known as a central hallmark of osteoarthritis, which is a complex musculoskeletal disorder involving numerous contributory genetic, constitutional and biomechanical factors. As a part of the cartilage degeneration, the volume occupied by the collagen fibers becomes reduced and the cell (chondrocyte) volume increased. Since high frequency ultrasound has the capability of resolving individual chondrocytes, ultrasound has been suggested as a promising method for determining the cartilage status. In the current work, the main objective has been to compare images taken in vitro with different transducer types, in order to determine their suitability for cartilage imaging. Scanning acoustic microscopy (SAM) is a wide field nondestructive and non-invasive technique that has been widely used over several decades for surface and subsurface microscopic imaging for industrial and biological specimens The commercial transducers used in SAM are made up of ceramic, single crystals or thin films of piezoelectric materials. In the field of SAM, acoustic transducers having broad bandwidth, high sensitivity and mechanical flexibility has become crucial. Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) and its copolymer is a piezoelectric material and inherently possess a number of benefits for acoustic transducer. PVDF is a flexible material, which allows high degree of physical focusing without lenses The articular cartilage is a bonding tissue that acts as a cushion between joints. It is a hyaline, helping bones to glide over each other with low friction. It also lacks of blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves The clinical non-invasive imaging modalities such as radiography, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and conventional echography enable the detection of only severe cartilage lesions which is a characteristic of late stages of OA Non-degenerated cartilage sample was obtained from the University Hospital of Northern Norway. The sample was from the patients (age between 50 to 60) who underwent a complete knee replacement. The patients having inflammatory joint diseases and advanced osteoarthritis were not included from the study. The study was approved by Regional Ethical Committee of Northern Norway (REK Nord 2014/920). A written consent was provided to all patients for the use of their cartilage for further study. We prepared the sample by slicing them carefully that resulted in a sample of around 1.25 mm thickness and then stored them in the PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) solution. The cartilage sample was placed inside a petri-dish (ibidis-50 mm) made up of polymer. The sample was fixed on the surface of the petri-dish using sticky tape. The petri-dish with cartilage was filled with water in order to facilitate a better acoustic coupling since air is a very poor transmitter of acoustic energy coming from transducers. Fig. The fabrication process of the P(VDF-TrFE) transducer begins with engraving of polymer polyethyleneimines (PEI) substrate having dimensions of 30×30 mm 2 and 0.85mm thickness with four spherical cavities of 2 mm diameter. After the milling process, the spherical cavities were cleaned with ethanol to remove unwanted material and grease. In order to increase the wettability of the substrate, plasma cleaner was employed. Sputtering was done through a high-resolution metal mask to get the first electrode (lower) layer. Subsequently, spin-coating was done on top of the patterned electrode fluid phase P(VDF-TrFE) (77:23, molar ratio) dissolved in appropriate amount of solvent. After that, the spin-coated substrate was degassed at 1mbar atm to vaporize the solvent and thereafter annealing was done at a temperature of 130° C for 8 hours to increase the crystallinity. Later on, the upper electrode was deposited silver with a thickness of ~80 nm on the top of P(VDF-TrFE) with the patterned metal mask. Each of the transducers in the substrate were connected directly onto a PCB using small spring contacts for poling and characterize the acoustic response. Fig. The experiments were performed on an inverted microscope (Leica Dmi8) assembled with a custom-designed high precision scanning platform (ASI MS-2000) and other components. A detailed overview of the experimental setup can be found A prepared slice of articular cartilage as shown in Fig. The averaged backscattered signals were digitized into time series containing 2048 samples for each pixel in a xy-scan matrix, and saved to a HDF5 file format for further processing in MATLAB. This processing includes for example, wave compression of the coded waveforms which was done using a Wiener filter in the Fourier domain as previously described in The results have demonstrated that the homemade P(VDF-TrFE) transducer is capable of producing images with good resolution of the cartilage test sample, and also visualising cell structures in the upper part of the sample. The in-house transducer also yielded significant better resolution and a smaller point-spread function than the commercial PVDF transducer. However, the SNR of the in-house transducer is currently not large enough to penetrate deep into the cartilage sample, and therefore not suitable for volume imaging of thick samples. The B-and C-scans taken with both transducers clearly show that the chirp-coded waveform is superior to the Ricker wavelet in terms of SNR and dynamical range. It is also believed that the SNR for the in-house transducer can be improved significantly by redesigning the systems preamplifier for the higher electrical impedance and the lower signal level produced by this transducer.