Metal nanoclusters (NCs), typically consisting of a few to tens of metal atoms, bridge the gap between organometallic compounds and crystalline metal nanoparticles. As their size approaches the Fermi wavelength of electrons, metal NCs exhibit discrete energy levels, which in turn results in the emergence of intriguing physical and chemical (or physicochemical) properties, especially strong fluorescence. In the past few decades, dramatic growth has been witnessed in the development of different types of noble metal NCs (mainly AuNCs and AgNCs). However, compared with noble metals, copper is a relatively earth-abundant and cost-effective metal. Theoretical and experimental studies have shown that copper NCs (CuNCs) possess unique catalytic and photoluminescent properties. In this context, CuNCs are emerging as a new class of nontoxic, economic, and effective phosphors and catalysts, drawing significant interest across the life and medical sciences. To highlight these achievements, this review begins by providing an overview of a multitude of factors that play central roles in the fluorescence of CuNCs. Additionally, a critical perspective of how the aggregation of CuNCs can efficiently improve the florescent stability, tunability, and intensity is also discussed. Following, we present representative applications of CuNCs in detection and bioimaging. Finally, we outline current challenges and our perspective on the development of CuNCs. When decreasing the size of nanoparticles so that it approaches the Fermi wavelength of an electron, novel optical, electrical and magnetic properties appear Over the past few years, assembling relatively unstable CuNCs into uniformly larger nanostructures with controllable size and shape has provided new opportunities for applications of CuNCs, ranging from electronics, and optics to nanomedicine Very recently, in 2019, Zhou and colleagues reported a practical and robust strategy for in situ synthesis of highly luminescent Cu nanoassemblies with uniform morphology and remarkable stability Furthermore, Cu nanoassembly growth was affected by the three different hydrophobic core sizes of the spherical micelle templates formed by the self-assembly of the triblock copolymers. As shown in Fig. As anticipated, the type and state of surface ligands of CuNCs greatly influenced fluorescent properties. Taking AuNCs as an example, Wu et al. The function of the protein directly depends on its three-dimensional conformation It should be noted that the luminescence mechanism is not only related to the quantum confinement effect of the metal core, but also the ligands on the surface of CuNCs The Group IB metal in the +1 oxidation state generally has a very short metal-metal bond length. This unusual physicochemical property mainly originates from the interaction of d 10 -d 10 , which is also called closed-shell interactions (CSI). Although the strength of CSI is not comparable to the strength of covalent or ionic bonds, metallophilic attractions are related to correlation and relativistic effects, which have been regarded as important for explaining the luminescent behavior of metal compounds Since the solid-state emission heavily depends on the arrangement and molecular structure in the solid state, it is widely observed that mechanical grinding will produce a direct influence on the structural packing mode and, in turn, change the emission wavelength The effect of Cu•••Cu interaction in the liquid phase is similar to that described above. As an important new type of porous material, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are widely used in catalysis, energy storage, and separation The ground and excited states of fluorescent molecules have different electron distributions, resulting in different dipole moments and polarizability Ling et al. studied the solvent effect in 12 polar organic solvents, using polyethyleneimine (PEI)-terminated CuNCs as a research target ), (1) The different behavior on the Stokes shift was induced by the dielectric constant (ε) and refractive index (n). The νa and νf are the frequencies of the absorption and emission maxima, respectively. The μ* and μ are the dipole moments in excited-state and ground-state, respectively. c is the speed of light, h is Planck's constant, and a is the solute cavity radius. The orientation polarizability (Δf) is in parentheses, νa minus νf is the Stokes shift. Generally, the Stokes shift decreases when the refractive index increases, whereas an increase in dielectric constant leads to a larger Stokes shift The development of luminescent materials is indispensable in the process of human life and civilization. Aggregation-induced emission enhancement (AIEE) is a phenomenon that was accidentally discovered by Tang's group in 2001 Recently, Subarna et al. Fluorescence properties vary with pH, usually accompanied by the formation of hydrogen bonds or protonation/deprotonation processes leading to significant changes in the excitation (emission) spectra. Superior optical reversibility is the basis for the further use of pH-responsive probes. Su et al. Cation-induced aggregation is one of main methods used for enhancing the emission efficiency of CuNCs. Generally, cation-induced aggregation can be attributed to the neutralization of surface charges on CuNCs or the formation of new bonds due to the high affinity. Hu et al. identified that the fluorescence emission of dithiothreitol (DTT)-capped CuNCs could be significantly enhanced when Al 3+ was added into the solution Selectivity, stability, detection range, and detection limit are the four important criteria when considering the feasibility of CuNCs as probes. Over the past few years, CuNCs have been used as intriguing ion probes because of their superior optical properties. By capping them with different ligands, CuNCs usually display powerful recognition capabilities, from small ions to large biological molecules. Strategically, the majority of detection methods follow a similar principle. The concentration of the target substrate can be determined based on the difference in fluorescence intensity before and after the detecting treatments. So far, it has been well documented that Al 3+ can enhance the fluorescence intensity of CuNCs. Boonmee et al. found that cysteamine capped CuNCs showed good responsiveness to Al 3+ Differing from the above fluorescence enhancement principle, Pang et al. designed a selective fluorescent switching probe for the detection of F -using Al 3+ as a bridge As a harmful heavy metal element, mercury exists in different forms in nature. Excessive exposure to an environment rich in Hg causes serious adverse effects to human body. Recently, Bhamore et al. synthesized CuNCs with bright blue fluorescence using curcuminoids as the template Liu et al. Copper participates in many physiological processes in living organisms involving the electron transfer catalysis of two oxidation states Recently, a dual emission nanocomposite of CuNCs/CDs (carbon dots) was reportedly used as a ratiometric fluorescent probe for the detection of sulfide and gaseous H2S (Fig. Aparna et al. Ravi et al. Based on AIEE mechanism, fluorescent Cys-CuNCs were used for the detection of m-dinitrobenzene (m-DNB) Dopamine acts as a neurotransmitter to regulate a variety of physiological functions of the central nervous system He et al. Recently, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) coated CuNCs were designed as a probe for the determination of carbamazepine (CBZ). In the study, CTAB served as the linking reagent, which could interact with CBZ to enhance fluorescence by blocking the non-radiative e -/h + recombination defect sites on the surface of CuNCs Ling et al. Liu and colleagues In addition, it was also reported that GSH-CuNCs exhibited a similar performance, which was used for detecting pyrophosphatase and alkaline phosphatase Staphylococcus aureus is one of the common etiological agents of food-borne illness. It often exists in blood vessels leading to different kinds of diseases Ovalbumin (OVA)-stabilized CuNCs (OVA-CuNCs) with excellent water solubility and biocompatibility were reported by Li and his colleagues Recently, a novel method for the determination of FA and nitrite was developed using Cys-CuNCs based on the reaction between diperiodate (III) (DPA) and FA Flavonoids are known for their significant scavenging properties on oxygen radicals. As a natural flavonoid derivative, rutin is commonly found in many vegetables and fruits DNA nanopreparation has attracted great interest as a template for bottom-up due to its excellent properties, including nanoscale geometry, programmable and artificial synthesis, DNA-metal ion interaction, and powerful molecular recognition capabilities Recently, a dual-signal strategy based on small molecule-protein interactions was successfully used for detection of small molecules and protein solids. As shown in Fig. A new method has been developed to detect glucose based on the reaction between glucose and glucose oxidase The detection of histamine is imperative, because it plays an important role in nueroinflammation and microglial regulation Bilirubin serves a vital role in antioxidants, and the lack of bilirubin may lead to coronary heart disease and anemia Over the past five years, CuNCs have achieved satisfactory detection for various analytes, mainly ions and virous biomolecules Cancer cells generally show multiple differences in intracellular pH, temperature, enhanced receptor mediated, protein overexpression, and reactive oxygen/nitrogen production The controlled and highly luminescent CuNCs assemblies showed good stability in the cell imaging mentioned above The difference was that the increase in emission observed in HEK-293 cells was relatively weaker compared to that observed in MCF-7 cells. If the rate of fluorescence growth in HEK-293 cells was considered to be linear, then the fluorescence intensity in MCF-7 cells increased exponentially (Fig. Recently, a dual emission ratio fluorescent probe was reported to be used to specifically identify Ca 2+ in a cell model In this review, we focused on the fluorescence of CuNCs. The factors affecting the CuNCs fluorescence are primarily divided into four categories: (1) size-dependent fluorescence; (2) Cu•••Cu interaction; (3) the solvent effect; and (4) aggregation-induced luminescence. This review highlights the effects of aggregationinduced enhanced emission and its importance in detection processes. The unique fluorescent properties of CuNCs provide great opportunities in sensing and bioimaging applications. Many detection methods have been used for actual testing and have achieved satisfactory performances. According to the reported results, there are a variety of CuNC nanoprobes for certain substrates. However, the detection environment (pH, concentration range, etc.) for each nanoprobe is different. Therefore, we should specifically choose optimized CuNCs according to the environment in which the substrate is placed. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that nanometer-sized CuNCs also have achieved good results in catalytic performance. From current research progress, most CuNC nanoprobes have been used for environmental testing, as well as in vitro testing. More meaningful, in vivo probes are seldomly reported. As the ultimate goal of biological probe usage, biological probes are subject to a variety of factors in their specific applications. Although CuNCs have good biocompatibility, the stability and selectivity of probes are greatly challenged by in vivo complex environments, such as pH change, ascorbic acid, H2O2, and even lysosomes. Although significant advances having been made in the functionalization and biomedical applications of fluorescent CuNCs over the past few years, there are still challenges that need to be addressed in the future. Compared with AuNCs and AgNCs, CuNCs are more likely to oxidize and thus have lower quantum yields. Overall, improvement in fluorescence emissions and further enhancement of quantum yield remain the focus of future developments. Furthermore, although the AIEE effect can significantly improve the intensity of CuNCs fluorescence, the stability of the aggregates induced by this strategy is somewhat challenged by biological environments. Additionally, the use of organic solvents limits its bio-related applications. The pHdependent AIEE effect may be the entry point for study in vivo. Presently, another problem faced in the design of clusters is to determine the key factors of quantum yield and emission wavelength of CuNCs. The clear image underlying the fluorescence mechanism, precise determination of crystal structure, including the arrangement of metal atoms and metal-ligand bonding, will be an important step forward in the development of CuNCs.