We have performed Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation work to study the effect of diffusion anisotropy, bonding anisotropy and edge diffusion on island formation at different temperatures during the sub-monolayer film growth in Molecular Beam Epitaxy. We use simple cubic solid on solid model and event based Bortz, Kalos and Labowitch (BKL) algorithm on the Kinetic Monte Carlo method to simulate the physical phenomena. We have found that the island morphology and growth exponent are found to be influenced by substrate anisotropy as well as edge diffusion, however they do not play a significant role in island elongation. The growth exponent and island size distribution are observed to be influenced by substrate anisotropy but are negligibly influenced by edge diffusion. We have found fractal islands when edge diffusion is excluded and compact islands when edge diffusion is included. Recently there has been considerable interest in the studies of sub-monolayer epitaxy on metal and semiconductor surface due to their immense potential for technological applications A Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation method is a probabilistic simulation method that deals with kinetic processes. Each configurational change corresponds to the real events and each event can happen with some probability that depends on their rate. Our KMC simulation model basically resembles the solid on solid model on square lattice, as used by Heyn where j = X, Y corresponds to the diffusion direction; D o is the common prefactor of order 10 13 sec -1 and E j is the barrier potential for the adatom diffusion along the respective direction. The energy barrier E j is a sum of two contributions, a site-independent surface term E S and a term given by the number of lateral nearest neighbors, nE N, where E N is the in-plane bond energy. Thus, where, n = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 is the number of occupied lateral nearest neighbors at the site. The isotropic form of energy is modified to incorporate the anisotropy of the surface with two non equivalent directions X and Y. This means the adatom can diffuse along X and Y direction with different probability. With these considerations, the energy barrier for the surface diffusion along the Xdirection and Y-direction are given by where E S,X , E S,Y are the energy barriers for monomer diffusion in the respective direction E N,X , E N,Y are bonding energies and the numbers n x , n Y = 0, 1, 2 represent the number of bonds of nearest neighbors in X and Y direction respectively. When adatom encounters another adatom as its nearest neighbor, both atoms are frozen and stable two atom island nucleates on the surface. Similarly, when a diffusing adatom encounters an existing island of size S, it sticks on the island yielding an island of size S+1. The dimers and larger islands are assumed not to move as rigid bodies. The dissociation rate of island is taken as D diss,j = Doexp(-E diss,j /K B T) along the j = X,Y direction, where E diss,j is the dissociation barrier along the respective direction, i.e. D diss ,j = E s + E N,j . Since, in our model the islands formed are rigid and stable, no dissociation of atoms is allowed. This is incorporated by taking the high value of D diss ,j. Adatom on an island edge with only one bond is allowed to diffuse within the island perimeter. The hopping rate for edge diffusion is taken as De = D o exp(-E ed /K B T), where E ed is the potential barrier for the edge diffusion. In our model, the rate of edge diffusion has been taken relative to the rate of monomer diffusion on the surface rather than taking an independent value of E ed . The transition barriers for the various atomistic processes used are similar to the barriers used by Heyn In order to study the influence of different processes, we have monitored the island morphology, aspect ratio, island number density and size distribution by varying different deposition parameters. The influence of anisotropic terrace diffusion is studied using a model for irreversible island growth. This is done by setting the neighbor related energy terms (E N,X = E N,Y = 10 eV) to such a high value that detachment is suppressed. Effect of edge diffusion is excluded by setting very high value of E edge Fig. The variation of island morphology with temperature for different fixed value of E sx is depicted in the vertical panels in Fig. The observed increase in island size for substrate with higher degree of anisotropy can be explained as follows. As compared to isotropic substrate, with energy barrier E sx = E sy =1.3 eV, in anisotropic substrate with energy barrier E sy = 1.3 and E sx = 0.8 the diffusion barrier along X direction is low. Therefore, the adatoms make a larger number of jumps before another adatoms gets deposited. Due to this nucleation probability is decreased and growth probability is increased. Therefore, island size is increased and its number density is decreased. The result for effect of temperature can also be explained in a similar way. When the substrate temperature is high, the adatoms diffuse for longer distances within the lattice and hence they encounter frequently with the existing islands and aggregate forming a larger sized island and smaller number density. Fig. The decrease of island density appeared continuously indicating that in the studied temperature range no change of critical nucleus size occurs. The variation of N with D/F ratio shows power law behavior. The growth exponent χ was found to be χ = 0.30 and χ = 0.27 for the isotropic (E sx = E sy = 1.3 eV) and anisotropic (E sx = 1eV, E sy = 1.3 eV) substrate, respectively. In our model, islands with size greater than or equal to 2 are not allowed to diffuse nor dissociate. Therefore, the critical nucleus size is i=1. The power law behavior of N enables us to test whether or not the scaling relation given by equation holds or not. Therefore, the value of growth exponent given by χ=i/(i+2) for i = 1 is expected to be χ=1/3 It was observed that the value of the growth exponent χ for isotropic substrate (E sx = E sy = 1.3 eV) is about 10% less than the theoretical value predicted by the rate equation analysis. The discrepancy is possibly due to the statistical errors in the simulation. Liu et al. Fig. Fig. Comparing Fig. Fig. From the figure it is seen that, the island size distribution N s for the different temperatures plotted against scaled variable s/S av collapse in a single master curve showing the scaling of the island size distribution. Comparing the scaling function curve for isotropic substrate (Fig. We have also studied the effect of edge diffusion on island morphology. The rate for an adatom to diffuse along the edge within the island was taken with respect to the rate of terrace diffusion rather than taking an independent value. In the present study, we have considered only the isotropic terrace diffusion case E sx = E sy = 1.3 eV. Variation on island shape and growth exponent with the variation in rate of edge diffusion has been studied taking three ratios D e /D = 0.001, 0.01 and 0.1 for fixed flux 0.1 ML/s and fixed coverage 0.075 ML in the temperature range T = 600 K to T = 1000 K. Here D e is the rate of edge diffusion and D is the rate of terrace diffusion. All others phenomena such as dimer diffusion, trimer diffusion, dissociation from island edge etc. are not allowed. Here Fig. Thus, the effect of edge diffusion is observed to change the island shape drastically from dendrite to compact shape. From the observation of these morphologies, it is found that at higher temperature the effect of edge diffusion becomes more significant. At the higher temperature the edge diffusion becomes more effective so the islands are more compact. This is clearly seen in Fig. The value of the growth exponent with and without edge diffusion is observed to be nearly the same, which indicates that at the studied temperature range the edge diffusion is not operative to change growth exponent. However, it has been reported We have presented the Kinetic Monte Carlo results of the study of the effect of edge diffusion and substrate anisotropy in terrace diffusion on the island morphology and island growth exponent for the various simulation parameters. The main findings of our works are summarized below. It is found that the anisotropy in diffusion barriers does not produce effectively elongated islands. The island growth exponent is found to be 0.30 for isotropic substrate and 0.26 for anisotropic substrate. The effect of low edge diffusion does not bring any appreciable change in island growth exponent (χ) while it leads the islands to the change from fractal to the compact shape. The effect of edge diffusion is observed to be more pronounced at higher temperature. 