Natural structural materials, such as bone and wood, can autonomously adapt their mechanical properties in response to loading to prevent failure. They smartly control the addition of material in locations of high stress by utilizing locally available resources guided by biological signals. On the contrary, synthetic structural materials have unchanging mechanical properties limiting their mechanical performance and service life. Here, a material system that autonomously adapts its mechanical properties in response to mechanical loading is reported inspired by the mineralization process of bone. It is observed that charges from piezoelectric scaffolds can induce mineralization from media with mineral ions. The material system adapts to mechanical loading by inducing mineral deposition in proportion to the magnitude of the loading and the resulting piezoelectric charges. Moreover, the mechanism allows a simple one-step route for making graded materials by controlling stress distribution along the scaffold. The findings can pave the way for a new class of self-adaptive materials that reinforce the region of high stress or induce deposition of minerals on the damaged areas from the increase in stress to prevent/mitigate failure. They can also contribute to addressing the current challenges of synthetic materials for load-bearing applications from selfadaptive capabilities. The mechanical efficiency of natural (or biological) structural materials is remarkable. Self-optimized architectures, A potential solution for this dichotomy is to have materials with self-adaptable properties responding to loading conditions. This feature can result in materials with improved mechanical efficiency and reduction in costs, resources and environmental impact. So far, there are few synthetic materials capable of increasing stiffness in response to external stimuli. For example, Capadona et al. and Ramirez et al. reported polymers that changed elastic moduli by changing the degree of crosslinking upon chemical, thermal or mechanical stimuli. Here we report a synthetic material system that can change its mechanical behaviors in response to external loading conditions inspired by natural mineralization processes in bone and coral reefs. We hypothesized that if we have a scaffold that can generate charges proportional to an external mechanical stimulus, the charges can work as signals to induce mineralization from resources (e.g. mineral ions) available in surrounding media. As a result, the material system can exhibit self-adapting mechanical behaviors. Our material system uses a new mechanism to realize self-stiffening materials and overcomes limitations of current synthetic materials with changing mechanical properties from its enhanced load-bearing capability, low cost, simple synthesis, no need of extra energy, and biocompatibility. To test our hypothesis, we utilized piezoelectric materials as scaffolds because they convert mechanical forces into electrical charges while other materials (e.g. triboelectric, flexoelectric materials) could be utilized. We immersed piezoelectric polymer films (PVDF, (CH2CF2)n), d33~30 pC/N) with oppositely charged surfaces in a simulated body fluid (SBF) To understand the dynamics of mineralization, we conducted quantitative studies by comparing the mineral thickness at different conditions (Figure As an application of the mineralization mechanism controlled by mechanical stress, we made a graded material by using a simple one-step process. A piezoelectric PVDF film was subjected to a cantilever loading since it offers a gradual increase of stress (σ) from the free end to the fixation point (see Figure Interestingly, the stress distributions at different positions of the specimen showed similar trends as the mineral thickness (Figure (Q: charge in C, MH: mineral height in mm, d: piezoelectric coefficient in pC/N, A: area in mm 2 ). Furthermore, we investigated whether our material system can change its mechanical behavior by inducing mineral formation in response to the external loading akin to bone (Figure From the measurements, our material system showed self-stiffening behaviors by changing its mechanical properties in response to periodic loadings (Figure Moreover, to further test the self-adaptive behavior of the material system, we subjected scaffolds to cyclic mechanical loading with different load magnitudes while submerged in SBF. Before cyclic loading, we verified the different piezoelectric charges under different load magnitudes. We measured the stress-strain responses after samples were submerged in SBF. As expected, the modulus of the material system increased proportional to the magnitude of the load and the resulting piezoelectric charge (Figure In summary, we report a synthetic material system capable of changing its mechanical properties depending on external loading conditions by utilizing scaffolds that generate "signals" to induce mineralization from media with mineral ions. The material system allows control of the location and the rate of mineral formation by modulating the loading conditions. Our findings can contribute to addressing current challenges of synthetic materials used for loadbearing applications from self-adaptive capabilities. To make the material system portable, one can utilize porous scaffolds with suitable surface properties SBF Incubation: Piezoelectric PVDF films (TE Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) were submerged in a sealed polypropylene bottle (Dyn-A-Med, 80094) containing ~200 mL of SBF solution kept at 37 °C for the duration of the experiment (see Figure and put back into a refreshed solution. After the incubation, the sample was repeatedly rinsed gently in a de-ionized water solution to remove salts of NaCl. The sample was taken out and dried at room temperature in air for further analysis including SEM, EDS, XRD, profilometer. To test the self-stiffening capability of our material system, electrospun PVDF samples were submerged in SBF solutions and were subjected to cyclic mechanical loadings to activate the piezoelectric charge generation. We prepared electrospun PVDF samples of 30×15 mm 2 . Simulated body fluids (10×SBF) were prepared by following protocols described in Supporting Information S1. While submerged in the solution at room temperature, samples were subjected to cyclic compression loading using an electromechanical universal testing machine (TA Instruments Electroforce 5500 with a 10 N capacity load cell). The stiffness (S) was calculated from the load (P) and displacement (∆δ A scanning electronic microscope (Tescan, Mira3) was used to observe the morphology of the formed minerals at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. Figure Piezoelectric composites were utilized to check whether mineralizations induced by piezoelectric charges occur in a different material system. We employed a porous piezoelectric composite comprised of a PDMS matrix, carbon nanotubes and BaTiO3 fillers. The sample was prepared by utilizing a combination of the fabrication methods described in the work by Li et al. After fabrication, the piezocomposite was incubated in 10×SBF for 7 days under cyclic mechanical loading as explained in Supporting Information S1. After incubation, the sample was cut in half using a razor blade, and the fractured surface was evaluated in SEM and EDS as explained in Supporting Information S2. Figure To study the potential change of calcium and phosphate ions present in SBF over time as a result of mineral formation, we conducted ion concentration studies in the solutions. Calcium concentration in the SBF solution was measured using the protocol outlined by Gindler and King. where C is calcium concentration in mmol/L and A is absorbance. This relationship was used to estimate the calcium concentration values in SBF solutions from absorbance readings. To test calcium concentrations in SBF buffers, 0.050 mL of SBF solution was mixed with 3.00 mL of working solution in a cuvette. Calcium concentrations were correlated to absorbance reading using the calibration curve and Equation S1. The change of calcium concentration in an SBF solution is presented in Figure Phosphate concentrations in solution were measured using the protocol outlined by Karl and Tien. We measured the electromechanical response of the materials utilized in this investigation (i.e. commercial PVDF film, electrospun PVDF and piezoelectric composite) based on the Berlincourt's method. To validate electromechanical experiments, we used the commercial PVDF film (TE Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) with known piezoelectric coefficient (d33 ~ 30 pC/N) before each measurement (see Figure We utilized analysis tools to quantify height distribution of minerals along the length of sample. Specifically, we obtained the mineral height along the beam length by calculating the root mean square mineral height on the film surface. The mineral height vs. beam length data was then filtered using a 1-D median filtering of order 300. This allowed the mineral distribution to be less noisy. A three-dimensional (3D) finite element model was developed to simulate piezoelectric beam deflection. The simulation was conducted using the commercial FEA package Abaqus (SIMULIA, Providence, RI). The Abaqus/Standard solver was employed and the model was built using linear solid elements (Element type: C3D8). The beam geometry was set as 15 mm (length) × 0.1 mm (thickness) × 5 mm (width). The material was assumed to be linearly elastic, with Young's modulus of 4 GPa and Poisson's ratio of 0.18. The one end of the beam was constrained in all degree of freedom and the bottom surface of the beam was loaded with 500 Pa in the vertical direction of the beam (Figure To make porous piezoelectric scaffolds, electrospinning was utilized. PVDF pellets (Mw=530,000), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) and acetone (99.5%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All the materials were used as received without further purification. The PVDF pellets were first dissolved in a DMF/acetone mixed solvent at a certain concentration and stirred at 80°C overnight until a transparent homogenous solution was obtained. The weight ratio of the DMF and acetone in the mixed solvent was 2:3 and the mass concentration of PVDF in the solution was 18%. Then, the PVDF/DMF/acetone solution was cooled down to the room temperature. To electrospin fibrous PVDF membranes, the PVDF/DMF/acetone solution was placed into a 10-mL glass syringe installed with a stainless steel-needle as the spinneret. A digitally controlled syringe pump (N1000 -New Era Pump Systems, Inc.) was used to feed the polymer solution into the needle tip at a constant feeding rate of 1 mL/hr. A rotary disk with the diameter of 30 cm was electrically connected to the ground and used as the fiber collector. The whole setup is shown in Figure (1 1 0, 2 0 0) and (0 2 0, 1 0 1) diffractions of the β-PVDF crystal plane, respectively. To test the self-stiffening capability of our material system, electrospun PVDF samples were submerged in SBF solutions and were subjected to cyclic mechanical loading (i.e. external stimulus) to activate the electrical charge generation and promote the nucleation and growth of minerals that can modulate the effective stiffness by adding minerals. We prepared electrospun PVDF samples of 30×15 mm 2 according to Supporting Information S10. Simulated body fluids (10×SBF) were prepared by following protocols described in Supporting Information S1. While submerged in the solution at room temperature, samples were subjected to cyclic compression loading using an electromechanical universal testing machine (TA Instruments Electroforce 5500 with a 10 N capacity load cell). The stiffness (S) was calculated from the load (P) and After the modulus reached a constant value (Figure We further analyzed the data from the functionally graded material experiment (Supporting Information S7) to find the relation between the mineral height and the charge along the beam. Assuming small deformation, linear elastic response of a material and a linear relation between force and charge, we can obtain Eqnuation (S6): where Q is charge (unit: C), d33 is piezoelectric constant (unit: pC/N), G is stress (unit: MPa), and A is area perpendicular to stress direction (unit: mm 2 ). G $$ = 0.1H 0 -4.1866H + 37.183 (S7) From the mineral formation distribution along the beam length, the mineral height at a location can be approximated as Equation. (S8) after a linear regression (R 2 =0.82), (see Figure where MH is mineral height (mm), x is the beam length (mm). After solving for x in Equation (S8), and replacing it into Equation (S7), and then into Equation (S6), we can obtain Equation. (S9): ! ≅ # $$ %(4.33 × 10 -./ 0 ) (S9) Then, the Equation (S9) can be rewritten as Equation (S10): ./ = > E -.$$×87 N O PP 5 (S10) Because charge (Q) is linearly proportional to stress (σ) (Equation 