The possibility of producing polymer-bonded magnets with the aid of additive processes, such as 3D printing, opens up a multitude of new areas of application. Almost any structures and prototypes can be produced costeffectively in small quantities. Extending the 3D printing process allows the manufacturing of anisotropic magnetic structures by aligning the magnetic easy axis of ferromagnetic particles inside a paste-like compound material along an external magnetic field. This is achieved by two different approaches: First, the magnetic field for aligning the particles is provided by a permanent magnet. Secondly, the 3D printing process itselfs generates an anisotropic behavior of the structures. An inexpensive and customizable end-user fused filament fabrication 3D printer is used to print the magnetic samples. The magnetical properties of different magnetic anisotropic Sr ferrite and SmFeN materials are investigated and discussed. Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF) is a well established additive manufacturing (3D printing) process using thermoplastic materials Certain applications of magnetic designs have complex requirements on the magnetic field distribution, for example highest possible magnetic field homogeneity in a certain volume. 3D printing of isotropic NdFeB magnets with focus on tailoring the external stray field by topology optimisation of the magnet was successfully implemented. Three different magnetic anisotropic compounds are investigated: By applying an external magnetic field with varying strength during the printing process, the minimum alignment field to orient the magnetic particles can be determined. The Sprox and Sm 2 Fe 17 N 3 grains are particles with uniaxial anisotropy and show one magnetic easy axis. In our case, we are using a permanent magnet to generate an external field during the printing process. The used magnets provide fields of approximately 550 mT for a 40 × 40 × 40 mm 3 (L×W ×H) NdFeB magnet in the center and 150 mT for a plate cylinder with a diameter of 25 mm and a thickness of 3 mm. The calculation of the flux density along the symmetry axis of a cube and a cylinder magnet is performed analytically Hysteresis loops with the applied field parallel to and orthogonal to the print direction were performed in the VSM with the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3 (L × W × H) cubes. This paper presents two methods for aligning the easy axis of magnetic particles during 3D printing. A ferromagnetic powder inside a thermoplastic matrix is processed. The described techniques allow the printing of samples with a higher remanence B r than isotropic powders. Compared to the presented approaches, providing an external alignment field produces better results in terms of m r /m s but the observed flow anisotropy shows, that the print process itself has an influence on the alignment of the particles. The results show that a magnetic field B z of approximately 200 mT is sufficient for aligning the the hardmagnetic Strontium Hexaferrite particles in the Sprox compound materials. For SmFeN the threshold value stays unknown, since printing above external fields bigger than 150 mT is not possible right now. An improved cooling could contribute to the increase of the magnetic field during printing SmFeN. As a next step the results motivate the development of a customized 3D printer capable of aligning the particles arbitrarily during printing by applying a variable external magnetic field of 200 mT in the desired direction for the alignment of the particle. After successfully implementing this design, complex structures with special magnetic capabilities should be printable. This would be a breakthrough in the development and manufacturing of magnets with varying local magnetization direction that can not be produced by fabrication techniques that are state of the art.