We propose the concept of the time-independent correlators for the even-and odd-frequency pairing states that can be defined for both bosonic and fermionic quasiparticles. These correlators explicitly capture the existence of two distinct classes of pairing states and provide a direct probe of the hidden Berezinskii order. This concept is illustrated in the cases of pairings for Majorana fermions and quasiparticles in Dirac semimetals. It is shown that the time-independent correlator is able to effectively capture the energy scale relevant for pairing. Questions on the nature of order of quantum matter in time domain become an exciting frontier in quantum condensed matter. Introduction of time dynamics increases the complexity of the problem of quantum correlations and orders. The very concepts of equilibrium physics are no longer applicable. For example, the singular role the ground state plays in determining the properties system is not relevant in dynamical systems At first, the question seem paradoxical. How one can have a dynamic phase in equilibrium? What is meant is to seek the orders that have nontrivial dependence on relative times of the two-particle correlation functions that used to describe the order. To make the point, we focus on the class of superconducting states that exhibit pairing correlations that develop a node in relative time, the so-called odd-frequency states. These superconducting states were posited by Berezinskii in 1974 in the context of fermion pairing in the superfluid He 3 Consider orders that can be described by broken symmetries with respective correlations describable by twoparticle coherences. Specifically we look at the pairing state described by correlations functions of two fermions Reasons one prefers to call these state pairing states instead of superconducting state is the fact that these pairing states can develop for neutral particles like superfluid pairing and Majorana fermion pairing correlations where one has pairing but there is no flow of any current nor other attributes of a charged superconductor. Once the state develops the particle-particle condensate, we focus on the classification of the pairing states with respect to a point group of crystal G and translations T. An ordered state breaks the initial group to an invariant subgroup that describes the correlated state. One can then classify the states as conventional or unconventional pairing states depending on the symmetry properties and what symmetry was broken. For example, if the pairing correlator breaks the initial point group, we find the unconventional pairing states sometimes called p-wave or d-wave state, depending on the symmetry of the order One can analyze the time-dependent orders in a similar fashion and seek the classification of pairing states with respect to time. Turns out that there are two suspect possibilities here: one is the correlations that are even in relative time τ-τ ′ and surprisingly there are pairing states that are odd in ττ ′ . It was Berezinskii where 0 ≥ τ ≥ 1 is the Matsubara time (we assume that temperature T = 1), ψ α (τ) is the Fermi annihilation operator with index α labeling space, band, spin index. The detailed dependence on these indices is not important as we focus on time dynamics, T τ is the time ordering. For equilibrium system, we assume here, F αβ depends only on ττ ′ and we will keep the time dependence on the first operator F αβ (τ) = 〈T τ ψ α (τ)ψ β (0)〉. The symmetry of pairing states is constrained by the condition that correlator should be odd under simultaneous interchange of all indices: ( This constraint can be rewritten as where S is the operation of permutation of spin indices, P * is the permutation of the coordinates of particles r 1 ↔ r 2 , O is the permutation of orbital indices, and T * is the permutation of the time coordinates τ 1 ↔ τ 2 , see e.g. From the SPOT classification one can infer the existence of the odd frequency (Berezinskii) pairing where T * = -1 and one thus can develop spin-singlet pairing correlations that have a p-wave structure as a function of relative coordinate S = -, P * = -, T * = -, O = +, which can be shorthand written as --+-correlations. Alternatively, one can have s-wave triplet pairing correlations, initially proposed by Berezinskii, that have a + + +-signature. An odd-frequency state can be viewed as a hidden order in a sense that the pairing correlations vanish at equal time as a pairing correlation is odd under τ ↔ τ ′ and hence equal time correlation is zero in the Matsubara time. The long-standing question in the field is what is the natural order parameter for an odd-frequency superconductor. One approach, which is often taken in the field, would be to take the time derivative of the pairing correlation function at τ → 0. This paper will present alternative time-independent correlators that will explicitly capture the existence of two distinct classes of superconductors, see Table The plan of the paper is to introduce the pairing correlators in Section 2. In Sections 3 and 4, we will give two examples of explicit calculations for these correlators. First, we consider the case of Majorana fermions that realize the odd-frequency pairing. Second, we discuss the case of the odd-frequency pairing in Dirac semimetals and present B αβ correlator for this case as well. We prove the existence of two classes of superconductors that have the same spin quantum numbers, total spin S = 0, 1 but with the opposite orbital parities. While the key attention will paid to the case of fermions, bosonic systems will be also considered. Let us start with a general relation for fermions F αβ (τ) = -F αβ (τ + 1). This results in the Matsubara frequencies that are odd: ω n = (2n + 1)π. Hence, any correlator can be represented through Matsubara components. Let us introduce two types of time-independent correlators: One can prove that A αβ is antisymmetric upon permutation of indices and B αβ is symmetric. We will illustrate the proof for the correlator A αβ . Starting with where H is the Hamiltonian, η = -τ, and the properties of time-ordered correlation were used. Proof of B αβ = B βα can be performed in a similar fashion. Thus, the correlators A αβ and B αβ defined in Eqs. ( For a given spin-projected state we have: a) S = 0, spin-singlet state. It follows that there are two families of spin-singlet superconductors, one is with S = -, P * = -for A αβ correlator and one is for S = -, P * = + for B αβ correlator. The latter corresponds to the even-frequency superconductor -+ ++ and the other to the odd frequency state with --+-state (in the SPOT nomenclature, the single band case considered here means O = +). b) S = 1, spin-triple state. In that case, B αβ would capture the +++-state and A αβ = 0 corresponds to the evenfrequency case + -++. This construction thus points to the existence of two types of superconducting states that have corresponding time-independent correlators A αβ and B αβ with opposite parities for same spin states. It is useful to introduce: Here cos(ω n τ) and sin(ω n τ) project even and odd in τ components from the total F αβ (τ) = F e αβ (τ) + F o αβ (τ). The similar relation holds for the Fourier transforms F αβ,n = F e αβ,n + F o αβ,n . Even and odd components have the following properties: and explicit expressions for A αβ are: for F e αβ (13) It is worth noting that one can introduce a more general definition of the time-independent correlator for fermions It is related to the correlators A αβ and B αβ as C (0) αβ ≡ B αβ and C (1) αβ ≡ A αβ . The correlator given in Eq. ( for even N (16) The generalized function In this subsection, we generalize the concept of the time-independent correlators A αβ and B αβ to the case of bosons. The corresponding correlator As is well known, the Berezinskii classification exists also for bosonic system Correlator Fermion even-f Fermion odd-f Boson even-f Boson odd-f 0 Table from which the possibility of the odd-frequency anomalous pairing with T * = -1 immediately follows. Such an order parameter could be observed in nematic Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) systems with multiband or multiorbital hybridization Here φ α (τ) is the bosonic field. For n = 0, where there is a condensed phase that that corresponds to a zero mode, one would get a finite B αβ = F αβ (τ = 0). It, however, corresponds only to the even-frequency case. Thus, neither A αβ nor B αβ are sensitive to the odd-frequency pairing in bosonic systems. An efficient way to probe the Berezinskii state is to use the following time-independent order parameters: Physically, they could be viewed as analogs of the heat capacity. With the above definitions for bosonic systems, we get, and for F e αβ (26) Here Like in the case of fermions (see Eq. ( The correlator C (N ) αβ has the following even and odd components: for even N (30) Let us apply the concept of the time-independent correlator B αβ , which can be viewed as an order parameter for odd-frequency pairing, to the specific example of Majorana fermions. Free theory with zero energy Majorana fermions is described by the following Lagrangian: In this case, the Berezinskii pairing is natural. Indeed, Majorana fermions are self-adjoint and the creation and annihilation operators are identical μ † (τ) = μ ( τ). Then, the single particle propagator G(τ) = 〈T τ μ † (τ)μ(0)〉 for Majorana fermions is identical to anomalous Greens function and F (τ) = si g n(τ)/2 for small τ. Thus the zero energy mode does realize the Berezinskii pairing state (for more discussion, see ref. and A 11 = 0. For the case of interacting Majorana fermions, oddfrequency correlations depend on the nature of interactions. Let us consider the following two cases: a) Interacting Majorana fermions at the ends of wire. In this case, one would expect that the free Majorana propagator F (ω n ) ∼ 1/(i ω n ) will be replaced by where J is the interaction scale and diminishes as ∼ 1/J at large J . b) Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model. This is the model of "all with all" interactions between many zero-dimensional Majorana fermions with 〈J i j kl J i j kl 〉 = 6J 2 /N 3 . The large-N limit propagator is where the term with ∂ τ in Eq. ( Is one can see from Eqs. ( The other example of the Berezinskii state is related to the pairing in Dirac semimetals where ǫ k = v F k stands for the quasiparticle dispersion relation in Dirac semimetals, k is momentum, and v F is the Fermi velocity. In the vicinity of the critical phase transition T ≈ T c , Then, as an example, a simple odd-frequency ansatz The results for a more complicated ansatz ∆(ω n ) = ∆ 0 ω n / ω 4 n + 1 are shown in Fig. In this paper, we introduced the concept of the timeindependent correlators for even-and odd-frequency pairing states, which in the case of fermions read as A αβ and B αβ , respectively. In the case of bosons, the corresponding correlators A αβ and B αβ are defined in a similar way albeit should include a derivative over temperature. These correlators provide an alternative approach for capturing the existence of the odd-frequency Berezinskii pairing channel and can be used as the order parameters for this hidden order. To illustrate the concept of the time-independent correlators, we considered B αβ in the case of Majorana fermions and Dirac semimetals. It is found that the timeindependent correlators are able to effectively capture the dependence on the energy scale. For example, in the case of Majorana fermions, B αβ is constant for noninteracting Majorana modes and scales as 1/J for large intrawire interaction scales J . On the other hand, B ∼ 1/J 1/2 for interacting Majorana modes in the SYK model. The time-independent correlator B αβ can be also introduced for the Berezinskii pairing in Dirac semimetals. In particular, the latter state could be realized for a repulsive interaction in the inter-chirality, s-wave, spin-singlet channel. Interaction potential or, equivalently, the profile of the gap function strongly affects the dependence of the time-independent correlator on momentum. We believe that our results will provide new tools for investigating hidden quantum time orders, allow constructing order parameters for the odd-frequency Berezinskii pairing, and might help to identify it in experiments. Copyright line will be provided by the publisher December 30, 2019 Copyright line will be provided by the publisher