We develop an operator-based description of two types of multimode-entangled single-neutron quantum optical devices: Wollaston prisms and radio-frequency spin flippers in inclined magnetic field gradients. This treatment is similar to the approach used in quantum optics, and is convenient for the analysis of quantum contextuality measurements in certain types of neutron interferometers. We describe operationally the way multimode-entangled single-neutron states evolve in these devices, and provide expressions for the associated operators describing the dynamics, in the limit in which the neutron state space is approximated by a finite tensor product of distinguishable subsystems. We design entangled-neutron interferometers to measure entanglement witnesses for the Clauser, Horne, Shimony and Holt, and Mermin inequalities, and compare the theoretical predictions with recent experimental results. We present the generalization of these expressions to n entangled distinguishable subsystems, which could become relevant in the future if it becomes possible to add neutron orbital angular momentum to the experimentally-accessible list of entangled modes. We view this work as a necessary first step towards a theoretical description of entangled neutron scattering from strongly entangled matter, and we explain why it should be possible to formulate a useful generalization of the usual Van Hove linear response theory for this case. We also briefly describe some other scientific extensions and applications which can benefit from interferometric measurements using the types of single-neutron multimode entanglement described by this analysis. Conventional neutron interferometry, employing devices constructed from large perfect single crystals of silicon, has been used to explore various foundational aspects of quantum mechanics A spin-echo neutron interferometer Naturally, the first step in a plan to develop entangled neutron scattering is to prove that the neutron states realized in the neutron spin-echo spectrometers of interest are in fact entangled. Quantum entanglement, or nonseparability, is at the core of the fundamental difference between classical and quantum representations of reality In our setup we are able to entangle the spin, path (position or trajectory), and energy observables of a single neutron in either spin and path or in spin, path, and energy by using the action of a trapezoidal RFNSF. The relevant bounds for these two cases are set by the Mermin inequality The validity of the approximation of the neutron state space in terms of distinguishable subsystems, which we employ in this paper, deserves a brief explanation. The subsystem (mode or qubit) treatment of the spin- 1 2 degree of freedom of the neutron is complete as we can ignore the antineutron degrees of freedom present in principle in the 4-component neutron Dirac spinor in the extreme nonrelativistic limit we operate the experiment in. The subsystem treatment of the energy and path degrees of freedom, although an excellent approximation in both cases, is an approximation. For the neutron path degree of freedom, the validity of the distinguishable subsystem picture depends on having negligible overlap of the neutron coherence volumes associated with the two possible paths through the interferometer. As the neutron source itself possesses no coherence, the coherence volume is developed dynamically The neutron interferometric setup we describe below In addition to the three entangled neutron properties of spin, path, and energy whose various forms of entanglement we describe below, one can also imagine that in the future it may be possible to produce single-particle neutron states with additional orbital angular momentum (OAM) mode entanglement. If these efforts can be successful at the neutron single-particle level, one can imagine the future possibility of generating single-particle entangled neutron states in four different dynamical variables: spin, path, energy, and OAM. We therefore present the generalization of our formalism to cover some aspects of this general case as well. This may lead to the development of new protocols for quantum estimation and metrology of fundamental physical constants This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we briefly review the concept of contextuality in measurements of physical properties, and the way it is quantified by means of entanglement witnesses. We next present a theoretical description of the devices utilized in the design of multimode-entangled single-neutron interferometers. In Sec. III we introduce two types of neutron devices that act as "entanglers" of the distinguishable properties of the neutron. They are the MWP and RFNSFs combined with field gradients inclined to the neutron momentum. We discuss the experimental setup for the entangled neutron interferometers in Sec. IV. The exact relation between the measured spin polarization of the neutron and the entanglement witnesses is explained in Sec. V. In Sec. VI we present the generalization to multiple-mode entanglement of n distinguishable subsystems. In Sec. VII the recent experimental results are presented and analyzed in light of the theory developed. Section VIII discusses ideas for further development of a broadly-applicable theory for entangled neutron scattering from entangled systems in the same linear-response limit where the usual Van Hove treatment of unentangled neutron scattering holds. Furthermore, we also provide an outlook for future extensions to add OAM and perform quantum-enhanced metrology of fundamental physical constants A fundamental characteristic of a quantum description of physical phenomena is its contextual nature. Measurement outcomes of compatible sets of quantum observables, known as contexts, cannot reveal pre-existent values of the properties measured. The measured values depend upon the context. The Kochen-Specker theorem proves that NCHV theories cannot reproduce the empirical predictions of quantum physics Although quantum contextuality and Bell non-locality represent independent concepts We treat spin (s) and path (p) degrees of freedom as two distinguishable subsytems Having introduced the observables, we now define the CHSH witness where E(α, χ) represent the expectation value of Any state violating the CHSH inequality (4) is necessarily an entangled state in the spin and path degrees of freedom. In 1990, Mermin proposed a stronger version of the Bell inequality An essential part of any quantum interferometer is the entangler which generates the desired entangled state starting from an unentangled initial state. In this section we discuss the construction and working principles of two specific entangler devices for a single-neutron state, i) a pair of MWPs and ii) a pair of RFNSFs, with magnetic field boundaries inclined with respect to the neutron momentum, used in the interferometer discussed in Sec. IV. The first one entangles the incident neutron in spin and path modes, while the second one can entangle the neutron either into (two) spin and path modes or into three modes of spin, path and energy. Polarizing Beam Splitter In this section we show how a pair of MWPs work together to entangle a neutron beam in spin and path subsystems or modes. Just like an optical Wollaston prism refracts the two polarization components of incident light into different directions 0 n S h p y 3 R 8 n t 7 a + s b m V 3 y 7 s 7 O 7 t H x Q P j x o m T r X A u o h V r F s + N 6 h k h H W S p L C V a O S h r 7 D p j + 5 n f v M Z t Z F x 9 E j j B L s h H 0 Q y k I K T l W r j X r H k l t 0 5 2 F / i Z a Q E G a q 9 4 n e n H 4 s 0 x I i E 4 s a 0 P T e h 7 o R r k k L h t N B J D S Z c j P g A J / P 1 p u z M S n 0 W x N q + i N h c X c r x 0 J h x 6 N t k y G l o V r 2 Z + J / X T i m 4 7 U 5 k l K S E k V g M C l L F K G a z r q w v N Q p S Y 0 u 4 0 N J u y M S Q a y 7 I X q R g q 3 u r R f + S x k X Z u y x f 1 neutrons pass directly through with negligible decoherence. The triangular magnetic field geometry is sharply defined by the Meissner effect from high-T c films on all three sides. Neutrons which pass quickly enough through the sharply-defined magnetic field discontinuity at the interface between these two triangular regions experience a nonadiabatic change in their potential energy from the μ • B interaction of the neutron magnetic moment μ with the field. The motion normal to the magnetic field boundary is well modeled as a one-dimensional potential energy step whose sign is different for the two neutron spin states, and the motion parallel to the magnetic field boundary sees no gradient. The neutron therefore refracts from this step change in the potential with an amplitude that can be calculated very simply using onedimensional quantum mechanics of a single particle. The final energies and momenta of the two refracted compo-nents of the initial neutron state are determined by applying energy and momentum conservation at the boundary. One spin projection along B gains kinetic energy while the other loses kinetic energy, and so these two neutron spin states exit the device in different directions. By the linearity of quantum mechanics, an incident neutron state which is a coherent superposition of these two spin components becomes entangled in spin and momentum by this first component of the MWP As shown in Fig. FIG. We derive the unitary operator corresponding to this MWP entangler (MWPE). First we derive an operator U BS which accounts for the beam-splitting operation of the MWPE. We label the transition amplitudes from path a to path c as (t ↑,↓ ) and the transition amplitudes from path a to path d as (r ↑,↓ ). We label b as the incident path transmitted to d and reflected to c as shown them in Fig. with t ↑,↓ , r ↑,↓ ∈ R and |t ↑,↓ | 2 + |r ↑,↓ | 2 = 1. Note that the first basis vector for each subsystem corresponds to the vector 1 0 , while the second one to 0 1 . The transition amplitudes are described in Eq. ( This matrix will introduce complex phases in the transition amplitudes defined in Eq. ( ⊗ |a , then this entangler creates a Bell state where we have redefined the basis states |a → |a , |c → |c , ie -i2φ |b → |b , and ie -i2φ |d → |d , to get rid of the relative phase between |↑ c and |↓ d . In this new basis In this section we show how a pair of RFNSFs combined with static magnetic field boundaries inclined relative to the neutron momentum can work together to entangle an incident neutron state in its different degrees of freedom. This RFNSF group (RFNSFG) entangler can operate in two modes: it entangles neutrons either in the two degrees of freedom of spin and path or in the three degrees of freedom of spin, path, and energy. As shown below, the spin, path, and energy entanglement can be continuously tuned into spin and path entanglement by adjusting the RF magnetic field frequency. We denote the neutron path state incident upon the entangler with energy E 0 as |0 . The entangler consists of two RFNSFs (RF 1 and RF 2) and a static magnetic field with two parallel inclined magnetic field boundaries as shown in Fig. As for the MWPs, a small static magnetic field B 0 is applied over the whole interferometer to minimize the generation of decoherence of the neutron spin from the environment. We neglect the effect of this small field in the entangler. To derive the unitary operator for this entangler, we write down the Hamiltonian H which implements the transition amplitudes in Eq. ( where where we used with ( † denotes the Hermitian conjugate) Here, P ψ = |ψ ψ| represents the projector onto the state |ψ , P ↑ pe = P 0E0 + P 0E+ + P 1E-+ P 1E0 and P ↓ pe = P 0E-+P 0E0 +P 2E0 +P 2E+ . This propagator includes the transitions discussed in Eq. ( This matrix possesses complex phases in the transition amplitudes as discussed in Eqs. If the incident beam is |↑ +|↓ √ 2 ⊗|0 E 0 then this entangler creates the GHZ state Next we describe the mode of operation of this entangler when only the spin and path subspaces become entangled. When ∆ = 0, E -= E 0 = E + , and we can disregard the energy subsystem altogether. The transition amplitudes are depicted in Fig. which implies H 2 = 1 -P ↑2 -P ↓1 . We follow the same procedure as in the three subsystem case. Expanding the exponential exp -iHt and setting t = π 2 one can show that exp -iπH Including Larmor precession one can finally derive the desired unitary operator To avoid the complex phases in the transition amplitudes discussed in Eq. ( For an incident neutron in the state |↑ +|↓ √ 2 ⊗ |0 with energy E 0 this entangler creates a Bell state which in that basis is w D K / w 5 i j n x X l 3 P m a t S 0 4 + c w B / 4 H z + A M X l j q s = < / l a t e x i t > FIG. In this section we construct the mathematical representation of the unitary operations realized by the neutron interferometer used in our measurements by applying sequences of the two entangler operators constructed in Sec. III. In combination with coherent neutron optical elements introduced into the interferometer which introduce adjustable phase shifts between the components of the different subsystems, one can realize measurements of the entanglement witnesses described below solely through count rates measured in a neutron detector after a correctly-chosen final state spin projection. In this apparatus, entanglement is created using the entangler constructed by a pair of MWPs discussed in Sec. III A. This apparatus entangles the neutron spin and path subspaces. The interferometer possesses three stages (see Fig. ⊗ |a by the entangler discussed in Eq. ( To implement the entanglement witness measurements we use a spin phase coil U s (α), to introduce a relative phase shift between the two spin states, and transmission through the quartz crystal U p (χ), to introduce a relative phase between the two path states, The combined effect of these two commuting phase shifters leads to The recombination of the path amplitudes of the entangled neutron state is done by an inverse MWP (dis)entangler U -1 Finally, |ψ f passes through a π 2 spin-turner and then enters the polarization analyzer and the detector. Each Pauli matrix defined in Eq. ( Therefore, The disentangler U -1 ent together with the path phase shift U p act like a projective measurement P p (χ) on the path subsystem, and the projective measurement P s (0) together with the spin phase shift U s (α) act on the spin like the projective measurement P s (α). Therefore, where In this interferometer entanglement is generated using the RFNSFG discussed in Sec. III B. This apparatus is very similar to the MWP-based interferometer but it is more flexible as it can entangle either two or three degrees of freedom depending on the mode of operation chosen through the selection of the RF frequencies. We first discuss the three-mode interferometer setup (see Fig. As for the MWP case we introduce relative phase shifts to perform projective measurements in some desired regions of the subsystems' Bloch spheres. Three different commuting phase shifters act on the spin, path, and energy modes. Spin and path phase shifts are generated as above by the spin phase coil and the quartz crystal, respectively. The energy phase shift is created by a so-called zero-field precession where we disregard the energy state |E 0 and path state |0 as the neutron does not exist in those states in between the first and last RFNSFs in this apparatus configuration. The neutron state after the phase shifters becomes These phase-shifts are followed by a recombination of path and energy subspaces of the entangled beam to create an unentangled product state using an inverse RFNSFG As in the case of the MWP interferometer |ψ f passes through the π 2 spin turner, polarization analyzer, and detector. Similar to previous section, we write the Pauli matrices in terms of projectors 8. This interferometer consists of two RFNSFG entanglers, three commuting neutron optical phase shifters in the three different distinguished subspaces, and a polarization analyzer and neutron detector. The first RFNSFG, Uent, entangles the neutron into spin, path, and energy modes (or, only spin and path modes when ∆ = 0), while the second RFNSFG, U -1 ent , recombines and disentangles the neutron state. Three commuting phase shifters Us(α), Up(χ) and Ue(γ) (or, two phase-shifters Us(α) and Up(χ) for the two subsystem case) are inserted between the flippers to apply phase shifts in the different subsystems. Finally the neutron state is analyzed by the polarization analyzer and counted in the detector. The inset for the path phase crystal shows how this phase can be realized and adjusted using a pair of quartz blocks with an adjustable angle φ. with the addition, to Eqs. ( incident on the spin turner. Let N (α, χ, γ) be the number of neutrons counted with spin, path and energy phase shifts set to α, χ and γ, then one can show that Therefore, The disentangler U -1 ent together with the path phase shift U p and energy phase shift U e act like a combination of two compatible projective measurements P p (χ) and P e (γ) on the path and energy mode, respectively, and the projective measurement P s (0) together with the spin phase shift U s (α) act on the spin like the projective measurement P s (α). Therefore, where The two subsystem mode is a limiting case of the three subsystem configuration as discussed in Sec. III B when ∆ = 0. In the first stage a Bell state is created from the unentangled incident state |ψ i = |↑ +|↓ √ 2 ⊗ |a by the entangler shown in Eq. ( In this case zero-field precession is absent and the energy phase shifter is the identity U e = 1. Combining the effects from the spin and path phase shifts one can show that In the final stage, the second RFNSF disentangles the state and |ψ f passes through spin turner, analyzer and detector. The analysis of the neutron count rate N (α, χ) is identical to the one done in IV A. In this section express the CHSH and Mermin entanglement witnesses defined in Sec. II in terms of the interferometer count rates defined in Sec. for special choices of the phase shifts. These interferometers cannot directly measure the observables in Eq. (3) (5) as the only available data comes from polarization in the spin subsystem. However one can construct the entanglement witnesses of interest by conducting measurements with different settings of phase shifters. Consider a particular context {σ s u(α) , σ v(χ) } in a CHSH witness S from the arrangements described in Sec. IV A and IV B. By decomposing each matrix into two projectors as in Eq.( We can also determine the expectation values of the relevant contexts involved in the Mermin witness M defined in Eq. (5), {σ s u(α) , σ p v(χ) , σ e w(γ) } with α, χ, γ = 0, π 2 . We discussed the three subsystems case in Sec. IV A. By decomposing the Pauli matrices into projectors like in the two subsystems case we get E(α, χ, γ) = μs,μp,μe (- , where E μsμpμe = E[P s (α+μ s π)P p (χ+μ p π)P e (γ +μ e π)] and N μsμpμe = N (α + μ s π, χ + μ p π, γ + μ e π) after using Eq. Here we generalize the results derived above for a neutron interferometer which possesses n entangled distinguishable subsystems and show how one can determine the expectation value of a context using counting statistics from the detectors of that interferometer assuming that the final stage of the interferometer consists of the same spin projection and neutron detection combination as described above. This calculation might be useful for future entangled neutron state measurements if one can generate single-particle neutron states with OAM whose amplitudes can be treated to a good approximation as finite-dimensional subsystems. In this case it might be possible to form single-particle entangled neutron states in four distinct properties: spin, path, energy, and OAM. We express the full Hilbert space in terms of the tensor product decomposition where H l is the two dimensional space for the l-th subsystem and l = 0 labels the spin subsystem. Choose a basis {|⇑ , |⇓ } for H l . Define the context to be measured as {σ 0 u(φ0) , . . . , σ n-1 u(φn-1) }, where σ l u(φ l ) = cos φ l σ l x + sin φ l σ l y , l = 0, 1, • • • , n -1, acts on the l-th subsystem. Now, one can decompose σ l u(φ l ) into projectors as σ l u(φ l ) = P l (φ l ) -P l (φ l + π), where Let the entangler of the interferometer prepare a maximally entangled state |ψ E = |⇑⇑...⇑ +|⇓⇓...⇓ √ 2 . the l-th phase shifter U l (φ l ) introduce a relative phase e iφ l between |⇑ and |⇓ , Combining the effects of all the phase shifters one can show that In the next stage the state is disentangled by U det . Although the full mathematical description of this disentangler depends on apparatus details, the relevant action on the state is where |unknown is some unknown state. We get the final state which passes through the spin-turner and polarization analyzer. Together they realize the projective measurement P 0 (0) which detect and count neutrons in the spin Let N ({φ l }) be the number of neutrons detected in the detector with phase shifts set to the angles {φ l }. Then Therefore, Note that N ({φ l }) is proportional to The reason is that the disentangler U det together with the phase shift l U l acts like a combination of n-1 compatible projective measurements {P l (φ l )}, and the projective measurement P 0 (0) together with the spin phase shift U 0 (φ 0 ) act on the spin like the projective measurement P 0 (φ 0 ). Using the above result one can derive the expectation value of the context as , where E {μ l } = E[ l P l ({φ l + μ l π})] and N {μ l } = N ({φ l + μ l π}). To determine the expectation value of the context one needs 2 n measurements with different phase shifter settings {N ({φ l + μ l π})} with μ l = 0, 1. The construction presented in the previous sections forms the theoretical underpinnings for a quantitative analysis of the recent entanglement witness measurements performed on the Larmor neutron spin-echo instrument at the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source Center in the UK The values presented above for the measured entanglement witnesses use for their normalization the measured product, Pol × A = 0.78, of the incident neutron beam polarization Pol of the polarizer, and the analyzing power A of the polarization analyzer. There are several subtle aspects of the neutron beam instrumentation which are subsumed into this product. Since individual neutrons come from a distribution of momenta and trajectories, each experiences a slightly different Hamiltonian evolution as it moves through the instrument and individual neutrons therefore experience different final phase differences between their up and down states. To manipulate the neutrons spin during the experiment we have to engineer magnetic fields with a particular geometry to change the neutron state (or not) and these do not work with perfect efficiency. The overall result of these instrumental effects is that we lose contrast in our interferograms. We express this loss of contrast by a single number the polarization product Pol × A which multiplies the result that we would get if the apparatus were ideal to give our actual result. We do not have enough information on all of the imperfections of our apparatus to be able to isolate and quantify the relative contributions to the observed entanglement witnesses from decoherence, dephasing, and statistical averaging effects. Such a more detailed analysis and investigation would be required to quantify with higher precision the degree of deviation of our measured entanglement witnesses from the classical and quantum bounds. Given the relative simplicity of the neutron interactions with the matter and external fields of the apparatus, however, nothing would preclude in principle such a more detailed (and complex) characterization. Interactions of neutrons are typically weak enough that one can apply either perturbative or coherent optical analyses to the neutron-matter interactions with the apparatus components based on the well-measured neutron scattering amplitudes from atoms in materials. Even without such a more detailed analysis, it is clear that our measurement strongly violates the classical bound and is quite close to the expected quantum bound. We conclude that our experiment verifies quantum contextuality in both the double and triple entangled cases and that the single neutron states are entangled. The main intellectual motivation for this work is to develop a qualitatively new type of neutron scattering modality which can identify entangled degrees of freedom in matter, without prior knowledge of the responsible many-body interactions that in practice are usually unknown. Although various authors The information encoded in the entanglement of the state of the system is generally not directly accessible to the type of probes developed in the twentieth century. These probes were conceived to investigate the properties of quasiparticles of energy ω and momentum q, according to the Landau paradigm of elementary excitations, without additional theoretical knowledge of the excitations and interactions in the system. The quantitative interpretation of scattering probes of condensed matter systems using the linear-response-based van Hove theory The question is whether or not one can formulate a theory in a sufficiently general way, to deliver physically interesting information about a system whose specific Hamiltonian is not known in advance, so that entangled particle scattering can be used as a multipurpose scientific tool. We are presently engaged in this theoretical construction for the case of neutron scattering. This is no accident. Neutrons are an excellent choice for such a theoretical and experimental development. The zero electric charge, small magnetic moment, and very small electric polarizability of the neutron make it highly insensitive to many sources of environmental decoherence which can threaten to ruin interferometric measurements. The entangled states of neutrons which we have created and characterized in this work are highly robust as shown by the near-saturation of the entanglement witness quantum bounds, despite the transmission of the neutrons through macroscopic amounts of matter in the apparatus. The range of energies and momenta used in neutron scattering measurements for condensed matter and materials research lies well below the thresholds for the ionization of matter, thereby allowing coherent interactions of the neutron with matter to play a dominant role. From this perspective, one can view the formalism developed in this paper as a zeroth-order version of this eventual entangled scattering theory for forward elastic interactions with unentangled systems. Indeed the procedures by which the various phase shifts of the different entangled modes are implemented all involve interactions with either macroscopic classical fields in coherent states of the electromagnetic field or with the macroscopic neutron optical potential of matter. In both of these cases any entanglement which might be generated in the interaction of the neutrons with these media are coupled to macroscopic collective coordinates of the apparatus. These collective coordinates suffer such rapid decoherence from interactions with the environment that for all practical purposes they can be treated as semi-classical external fields acting on the neutron's quantum degrees of freedom. As a result there is no need to treat explicitly their internal degrees of freedom and we can model them simply as "entanglers" of the neutron degrees of freedom. Furthermore there is no intrinsic pre-existing entanglement present in these media which couples to the neutron. Coherent states of the electromagnetic field are semi-classical, and the averaging procedure used in the multiple scattering theory which forms the foundation of the concept of the neutron optical potential The interferometric measurements with entangled neutrons generated by the entanglers described and modeled in this paper enable one to probe condensed matter phenomena on small spatial scales. In this paper, we described single-particle multimode-entanglement dynamics using two entanglement-generating neutron devices: the MWP and the RFNSF. Using a single neutronquantum optics analysis, we derived the theoretical expressions needed to quantify contextuality to deal with entangled neutron beams generated by these devices. We constructed the CHSH witness for the doubly-entangled states in spin and position and the Mermin witness for the triply-entangled states in spin, position, and energy. We also showed how the Mermin witness reduces to the CHSH witness when the energy shift ∆ vanishes. We controlled the entanglement length ξ at micron length scales and the wavelength splitting to 0.01nm. Our ability to control and vary the entanglement lengths and neutron wavelength splitting on these scales, which correspond to the scales of many different types of dynamical phenomena in condensed matter, can provide us with a qualitatively new probe of correlated materials such as unconventional superconductors, frustrated magnets hosting quantum spin liquid phases and exotic chiral orders. We can certainly explore the fundamental properties of the quantum world in new regimes. At the experimental level, the immediate continuation of our program to develop entangled neutron probes requires a more detailed understanding of what happens to the interference contrast as one "turns off" the entanglement in the energy or path subsystems. The detailed behavior of the interference contrast in this regime cannot be modeled within the discrete approximation used in this paper. As the modes' variables overlap the dynamics becomes sensitive to the form of the quantum amplitudes, which are really continuous functions of the dynamical variables and depend on the longitudinal and transverse coherence functions of the neutrons in the beam. Experiments are needed to map out the dynamical range over which the finite discrete mode approximations to the dynamics that we have used for the models presented in this paper are valid. An even more stringent test is the implementation of a quantum self-testing protocol to determine a lower bound in the fidelity of the supposedly multimode-entangled state one wants to generate. Although self-testing protocols using CHSH and Mermin type inequalities for spacelike separated entangled particles are known We would like next to indicate other possible scientific applications of our entangled neutron states. OAM beams, which possess a nonzero OAM about the beam axis and are therefore not the traditional plane wave states described in the scattering theory textbooks, have now been created for photons, electrons, and neutrons We also note that entangled neutron interferometry of the type described in this paper can be used to pose and answer new questions regarding the influence of inertial and gravitational effects on entangled particles. One example is the famous Sagnac effect, which consists of an extra phase shift upon recombination of the two paths taken by a particle traversing an interferometer coming from a rotation of the interferometer apparatus. The Sagnac phase shift has been measured using photons A neutron with spin up and with energy E 0 is created from an initially unpolarized monochromatic neutron beam by a polarizer, and is incident upon a 50:50 perfect crystal beamsplitter. Define the incident path as II and the reflected path as I, then Neutron amplitudes in paths I and II diffract from the second blade of the interferometer and then impact on the third blade of the interferometer. The third blade of the interferometer recombines the beam. On the path I component of the final state one has an entangled state in spin and energy. This projection operation can be defined as where N is a normalization constant. This projection operation leads to the state This |ψ f passes through a π 2 spin turner and then enters the polarization analyzer and the detector. This combination realizes a projective measurement P s (0) on the spin state which counts neutrons in the state |↑ +|↓ √ 2 . Let N (α, χ, γ) be the neutron count rate with spin, path and energy phase shifts set to α, χ and γ. One can show that N (α, χ, γ) ∝ 1 + cos α + χ + γ + π 2 . Note that N (α, χ, γ) is proportional to P s (α)P p (χ)P e (γ)|ψ GHZ 2 . The reason is that the path phase shifter U p (χ) together with the projection operation P p BR act like a projection operation P p (χ) on the path subsystem, U det together with the energy phase shift U e (γ) and DC spin flipper act like a projection operation on the energy subsystem P e (γ), and the spin phase shift U s (α) together with P s (0) act like a projective measurement P s (α) on the spin. Therefore, N (α, χ, γ) ∝ E[P s (α)P p (χ)P e (γ)]. (A2) To measure the Mermin witness M , using this perfect crystal interferometer, one proceeds as in Sec. V.