Recently Li et al (2019 Nature 572 624) discovered a new type of oxide superconductor Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 with Tc = 14 K. To classify superconductivity in this infinite-layer nickelate experimental upper critical field, Bc2(T), and the self-field critical current densities, Jc(sf,T), reported by Li et al (2019 Nature 572 624), are analysed in assumption of s-, d-, and p-wave pairing symmetries and single-and multiple-band superconductivity. Based on deduced the ground-state superconducting energy gap, (0), the London penetration depth, (0), the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc, ΔC/C, and the ratio of 2(0)/kBTc, we conclude that Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 is type-II high- weak-coupled single-band s-wave superconductor. Classifying superconductivity in an infinite-layer nickelate Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 For several decades the term of infinite-layer superconductor was referred to a copper-oxide superconducting compounds, Sr1-xMxCuO2 (M=La, Nd, Ca, Sr...) In this paper, to classify superconductivity in this new class of oxide superconductors the temperature-dependent upper critical field, Bc2(T), and the self-field critical current density, Jc(sf,T), are analysed within s-, d-, and p-pairing symmetries. In result, it is shown that infinitelayer Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 nickelate is weak-coupled single band s-wave superconductor. The Ginzburg-Landau theory where φ 0 = 2.068 • 10 -15 Wb is magnetic flux quantum, and Bc2(0) is the ground state upper critical field. For temperature dependent coherence length, (T), several models were proposed (2) The second model was proposed by Baumgartner et al And the third model was proposed recently in our recent report where kB is Boltzmann constant, and (T) is the temperature-dependent superconducting gap, for which analytical expression was given by Gross et al where (0) is the ground state energy gap amplitude, ΔC/C is the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc,  = 2/3 for s-wave superconductors Thus, (0) and Tc can be obtained by fitting experimental Bc2(T) data to Eqs. 2-4. In addition, C/C, (0) and, thus, the ratio of , can be deduced as free-fitting parameters by fitting experimental Bc2(T) data to Eq. 4. More details about the procedures can be found elsewhere There is an alternative way to deduce (0), C/C, Tc and by the fit of experimental self-field critical current density, Jc(sf,T), to universal equation, which is for thin-film superconductors reduced to simple form where φ0 = 2.067 × 10 -15 Wb is the magnetic flux quantum, μ0 = 4π × 10 -7 H/m is the magnetic permeability of free space, and the London penetration depth, (T), is given by: for s-wave superconductors, where (T) is given by Eq. 5 for d-wave superconductors, where the superconducting energy gap, (T,), is given by where m(T) is the is the maximum amplitude of the k-dependent d-wave gap given by Eq. 5,  is the angle around the Fermi surface subtended at (, ) in the Brillouin zone (details can be found elsewhere 3. And p-wave symmetry •dx where, (T) is the superconducting gap amplitude, k is the wave vector, and l is the gap axis. Thus, temperature dependence of (T) is determined by mutual orientation of the vector potential, A, and the gap axis, l, which is for transport current experiment just the orientation of the crystallographic axes of the film compared with the direction of the electric current. There are two distinctive orientations, Al (when A is perpendicular to l) and polar Al (when A is parallel to l) and and the gap amplitude in Eq. 11 is just Eq. 5, but  is given by (x)•dx f a (x) = √1 -x 2 ; axial configuration ( More details about the Jc(sf,T) analysis for p-wave symmetry can be found elsewhere By substituting Eqs. 5, 7-13 in Eq. 6, one can fit experimental Jc(sf,T) data to s-, d-, pwave gap symmetries to deduce (0), Δ(0), ΔC/C, Tc and k B T c as free-fitting parameters. This approach is recently applied for wide range of thin film unconventional superconductors There are several criteria to define Bc2(T) from experimental R(T) curves. In this paper ti define Bc2(T) we use the criterion of 3% of normal state resistance, Rnorm(T), for R(T) curves of Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 presented in Fig. Figure Deduced values by the fit to Eq. 4: are, within uncertainties, equal to BCS for s-wave oxide superconductor of Ba0.51K0.49BiO3 It should be noted that there is no sign in experimental Bc2(T) data that Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 exhibits two superconducting band state, which can be seen as sharp enhancement in amplitude of Bc2(T) at critical temperature of the second superconducting band opening (see for details Ref. 36). The critical current density, Jc, is defined as the lowest, detectable in experiment, value of electric power dissipation in a superconductor on electric current flow. For available E(I) curves presented by Li et al By utilizing deduced (0) value the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = λ(0) ξ(0) = 130 which is similar to La1-xSrxCuO2 Table The cases of polar Al and axial Al gap symmetries are still hypothetically possible (Table It should be also noted that there is no sign for two-band superconductivity in Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 which usually can be detected by a sharp enhancement in Jc(sf,T) at critical temperature of the second band opening By taking in account a good agreement between Recently discovered In result, it is found that an infinite-layer nickelate Nd0.8Sr0.2NiO2 is weak-coupling single band high- s-wave superconductor.