5d iridates have shown vast emergent phenomena due to a strong interplay among its lattice, charge and spin degrees of freedom, because of which the potential in spintronic application of the thin-film form is highly leveraged. Here we have epitaxially stabilized perovskite SrIr0.8Sn0.2O3 on [001] SrTiO3 substrates through pulsed laser deposition and systematically characterized the structural, electronic and magnetic properties. Physical properties measurements unravel an insulating ground state with a weak ferromagnetism in the compressively strained epitaxial film. The octahedral rotation pattern is identified by synchrotron x-ray diffraction, resolving a mix of a + b -c -and a -b + c -domains. X-ray magnetic resonant scattering directly demonstrates a G-type antiferromagnetic structure of the magnetic order and the spin canting nature of the weak ferromagnetism. The combination of electron-electron interactions, spin-orbit coupling (SOC), and crystal field all at similar energy scales has raised increasing interests in discovering emergent phenomena in 5d transition metal oxides, such as topological phases and unconventional magnetism In this work, we show that high-quality epitaxial thin films of perovskite SrIr0.8Sn0.2O3 (SISO) can be synthesized on SrTiO3 (STO) single-crystal substrates. Resistivity and magnetic measurements show that the SISO films are insulators with a weak ferromagnetic (FM) transition, which are consistent with the bulk During deposition, the substrate temperature and laser fluence were kept as 700 °C and 2 J/cm 2 , respectively, with a constant oxygen pressure of 115 mTorr. Crystal structure and crystallinity of the thin films were investigated by x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on a Panalytical X'Pert MRD diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (1.5406 Å). The surface quality was characterized by atomic force microscopy. The composition was checked through energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Magnetic properties measurements were carried out on a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (Quantum Design). Sample resistivity was measured by using the standard four-point probe on a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design). Synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements were carried out at room temperature at beamline 33-BM, and x-ray resonant magnetic scattering experiments were performed at beamline 6-ID-B at the Advanced Photon Source of the Argonne National Laboratory. scan of the obtained SISO films along the STO (001) direction, from which clear film Bragg reflections are observed next to the STO substrate peaks. No impurity phase reflection is found, confirming the single perovskite phase of the samples. The out-of-plane lattice constant can be determined as 4.028 Å which is significantly larger than the bulk (~3.966 Å) Meanwhile, no significant remnant magnetization along the out-of-plane direction (ReM//c-axis) was observed. The onset temperature of the weak FM transition is similar to the onset temperature of the resistivity kink, confirming a strong coupling between electronic transport and magnetic ordering in the SISO film. The origin of the weak ferromagnetism of SISO is believed to be associated with spin canting of a G-type AFM order of the Jeff = 1/2 moments on Ir sites Since the octahedral rotation peak is not supposed to have structural contribution from the Ir sublattice, the observed resonance is likely to due to magnetic order. This is confirmed by the energy profile shown in Fig. In the G-type AFM order, each Ir moment is antiparallel aligned with all six neighboring Ir moments regardless whether the neighbor's octahedron is rotated in-phase or out-of-phase. The antiferromagnetic interaction can be considered as Heisenberg-like superexchange, and it is not expected to be very sensitive to the 90 0 -rotated orthorhombic domain boundary, unlike the antiphase domains Finally, we noticed the AFM ordering temperature is lower than the bulk. We checked the Sn concentration of the film by EDS, which shows a 1:3 atomic ratio between Sn and Ir but with significant error due to the small film signal. Although the deviation from the nominal Sn concentration could be related to the nonequilibrium process of the deposition, this result suggests that the lower ordering temperature is not due to Sn-deficiency. Other effects, such as epitaxial strain, could be in play. All these open questions are interesting directions for future investigations, given the possibility of directly probing the AFM order in such thin films by resonant x-ray. In conclusion, we have synthesized perovskite SrIr0.8Sn0.2O3 epitaxial thin films on SrTiO3 (001) substrate. Synchrotron x-ray diffraction unraveled two perpendicular in-phase octahedral rotation axes within the ab-plane, indicative of two structural domains of the orthorhombic cell. No in-phase rotation around the out-of-plane direction was observed. Physical properties measurements revealed an insulating state of the film, where the resistivity is enhanced upon a weak ferromagnetic transition, implying a close interplay between electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom. Stabilization of the epitaxial films enables investigation on the microscopic magnetic