Solid-state magnetic field sensors are important to both modern electronics and fundamental materials science. Many types of these sensors maintain high sensitivity only in a limited range of temperature and background magnetic field, but Hall-effect sensors are in principle able to operate over a broad range of these conditions. Here, we fabricate and characterize micrometer-scale graphene Hall sensors demonstrating high magnetic field sensitivity from liquid-helium to room temperature and in background magnetic field up to several Tesla. By tuning the charge carrier density with an electrostatic gate, we optimize the magnetic field sensitivity for different working conditions. From measurements of the Hall coefficient and the Hall voltage noise at 1 kHz, we estimate an optimum magnetic field sensitivity of 80 nT Hz -1/2 at 4.2 K, 700 nT Hz -1/2 at room temperature, and 3 μT Hz -1/2 in 3 T background magnetic field at 4.2 K. Our devices perform competitively with the best existing Hall sensor technologies at room temperature, outperform any Hall sensors reported in the literature at 4.2 K, and demonstrate high sensitivity for the first time in a few Tesla applied magnetic field. Hall-effect sensors are attractive for a variety of applications ranging from position detection in robotics The desired combination of a large voltage response and low Johnson noise suggest a material system with low carrier density and high carrier mobility. Whereas carrier mobility decreases at low carrier density in most semiconductor-based two-dimensional electron systems Figure We first evaluate the electronic quality of our devices at low background magnetic field and low temperature in a liquid-helium cryostat. We bias the device with a small ac current I and measure the two-point (V2p) and Hall (VH) voltages using standard low-frequency lock-in techniques while applying top gate voltage Vg to tune the carrier density (Figure Next, we characterize the voltage response as a function of applied dc current bias up to 50 μA. The Hall voltage response to a small change in magnetic field δB is δVH = IRHδB, suggesting that applying a larger bias current in principle proportionally increases the voltage signal. In practice, a large dc bias causes two changes in the transport characteristics of the devices (Figure To determine the magnetic field sensitivity reported in Figure Figure In summary, we show that hBN-encapsulated monolayer graphene combined with few-layer graphite gates is an excellent material system for micrometer-scale Hall sensors. Because our devices are gate-tunable, we can optimize the magnetic field sensitivity over a large range of both temperature and magnetic field. We anticipate that optimization of the measurement itself (e.g. through lower noise pre-amplification) will further improve the reported sensitivities in the future. In addition to enabling high sensitivity, the dry-transfer fabrication process offers the flexibility to fabricate Hall sensors directly on top of materials of interest We obtain monolayer graphene (MLG), few-layer graphite (FLG), and ∼20-40 nm thick hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) flakes via mechanical exfoliation of bulk crystals using Scotch Magic tape onto as-received degenerately-doped silicon wafers with 285 nm SiO 2 (Nova Electronic Materials). To increase the yield of large-area flakes, we clean the substrates with a gentle oxygen plasma, press the tape down onto the substrate, heat for 5 minutes at 100 • C, and let the chips return to room temperature before removing the tape [1]. We were most successful using Kish graphite (CoorsTek) and hBN crystals grown using a highpressure technique [2]. We identify suitable flakes for devices only using optical inspection. We create heterostructures with layer structure hBN/FLG/hBN/MLG/hBN/FLG/SiO 2 /Si using a dry-transfer technique [3-5]. Our transfer slide consists of a thin sheet of poly(bisphenol A carbonate) (PC, Sigma Aldrich 435139) on top of a PDMS stamp (Gel-Pak) with curved top surface [6], allowing for precise control over the engagement of the stamp onto the substrate. The top hBN (∼5 nm) only facilitates pickup of the other flakes and does not in principle influence the electronic properties of the device. We pick up flakes sequentially at 80 • C and heat the final silicon substrate at 180 • C before releasing the stack, ensuring that bubbles trapped between the flakes are pushed towards the edges of the stack upon engaging [7, 8]. We intentionally misalign the straight edges of the graphene and hBN flakes by ∼15 • to avoid creating a Moiré pattern between the graphene and hBN sheets [9]. Finally, we dissolve the PC in chloroform for ∼4 hours, rinse with isopropyl alcohol, and blow dry with nitrogen. A final anneal in high vacuum (< 10 -6 Torr) for 3 hours at 300 • C is effective in removing polymer residues from the transfer. We employ standard nanofabrication techniques to pattern the device shape, expose a one-dimensional graphene edge [3], and make edge contacts (3 nm Cr/40 nm Pd/40 nm Au or 3 nm Cr/80 nm Au) to the graphene and graphite layers. Importantly, we have developed process conditions that help reduce the contact resistance. We use a CHF 3 /O 2 /Ar (20/10/10 sccm, 10 mTorr, 30 W ICP, 10 W RF) inductively-coupled plasma selective towards etching hBN. Previous work suggests that selective etching reduces the contact resistance by increasing the metal-graphene contact area [10]. Finally, we emphasize that to achieve consistently working contacts, we found it necessary to use an electron-beam evaporator with low base pressure (∼10 -7 Torr) and a rotating sample chuck. The device discussed in the main text (D1) is fabricated with top and bottom graphite gate electrodes and possesses exceptionally small charge inhomogeneity δn. In addition to the sharpness of the two-point resistance and large peak value of the Hall coefficient, the Hall resistance V H /I exhibits quantum Hall resistance plateaus developing at magnetic field as low as ∼40 mT at liquid-helium temperature (Figure Table Other than lower δn, a second benefit of having a bottom graphite gate is that the contacts can be independently doped to high electron density while we gate the Hall cross to its most sensitive working point. In D1, doping the contacts both reduces the two-point resistance and voltage noise (Figure Applying a large bias current to our devices strongly modifies the relationship between Hall coefficient and gate voltage. Here, we show that our measurements are consistent with carrier density gradients resulting from the large bias current. We consider an L×L square device with contacts spanning the entire length of each of the four edges (Figure The electron (n g ) and hole (p g ) densities away from the CNP depend on the potential difference between the gate and the graphene layer: where C g is the gate capacitance. Accounting for charge inhomogeneity δn near the Dirac point, the electron and hole densities become [14] n Noting n 2 g = p 2 g and n g + p g = 0, the total carrier density is: Finally, using the resistivity ρ -1 = eμ(n + p), the Ohmic potential drop is given by: Solving this differential equation numerically with initial condition ψ(L) = 0 reveals that the potential ψ(x) drops nonlinearly along the device channel (Figure Our calculation (Figure The same wiring and instrumentation is used for both Hall voltage and noise measurements under dc current bias. We apply dc current using a constant-current source and a series ∼1 MΩ bias resistor. We amplify and filter the Hall voltage using a preamplifier (10 kHz lowpass filter), and we obtain time traces using the input terminal of a lock-in amplifier. The preamplifier is in dc coupling mode for Hall voltage measurements and in ac coupling mode (with larger gain) for noise measurements. In the latter case, we record 30 time traces sampled at 3.7 kHz for ∼4 seconds each, giving 2 8 sampled points per time trace. The Fourier transform of each time trace is computed using Welch's method [16, 17] with a Hann window. We use frequency bins with 50% overlap consisting of 27 points to reduce variance. The resulting power spectral density S V is valid in a frequency band spanning ∼1 Hz to ∼3.7 kHz. Noise levels quoted at a particular frequency are root-mean-square averages over a narrow band centered at that frequency, with the uncertainty given by the standard deviation of the data points in that band. When the noise magnitude is above the noise floor of the instrumentation (input noise ∼6 nV Hz -1/2 ), the noise characteristics of the Hall voltage are well described by a combination of flicker ("1/f ") noise and random telegraph noise (RTN). Meanwhile, the white Johnson noise S 1/2 V = √ 4k B T R is at most ∼10 nV Hz -1/2 for a maximum R 2p of ∼250 kΩ at liquid-helium temperature (main text) or ∼18 nV Hz -1/2 for ∼20 kΩ at room temperature (Figure Although the general behavior of our devices remains the same between cooldowns, the specific amplitude of RTN and gate voltage region over which it is significant tend to change. To illustrate this, we present noise measurements taken during two successive cooldowns, one in which RTN is only present for a small range of gate voltages and another in which RTN is almost completely absent. These measurements are performed in the same way as in the main text, but the wiring used for these measurements involves twisted pairs which add a parasitic capacitance to ground that may suppress the noise slightly at frequencies approaching 1 kHz. In Cooldown B (Figure The total voltage noise spectral density can be modeled using [18] where f is the frequency, τ -1 = τ -1 1 + τ -1 2 , A is the flicker noise amplitude, and α ∼ 1. We fit the uppermost spectrum in Figure where h is the reduced Planck constant, v F = 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity, and k B T is the thermal energy. In Figure At room temperature (∼300 K), we perform full characterization of device D1 using the same cryostat insert used for low-temperature measurements, instead positioned between the poles of a C-frame electromagnet (GMW Associates, model 5403). Notably, the bias current has little effect on R H below ∼20 μA because the thermal charge inhomogeneity exceeds the additional effective inhomogeneity from the bias current (Figure V and S 1/2 B have a similar dependence on gate voltage as at low temperature, reaching a minimum S 1/2 B ∼ 700 nT Hz -1/2 for small hole doping. 