Microscopic imaging based on nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres in diamond, a tool increasingly used for room-temperature studies of condensed matter systems, has recently been extended to cryogenic conditions. However, it remains unclear whether the technique is viable for imaging temperaturesensitive phenomena below 10 K given the inherent laser illumination requirements, especially in a widefield configuration. Here we realise a widefield NV microscope with a field of view of 100 μm and a base temperature of 4 K, and use it to image Abrikosov vortices and transport currents in a superconducting Nb film. We observe the disappearance of vortices upon increase of laser power and their clustering about hot spots upon decrease, indicating that laser powers as low as 1 mW (4 orders of magnitude below the NV saturation) are sufficient to locally quench the superconductivity of the film (Tc = 9 K). This significant local heating is confirmed by resistance measurements, which reveal the presence of large temperature gradients (several K) across the film. We then investigate the effect of such gradients on transport currents, where the current path is seen to correlate with the temperature profile even in the fully superconducting phase. In addition to highlighting the role of temperature inhomogeneities in superconductivity phenomena, this work establishes that, under sufficiently low laser power conditions, widefield NV microscopy enables imaging over mesoscopic scales down to 4 K with a submicrometer spatial resolution, providing a new platform for real-space investigations of a range of systems from topological insulators to van der Waals ferromagnets. Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre microscopy 1,2 is a multimodal imaging platform increasingly used to interrogate biological In this work, the impact of these essential components of NV microscopy is assessed by imaging superconducting niobium (Nb) devices in a cryostat with a base temperature (≈ 4 K) close to its critical temperature (T c ≈ 9 K). Superconducting phenomena, namely the nucleation of Abrikosov vortices, The cryogenic widefield NV microscope used for this study houses the sample in a closed-cycle cryostat with a base temperature down to 4.0 K (see Methods for details), equipped with a superconducting vector magnet allowing application of a uniform magnetic field up to 1 T along an arbitrary axis, B app . The cryostat contains a cage mounted optics column which includes a high numerical aperture objective lens, and is accessible via a window at the top of the cryostat [Fig. Four 200-nm-thick Nb devices were fabricated directly on the diamond surface, each device featuring two square bonding pads (500 μm) connected by a narrow channel (500 μm × 40 μm) [Fig. Prior to imaging, the devices were characterised electrically to identify their critical temperature. The resistance across each device (R) was measured as a function of temperature as read by the thermistor on the sample holder (T sensor ). All devices showed a superconducting transition at a critical temperature T c ≈ 9 K, where, for example, R decreases from the normal state resistance, R N = 50.2 Ω, to the superconducting resistance, R SC = 34.6 Ω, which corresponds to the resistance of the non-superconducting leads [Fig. We now move to NV magnetic imaging of a Nb device, focusing initially on vortices in the large Nb pad under no applied current. The sample was cooled to T sensor = 4.3 K under a uniform magnetic field perpendicular to the film plane (z axis), B app = 1.5 G, with the laser off. The net magnetic field was imaged using CW optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR), at a range of laser powers. The magnetic field images are presented as the field in the z direction, B z , which is calculated from projection of the field along the NV axes (see SI, section II). At P laser = 0.5 mW, the B z image shows vortices distributed across the field of view [Fig. Additionally, we observe clustering of vortices around intensity maxima in the laser profile when P laser is reduced from powers giving large areas of normal state Nb (P laser = 2.0 and 4.0 mW) to a less invasive power (P laser = 0.5 mW) [Fig. To further quantify the local heating, we measure the resistance, R, as a function of T sensor (controlled by the heater) and P laser , when the laser spot is focused at various locations around the device. When the laser is focused 200 μm from the Nb film, the R versus T sensor curves shift to lower T sensor as P laser increases, indicating a global heating of the Nb device [Fig. The minimum and maximum temperature increase along the current path through the device (∆T min and ∆T max ) can be quantified by the shift in T + and T - at a given P laser from their values when the laser is off [Figs. Resistance measurements allow us to characterise local heating due to the laser and infer its impact on the current path, however, the impact of laser heating on the local current distribution can be imaged directly by measuring the Ørsted field using ODMR. Direct reconstruction of current paths in superconductors is of particular interest to superconducting single-photon and singleelectron detectors, which rely on quenching superconductivity at the site of detection. At P laser = 0.25 mW and 0.5 mW, R = 34.6 Ω for the duration of measurement (approximately 1 hour), in- dicating fully superconducting current pathways across the device (see Methods). The measured B z [Fig. The non-uniform current density through the superconducting state Nb channel is a direct consequence of the temperature profile imprinted by the laser [Fig. As the local temperature increases, the superconducting gap, and hence the critical current density, J c , is reduced. The measured current density is therefore larger where the local temperature is lower. Increasing the total laser power reduces J c across the channel, and the current density distribution broadens to maintain the same total current. Line cuts of the current density in the x direction highlight this effect [Fig. In this work, we demonstrated a cryogenic widefield NV microscope featuring a submicrometer spatial resolution and a field of view of 100 μm, and applied it to the imaging of vortices and transport currents in superconducting Nb devices. The demonstrated field of view is five times larger than in the previous demonstration of widefield NV imaging at cryogenic temperatures, which reported a field of view of 20 μm. Our work also highlighted a limitation of NV microscopy for low temperature measurements, where the laser illumination required to optically interrogate the NV centres can lead to significant heating of the sample under study. Using the Nb superconducting film (T c ≈ 9 K) as a local temperature probe, we found that even modest illumination powers (2 mW, corresponding to a peak intensity of 40 W/cm 2 ) can locally quench the superconductivity of the film, implying that the sample temperature exceeds 9 K even when the temperature measured with a nearby sensor remains below 5 K, close to the base temperature of the cryostat. This work thus demonstrates the need for caution in NV sensing experiments at low temperature, setting a limit to the laser power that can be used for minimally-invasive imaging. In our experiments, a total power of 0.5 mW (peak intensity of 10 W/cm 2 ) was sufficiently low to keep the Nb devices fully superconducting, allowing an array of frozen superconducting vortices to be imaged. Although the acceptable illumination conditions will depend on the details of the experimental setup and sample under study, it is likely that the most sensitive samples will require strategies to mitigate laser-induced heating. These include the introduction of a thin high-reflectance metallic film between the diamond and sample of interest, the use of better thermal conductors between the sample and the cooling elements of the cryostat, or the implementation of an optimised illumination geometry to reduce the required laser power. These precautions may be necessary even in single NV experiments which can have similar laser power densities at the point of imaging despite using less total power. Such steps will unlock the potential of NV microscopy for a broader range of low temperature condensed matter phenomena. The NV-diamond sample used in these experiments was made from a 4.4 mm × 4.4 mm × 50 μm type-Ib, single-crystal diamond substrate grown by high-pressure, high-temperature synthesis, with {100}-oriented polished faces (best surface roughness < 5 nm Ra), purchased from Delaware Diamond Knives. The diamond had an initial nitrogen concentration of [N] ∼ 100 ppm. To create vacancies, the received plate was irradiated with 12 C - ions accelerated at 100 keV with a dose of 10 12 ions/cm 2 . We performed full cascade Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the depth distribution of the created vacancies [Fig. The devices were fabricated by e-beam evaporation of 200 nm of Nb through an Invar shadow mask. To achieve superconducting Nb, care was taken in preparing the high vacuum of our Thermionics e-beam evaporator. Namely, Nb pellets in a Fabmate crucible were first heated to evaporating temperatures with the sample shutter closed for 10 min. Then Ti was evaporated, again with the sample shutter closed, to bring the chamber vacuum below 10 -7 mbar via a sublimation effect. Finally the Nb was heated to evaporation temperature and the shutter was opened with an evaporation rate of 6 -8 Å/s, with chamber pressures below 2 × 10 -5 mbar during evaporation. Care was taken to ensure sufficient Nb was present in the crucible to avoid damage from the high Nb evaporation temperatures, as visible crucible burning damage correlated with poor quality superconductivity (i.e., low T c ). After fabrication of the Nb devices, the diamond was glued on a glass cover-slip, itself glued to a PCB, and the Nb devices were electrically connected to the PCB via Al wire bonds visible in Fig. The NV imaging was facilitated by a custom-built widefield fluorescence microscope, similar to those described in Refs. The cryostat integrates a superconducting vector magnet capable of applying up to 1 T in any direction. The cold plate of the cryostat is thermally coupled to the sample-holding optical column via a He exchange gas, the pressure of which tunes the base temperature at the sample down to 4.0 K. In these experiments, we use an exchange gas pressure such that T base = 4.3 K. The calculated optical resolution limit of the microscope is ≈ 0.4 μm, given the objective numerical aperture of 0.82 and target PL wavelengths 650-800 nm. In practice, the smallest resolvable features observed are down to 0.7 μm, as shown in an ODMR frequency shift map of stress features on the bare diamond surface [Fig. The resistance vs temperature (RT) measurements shown in Fig. To obtain an RT curve, the temperature setpoint was incremented by 0.2 K in the increasing direction starting from the base temperature, and a series of measurements of both the resistance and temperature was recorded as the temperature settled. The number of measurements was chosen such that the temperature is mostly flat at the end of the series -20 measurements over the course of 2 seconds in this case. The resistance and temperature of the final measurement of the series for each set-point were then combined to form an RT plot. In Fig. Most NV experiments utilise a microwave resonator or strip-line to drive NV spin-state transitions. The required microwave field power varies greatly depending on the measurement, and the microwave-source-sample configuration. Here, we assess heating of the Nb sample due to the microwave resonator by measuring the device resistance and T sensor across a range of microwave powers, P MW . The R versus T sensor curves of the device imaged in the main text at various P MW show a translation of the critical temperature to lower T sensor as P MW is increased [Fig. The magnetic images of vortices presented in Fig. CW ODMR images of vortices were produced by PL accumulation over a (100 μm) 2 field of view [Fig. The fit parameters for each resonance, obtained by fitting spectra across an entire image, show long-range variations that are somewhat correlated to the laser intensity distribution [Fig. The magnetic images produced by the method outlined above, allow us to determine the size and magnitude of the magnetic field features associated with the vortices. Examining our B NV images over smaller areas better highlights the features of individual vortices [Fig. Local reductions in ODMR contrast, as seen in Fig. The number of vortices within a given area is such that the sum of their fluxes is equal to the total flux passing through the same area in the normal state. Each vortex is threaded by a magnetic flux quantum, Φ 0 , and hence N Φ 0 = B 0 • A, where N is the number of vortices within an area, A, at a magnetic field, B 0 . The vortex images presented in Fig. Varying B app from 2.0 to -4.0 G in the z-direction, the number of vortices within the field of view changes considerably [Fig. In the following, we describe how to model superconducting vortices in a temperature gradient, induced for instance by heating a sample locally with a laser. We consider a rectangular geometry with periodic boundary conditions, where we define a periodic temperature gradient (shown in Fig. where L x and L y denote the length of the system in xand y-direction, respectively. a 0 (a 1 ) denotes the highest (lowest) appearing value of τ . Eq. ( Using the London equation we can calculate the magnetic field, h, and ultimately the energy of a given configuration using the London energy functional which is given by With the Maxwell equation ∇ • h = 0, the temperature dependance of the penetration length, λ = λ(0)/ √ τ , and h = hê z , Eq. ( (5) Implementing an arbitrary magnetic flux configuration Φ(x, y) into the system is simply done by adding it as a inhomogeneity to the right hand side of Eq. ( The integral of Φ over the whole space yields the total flux introduced. For a single vortex at position r 0 we add the flux in form of a delta distribution, Φ( r 0 ) = Φ 0 δ( r 0 -r), with the flux quantum Φ 0 . Multiple vortices at positions r i are introduced by simply summing up their respective inhomogeneities, i.e. Φ(x, y) = Φ 0 i δ( r i -r). Since we calculate the energy of a given vortex configuration from the total magnetic field, using Eq. ( The results of the simulations for the total energy with a single vortex are shown in Fig. For a two vortex state the minimum in energy according to Eq. ( The behavior of a system with many vortices can be extrapolated from the results shown here. Vortices still tend to move towards regions with higher temperature, but the repulsive vortex-vortex interaction keeps them apart and thus acts as a limiting force. This will result in clustering around hot spots for a low number of vortices and a gradient in the vortex density for a very large number of vortices, where the density is higher in warmer regions. When the sample is heated locally (assuming adiabatically slow temperature change), as done in the experiments with a laser, the vortex density would first increase in the hot region. When the temperature becomes close to T c , however, the vortices not only get repelled from each other but also from the center of the hot spot (based on Fig. Likewise, when the temperature decreases and the normal conducting region shrinks, it will become energetically favourable for the vortices to re-nucleate into the superconducting region where they will remain trapped near the energy minimum seen in Fig. In order to image transport currents, as shown in Fig. To analyse the ODMR data, we first fit the spectrum at each pixel with a sum of eight Lorentzian functions with free frequencies, amplitudes and widths (solid lines in Fig. where {f calc i (D, B tot )} i=1...8 are the calculated frequencies obtained by numerically computing the eigenvalues of the spin Hamiltonian for each NV orientation, and deducing the electron spin transition frequencies. Here S = (S X , S Y , S Z ) are the spin-1 operators, D is the temperature-dependent zero-field splitting, γ NV = 28.035(3) GHz/T is the isotropic gyromagnetic ratio, and XY Z is the reference frame specific to each NV orientation, Z being the symmetry axis of the defect 1,47 with unit vector u NV defined previously. The resulting total magnetic field B tot contains both the applied bias field and the field from the Nb film due to the magnetic response as well as the transport current (Ørsted field). Since the applied field is uniform over the field of view, we simply subtract a constant offset to B tot , taken to be the field measured far from the Nb wire, to obtain the Nb-induced field. Illustrative results of this analysis are shown in Fig. Comparing the ODMR contrast maps in Fig. We now describe the methods for reconstructing the current density in the Nb film. In principle, the three magnetic field components (B x , B y , B z ) are related to each other via Ampère's law, ∇ × B = 0, So far we have presented results from a single location along the Nb wire. In Fig. 