In spite of its great promises for energy efficient power conversion, the electronic quality of cubic silicon carbide (3C-SiC) on silicon is currently limited by the presence of a variety of extended defects in the heteroepitaxial material. However, the specific role of the different defects on the electronic transport is still under debate. In this work, a macro-and nano-scale characterization of Schottky contacts on 3C-SiC/Si was carried out, to elucidate the impact of the anti-phase-boundaries (APBs) and stacking-faults (SFs) on the forward and reverse currentvoltage characteristics of these devices. Current mapping of 3C-SiC by conductive atomic force microscopy (CAFM) directly showed the role of APBs as the main defects responsible of the reverse bias leakage, while both APBs and SFs were shown to work as preferential current paths under forward polarization. Distinct differences between these two kinds of defects were also confirmed by electronic transport simulations of a front-to-back contacted SF and APB. These experimental and simulation results provide a picture of the role played by different types of extended defects on the electrical transport in vertical or quasi-vertical devices based on 3C-SiC/Si, and can serve as a guide for improving material quality by defects' engineering Silicon carbide (SiC) is an excellent semiconductor for the fabrication of power electronics devices A unique feature of the 3C-SiC polytype is the possibility to be grown on large diameter silicon (Si) substrates. Hence, the 3C-SiC/Si systems are of great interest to integrate the superior properties of SiC into the well-established Si technology and achieve excellent performances at a lower cost than 4H-SiC. As an example, Tanner et al. In spite of this great potential, the use of 3C-SiC/Si for power devices is still hindered by the quality of the available material, which is characterized by the presence of a high density of extended defects, such as micro-twins, stacking faults (SFs) and crystalline domains boundaries, specifically the anti-phase boundaries (APBs) Achieving good Schottky contacts has been always a challenge for device fabrication on 3C-SiC. In fact, even high work function metals, like Au, typically exhibited low values of the Schottky barrier height on 3C-SiC compared to the theoretical predictions Using a nanoscale characterization by conductive atomic force microscopy (CAFM), Eriksson et al. Clearly, this topic is still object of controversial interpretation and further experimental and theoretical investigations are required to get a clear understanding of the role played by extended defects in heteroepitaxial 3C-SiC on the electrical behavior of Schottky diodes fabricated on this system. This paper presents a multiscale (i.e. macro-and nano-scale) characterization of Pt-Schottky contacts on 3C-SiC/Si, to elucidate the impact of APBs and SFs on the forward and reverse current-voltage characteristics of these devices. Statistical analysis on Schottky diodes with variable size showed a decrease of the forward bias turn-on voltage (Von) and an increase of the reverse bias leakage current density with increasing the contact area. Furthermore, an areal density D2×10 5 cm -2 of the defects responsible for the enhanced leakage current was evaluated from this statistical analysis. Nanoscale resolution current mapping of 3C-SiC by CAFM provided a direct demonstration of the key role of APBs as the main extended defects responsible for the enhanced leakage under reverse bias, while both APBs and SFs were shown to work as preferential current paths under forward polarization. Electronic transport simulations of a front-to-back contacted SF and APB showed a significantly increased transmittance as compared to defect-free 3C-SiC, and distinct differences between these two types of defects, thus confirming their key role as preferential current paths under particular bias polarizations. Unintentionally doped 3C-SiC films with 10 m thickness were grown by CVD on a n-type (1-10  cm resistivity) on-axis Si(100) substrate, after the formation of a buffer layer by carbonization of the Si surface Since the reverse leakage current is a very relevant parameter for the diodes' performance, fixing a threshold current density and sorting the diodes with a leakage below this value is a reasonable criterion to estimate the "yield" of working devices. As illustrated by the horizontal dashed lines in Fig. where A is the contact area and D is the areal density of defects responsible for devices failure. This probability function is commonly employed to describe the yield of electronic devices, and it has been also applied to the case of Schottky diodes onto 3C-on 4H-SiC substrates In the present case, the evaluated density D=2×10 5 cm -2 is associated with the extended defects responsible for a leakage current exceeding the fixed threshold of 10 A/cm 2 . From this areal density value, a typical distance L=1/D 1/2 20 m between these defects can be estimated. The Schottky contact area was found to have an impact not only on the reverse bias leakage current but also on the current onset under forward bias polarization. Fig. 