Current implementations of quantum computers suffer from large numbers of control lines per qubit, becoming unmanageable with system scale up. Here, we discuss a sparse spin-qubit architecture featuring integrated control electronics significantly reducing the off-chip wire count. This quantumclassical hardware integration closes the feasibility gap towards a CMOS quantum computer. Semiconductor spin qubits Therefore, the open questions surrounding the challenge of scaling-up Finally we provide a discussion of some of the technological considerations, potential challenges and options for solving them. We propose a quantum computing architecture consisting of a two-dimensional array of electron-spin qubits using linear arrays of gate electrodes (Fig. Fig. All the qubit operations are performed by shuttling the qubits to the operation regions and applying pulsed signals to the appropriate gates to perform the operations. The shuttle channels are defined by a linear array of gates (blue gates in Fig. Single-qubit gates are performed by applying a microwave pulse to the control gate labelled MW in Fig. The surface code is sustained using a cyclic sequence of pulsed signals within a unit cell, with the same sequence performed in parallel across all unit cells in the entire array. A set of remote pulsed voltage sources is used to generate the required cyclic pulsed signals at each gate (i.e., one source per pulsed gate in a unit cell). Logic gates in the surface code with lattice surgery are achieved by creating defects in the lattice. We implement these defects by preventing shuttling of a subset of data qubits via locally integrated switches. Qubit readout is performed at the operation region shown in Fig. The drain contacts of all readout dots in a module are connected to a single line at the quantum plane boundary, and readout is performed sequentially across the unit cells of each module, while the modules are read out in parallel. This is achieved by sequentially pulsing every sensor plunger in a module to the low-impedance, electrostatically sensitive regime, while all other sensors in the module are at highimpedance (i.e., Coulomb blockade). The sequential control of the plungers in a module is achieved using a global readout demultiplexer that can be shared between all modules across the entire array. The signal routing we have described (as summarized in Table The sparse array with sample-and-hold circuits provides independent DC biasing with O(M 2 +N) lines at the quantum plane boundary. All pulsed and microwave control signals needed to sustain the surface code, can be shared across every unit cell in the entire array. This amounts to a constant number of 58 lines at the quantum plane boundary irrespective of the number of qubits. The signals used to control the switches that deactivate data qubits for the logical qubit implementation scheme, are arranged in a crossbar fashion across the entire quantum plane, reducing the number of lines for this purpose to as few as O(MN) at the quantum plane boundary. In practice, we propose to use x crossbars over the entire array, in order to allow for x defects to be simultaneously created and manipulated, bringing the line scaling to O(xMN). By using decoding to address the readout plungers per module, the sequential readout scheme obtains a line scaling at the quantum plane boundary as O(M 2 +log(N)). At the boundary of the quantum plane, Rent's exponent can thus be as low as p=0.5. We now consider the footprint requirements of the control electronics that need to be locally integrated in the quantum plane, and the wire density at various levels. The bulk of the footprint will be taken up by the capacitors required for the sample-and-hold scheme. Coarse resolution is required for 32 gates and another 32 gates require fine resolution, which comprise a total capacitance per unit cell of ~450 pF. Assuming ~1 pF/μm 2 (using state-of-the-art deeptrench capacitor technology For a total of 2 20 (≈10 6 ) qubits, the total area covered by the quantum plane is ~151 mm 2 , leaving ~575 mm 2 of space remaining in the die, which can be used to implement classical control circuits and to bring the wire count going off-chip, typically the real bottleneck for Rent's rule, to well below the wire count at the quantum plane boundary by means of additional levels of multiplexing. Very-large scale spin qubit devices will ultimately be based on a trade-off of a large number of considerations. With this proposal we explore the extreme sparse approach, with single qubits placed at the nodes of the shuttling channels. Different from some existing proposals, this approach does not make strong assumptions on the potential landscape homogeneity or the density with which transistors and qubits can be integrated, but it does assume that spins can be shuttled over 10 μm distances with very high fidelity. It should also be possible to design a similar integrated electronic scheme for architectures with larger qubit-cluster nodes, for which it has been shown that the fidelity requirements of the shuttling channels are more relaxed In this work we have focused on the reduction of the number of control lines at the quantum plane boundary, as well as on the footprint of the classical control electronics, a key first step to assess the feasibility of implementing sparse spin qubit architectures, which motivates future work into addressing the following open issues. Distributing all signals for qubit operations across the entire qubit array requires careful design for minimizing crosstalk, along with to estimate the total line capacitance, which will affect clock speeds and required source power. There will be a large number of switches, used to separate the cycles of DC biasing and qubit operation on the applied gate voltages and to perform lattice surgery. The power dissipated by these switches can be significant and will be a factor in considering the clock rates of the system and the achievable operating temperature. It is most likely that both the surface code cycle rate and the size of the array will be limited by the number of sequential readouts required, since this is the most time consuming of all operations. Some degree of parallel readout can be implemented by amplitude modulation or frequency modulation. If that is not sufficient, smaller readout modules can be defined, each consisting of a subset of unit cells that are read sequentially. This comes at the expense of an increased number of readout connections. All things considered, this proposal provides an appealing outlook for the long-term implementation of larger scale quantum computing chips, and provides guidance for nearterm research at the quantum, classical and integrated levels. 