Low-loss fiber optic links have the potential to connect superconducting quantum processors together over long distances to form large scale quantum networks. A key component of these future networks is a quantum transducer that coherently and bidirectionally converts photons from microwave frequencies to optical frequencies. We present a platform for electro-optic photon conversion based on silicon-organic hybrid photonics. Our device combines high quality factor microwave and optical resonators with an electro-optic polymer cladding to perform microwave-to-optical photon conversion from 6.7 GHz to 193 THz (1558 nm). The device achieves an electrooptic coupling rate of 330 Hz in a milliKelvin dilution refrigerator environment. We use an optical heterodyne measurement technique to demonstrate the single-sideband nature of the conversion with a selectivity of approximately 10 dB. We analyze the effects of stray light in our device and suggest ways in which this can be mitigated. Finally, we present initial results on high-impedance spiral resonators designed to increase the electro-optic coupling. Over the last two decades tremendous advances have been made in the field of superconducting quantum devices In the last few years there have been a number of experimental demonstrations of microwave-to-optical transduction using diverse approaches such as electrooptomechanics One class of electro-optic devices that has achieved impressive results for classical modulators are silicon-organic hybrid (SOH) devices In this work we experimentally explore the suitability of silicon-organic hybrid devices for quantum microwave-to-optical transduction. We design and demonstrate a sideband-resolved converter and characterize it in a dilution refrigerator, and suggest future steps to improve the transduction efficiency. To achieve electro-optic conversion from microwave photons to optical photons, our device combines high quality (Q) factor optical and microwave resonators with an electro-optic polymer cladding. An overview of the device can be seen in Figure The microwave resonator consists of a λ/4 coplanar waveguide (CPW) terminated by a capacitor. The capacitor electrodes induce an electric field which extends across a silicon optical waveguide (Figure where ω opt (ω MW ) is the optical (microwave) resonator frequency, â ( b) is the annihilation operator for optical (microwave) cavity photons, and g 0 is the electro-optic coupling rate. This Hamiltonian has the same form as the Hamiltonian for optomechanics where n cav is the mean intracavity optical photon number. When the pump is reddetuned by exactly the microwave frequency, the photon number conversion efficiency from microwaves to optics is given by where κ e (γ e ) is the extrinsic optical (microwave) loss rate, κ tot (γ tot ) is the total optical (microwave) loss rate, and C = 4g 2 0 ncav κ tot γ tot is the cooperativity. Achieving high conversion efficiency therefore requires over-coupled resonators ( κe κ tot , γe γ tot ≈ 1) and nearunity cooperativity (C ≈ 1). To increase the electro-optic cooperativity towards unity, it is necessary to reduce both the optical and microwave loss rates, as well as to maximize the electro-optic interaction strength √ n cav g 0 . To better understand the electro-optic coupling rate g 0 , we can write it as where g V /2π is the electro-optic tuning rate of the optical resonator measured in units of hertz per volt, V zpf is the zero-point voltage fluctuation on the capacitor of the microwave LC resonator, and Z is the microwave resonator impedance. From firstorder perturbation theory where ) is the electric field of the unperturbed optical mode, and ∆ε is the permittivity change due to the electro-optic effect in the polymer. The primary component of the polymer electro-optic tensor is r 33 , where the '3' direction here is in the plane of the chip, perpendicular to the waveguide. If we include only this component of the electro-optic tensor then we can write ∆n = ∆ε/2n = -1 2 n 3 polymer r 33 E RF,3 , with E RF,3 the radio frequency (RF) electric field from the electrodes. If we further make an approximation that ∆ε is constant across the relevant area of the polymer and that the optical mode is TE polarized, then we can express the electro-optic tuning compactly as where U polymer /U total is the fraction of the optical mode energy in the polymer. One of the key advantages of the silicon-organic hybrid platform is that it can be fabricated almost entirely using standard silicon photonics processing. The only nonstandard steps are a final spin coating of the dies with EO polymer and subsequent poling. A simplified fabrication flow is shown in Figure When the EO polymer is first applied to the dies, the polar chromophore molecules are randomly oriented (Figure After the poling is finished, the device EO tuning can be measured and compared to simulations to extract the effective in-device EO coefficient of the polymer film. In practice, the measured EO coefficient of the polymer in a modulator device is always lower than the maximum EO coefficient obtained with uniform thin films Generally speaking, the largest device EO coefficients in SOH modulators are achieved using a so-called strip-loaded slot waveguide geometry To initially evaluate the EO performance of the slotted waveguide geometry, we fabricated fully-etched slotted photonic crystal cavities, pictured in Figure Figure To confine light in three dimensions on the chip we use a silicon waveguide terminated with a pair of photonic crystal mirrors (Figure There is a trade-off in determining how the electrodes should be positioned around the waveguide In order to couple light on and off chip, we use meta-surface grating couplers based on the design in We characterize the optical performance of the device by scanning a tunable laser (Santec TSL-550) and monitoring the reflected power. Figure We use a stroboscopic technique to quantify the electro-optic performance of the device at low frequencies. We directly apply a voltage signal from an arbitrary waveform generator (Rigol DG4102) across the waveguide capacitor by wirebonding to the poling bond pad (shown in Figure In the process of packaging the chips for cryogenic measurement, we noticed that the EO coefficient decreased dramatically after fibers were glued onto the chips, but before the chips were cooled down. For example, for the device described in Figure The efficiency of an electro-optic transducer can be increased by recirculating the microwave photons in a resonator The CPW has a length of 5200 μm and a simulated inductance (capacitance) per unit length of 620 nH/m (63 pF/m). The capacitor at the open end of the CPW consists of two 3 μm wide electrodes with a gap of 2.7 μm and a length of 450 μm, and it has a simulated capacitance of 21 fF. To characterize the microwave resonators, we wirebond the chips into a PCB and cool them to a temperature of approximately 7 mK in a Bluefors dilution refrigerator and measure the S 21 scattering parameter using a vector network analyzer (VNA, Rohde & Schwarz ZNB20). The measurement setup is illustrated in Figure The intrinsic Q factors for all the devices measured here ranged from about 600 to 6000. In similar CPW devices that were coated with the same EO polymer but fabricated on a high-resistivity silicon substrate, we measured intrinsic Q's between 30,000 and 40,000. This leads us to believe that the Q's of these devices are not currently limited by the EO polymer. One possibility is that the Q's are limited instead by the SOI substrate. The SOI used here is float-zone SOI from Shin-Etsu, with a large substrate resistivity > 3 kΩ•cm. However, it has been shown by Wu et al. in After separately outlining the device optical and microwave performance, we now turn to describe our measurement of microwave-to-optical photon conversion in a dilution refrigerator environment. One of the key characteristics that distinguishes our electrooptic converter from a standard electro-optic modulator is that the optical resonator in our device allows us to selectively generate either the red or blue optical sideband depending on the detuning of the optical pump tone with respect to the optical cavity. An illustration of the conversion process for the case of a red-detuned pump is shown in Figure In order to directly demonstrate the sideband selectivity of the conversion process, we use a heterodyne measurement technique illustrated in Figure We follow several steps to calculate and calibrate the device efficiency from the RF spectrum obtained from the heterodyne measurement. For each measurement, we subtract dark background data taken with no input signal from the signal data. The difference in power spectral density between the signal data and dark data (measured adjacent to the spectral peak of interest) gives the shot noise level, which is used for calibration. After subtracting the dark background and shot noise level from the signal spectrum, we integrate the peak of interest to find the total power. We then divide the noise-subtracted integrated power by the adjacent shot noise level to convert a given peak power to optical photon flux (units of photons/second). Finally, efficiency is calculated by dividing the optical sideband photon flux generated by the microwave photon flux incident on the converter. Figure Overall, the peak conversion efficiency that we observe is 2.2 ± 0.7 × 10 -9 , with an optical pump power of -26 dBm and microwave input power of -31 dBm. This efficiency is quoted immediately external to the packaged EO converter chip; it includes the loss of the optical grating coupler but not the loss of the upstream RF lines or the downstream optical fiber components. The uncertainty in the efficiency is systematic and is due primarily to our uncertainty in estimating the loss of the RF input lines and optical fibers in the dilution fridge. Based on the physics of the device, we expect the conversion efficiency for the reverse conversion process (optical photon converted to microwave photon) to be the same as the forward direction (microwave-to-optical). However, because of the low efficiency of the device we were not able to measure the optical-to-microwave conversion efficiency directly. To infer the electro-optic coupling rate g 0 from the measured conversion efficiency η, we use which is valid in the low cooperativity regime C 1. We estimate that the g 0 achieved in our system is 330 ± 60 Hz, where the uncertainty comes from our calibration of the conversion efficiency. This is only slightly lower than the value of 400 Hz that we would predict based on the room temperature measurements of resonator tuning. A summary of the nominal device parameters is given in Table Many approaches for performing microwave-to-optical transduction utilize superconducting resonators in close proximity to intense optical light The calibration procedure to extract the microwave-to-optical conversion efficiency is described in the text. generation in microwave resonators for several decades In analyzing the effect of optically generated quasiparticles on superconducting resonators, we follow the readable analyses of de Visser where ∆ is the superconducting gap, and σ n is the normal state conductivity. f (E) is the quasiparticle distribution function which in the case of thermal equilibrium is equal to the Fermi-Dirac distribution f (E) = 1/(1 + exp (E/k B T )). It should be stressed that the relevant temperature here is the temperature of the quasiparticle bath, which in the presence of stray light can be much higher than the base temperature of the cryostat. For quasiparticle temperatures greater than about T c /4, it becomes necessary to take into account the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap ∆, which is given implicitly by where N 0 is the single-spin density of electron states at the Fermi energy, V sc is the potential energy for electron-phonon exchange, and T D is the Debye temperature for the material. The next step is to translate this into a measurable effect on our resonators. The complex conductivity leads to a complex surface impedance, which in the so-called dirty limit (where the electron mean free path is less than the Cooper pair coherence length) is given by where μ 0 is the permeability of free space and d is the superconductor film thickness. We call R s the sheet resistance and L s the sheet kinetic inductance. The impact of the sheet kinetic inductance on a microwave resonator depends on the exact resonator geometry. For a CPW geometry the kinetic inductance per unit length can be calculated as L k = (g c + g g )L s , where g c and g g are factors accounting for the contributions of the center conductor and groundplane, respectively. The formulae for g c and g g are given in , where l is the CPW length, L tot = L geom + L k is the total inductance per unit length and C is the capacitance per unit length. A useful quantity to keep in mind is the kinetic inductance fraction, defined as , because it gives a measure of how sensitive a resonator geometry is to changes in quasiparticle density. We estimate that our CPW resonators have an α k of approximately 5% (for T T c ). The sheet resistance R s in Equation Rs . To summarize, the preceding analysis shows that given a quasiparticle bath temperature T , we can calculate the shift in resonator frequency and quality factor, and vice versa. From the bath temperature we can also calculate the quasiparticle density as The relevant superconducting parameters for our aluminum films are summarized in Table To investigate the effects of quasiparticle generation in our device, we took microwave spectra of the resonator described in Section 5 while sending different CW optical power levels to the optical cavity. Figure It is instructive to compare the estimated quasiparticle bath temperature with the temperature of the dilution fridge mixing chamber, as measured using a resistive thermometer. For the largest optical power of -17 dBm (20 μW) we observed the mixing chamber steady-state temperature rise from ≈ 7 mK to 18 mK, while for lower optical powers there was no measured change. Clearly this small temperature change cannot account for the estimated quasiparticle temperature of ≈ 0.8 K, and so this suggests that the quasiparticle generation we are observing is due to local absorption on the chip rather than a large-scale heating of the entire mixing chamber. Frequency ( One possibility for avoiding the effects of heating and quasiparticle generation in an electro-optic converter is to operate the device in a pulsed mode. In this scheme, the Parameter Description Value superconducting gap at zero-temperature 167 μeV N 0 single-spin density of states at Fermi energy 1.72 × 10 10 eV -1 μm -3 d metal film thickness 100 nm L s sheet inductance at T = 0 K 140 fH/square τ 0 electron-phonon interaction time 458 ns Table optical pump light would be switched on for a brief interval, during which the device could perform microwave-to-optical conversion with some efficiency. If this period was short enough, the conversion could finish before the microwave Q factor became degraded-that is, before the quasiparticle population came to thermal equilibrium with the rest of the system-and therefore achieve a higher peak efficiency. By keeping the duty cycle low, it would be possible to decrease the steady-state heat load on the device, albeit at the expense of conversion throughput. To investigate the feasibility of pulsed operation in our system, we shine pulsed laser light onto the device and measure the time-dependent response of the microwave resonator. Experimentally, we implement the pulsing by switching on and off the RF power to the acousto-optic modulator shown in Figure An example of such a spectrum is shown in Figure To understand the time-scales present in the system, we first note that a pair of quasiparticles relaxes by recombining and emitting a phonon, which must then scatter out of the superconducting film where τ 0 is the material dependent electron-phonon interaction time. The approximation in Equation 14 is valid for thermally distributed quasiparticles near the gap edge (E ≈ ∆), with T T c . Experimentally the quasiparticle lifetime is observed to saturate at some maximum value, so this relationship is only accurate for sufficiently large quasiparticle density ( 100 μm -3 for aluminum) In contrast, the longer time-scales of 655 and 450 μs seem too long to correspond to quasiparticle lifetimes based on the quasiparticle densities inferred here. More likely these time-scales are set by thermal time constants related to heat transfer between the silicon chip and the copper PCB. These thermal time constants are challenging to estimate because of the difficulty in finding reliable data for the heat capacity and thermal conductivity of our materials at millikelvin temperatures. We note that we have observed similar time scales (100's of microseconds) for niobium resonators on sapphire substrates at 1 K. In that case, the niobium quasiparticle lifetime is expected to be extremely short (< 1 ns, see Table Finally, we note that there is a discrepancy between the maximum frequency shift of -13 MHz observed with pulsed light and the steady-state frequency shift of -33 MHz observed in Figure Returning to our original motivation of pulsed converter operation, we see from Figure The effect of stray light on the microwave quality factor is one of the key limiting factors of the conversion efficiency in this demonstration. Even using extremely limited optical pump powers of -20 dBm, we already see the conversion efficiency saturate due to increased microwave loss. If instead we could use an optical pump power of 14 dBm as in We can break down strategies for reducing the effect of stray light into three main approaches. The first possibility is to directly reduce the rate of optical generation of quasiparticles. Of course, the best approach is to reduce the source of optical scattering in the first place, e.g. by improving fiber-to-chip coupling efficiency or by reducing intrinsic loss in the optical cavity, since this is the only way to reduce steady-state heating of the dilution fridge. Other strategies are physically separating or shielding the microwave resonator from the light or adding optically absorptive materials around the device A second possibility is to keep the quasiparticle generation rate fixed, but to reduce the resulting quasiparticle density. This can be achieved by fabricating the microwave resonator from a superconductor with a short maximum quasiparticle lifetime, since a short lifetime results in a smaller steady state quasiparticle population The third possibility is to keep the quasiparticle density fixed, but to reduce its impact on the microwave quality factor by reducing the kinetic inductance fraction. As explained in Section 7.1, the amount of loss added by the excess quasiparticles is directly proportional to the kinetic inductance fraction α k The choice of superconductor is clearly important. To reduce the impact of optically generated quasiparticles we want to choose a superconductor that has a short quasiparticle lifetime and a small penetration depth λ 0 . Interestingly, this is exactly the opposite criteria compared to what is desirable for an MKID detector, where the goal is to make a resonator as sensitive to optically generated quasiparticles as possible Because the electro-optic coupling rate g 0 scales with √ Z = (L/C) 1 4 , as shown in Equation Figure An example spiral inductor is shown in Figure geometry is that the wires in the coil region must be able to "jump" over the central feed wire. To enable this, we use an airbridge fabrication process similar to the one described in The microwave spectrum from an example device consisting of a spiral inductor with a shunt capacitor is shown in Figure We have presented a new platform for quantum microwave-to-optical transduction based on silicon-organic hybrid photonics. This platform takes advantage of the large electrooptic coefficient of EO polymers and the mature nanofabrication associated with SOI technology. Our doubly-resonant design allows the device to achieve sideband-selective photon conversion. The device has a large bandwidth of 20.3 MHz, and the measured coupling rate g 0 /2π of 330 Hz is comparable to that of other electro-optic transduction approaches Although the conversion efficiency of 2.2 × 10 -9 demonstrated here is very modest, we note that there are straightforward paths for improvement. For example, as mentioned earlier, the conversion efficiency was decreased by a factor of 11 due to an avoidable packaging issue. We also anticipate that the conversion efficiency could be improved by 2-3 orders of magnitude by changing the metal from aluminum to Nb or NbTiN to allow for larger optical pump powers, and another order of magnitude by increasing the impedance of the microwave resonator. Since the microwave quality factor seems to be limited by the SOI substrate rather than the EO polymer, switching to a lower loss substrate such as sapphire may provide an additional order of magnitude. One aspect which may prove more challenging to improve is the optical Q factor, since this seems to be limited directly by poling induced loss in the EO polymer. Overall, we expect that this platform has the potential to make a significant contribution to the technology of future quantum networks.