It has recently been indicated that the hexagonal manganites exhibit Higgs-and Goldstone-like phonon modes that modulate the amplitude and phase of their primary order parameter. Here, we describe a mechanism by which a silent Goldstone-like phonon mode can be coherently excited, which is based on nonlinear coupling to an infrared-active Higgs-like phonon mode. Using a combination of first-principles calculations and phenomenological modeling, we describe the coupled Higgs-Goldstone dynamics in response to the excitation with a terahertz pulse. Besides theoretically demonstrating coherent control of crystallographic Higgs and Goldstone excitations, we show that the previously inaccessible silent phonon modes can be excited coherently with this mechanism. Order parameters are physical observables that are used to quantify the different states of matter. Their amplitudes and phases can be excited by external stimuli, such as a laser pulse, leading to exotic states of matter that cannot be accessed in equilibrium Coherent control over Raman-active phonons via impulsive stimulated Raman scattering using visible light pulses is well-established Higgs and Goldstone modes, similar to silent phonon modes, are challenging to excite and coherently address, because they often do not directly couple to light. In this work, we overcome this hurdle by synthesizing advances from two parallel fields, order-parameter physics of continuous symmetry broken systems and coherent control of crystal lattice dynamics. Specifically, we demonstrate that the low-frequency silent Goldstone-like optical phonon mode in indium manganite (InMnO 3 ) can be coherently excited by coupling nonlinearly to the lowfrequency Higgs-like optical phonon mode. In InMnO 3 , this Higgs-like phonon mode is IR active and can be driven resonantly with a terahertz pulse. We depict the two phonon modes in Fig. Structural properties of InMnO 3 . InMnO 3 crystallizes in the hexagonal manganite structure shown in Fig. Density functional theory calculations. We begin by calculating the structural properties of InMnO 3 from first principles using the density functional theory formalism as implemented in the abinit code where Q i is the normal mode coordinate (or amplitude) of the Higgs (i=H) and Goldstone (i=G) mode in units of Å√ amu, where amu is the atomic mass unit. κ i is the phonon linewidth, Z i is the mode effective charge, V (Q) is the anharmonic phonon potential, and E the electric field component of the pulse. The mode effective charge is given by Z i = n Z * n q i,n / √ M n , where Z * n is the Born effective charge tensor of atom n in units of the elementary charge e, q i,n is its eigenvector, and M n its atomic mass , the lowest-order symmetry-allowed nonlinear phonon coupling between the Higgs and Goldstone modes is of the form Q H Q 2 G . A phonon coupling squared in the IR-active mode and linear in the other one that is required for ionic Raman scattering -2. -1. in a minimal model as where Ω H and Ω G are the phonon eigenfrequencies given in 2π×THz, and c is their linear-quadratic coupling coefficient given in meV/( Å√ amu) 3 . For accuracy we include all anharmonicities and nonlinear phonon couplings up to fourth order in the phonon amplitude, which can be written as We find the coupling coefficients d to g to be small compared to c. Substituting V = V min + Ṽ into Eq. ( The nonlinear phonon coupling acts as a temporal modulation of the eigenfrequency of the Goldstone mode in Eq. ( Once the Goldstone mode is excited, Q 2 G reciprocally acts as a driving force for the Higgs mode in Eq. Note that the phonon modes are detuned from the resonance condition Ω G = Ω H /2 by 0.4 THz. As we will see, this mismatch is compensated by the broadening of the phonon frequencies due to their natural linewidths and due to the temporal envelope that the IR-active Higgs mode obtains through the resonant driving by the ter-ahertz pulse. In addition to the parametric downconversion described here, coupling of the Higgs mode to higher-frequency A 1 modes of the form Q 2 H Q A1 may lead to a phonon upconversion according to sum-frequency ionic Raman scattering We model the electric field component of the terahertz pulse as , where E 0 is the peak electric field, ω 0 is the center frequency, and τ is the full width at half maximum duration of the pulse We show representative dynamics of the Higgs and Goldstone modes after the optical excitation according to Eqs. ( As the parametric excitation requires an initial nonzero value of the Goldstone mode, the outcome of Eqs. ( Conclusion. We have shown theoretically that resonant driving of the IR-active Higgs mode in InMnO 3 leads to a subsequent coherent energy transfer to the silent Goldstone mode through parametric downconversion. This process allows the coherent excitation of both Raman-active and silent phonon modes in contrast to conventional difference and sum-frequency ionic Raman scattering that only allow coupling of Raman-active to IR-active phonons. The energy conversion efficiency of the parametric excitation thereby outperforms ionic Raman scattering, in which only a fraction of the energy is transferred to other modes The coupling between the Higgs and Goldstone modes derives purely from symmetry considerations, and we expect that the dynamics described here are a general feature of the hexagonal manganites. Furthermore, the mechanism of parametric downconversion requires only the existence of fully symmetric IR-active modes and is therefore relevant to all materials with broken inversion symmetry. The lattice dynamics are strongly dependent on the linewidth of the IR-active mode, but only weakly dependent on the linewidth of the silent mode. This dependence makes it simpler to predict the effect in other materials, as IR spectra are much more broadly available than hyper-Raman spectra. The efficiency of the mechanism is maximal when the phonon modes fulfill the resonance condition Q IR /2 = Q 2 . We suggest that techniques used in the field of ultrastrong light-matter coupling could be leveraged here by tuning the frequency of the IR-active mode into resonance with the second phonon mode in an optical cavity in order to increase the effect We point out that the parametric downconversion described here is fundamentally different from the parametric amplification observed in a recent experiment Finally, we conjecture that the generation of a large population of silent (hyper-Raman-active) phonons could possibly open a route towards stimulated hyper-Raman scattering in solids, which has before only been achieved in atomic vapors n 