We demonstrate waveguide-integrated superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors on thin-film lithium niobate (LN). Using a 250 μm-long NbN superconducting nanowire lithographically defined on top of a 125 μm-long LN nanowaveguide, on-chip detection efficiency of 46% is realized with simultaneous high performance in dark count rate and timing jitter. As LN possesses high second-order nonlinear χ (2) and electro-optic properties, an efficient single-photon detector on thin-film LN opens up the possibility to construct small-scale fully-integrated quantum photonic chip which includes single-photon sources, filters, tunable quantum gates and detectors. Waveguide-integrated superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) are powerful components that can be exploited to analyze photonic quantum states in an integrated quantum photonic circuit 1,2 . Originally, such detectors have been proposed as an alternative to traditional normal incident planar SNSPDs In this Letter, we demonstrate efficient waveguideintegrated SNSPDs on thin-film LN with on-chip detection efficiency (OCDE) of 46%, dark count rate of 13 Hz, timing jitter of 32 ps and noise equivalent power (NEP) a) Electronic mail: hong.tang@yale.edu of 1.42 × 10 -18 W/ √ Hz. Together with the ultralow loss characteristics of thin-film LN waveguides, large secondorder non-linear χ The device is fabricated from a commercial thin-film LN on insulator (LNOI) wafer (supplied by NANOLN) with 615 nm-thick z-cut LN film bonded to 2 μm-thick silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) on a 400 μm-thick silicon handle. The photonic waveguiding components including the grating couplers, waveguides, splitters are patterned with electron beam lithography using FOx-16 hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist. The patterns are transferred to the LN thin film using an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactive ion etching (RIE) tool employing Ar + plasma. Figure We first analyze the nanowire absorption rate by two dimensional finite-element method (COMSOL) simulation. Figure For waveguide-integrated SNSPDs, the OCDE is the most relevant parameter, especially for a quantum circuit where single-photon sources and detectors are supposed to be integrated on a single chip 1,2,8 . Figure where, η OC is the OCDE, hν is the single photon energy. The power of the output grating coupler can be written as, From Eq. 1 and 2, the OCDE is given by, From Fig. We select the 250 μm-long nanowire detector with the highest OCDE to characterize its DCR as a function of I b /I SW , as shown in Fig. To characterize timing jitter, we use a femtosecond-pulsed 1560 nm laser (Toptica FemtoFErb 1560) to illuminate the detector, and the arrival time differences (∆t) between the photon-excited detector signal and the synchronization trigger signal from the laser are recorded by a 40 Sample/s real-time oscilloscope (Lecroy HDO9404). Figure In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated waveguide-integrated SNSPDs on thin-film LN. Utilizing the high second-order nonlinear χ X. Guo, C.-l. Zou, C. Schuck, H. Jung, R. Cheng, and H. X. Tang, Light: Science & Applications 6, e16249 (2017).