We show that the annihilation dynamics of excess quasi-particles in superconductors may result in the spontaneous formation of large spin-polarized clusters. This presents a novel scenario for spontaneous spin polarization. We estimate the relevant scales for aluminum, finding the feasibility of clusters with total spin S 10 4 that could be spread over microns. The fluctuation dynamics of such large spins may be detected by measuring the flux noise in a loop hosting a cluster. Various experiments using superconductors have been interpreted in terms of a long-lived, non-equilibrium quasi-particle population that persists at low temperatures . Such quasi-particles may be created, for example, by Cooper pair breaking due to the absorption of stray photons or cosmic rays -the dominant mechanism is not clear at the moment. The bottleneck for their evacuation is the two-particle recombination mediated by the electron-phonon interaction. A simple balance predicts a residual quasi-particle density n ∼ c 0 = (2A/ Γ) 1/2 , where A is the rate of non-equilibrium generation of quasi-particles per unit volume, and Γ is a material constant characterizing the inelastic quasi-particle relaxation due to the electron-phonon interaction. The subject has attracted much interest recently as excess quasi-particles will ultimately limit the performance of many superconducting devices All above considerations neglect the quasi-particle spin. We note the spin selectivity of the recombination process: in the absence of interactions violating spin conservation, the recombination only proceeds if two quasiparticles are in a spin-singlet state. In this Letter, we show that this spin selectivity may become a mechanism of non-equilibrium spin polarization. The quasi-particles align their spins forming a polarized cluster with greatly enhanced concentration, the number of particles in the cluster and its size being limited by spin relaxation processes. We derive the corresponding conditions for aluminum, showing the feasibility of the clusters of ∼10 4 quasi-particles that could be spread over microns. The polarization of the cluster slowly fluctuates in time, and we propose a simple setup where the resulting noise can be utilized for the experimental observation of the phenomenon. A cluster consists of an ensemble of quasi-particles with mutually overlapping wavefunctions. In the presence of spin-singlet recombination, a cluster of N quasi-particles is stable only if no pair of quasi-particles has an overlap with a spin-singlet state. This is the case if the cluster is in a maximal spin state, with total spin S = N/2. Let us align the z-axis with the cluster polarization. If a new quasi-particle is added to such a cluster, the number of quasi-particles changes by 1: N → N = N +1, whereas the total spin changes by ±1/2: S → S = S ±1/2 = (N ±1)/2. The z-projection of the spin is S z = N/2+s z , where s z = ±1/2 is the z-projection of the spin of the incoming particle. Thus, if s z = 1/2, we obtain the maximal spin state |S = (N + 1)/2, S z = (N + 1)/2 . By contrast, if s z = -1/2, there are two possible spin states: |S = (N ± 1)/2, S z = (N -1)/2 . The relative probabilities of these two possibilities are determined by the corresponding Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, which are given in Sec. I of the Supplemental Material (SM) From this consideration, we construct a simple model for the spin dynamics of excess quasi-particles. To do so, we consider N quasi-particles in a volume V . We assume that the diffusion of the particles is sufficiently fast that the spatial structure of their wavefunctions does not affect the spin dynamics and concentrate on spin effects only. Let us consider clusters that are close to the stable configuration with maximal spin S = N/2. We choose the instantaneous spin quantization axis such that S z = S and describe the cluster's deviation from the maximal spin state with the integer m = N/2 -S, m N, S. We consider four different processes that can change the state (N, m) of the cluster: (1) Quasi-particle injection: Quasi-particles are injected with a rate AV and arbitrary spin. Thus, half of them are aligned with the polarization axis of the existing cluster, whereas half of them are antialigned. If the spin is antialigned, we find that the probability of creating an additional spin flip, (2) Singlet annihilation: Such annihilation processes are possible only if the system is not in a maximal spin state. At small concentration of spin flips, m N , the corresponding rate is, thus, proportional to m. In particular, the process (N, m) → (N -2, m -1) happens with rate Γ(Nm)m/V . (3) Spin flips: Spin-orbit coupling admits for inelastic spin-flips via the electron-phonon interaction. We assume that each spin may flip independently. As for the injection process, a spin flip does not necessarily change the total spin -however we will neglect the corresponding 1/N -corrections to the rates. The rate for the process (N, m) → (N, m + 1) is then given as (Nm)/τ s , where 1/τ s is the spin flip rate for a single spin. Similarly the process (N, m) → (N, m -1) has the rate m/τ s . (4) Triplet annihilation: In the presence of spin-orbit coupling, pairs of quasi-particles may annihilate even when they are in a spin-triplet state. To account for such processes, we introduce a weak spin-independent annihilation, Γt Γ. Taking into account all possible orientations of the spins of the annihilated particles, this adds the following processes: With this, the dynamics are described by a master equation explicitly given in Sec. II of the SM -Γt Using Γt Γ and m N , Eq. ( Substitution into Eq. ( We can distinguish two regimes, depending on whether spin relaxation (SR) or triplet annihilation (TA) dominates. In the SR regime, Eq. ( The corresponding values for m are given as m 0 , respectively. Comparing the two expressions for N 0 , we conclude that the TA regime requires A > V /( Γ2 t τ 3 s ), that is, a sufficiently high injection rate at any given volume. The above equations allow us to derive the requirements for the cluster to be highly polarized, that is, N 0 m 0 . Let us first consider a small A such the cluster is in the SR regime. In this case, a sufficiently small volume V V c ≡ Γτ s is required. If at a given V < V c we increase A, and therefore the number of particles in the cluster, we cross-over to the TA regime, and a high polarization persists up to A A c (V c /V ) 2 with A c ≡ Γ/( Γt τ s ) 2 . This requirement is convenient to express in terms of the number of particles in the cluster, N N c ≡ Γ/ Γt . Note that, in a polarized cluster, N 0 largely exceeds the value N unpol. = c 0 V expected for an unpolarized system. It is constructive to express the concentrations as follows: in the SR regime, with ζ s ≡ V /V c 1, and in the TA regime, The regions where a polarized state is expected are illustrated in Fig. Let us estimate the relevant material parameters Γ, Γt , and τ s . In aluminum, the phonon-assisted recombination rate for quasi-particles near the gap edge is characterized by Γ 18 s -1 μm 3 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " ( n u l l ) " > ( n u l l ) < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " ( n u l l ) " > ( n u l l ) < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " ( n u l l ) " > ( n u l l ) < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " ( n u l l ) " > ( n u l l ) < / l a t e x i t > FIG. involved that is set by the energy ∼ ∆ released, cq ∆, c being the sound velocity and ∆ being the superconducting gap. In the absence of disorder, K (qa) 2 It is important to note that the number of particles in the cluster strongly fluctuates. The mean-field solution gives the most probable number of particles in the cluster, N 0 , while N differs from N 0 by a factor and the fluctuations N 2 = N 2 -N 2 are of the order N 2 0 . To quantify the fluctuations, we utilize a Fokker-Planck equation, cf. Sec. II of the SM where the constant C ensures the normalization. For the SR and TA regimes, this gives, respectively, A comparison with the classical model While the quasi-particle system is polarized, its spin quantization axis is not fixed but diffuses with time, along with the number of the polarized particles. This produces a measurable spin noise that can be utilized for the experimental verification of the polarization, using the setup sketched in Fig. In this work, we assume that a possible external magnetic field does not polarize the quasiparticle spins. This is valid provided the corresponding Zeeman energy E Z δ . On the level of the master equation, the polarizing effect of the magnetic field can be taken into account by assigning an anisotropy to the spin relaxation, but we have not investigated this. In conclusion, we propose a novel scenario for spontaneous spin polarization of a finite system under out-of-equilibrium conditions. We predict that, owing to the spin selectivity of recombination, the excess quasiparticles in a superconductor may spontaneously polarize in clusters. The underlying mechanism differs from that considered in Ref. 