We report the discovery of a new noncentrosymmetric superconductor CaPtAs. It crystallizes in a tetragonal structure (space group I41md, No. 109), featuring three dimensional honeycomb networks of Pt-As and a much elongated c-axis (a = b = 4.18 Å, and c = 43.70 Å). The superconductivity of CaPtAs with Tc = 1.47 K was characterized by means of electrical resistivity, specific heat, and ac magnetic susceptibility. The electronic specific heat Ce(T )/T shows evidence for a deviation from the behavior of a conventional BCS superconductor, and can be reasonably fitted by a p-wave model. The upper critical field μ0Hc2 of CaPtAs exhibits a relatively large anisotropy, with an in-plane value of around 204 mT and an out-of-plane value of 148 mT. Density functional theory calculations indicate that the Pt-5d and As-4p orbitals mainly contribute to the density of states near the Fermi level, showing that the Pt-As honeycomb networks may significantly influence the superconducting properties. Noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSs) have been extensively studied since the discovery of coexistent heavy fermion superconductivity and antiferromagnetism in CePt 3 Si Furthermore, an increasing number of NCSs have been found to show time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking upon entering the superconducting state, such as LaNiC 2 The origin of these observations and their relationship with the noncentrosymmetric crystal structures remain to be determined. It is of particular importance to look for new families of NCSs in order to characterize the superconducting properties and examine the influence of a strong ASOC and potential TRS breaking. The alkaline-earth based equiatomic ternary compounds have attracted considerable interest since SrP-tAs was found to superconduct below 2.4 K Recently, two additional examples of alkaline-earth based 111 superconductors were reported, BaPtAs Polycrystalline samples of CaPtAs were synthesized using a solid state reaction method. The PtAs 2 precursor was synthesized by heating stoichiometric quantities of Pt-powder and As granules at 700 • C. Subsequently, Ca, Pt and PtAs 2 with a molar ratio of 2 : 1 : 1 were loaded into a crucible and sealed in an evacuated quartz ampule. The ampule was heated up to 1000 • C and sintered at this temperature for several days. The sample was then ground and pelleted before being annealed at 950 • C for another week. For the single crystal growth, a self-flux method was used. The Ca, Pt and As elements were combined in a molar ratio of 1:1:1, loaded into a crucible and sealed in an evacuated quartz ampule. The ampule was slowly heated up to 1150 • C, kept at this temperature for several days before being slowly cooled. The obtained polycrystalline samples are hard and black, while the single crystals are shiny with a purple luster and irregular plate shape [inset of Fig. Electrical resistivity measurements under hydrostatic pressures were carried out using a piston-cylinder clamptype cell. Daphne oil 7373 was used as a pressure transmitting medium. The pressure was determined by measuring the superconducting transition of pure Pb. DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP). In particular, the projected augmented wave (PAW) method and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhoff (PBE) flavor of generalized gradient approximation were employed. A plane-wave basis up to 500 eV and 12×12×12 Γ-centered K-mesh were used to ensure convergence. Both the lattice constants and the atomic internal coordinates were optimized so that the forces on each atom were smaller than 0.01 eV/ Å and the internal stress smaller than 0.1 kbar. The crystal structure of CaPtAs is shown in Fig. Powder XRD data for CaPtAs are shown in Fig. Figure ), are found to be 0.16 K and 0.08 K, for polycrystalline and single crystal samples, respectively. Figure The Debye temperatures Θ D can be calculated ac- , where n = 3 is the number of atoms per formula unit and R is the molar gas constant , where the repulsive screened coulomb parameter μ * is taken to have the typical value of 0.13. The relatively small λ ep indicates that CaPtAs is a weakly coupled superconductor. In addition, γ n is related to the density of states at the Fermi level N (E F ) by where k B is the Boltzmann constant. N (E F ) was calculated to be 1.7 states/(eV atom). The electronic specific heat jump ∆C/γ n T c was determined from Fig. The temperature-dependent electronic heat-capacity in the superconducting state can be calculated from C e = T dS dT , where the superconducting contribution to the entropy S(T ) was calculated using is the excitation energy of quasiparticles, where ǫ are the electron energies measured relative to the chemical potential where ∆ 0 is the superconducting gap at zero temperature. While in the p-, and d -wave model, ∆(T ) is ∆ s (T ) sin θ and ∆ s (T ) cos 2φ, respectively, with the existence of point node and line node in the respective gap function. The results from fitting with the above-mentioned models are shown by the solid lines in Fig. To study the upper critical field μ 0 H c2 of CaPtAs, we performed electrical resistivity and heat capacity measurements under various magnetic fields up to 0.2 T. Considering the largely elongated c-axis in the lattice, we focus on the anisotropic of μ 0 H c2 , which was checked by applying magnetic fields along the c-axis and within the ab-plane. The data are shown in Fig. We summarize the results in Fig. Both the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model )], a carrier concentration n of about 1.8×10 22 cm -3 (from the measured Hall coefficient at 2 K), and taking the ratio of Fermi surface area S/S F ≈ 1. The BCS coherence length ξ 0 was estimated to be 3910 Å, using ξ 0 = 7.95 × 10 -17 × (n 2/3 S/S F )(γ n T c ) -1 It can be seen that the experimental data can be better fitted by the WHH model, as shown in Fig. The constituent elements of CaPtAs are close to the alkaline-earth based 111 compounds, such as SrPtAs, BaPtAs. However, its structure is more analogous to LaIrAs We have also performed DFT calculations for CaPtAs. Our results show that the band structure is complex due to the large number of atoms per unit cell, as shown in Fig. To summarize, we have successfully synthesized both poly-and single-crystalline samples of a new superconductor CaPtAs. Unlike SrPtAs and BaPtAs, CaPtAs crystallizes in a body-centered tetragonal noncentrosymmetric structure consisting of Pt-As honeycombs which extending along a much elongated c-axis. Zero-field resistivity, ac magnetic susceptibility and specific heat measurements demonstrate the presence of bulk superconductivity in CaPtAs with a T c of 1.47 K. The specific heat jump at T c , i.e., ∆C /γT c is around 0.92-1.25, which is smaller than the value of 1.43 from weak-coupling BCS theory. The temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat can not be well fitted by a single gap BCS model. The upper critical field shows a moderate anisotropy, with zero temperature values of 204 mT for H ⊥ c, and 148 mT for H c. Applying hydrostatic pressure up to 2.2 GPa leads to a slight enhancement of the T c , and residual resistivity ρ 0 . From the DFT calculations, we found that the ASOC-induced band splitting is around 50-100 meV. Furthermore, the DOS near Fermi level is dominated by Pt-5d and As-4p orbitals, suggesting that an important role is played by the Pt-As honeycombs in influencing the superconducting properties. Although the specific heat could be reasonably fitted by a p-wave model, additional measurements at lower temperatures sensitive to low energy excitations, such as the magnetic penetration depth, are necessary to characterize the gap structure and determine the nature of the pairing state.