We present results of comprehensive study of electronic properties of (TiZrNbCu) 1-x Ni x metallic glasses performed in broad composition range x encompassing both, high entropy (HE) range, and conventional Ni-base alloy concentration range, x ≥ 0.35. The electronic structure studied by photoemission spectroscopy and low temperature specific heat (LTSH) reveal a split-band structure of density of states inside valence band with d-electrons of Ti, Zr, Nb and also Ni present at Fermi level N (E F ), whereas LTSH and magnetoresistivity results show that variation of N (E F ) with x changes in Ni-base regime. The variation of superconducting transition temperatures with x closely follows that of N (E F ). The electrical resistivities of all alloys are high and decrease with increasing temperature over most of explored temperature range, and their temperature dependence seems dominated by weak localization effects over a broad temperature range (10 -300 K). The preliminary study of Hall Recent concept of high entropy alloys (HEA, multicomponent near to equi-atomic alloys) Intense research on HEAs over the last fifteen years has led to the production of several hundred new alloys However, present research of HEAs seems somewhat uneven, with the main effort invested in the development of new structural materials, thus focused on their mechanical properties, microstructure and thermal stability (e.g., The important problem of the transition from a-HEAs to conventional metallic glasses (MG) with the same chemical make-up was however ignored. The study of this transition is important both for understanding the formation of HEAs, and for proper evaluation of their potential in respect to that of conventional alloys. Very recently, we reported, to our knowledge, the first systematic study of the atomic structure-electronic structure-property relationship in (TiZrNbCu) 1-x Ni x (x ≤ 0.5) MGs for x in both the HEA (x ≤ 0.35) and conventional Ni-rich concentration range Here we report the first, to the best of our knowledge, comprehensive study of the electronic properties of quinary MG system (TiZrNbCu) 1-x Ni x over a broad composition range (x ≤ 0.5) encompassing both the highentropy and the conventional alloy concentration range (x > 0.35). Electrical resistivities of all alloys are high (ρ ≥ 160 μΩcm) and show qualitatively the same variations with x and temperature as in corresponding binary MGs We also show that superconductivity in our alloys as well as that in crystalline HEAs As described in some detail elsewhere Thin ribbons with thickness of about 20 μm were fabricated from fragments of these alloys by melt spinning molten alloys on the surface of a copper roller in a pure He atmosphere XRD and DSC results revealed that all samples except for those with x = 0 and 0.55 were fully amorphous. Therefore, the samples with x = 0 and 0.55 were not used in further studies. Details of the characterization of fully amorphous samples including their XRD patterns, SEM/EDS images and DSC curves were recently published As described previously in The resistivity measurements were performed by the low frequency (typically 22 Hz) ac method with rms current i = 0.2 mA. About 8 mm long samples for resistivity measurements were mounted on the sample holder of a 3 He cryostat inserted into a 16/18 T Oxford superconducting magnet. The current and voltage wires were glued with silver paste onto the samples. The silver paste was allowed to dry at room temperature for about twelve hours resulting in contact resistances at most a few Ohms. The resistivity was determined from the measurements of resistance, length, mass and density of samples As noted earlier Figure To the best of our knowledge the main mechanism(s) giving rise to the observed resistivities of amorphous TE-TL alloys has not been identified yet (e.g., , thus 0.344 ≤ x TL ≤ 0.625 for studied alloys. Figure at lower temperatures and τ -1 i ∼ T for T > 100 K and follow from the expression for the electrical conductivity of three-dimensional disordered system in the regime of weak electron localization in the absence of magnetic field where A = ( √ 3e 2 /2πl) τ /τ so , t = τ so /4τ i , and τ and τ so are electronic ) transport life time and the life time due to spin orbit interaction, respectively. The complete expression for σ(T ) in weakly localized regime prevented their detailed analysis. Still, qualitatively the same variation of σ(T ) and MR observed in our and other TE 1-x TL x amorphous alloys indicates that the effects of incipient localization dominate the temperature dependence of resistivity in all these alloys. Some arguments (3) direct relationship between the magnitude of increase of σ with T and electron-phonon interaction (figures 1 and 2 and As illustrated in the inset to Figure Figure All three spectra show clearly split-band structure of valence band with Cu-3d states and Ni-3d states giving rise to spectral maxima at 3.5 eV and 1.7 eV below the Fermi level (E F ). The spectral intensities at and close to E F are dominated with d-states of TEs; Ti, Zr and probably to some lower extent of Nb was observed in Zr 1-x Ni x alloys with x ≥ 0.64 These measurements have shown that the coefficient γ of the electronic contribution to LTSH, which is proportional to dressed DOS at where λ e-p represents the electron-phonon enhancement of DOS at E F , N 0 (E F ), changes its variation with x for x > 0.35. In particular, γ As seen in figure Useful information about superconductivity in amorphous alloys can be obtained from the measurements of the upper critical field H c2 (T ) (e.g. In particular, in the absence of LTSH results one can estimate N γ (E F ) from the measurements of H c2 (T ) and ρ: where N A , M and d, are the Avogadro number, molecular weight and mass density respectively, and other symbols have their usual meaning The initial slopes of the upper critical field (dH c2 /dT ) Tc had values typical for amorphous TE 1-x TL x alloys (2.3 -2.6 T/K) and decreased with x, but this decrease stopped for x > 0.35. By using (2) we have calculated N γ (E F ) from the corresponding results for (dH c2 /dT ) Tc and ρ. In spite of the rather large scatter, caused by the uncertainty in ρ, the calculated values of N γ (E F ) are close to those obtained from LTSH measurements (figure In particular, these values of N γ (E F ) also showed a tendency to saturation for x ≥ 0.35. As is well known, H c2 also provides important information on the nature of superconductivity in the studied system where Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. Further, H c2 provides important information on the mechanisms causing the destruction of superconductivity in applied magnetic field. However, due to low T c s, the data for H c2 (T ) of our samples does not cover a sufficiently broad range of reduced temperatures t = T /T c which is required in order to obtain reliable results to all parameters affecting H c2 (T ) variation for a reliable fitting. Since the fits of our data to the phenomenological ex- As already noted and shown explicitly in figure The Hall coefficient of (TiZrNbCu) for disordered transition metals and their alloys. Circles represent our data; lines are from ref. Main results of the comprehensive study of electronic properties of (TiZrNbCu) 1-x Ni x amorphous alloys over a broad composition range (encompassing both highentropy and conventional alloy concentration range x > 0.35) are presented and compared with those for corresponding binary and multicomponent amorphous alloys of early (TE) and late (TL) transition metals. The observed magnitudes of the electrical resistivities (ρ) as well as their variations with x and temperature (T ) are very similar to those in corresponding binary TE 1-x TL x alloys, which probably implies that chemical complexity has little effect on electronic transport in amorphous TE-TL alloys. In particular, both in binary and our quinary alloys the variations of ρ with T seem dominated with the quantum interference effects which show up in the magnetoresistance and specific variations of ρ -1 vs. T at lower and higher (T ≥ 100 K) temperatures, respectively. The observed superconducting transition temperatures T c are surprisingly low (T c ≤ 1.57 K) and decrease further with increasing x, as expected from their split-band electronic density of states with d-states of TEs dominant at the Fermi level (E F ), as demonstrated by the photoemission spectra for x = 0.125, 0.2 and 0.5. The decrease of T c with total TL content x TL and V EC within the high-entropy concentration range were practically the same as in binary Zr 1-x Ni x alloys implying the same mechanism for the suppression of superconductivity. However, in agreement with the change in atomic and electronic structure on transition from HEA to Ni-based alloys, the decrease of T c with x declined for x > 0.35. Thus, T c is determined by the density of states at E F as is usual in disordered transition metal alloys. Moreover, both our and the literature results for crystalline HEAs show that superconductivity in alloys containing mixture of different transition metals is also determined with the band density of states. Since the estimated upper critical fields at T = 0 K (H c2 (0)) seem to be Pauli limiting fields, the variation of H c2 (0) with x is probably the same as that of T c . The preliminary results for the Hall effect show that R H > 0 and has a similar magnitude as that in Zr 1-x TL x alloys with low x. However, R H shows a tendency to change a sign to R H < 0 for x > 0.5, which probably indicates that the relationship between the R H > 0 and band-crossing is the same as in binary Zr 1-x TL x amorphous alloys. Summarizing the above, we note that the electronic properties of all disordered alloys of early and late transition metals strongly depend on their electronic structure and quenched-in disorder, and are less sensitive on their chemical complexity, i.e. number of components. (Indeed, recent study of the atomic structure, electronic structure and magnetism in similar (TiZrNbNi) 1-x Cu x MGs 