A chiral absorber of light can emit spin-polarized (circularly polarized) thermal radiation based on Kirchhoff's law which equates spin-resolved emissivity with spin-resolved absorptivity for reciprocal media at thermal equilibrium. No such law is known for nonreciprocal media. In this work, we discover three spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws of thermal radiation applicable for both reciprocal and nonreciprocal planar media. In particular, these laws are applicable to multi-layered or composite slabs of generic bianisotropic material classes which include (uniaxial or biaxial) birefringent crystals, (gyrotropic) Weyl semimetals, magnetized semiconductors, plasmas, ferromagnets and ferrites, (magnetoelectric) topological insulators, metamaterials and multiferroic media. We also propose an experiment to verify these laws using a single system of doped Indium Antimonide (InSb) thin film in an external magnetic field. Furthermore, we reveal a surprising result that the planar slabs of all these material classes can emit partially circularly polarized thermal light without requiring any surface patterning, and identify planar configurations which can experience nontrivial thermal optomechanical forces and torques upon thermal emission into the external environment at lower temperature (nonequilibrium). Our work also provides a new fundamental insight of detailed balance of angular momentum (in addition to energy) of equilibrium thermal radiation, and paves the way for practical functionalities based on thermal radiation using nonreciprocal bianisotropic materials. At the foundation of the field of thermal radiation lies Kirchhoff's law which relates emissivity with absorptivity. One formulation of Kirchhoff's law in the context of circularly polarized light states that emissivity (η) is equal to absorptivity (α) for both left circular polarization (LCP) and right circular polarization (RCP) states. Its mathematical form is: where (+) denotes RCP, (-) denotes LCP, ω is the frequency and n denotes the direction. However, this spin-resolved Kirchhoff's law is valid only for reciprocal media. Many works have used it to design reciprocal chiral absorbers Thermal radiation from nonreciprocal media is an emerging research area There are no experiments till date and computational tools for analyzing nonreciprocal thermal radiation in arbitrary geometries are still under development We derive the spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities for planar media using the radiometry principles and based on fluctuational electrodynamic calculations Our derivation is applicable for both reciprocal and nonreciprocal media because it does not require the concept of electromagnetic reciprocity. We further validate this derivation by proving thermodynamic consistency based on the detailed balance of linear and angular momentum transfer, via thermal radiation between the planar slab and the environment at thermal equilibrium. The spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities ensure that there is no nonzero force (linear momentum balance) or torque (angular momentum balance) on the planar slab when it is at thermal equilibrium with the environment. The principle of detailed balance of energy plays a pivotal role in the derivation of many heat-transfer laws. Here, we introduce a new concept of detailed balance of angular momentum of radiative heat at thermal equilibrium. Since this concept is generalizable to electrons, phonons, photons in various systems, it represents a paradigm shift in the analysis of heat transfer at thermal equilibrium. In this work, it is crucial for validating the spin-resolved emissivities for nonreciprocal media which have not been derived previously. We then analyze the spin-resolved thermal emission and absorption for planar media of all time-invariant bianisotropic material classes. The reciprocal media include uni/biaxial anisotropic materials Apart from the Kirchhoff's laws derived at thermal equilibrium, we also reveal other interesting spin-resolved thermal radiation features observed when the external environment is at lower temperature (nonequilibrium condition). First, we point out a striking result that the planar geometries of all material classes mentioned above except the conventional isotropic dielectric/metallic materials can emit partially spin-polarized thermal radiation in suitable directions. This is important from the perspective of generating circularly polarized light because most of these materials do not require any surface patterning which otherwise causes additional design complexity in previous experiments All these findings and theory details will be useful for engineering directional radiative heat transfer We consider an extended finite-thickness multilayered planar slab much larger than the thermal wavelength at thermal equilibrium with the blackbody radiation at temperature T . As shown in fig. where η is the dimensionless emissivity dependent on frequency (ω), emission direction (θ, φ) in spherical coordinates and orthogonal polarization states (ê). The angle φ ∈ [0, 2π] while the angle θ ∈ [0, π] such that θ ∈ [0, π/2) denotes the top hemisphere and θ ∈ [π/2, π] denotes the bottom hemisphere. For a semi-infinite half-space, θ ∈ [0, π/2]. The blackbody radiance at temperature T given by being the Planck's function, is divided by two to account for two polarization states separately. Similarly, the power absorbed per unit surface area dA due to the blackbody radiance incident at an angle θ to the surface normal within a solid angle dΩ per unit frequency interval dω is, We focus on polarization-dependent properties of thermal emission. Instead of the usual s, p-polarization basis, we consider RCP (ê + ) and LCP (ê -) polarization states. The circular polarization basis states in the basis of s,p polarization states (ê s , êp ) are ê± = (ê s ± iê p )/ √ 2. We derive (as explained in detail in the discussion section) and analyze the spin-resolved emissivities η (±) = η(ω, θ, φ, ê± ) and absorptivities α (±) = α(ω, θ, φ, ê± ) defined above for planar configurations of several material classes. As a superset of materials, we consider a linear, time-invariant generic bianisotropic medium whose optical properties are described using the following SKL-1 Weyl semimetals Nonreciprocal gyromagnetic Topological insulator where ε, μ are dimensionless permittivity and permeability tensors and ξ, ζ are magneto-electric coupling tensors. Such a material is reciprocal if these parameters satisfy the conditions where (• • • ) T denotes the matrix transpose. It is nonreciprocal if any one of these conditions is violated. We consider a list of several material classes as shown in table I, which includes isotropic, uni/biaxial anisotropic, gyroelectric, gyromagnetic and magneto-electric materials. We discover that for multilayered or composite planar slabs of most of these material classes, the spin-resolved emissivities (η (±) ) and absorptivities (α (±) ) satisfy specific relations described below and summarized in fig 1. They are called as spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws (SKLs). SKL-1: For multilayered or composite planar slabs of all reciprocal media, the spin-resolved emissivity in (θ, φ) direction is equal to the spin-resolved absorptivity in the same direction for each spin (polarization) state. SKL-2: For multilayered or composite planar slabs of nonreciprocal media that preserve the rotational symmetry in the plane of the surface such as gyrotropic media with gyrotropy axis perpendicular to the surface and isotropic magneto-electric (Tellegen) media, the spin-resolved emissivity in (θ, φ) direction is equal to the spin-resolved absorptivity in the same direction but of opposite spin state. SKL-3: For multi-layered or composite planar slabs of nonreciprocal media that do not preserve the rotational symmetry in the plane of the surface such as gyrotropic media with gyrotropy axis parallel to the surface and anisotropic nonreciprocal magneto-electric media that cause cross coupling between perpendicular and parallel components of E -H fields (E x -H z , E z -H x , E y -H z E z -H y ), the spin-resolved emissivity in the direction (θ, φ) is equal to the spin-resolved absorptivity for the conjugate direction (θ, φ + π) for each spin state. We emphasize that a multilayered or a composite planar slab which combines different material types following the same SKL also follows that same SKL. For instance, a planar slab which combines materials exhibiting gyrotropic and magnetoelectric response simultaneously, will follow SKL-2 or 3 depending on the gyrotropy axis and the isotropic or anisotropic nature of the magnetoelectric response as described above. For conventional isotropic dielectric/metallic materials, all three laws hold since the spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities are equal [η (+) = η (-) = α (+) = α (-) ] in all relevant directions. It follows that a multilayered planar slab which contains layers of such trivial materials (satisfying all three SKLs) along with more exotic bianisotropic media satisfying a specific SKL can be readily described using that specific SKL. However, the laws are not applicable when the nontrivial bianisotropic media following distinct SKLs are combined. One example can be a planar slab containing layers of uniaxial anisotropic media (SKL-1) and gyrotropic media (SKL-2 or 3). Interestingly, we also find that a nonreciprocal magnetoelectric medium that leads to coupling between the parallel components of E -H fields (E x -H y or E y -H x ) does not satisfy any one of these three SKLs. This special material is well-known in the literature for causing Fiegel effect and related phenomena We consider a doped Indium Antimonide (InSb) slab of thickness t = 1μm. and doping concentration n = 10 17 cm -3 (available at vendors like MTI Corp.) on top of a glass substrate of constant permittivity ε s = 2.25. We use the experimentally well-characterized Drude-Lorentz oscillator model v Figure For brevity, we focus on the direction (θ = π/4, φ = π/4). As shown in Fig. This example demonstrates that spin-resolved emissivities in (θ, φ) direction are equal to spin-resolved absorptivities for the same spin state but in the conjugate (θ, φ + π) direction. Thus, SKL-3 can be verified. In the context of spin-resolved thermal radiation, it is illuminating to answer two fundamental questions. First, what materials can emit spin-polarized or circularly polarized thermal radiation? And second, what materials can experience nontrivial torque and force upon thermal emission of spin-polarized photons? We answer both these questions with a universal perspective of all material classes listed in the table I. Note that we consider nonequilibrium situation unlike equilibrium thermal radiation for derivation of SKLs. We focus on thermal emission from the planar slab at temperature T 0 into the surrounding vacuum at T = 0K. The strength of the circular polarization of thermal emission is characterized using the well-known experimentally accessible Stokes S 3 parameter defined as: S 3 = +1 denotes pure RCP light while S 3 = -1 denotes pure LCP light in the given emission direction. When the planar slab emits thermal radiation into the environment at lower temperature, it loses linear and angular momentum carried away by the photons, and consequently experiences force and torque respectively. We compute the spectral force per unit area (F s given by Eq. 18) and the spectral torque per unit area (τ s given by Eq. 19) experienced by the planar slab due to the emission of photons of frequency ω by integrating over all emission directions. The derivation of these quantities is provided in section III. Figure Circularly polarized thermal emission: First, we note a surprising result that there are many materials whose planar slabs can emit partially spin-polarized thermal radiation. This is evident from the nonzero values of S 3 parameters demonstrated using contour plots in Fig. However, for magnetoelectric media, the spin-resolved emission is symmetric with respect to top (θ ∈ [0, π/2)) and bottom hemispheres (θ ∈ [π/2, π]) whereas it is asymmetric for vi gyrotropic media. The asymmetry can be predicted based on the microscopic picture of underlying cyclotron motion. If the thermally or statistically averaged cyclotron motion of electrons is anti-clockwise in the xy-plane (perpendicular gyrotropy axis) as viewed from +z-direction, the resulting emission should be RCP along +z-direction and LCP along -z-direction. We also point out that the material classes lead to unique dependence of S 3 on the emission directions which is evident from the contour plots. This can be informative from the perspective of classifying or identifying materials using infrared imaging polarimetry in an actual experiment. First, we derive the spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities for a semi-infinite half-space because of its simplicity and connection with the fluctuational electrodynamic theory as explained in the supplement. We then extend the derivation for a finite-thickness planar slab. Since we assume linear material response and regular reflection from the surface, the frequency ω and the angle θ are not changed upon reflection. Hence, we can apply the principle of total energy conservation for energy-exchange channels characterized by ω, θ separately and focus on the polarization or spin-dependent properties. The flux rates are given by equations 1 and 2. Figure Thermal photons in (θ, φ) direction at equilibrium Reflected Radiation Incident Radiation T (++) (̟-θ, φ+̟) I (+) T ( -+) (̟-θ, φ+̟) I (+) Transmitted Radiation FIG. (I (+) ) gets reflected as R (++) (θ, φ + π)I (+) (RCP) and R (-+) (θ, φ + π)I (+) (LCP) along (θ, φ) direction. Note that we have characterized directions based on the emitted radiation (indicated by arrows in (a)) and not the incident radiation. This avoids the ambiguity in characterizing directions for a thin film (finite-thickness slab described below) where transmitted radiation is also taken into account. The interconversion reflectances can be measured separately in an experiment or can be calculated for the planar slab using the well-known Fresnel reflection coefficients (r ss , r sp , r ps , r pp ) using the following expressions (omitting the dependence on θ, φ for brevity): The Fresnel reflection coefficient r jk for j, k = [s, p] denotes the amplitude of j-polarized reflected wave due to unit amplitude k-polarized incident wave. Since the overall radiation in the far-field is isotropic and unpolarized at thermal equilibrium, the spin-resolved energy flux rates in opposite directions are equal. This argument is justified by our previous work By equating the incoming and outgoing spin-resolved radiation flux rates in the far-field, we obtain the following spin-resolved emissivities in terms of reflectances: Similarly, it is straightforward to obtain the spin-resolved absorptivities by considering the reflection of incident polarized radiation I (±) separately. By subtracting the reflected flux from the incident radiation flux, we obtain the following spin-resolved absorptivities: We show in the supplement that the emissivities (Eq.9) can be obtained within the scattering matrix formulation of fluctuational electrodynamics theory. We further validate this derivation by proving the thermodynamic consistency condition of net zero exchange of linear and angular momentum of the planar slab with the environment at thermal equilibrium. But before that, we extend this analysis to obtain the spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities for a planar slab of finite thickness. For a finite-thickness slab surrounded by vacuum on both sides, the incident radiation, in addition to getting reflected, also gets transmitted to the other side of the slab. It is straightforward to obtain the emissivities in terms of reflectances and transmittances using similar energy-balance considerations. In particular, as shown in Fig. The transmittances are calculated from the associated Fresnel transmission coefficients (t ss , t sp , t ps , t pp ) using the expressions (omitting the dependence on θ, φ for brevity): The transmission coefficient t jk for j, k = [s, p] denotes the amplitude of j-polarized transmitted wave due to unit amplitude k-polarized incident wave. Equating outgoing and incoming spin-resolved flux rates in the opposite directions in the far-field, we obtain the following expressions for the spin-resolved emissivities: Similarly, the spin-resolved absorptivities are obtained by subtracting the reflected and transmitted flux rates from the incident polarized flux rates. We now demonstrate the theoretical consistency of the above derivation by showing detailed balance of linear and angular momentum exchange between the slab and its surroundings which must be maintained at thermal equilibrium. Since angular momentum remains a largely unexplored topic in the field of thermal radiation The rate of change of linear momentum dp/dt along +z-direction of the planar slab due to absorption, reflection, and transmission of photons incident along (θ, φ) direction and emitted by the slab along the same direction is given below (abbreviating dM = |cosθ|dωdΩdA in Eq.1 for simplicity): where T 0 is the temperature of the slab and T env is the temperature of the environment. The dependence of various quantities on (ω, θ, φ) is assumed and not mentioned above for brevity. As an explanation of various terms, we consider incident RCP (+) radiation in the top hemisphere and find the linear momentum change of the slab along +z-axis. It follows that α (+) portion gets absorbed imparting momentum ∝cos θα + I b,Tenv ω/c, R (++) + R (-+) portion gets reflected in the positive z-direction imparting momentum ∝ -2 cos θ(R (++) +R (-+) )I b,Tenv ω/c, and T (++) +T (-+) portion gets transmitted to the bottom hemisphere without imparting any momentum to the slab. Because of the emission of RCP radiation in the same direction, momentum ∝cos θη (+) I b,T0 is imparted to the slab. Negative sign corresponds to the loss of the linear momentum by the slab. Similarly, we obtain the rate of change of angular momentum (dJ/dt) of the planar slab whose z-component is: The x-components of both linear and angular momentum transfer rates are: The y-components are obtained by replacing cos φ with sin φ in above two expressions. It is then straightforward to calculate the spectral force per unit area (F s ) and the spectral torque per unit area (τ s ) experienced by the planar slab due to the thermal emission of photons of x frequency ω: Here the integration is over the solid angle dΩ and the terms in the denominator dωdA come from dM introduced in Eqs 14,15,16,17. The final expressions are integrated over the frequency ω for calculating total force and total torque per unit area. We now substitute the spin-resolved emissivities (Eq.12) and absorptivities (Eq.13) in the above expressions and compute the rates of linear and angular momentum transfer under thermal equilibrium condition (T 0 = T env ). We find that the following vectorial equalities always hold true: It follows upon integration over all emission directions that there is no net force or torque on the planar slab which is at thermal equilibrium with the surrounding environment. Since the spin-resolved emissivities (Eq.12) are derived without invoking the concept of electromagnetic reciprocity, and are new to the best of our knowledge, we note that the above analysis of detailed balance of linear and angular momentum transfer provides a thermodynamic consistency of the derivation. The above derivation is also crucial for computing the fluctuations-induced force and torque on the planar slabs under the nonequilibrium condition when T env = T 0 as discussed above. The calculation of spin-resolved emissivities and absorptivities requires the calculation of Fresnel reflection and transmission coefficients. While this is a very well-known topic in the literature, we note that, apart from the trivial isotropic media, the closed-form semi-analytic expressions of reflection coefficients are possible only for semi-infinite half-spaces of very few bianisotropic material classes Reciprocal materials: For a planar slab of reciprocal media, we find that the reflection coefficients satisfy the relations r ss,pp (θ, φ) = r ss,pp (θ, φ + π) and r sp (θ, φ) = -r ps (θ, φ + π). The transmission coefficients satisfy t ss,pp (θ, φ) = t ss,pp (πθ, φ + π) and t sp (θ, φ) = -t ps (πθ, φ + π). These relations can be inferred from the Green's function on the vacuum side of the geometry Nonreciprocal materials: For gyrotropic materials with the gyrotropy axis perpendicular to the planar surface and for nonreciprocal isotropic magneto-electric materials (Tellegen media) having diagonal ξ, ζ tensors, we find that the reflection coefficients satisfy the relations r ss,pp (θ, φ) = r ss,pp (θ, φ + π) and r sp (θ, φ) = r ps (θ, φ + π). The transmission coefficients satisfy the relations t ss,pp (θ, φ) = t ss,pp (πθ, φ + π) and t sp (θ, φ) = t ps (πθ, φ + π). Substituting these relations in Eqs. 12 and 13, we obtain η ± (ω, θ, φ) = α ∓ (ω, θ, φ). This is SKL-2 given in Eq. 5. Interestingly, multilayered planar slabs of other nonreciprocal gyrotopic and anisotropic magneto-electric materials also exhibit simplifying relations between the Fresnel coefficients. In particular, if the magnetoelectric coupling tensors (ξ, ζ) indicate cross coupling between electric and magnetic fields lying perpendicular and parallel to the slab (E x -H z , E z -H x , E y -H z or E z -H y ) or if the medium is gyrotropic with the gyrotropy axis parallel to the surface, the reflection coefficients satisfy the condition r sp (θ, φ) = -r ps (θ, φ) and the transmission coefficients satisfy t ss,pp (πθ, φ + xi π) = t ss,pp (θ, φ + π) and t sp (πθ, φ + π) = -t ps (θ, φ + π). Substituting these relations in Eqs. 12 and 13, we obtain η ± (ω, θ, φ) = α ± (ω, θ, φ + π). This is SKL-3 given in Eq. 6. We note that the above underlying relations are not obvious and their universal applicability for multilayered or composite configurations of many bianisotropic material classes has not been reported before. The explanation of their specific form based on the underlying structural characteristics or symmetries of material classes is a nontrivial problem that motivates new analogies or methods We consider a different perspective of spin-resolved or spin-polarized thermal radiation and analyze it comprehensively for reciprocal and nonreciprocal media. We use radiometry paradigm to derive the spin-resolved emissivity and absorptivity without invoking the concept of electromagnetic reciprocity. We further provide a validation of this derivation by showing the detailed balance of both linear and angular momentum transfer rates when the planar slab is at thermal equilibrium with its environment. The spin-resolved expressions ensure that there is no net nonzero force or torque on the planar slab which is a necessary condition to maintain thermal equilibrium with the environment. Our emphasis on these theory details and derivation is important because, although thermal radiation is a very old topic, its extension to nonreciprocal media is a recent development and reviving the old radiometry paradigm in that context (uncommon in recent works) requires careful analysis. Besides, the concept of detailed balance of angular momentum (in addition to energy) provides a fundamentally new insight related to the interplay of photon spin and thermal radiation. This concept can be extended to analyze heat transfer at thermal equilibrium in many other systems for validating underlying physical models or deriving similar heat-transfer laws. Through a universal perspective of spin-resolved thermal emission for generic bianisotropic material classes, we discover three useful spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws of thermal radiation applicable for reciprocal and nonreciprocal planar media. While the first law applicable for the reciprocal media (SKL-1) is known, the remaining two laws for the nonreciprocal planar media are new. We emphasize that these laws are applicable for composite media or multilayered configurations of many material classes, for all frequencies, emission directions, geometry and material parameters. Since Kirchhoff's laws are at the foundation of the field of thermal radiation and are applicable only for reciprocal media, their generalization to nonreciprocal media is a very important fundamental result. We also propose an experiment to verify the spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws conveniently by using a single material system. We note that we can obtain another formulation of directional Kirchhoff's laws relating total emissivity (η = η (+) + η (-) ) with total absorptivity (α = α (+) + α (-) ) by summing over both spin polarization states. The spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws and their derivatives will be useful for optimizing directional radiative heat transfer While the calculation of Fresnel coefficients for specific cases of bianisotropic media is a well-known topic in the literature, a universal perspective revealing the interesting underlying relations in this work is new to the best of our knowledge in that research area. They can be potentially used for discovering similar laws concerning different (not necessarily thermal) radiation properties. Moreover, we emphasize that this work is not merely the derivation of Fresnel coefficients. The central results are not obvious from the existing literature on Fresnel coefficients for bianisotropic media, since they primarily depend on the important theory details and derivation provided in this work. We also note that the concepts like spin-resolved radiative heat transfer, bianisotropic media, photon spin and angular momentum remain largely unexplored in the field of thermal radiation (see recent reviews In addition to the spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws, we also show other thermal spin photonic features for several material classes. First, we show a striking result that the planar media of many materials can emit spin-polarized thermal light. This includes all nonreciprocal media as well as reciprocal media such as uni/bi-axial anisotropic crystals and reciprocal magnetoelectric (chiral) media. Second, we demonstrate nonequilibrium force and torque experienced by planar slabs due to the loss of linear and angular momentum respectively, via thermal radiation into the environment at lower temperature. We also identify the material classes that can be used for engineering parallel and perpendicular components of nonequilibrium force and torque in multilayered planar slabs. These findings will be useful from the perspective of practical applications such as designing directional and spin-polarized light sources, engineering thermal optomechanical forces and torques, and classifying or identifying materials using infrared imaging polarimetry. The calculation of Fresnel reflection and transmission coefficients for the planar media involves two steps. The first step requires calculation of the wavevectors and the plane-wave solutions of the electromagnetic fields inside each layer of the planar slab. We consider most general multi-layered geometry. The second step involves the calculation of these coefficients by enforcing the boundary conditions at each interface for incidence of either ês or êp polarized light. A generic, homogeneous bianisotropic medium is described using the constitutive relations given in Eq.3. By writing electromagnetic fields inside the material as [E, μ0 ε0 H] T e i(k •R+kzz-iωt) and using these constitutive relations in Maxwell's equations, we obtain the following dimensionless dispersion equation for waves inside the material: Here, 6 × 6 material tensor M describes the constitutive relations and M k corresponds to the curl operator acting on plane waves. k is the parallel component of the incident wave which is conserved at each interface and hence is the same for all layers. k z is the z-component of the wavevector which is obtained by solving the above equation for given k = |k |, the angle φ made by k with the x-axis, and the material parameters ε, μ, ξ, ζ. The associated fields are the null-space eigenstates of the above dispersion equation. For all media, there are four solutions inside each layer of the planar slab where two solutions correspond to waves going in +z direction and the remaining two correspond to waves going in -z direction. We now consider the incidence of ês or êp polarized light. In vacuum, the polarization vectors êj± for j = s, p with ± denoting waves going along ±z directions are: Thus, for an incident êspolarized light (in the top hemisphere for a planar slab) of unit amplitude, the reflected fields in the same layer are r ss ês+ + r ps êp+ and the transmitted fields on the other side of the slab are t ss ês-+ t ps êp-. Inside each layer, the fields are described in the basis of four (null space) eigenstates using four unknowns. Thus, for a planar slab of N layers, there are 4N + 4 unknowns including the four reflection and transmission coefficients. These can be readily calculated by using 4(N +1) boundary conditions (continuity of E x , E y , H x , H y fields) for N + 1 interfaces of the planar geometry. The computational tools to calculate these coefficients are made available on GitHub https://github.com/chinmayCK/Fresnel under MIT license. This work was supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Science under award number de-sc0017717, DARPA Nascent Light-Matter Interaction program, and the Lillian Gilbreth Postdoctoral Fellowship program at Purdue University (CK). containing a bianisotropic medium characterized by the response parameters ε, μ, ξ, ζ. Here, in figure Parallel forces and torques: In the main text, we find that, without using the substrate slab, the parallel nonequilibrium force is experienced only by anisotropic nonreciprocal magnetoelectric materials which cause coupling between perpendicular and parallel components of E -H fields (examples 15 and 16). Figure Based on this universal perspective of multilayered bianisotropic slabs which are classified according to the spin-resolved Kirchhoff's laws (SKLs), the following general rules can be obtained. They are useful from the perspective of engineering thermal optomechanical forces and torques: • Perpendicular nonequilibrium thermal force can be obtained for all materials classes. • Perpendicular nonequilibrium thermal torque can be obtained for nonreciprocal media satisfying SKL-2 and isotropic reciprocal magnetoelectric media (Pasteur media). • Parallel nonequilibrium thermal force can exist only for nonreciprocal materials satisfying SKL-3. • Parallel nonequilibrium thermal torque can exist for nonreciprocal media satisfying SKL-3 and anisotropic reciprocal magnetoelectric media which cause coupling between perpendicular and parallel components of E-H fields. While deriving these rules, we have omitted consideration of multilayered slabs intermixing materials satisfying different SKLs. In that case, both perpendicular and parallel components of nonequilibrium force and torque can be engineered. We provide semi-analytic closed form expressions of Fresnel reflection coefficients for a gyromagnetic medium and derive some of the interesting relations between them noted in the main text. We consider a semi-infinite half-space of a gyromagnetic material having permittivity ε = I 3×3 , and a generic anti-symmetric permeability tensor μ = μ ij having nonzero off-diagonal elements with the property μ ij = -μ ji . On the vacuum side of the geometry, we write the incident and reflected electric and magetic fields as the following: where the polarization eigenstates ŝ± , p± , and the associated wavevectors k± /k 0 are: k denotes the conserved wavevector component parallel to the surface and η 0 = μ 0 / 0 . Similarly, we can write the electric and magnetic fields inside the gyromagnetic material as where Since there is only one interface, we have denoted the transmission coefficients as t jk for j, k = [s, p]. Note that k ± × p ± = ŝ ± . The value of k z (z-component of the wavevector) inside the medium can be obtained by solving the Maxwell's equations as described in the methods section of the main text. From these solutions and applying the boundary conditions for separate incidence of s-polarized light and p-polarized light, we find the values of r ss , r sp , r ps , r pp for given k and φ. For a gyromagnetic material considered here, the following simplified quartic equation is obtained: where There are four solutions where two of them correspond to waves propagating in -z direction and the other two correspond to waves propagating in +z direction. We choose the solutions that correspond to decay of the fields away from the interface inside the medium. Identifying these solutions as k (i) z with i = 1, 2, we have two sets of t sp , t (i) ps , and t (i) pp . Substituting the associated fields in Maxwell's equations, we obtain following equations relating these coefficients by considering x component of the fields: v Setting E 0p = 0 for calculation of r ss , r ps below (incidence of s-polarized light), we obtain: z cos φ + μ -1 zx k sin 2 φ + μ -1 yz k sin φ cos φ We also obtain A (i) and B (i) from the y-component of the fields which are as the following: We now write the boundary conditions for electric fields. x :E 0s sin φ(1 + r ss ) + E 0p k z cos φ(1r pp ) -E 0s r ps k z cos φ + E 0p r sp sin φ = The boundary conditions for the magnetic field are: x : E 0s k z cos φ(1r ss )-E 0p sin φ(1 + r pp ) -E 0s r ps sin φ -E 0p r sp k z cos φ = with μ -1 ij being the elements of the inverse of μ matrix assuming that it is invertible. We get from the electric field's boundary conditions, taking E 0p = 0 (incidence of s-polarized light), and, taking E 0s = 0 (incidence of p-polarized light), On the other hand, we get from the boundary conditions of the magnetic field, setting E 0p = 0 (incidence of s-polarized light), where Also, setting E 0s = 0 (incidence of p-polarized light), we get: vii where Solving these equations by substituting the values of A (i) , B (i) , we find the coefficients t pp from which the required reflection coefficients are obtained. Below, we look at specific cases that allow further simplification of these expressions and lead to useful relations between the reflection coefficients. We calculate the coefficients for light incidence in the xz-plane such that φ = 0 in the expressions obtained in previous section. This leads to simplified closed-form expressions for reflection coefficients. For a gyromagnetic slab with gyrotropy axis along z axis, the only nonzero components of the μ tensor are μ xx = μ yy , μ zz and μ xy = -μ yx . We also have μ and taking φ = 0 (incidence in xz-plane), we have: z A (2) V (1) r sp = 2 V (2) U (1) -V (1) U (2) U (2) -U (1) (26b) From Eqs. ( From these expressions and using Eqs. ( . Reciprocal and nonreciprocal material classes constitutive relations in the frequency domain assuming local material response: * ckhandek@purdue.edu † zjacob@purdue.edu