Transmission lines are essential components in various signal and power distribution systems. In addition to their main use as connecting elements, transmission lines can also be employed as continuous sensors for the measurement and detection of external influences such as mechanical strains and deformations. The measuring principle is based on deformation-induced changes of the characteristic impedance. Reflections of an injected test signal at resulting impedance mismatches can be used to infer applied deformations. To determine the effect of deformations on the characteristic impedance, we develop a numerical framework that allows us to solve Maxwell's equations for any desired transmission-line geometry over a wide frequency range. The proposed framework utilizes a staggered finite-difference Yee method on non-uniform grids to efficiently solve a set of decoupled partial differential equations that we derive from the frequency domain Maxwell equations. To test our framework, we compare simulation results with analytical predictions and corresponding experimental data. Our results suggest that the proposed numerical framework is able to capture experimentally observed deformation effects and may therefore be used in transmission-line-based deformation and strain sensing applications. Furthermore, our framework can also be utilized to simulate and study the electromagnetic properties of complex arrangements of conductor, insulator, and shielding materials. The transmission of electromagnetic waves is at the heart of many signal and power distribution applications. For wavelengths that are small compared to the conductor length, transmission lines such as coaxial cables or twisted pairs are used to limit radiative losses and reflections. In addition to their application in signal and power transmission systems, it is also possible to use transmission lines as continuous sensors for the measurement and detection of different environmental influences In contrast to discrete sensors (e.g., strain and displacement gauges), the advantage of continuous transmission-line sensors is the possibility to perform measurements at any location along a sensing line. The measuring principle in electrical transmission lines is based on two mechanisms: (i) Localized mechanical strains lead to transmission-line deformations and corresponding changes of the characteristic impedance. (ii) An injected test signal gets reflected at deformationinduced impedance mismatches and the information contained in signal reflections can be used to infer applied deformations. Electrical transmission lines are, however, not the only possibility to realize continuous strain and deformation sensors in practice. Another approach is based on optical fibres and Bragg grating and Brillouin scattering methods. The idea behind the Bragg grating method is to use optical gratings within optical fibres and measure wave-length changes that correspond to certain deformations. The disadvantage of this method is that it is only quasi-continuous and requires a large number of gratings to achieve good resolution To measure deformations with electrical transmission lines, it is necessary to determine the effect of deformations on the characteristic impedance. However, existing models only capture concentric transmissionline deformations and thus neglect any further shapespecific information Before focusing on the development of our numerical framework for the study of deformed transmission lines, we summarize some concepts from transmissionline theory. In most transmission-line applications, the transversal electromagnetic (TEM) mode can be regarded as the dominant signal propagation mode where ω = 2πf and f is the corresponding frequency. The transmission-line parameters are R = R(z, ω), L = L(z, ω), C = C(z, ω), and G = G(z, ω) and denote resistance, inductance, capacitance, and conductance per unit length, respectively. Some important factors that influence these parameters are transmission-line geometry, conductivity and dielectric properties of the used materials, and frequency of the incident wave. The telegrapher's equations may also be interpreted in terms of a sequence of equivalent circuits as we show in figure In a transmission line, electromagnetic waves propagate with a phase velocity of v = 1/ √ LC. If the surrounding medium is homogeneous with permeability μ and permittivity The imaginary part of the permittivity accounts for dielectric losses and 0 is the vacuum permittivity. In most transmission line applications, the permeability μ = μ 0 μ r is equal to the vacuum permeability μ 0 , because common conductors (e.g., copper and aluminum) exhibit a relative permeability of μ r ≈ 1. For each transmission-line segment, the characteristic impedance is and therefore a function of the transmission-line parameters. At an interface between a line segment with impedance Z 1 and another one with impedance Z 2 , the corresponding reflection coefficient describes the ratio of the reflected and the incident wave. No reflections occur for transmission lines with equal impedances along the line (matched transmission lines). To describe the influence of transmission-line deformations on characteristic impedance and signal propagation, we have to determine the corresponding transmission-line parameters. Only in certain cases such as for coaxial geometries, is it possible to find closed analytical solutions. For general deformations, it is necessary to utilize numerical methods. Under the quasi-TEM assumption, we first determine the electric and magnetic fields E (z, ω) and B (z, ω) for a transmission-line segment at position z. Based on the obtained electromagnetic fields, we then compute the transmission-line parameters for the considered segment. Specifically, let Ω ⊆ R 2 be the cross section of a certain transmission-line segment at position z. The cross section Ω shall include the surrounding medium up to a certain distance where the magnetic field is sufficiently small. We denote the current density in z direction by J z (z, ω) and describe resistive losses by where σ denotes the electric conductivity. Based on eq. ( where I is the current that flows through the transmission line. Next, we compute the inductance with the help of the total magnetic energy averaged over one cycle where Similarly, we determine the capacitance by considering the total electric energy averaged over one cycle where D (z, ω) = E (z, ω) / . We obtain the capacitance per unit length through where V is the voltage difference between inner and outer conductor. We note that electric field and capacitance are frequency-independent until currents that flow through the dielectric material become relevant. This is only the case for frequencies that are not captured by the quasi-TEM approximation. Another possibility to compute the capacitance is to consider the total charge Q. Therefore, let Ω ⊆ R 2 be the area that covers all conductors of the same voltage level. The total charge is where ρ is the charge density. The relative permittivity r may be position-dependent. The second step in eq. ( For a homogeneous dielectric medium, the conductance per unit length is where denotes the loss tangent. In practice, dielectric losses dominate and tan (δ) = / . To fully describe the dielectric material, it is necessary to determine the frequency dependence of tan (δ). For typical dielectric materials that are used in transmission line applications, the frequency dependence is almost constant over a certain frequency range where I t is the total transverse conduction current per unit line length between the conductors. Integrating the current density J = (σω ) E + J s over ∂Ω yields the total transverse conduction current and the conductance per unit length where J s in J is the externally applied source current. After having outlined the basic strategy of how to describe transmission lines of arbitrary cross sections in section 2, we now determine the electromagnetic fields of a given transmission-line segment We begin with a brief summary of the potential formulation of Maxwell's equations as proposed in We divide eq. ( where σ := σiω is the generalized conductivity. Moreover, a decomposition of E into the vector potential A and the scalar potential Φ yields The vector potential satisfies the Coulomb gauge condition Substituting eq. ( where we assumed a constant permeability μ. Using the Coulomb gauge condition of eq. ( and taking the divergence of eq. ( As described in section 2, under the quasi-TEM assumption we consider the transmission line to be composed of individual segments whose electromagnetic fields lie in the transverse (x, y) plane. Therefore, the solution of eqs. ( We note that Φ dropped out of eq. ( where n is the unit normal vector on the boundary ∂Ω. In the case of transmission lines, the inner and outer conductors can be assumed to exhibit potentials of the same absolute value relative to the respective area, but with opposite signs. Therefore, the boundary conditions given by eqs. (28c) and (28d) are already satisfied. To solve eqs. (27a) to (27d) for arbitrary transmissionline cross sections, we employ a staggered finitedifference scheme on non-uniform grids z (a) Electromagnetic field components in the plane. Specifically, we use a method that is based on central differences at midpoints. That is, we compute derivatives between two adjacent grid points using a forward-difference scheme and consider the resulting derivative values to be located at the corresponding midpoints. In this way, boundaries between different conductors and dielectric materials can be resolved well. We discretize the electromagnetic fields according to the Yee method (see figure One possibility to numerically solve eqs. (27a) to (27d), is to consider equal grid spacings in a two-dimensional Yee grid (see figure For perfectly coaxial geometries, such an approach is suitable to resolve the electromagnetic fields since they vanish outside the transmission line. However, for arbitrary geometries, it is important to resolve far field contributions of the magnetic field to correctly compute the inductance according to eqs. ( In the next step, we discretize σA x and consider σi,j to be located at the same position as Φ i,j and J i,j z (see figure For computing the second derivatives of the electromagnetic potentials, we consider the Taylor expansions (33) and of a function f . We eliminate ∂ x f i,j to obtain and similarly for a vector potential component (36) Since the vector potentials are located between grid points, we replace h i,j x by h x /2 and, for the second derivative of the vector potential, obtain (37) Furthermore, we compute the term ∂ x (σ∂ x Φ) in eq. (27d) by considering central differences at midpoints: Finally, we can formulate eqs. (27a) to (27d) in terms of a staggered finite-difference Yee discretization on a non-uniform grid: . Non-uniform grid. An illustration of a non-uniform discretization along the x-axis. i-1,j+ and Our approach extends To numerically solve eqs. (39) to (42), we rewrite the discretized PDEs in terms of a linear system of equations where J = -iωμ (J s,x , J s,y , J s,z , ∇J s /(iωμ)), A = (A x , A y , A z , Φ), and We solve eq. ( After having determined the electromagnetic potentials by solving eq. ( Based on eq. ( and thus x We only have to compute the electric field for one frequency, because the capacitance is frequencyindependent and the conductance scales linearly with ω according to eq. ( to compute resistance and inductance as defined in eqs. ( We note that the outlined numerical framework can be used to simulate the electromagnetic fields (see eqs. ( Based on the numerical framework that we introduced in sections 3 and 4, we now examine the effect of deformations on transmission-line parameters. We first study the convergence characteristics of the proposed framework by considering a single copper strand and comparing our numerical results with the corresponding analytical theory. After this initial test, we simulate the frequency-dependence of transmissionline parameters for undeformed coaxial geometries and draw a comparison to the deformed case. Finally, we compare our simulations of deformed transmission lines with corresponding experimental data. To test the proposed numerical framework, we consider a single copper strand of radius r 1 and compare the numerically obtained values of the magnetic field with the ones predicted by analytic theory. For low frequencies, the current density within the wire is uniform and using Ampère's law yields where r is the distance to the center of the strand, I is the current flowing through the strand, and μ = μ 0 . For high frequencies, the current density is not uniformly distributed in the wire, but exhibits a higher density on its surface (skin effect). In this case, the electric field is where k = √ iωμσ, and I 0 and I 1 are the modified Bessel functions of first order and first and second kind, respectively. The current density is thus and by applying Ampère's law to eq. ( We now compare our simulation results with the analytical predictions of eq. ( To study the convergence characteristics of our method for different numbers of grid points along one axis N , we define the error where S = (i, j)|r i,j ≤ r c and r i,j = (x i ) 2 + (y j ) 2 . The cut-off radius is denoted by r c , and M is the number of considered points. We use the convention that the value of r i,j = 0 corresponds to the center of the cooper strand. In our subsequent analysis, we set r c = 2 mm. The analytical magnetic field values B i,j analytical correspond to the ones of eq. ( To examine the effect of deformations on transmissionline parameters, we first simulate an undeformed coaxial cable (see figure The expressions for r ≤ r 2 and r ≥ r 3 are exact. The magnetic field vanishes for r ≥ r 3 , because the currents in the inner and outer conductors are oriented in the opposite directions. For the magnetic field in -1 . Magnetic field of a single copper strand at low and high frequencies. In the left panels, we show the absolute value of the magnetic field of a single copper strand surrounded by air for frequencies f = 1 Hz and f = 1 MHz. The radius of the strand is r 1 = 0.48 mm. The current is set to I = 1 A and the number of grid points along one axis is N = 256. The convergence characteristics of our method is shown in the corresponding right panels. The parameters were set to r,copper = 1 the outer conductor, we use an approximation that assumes that the current density distribution is the same as for a wire of radius t. In figures 7a and 7c, we see that the simulated magnetic field values agree well with the predictions of eq. ( We set r = 2.25 and tan (δ) = 10 -3 . According to eqs. ( The skin effect is approximated by describing the conductors as hollow . Cross sections of an undeformed and a deformed coaxial cable. The left panel shows an undeformed coaxial cable with an inner conductor of radius r 1 . The outer conductor begins at radius r 2 away from the center and has thickness t. The outer radius of the outer conductor is thus r 3 = r 2 + t. An example of a deformed coaxial cable is shown in the right panel. The radius of the upper and lower half circles is r 4 . The center of these half circles is located at distance h away from the center of the inner conductor. cylinders with their thickness being determined by the corresponding skin depth. In the low frequency regime, the resistance and conductance per unit length are and for high frequencies We show the analytical approximations of R and L and the corresponding simulation results in figure To study the influence of deformations on transmissionline parameters, we now compress the coaxial transmission line between two rigid parallel plates (see figure where r 2 is the inner radius of the outer conductor of the undeformed cable, r 4 is the radius of the upper and lower half circles of the deformed cable, and h is the distance of the centers of the half circles from the center of the inner conductor (see figure . Magnetic field of a coaxial cable at low and high frequencies. In the left panels, we show the absolute value of the magnetic field of a coaxial cable with copper conductors surrounded by air for frequencies f = 1 Hz and f = 1 MHz. The current is set to I = 1 A and the current in the inner conductor flows in the opposite direction as the one in the outer conductor. The number of grid points along one axis is N = 1024. The convergence characteristics of our method is shown in the corresponding right panels. The remaining parameters are r 1 = 0.48 mm, r 2 = 1.45 mm, r 3 = 1.6 mm, r,dielectric = 2.25, σ dielectric = 0, tan (δ) = 10 -3 , r,copper = 1 of the undeformed coaxial cable is about 50 % larger than the impedance of the deformed one. According to eq. ( Our simulations show that the impedance of a deformed coaxial transmission line is significantly smaller as compared to the undeformed case (see figure TDR measurements are based on the injection of a test signal (e.g., a step function) into a transmission line. Reflections of the injected signal occur at impedance discontinuities. Each reflection in the transmission line leads to a wave which travels back to the TDR where the resulting voltage differences and corresponding time stamps are monitored. These monitored quantities contain information about the spatial distribution of reflection coefficients and impedances along the transmission line. For our experiments, we use a Campbell Scientific TDR100. The considered coaxial transmission line has a length of 9.70(1) m and its dielectric material is a thermoplastic elastomer with a relative permittivity of r,dielectric = 2.14. The number in parentheses is the uncertainty in the last digit. With a vise of length 6.0(1) cm, we apply a deformation 6.98(1) m away from the TDR. We denote the distance between the two parallel plates of the vise by d. We show an illustration of the deformed transmission lines that we considered in our simulations and experiments in figures 10a and 10b. For the considered transmission line, we did not observe any traces of plastic-deformation effects in the TDR curves. However, depending on the used dielectric and cable jacket materials, plastic deformations may occur and affect measurements. Under the quasi-TEM assumption, the transmission line is composed of undeformed and deformed segments. We have to compute the frequency dependence of the transmissionline parameters for both cross sections only once to simulate the corresponding TDR profile according to the telegraphers equations as defined in eqs. (1a) and (1b). To solve eqs. (1a) and (1b), we employ a method as described in In the case of concentric deformations, we can obtain the characteristic impedance from eqs. (55), (56), (58) and (61): To describe the effect of general deformations on Z, it is necessary to use a numerical framework such as the one we propose in this work. In particular, we find that the simulations are able to capture the functional dependence of voltage minimum and plate distance d in the deformed regions. The experimentally observed TDR profiles are therefore consistent with our numerical framework for the simulation of arbitrarilyshaped transmission-line cross sections. We have introduced a numerical framework to simulate arbitrarily-shaped transmission lines over a wide frequency range. Our method is based on solving a sparse system of linear equations and thus is suitable for fast computations. The numerically computed transmission-line parameters and electromagnetic field values agree well with corresponding analytical predictions. We considered the effect of geometric deformations, but our framework can be extended to also account for strain-induced permittivity variations. We tested the proposed framework by comparing simulation results with corresponding experimental data and found good agreement between the model predictions and the experimentally observed behavior. Our study may improve continuous sensing applications for the measurement of deformations and mechanical strains based on strain-sensitive transmission lines. Instead of mapping observed impedance values to concentric deformations and thus neglecting any further structural information as suggested in A possible extension of our work is to combine our framework with an inversion algorithm and determine estimates of the most likely deformations and mechanical strains given a certain TDR observation. This can contribute to improvements in corrosion detection To enhance the long-term sensing performance, it is important to limit material degradation by using materials with physicochemical properties that are suitable for a given application For instance, photochemical and oxidative degradation (i.e., chemical aging) can be limited by lowering the influence of air and light on the sensor. In addition, one should also consider the effect of the change of physical properties over time (i.e., physical aging) that may occur in the used polymer blends 