In-plane compressively strained α-Sn films have been theoretically predicted and experimentally proven to possess nontrivial electronic states of a 3D topological Dirac semimetal. The robustness of these states typically strongly depends on purity, homogeneity and stability of the grown material itself. By developing a reliable fabrication process, we were able to grow pure strained α-Sn films on InSb(100), without heating of the substrate during growth, nor using any dopants. The α-Sn films were grown by molecular beam epitaxy, followed by experimental verification of the achieved chemical purity and structural properties of the film's surface. Local insight into the surface morphology was provided by scanning tunneling microscopy. We detected the existence of compressive strain using Mössbauer spectroscopy and we observed a remarkable robustness of the grown samples against ambient conditions. The topological character of the samples was confirmed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, revealing the Dirac cone of the topological surface state. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy, moreover, allowed obtaining an improved insight into the electronic structure of the 3D topological Dirac semimetal α-Sn above the Fermi level. α-Sn is a low-temperature phase of tin which in the bulk state becomes stable below 13.2 • C. In contrast to its much more commonly known metallic allotrope β -Sn, bulk α-Sn is a semi-metal (zero band gap) with a pronounced covalent character. This material has attracted the researchers' attention since it has been theoretically predicted that α-Sn is the only elemental strong 3D topological insulator (TI) if subjected to uniaxial strain, which would open a bulk bandgap The growth of α-Sn thin films is associated with difficul-ties, since this allotrope of Sn is not stable in bulk at room temperature. To stabilize it by inducing the epitaxial growth of α-Sn, a suitable substrate with matching lattice constant is needed (acting as a crystallization seed). InSb(100) provides that matching and in addition introduces strain in the grown α-Sn film. However, the use of InSb substrates brings along challenges such as surface degradation (InSb is very volatile to surface oxidation) and thermal instability (InSb decomposes far below its melting point), complicating the preparation of the substrate surface by annealing. These challenges can be, to a certain extent, overcome by employing a procedure which includes combined ion-beam sputtering and thermal annealing in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) As α-Sn crystallizes in the diamond structure, the dangling sp 3 -bonds of the top most surface atomic layer of the (100) planes are unsaturated, and they are pointing diagonally (lying in the (110) plane). Such bond orientation leads to the formation of asymmetric dimers on the film surface, similar to the cases of Si(100) and Ge(100) Here we present the possibility of growing high-quality films of the 3D TDS α-Sn in its full elemental form, showing a great stability. A combined study of growth, structural and electronic properties of α-Sn is presented. We demonstrate the existence of strain with conversion electron Mössbauer spectroscopy (CEMS) and take a special closer look at the local surface morphology of the α-Sn films with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). We report topological surface electronic states in this type of samples using ARPES, and also provide a unique insight into the surface electronic properties above the Fermi level using scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS). Before the film growth, the high-quality single-crystal undoped (n-type) InSb(100) substrates (Wafer Technology Ltd.) were cleaned and polished in UHV environment using a multistep process (see Supplementary Material). This included several cycles of Ar + ion-beam sputtering, using two energy modes in order to clean and achieve a gentle polishing of the InSb(100) substrate surface. Every cycle of the ion-beam sputtering is followed by a short multi-step thermal annealing cycle. The preparation process was monitored by Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) and reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED). This multi-step preparation procedure resulted in atomically flat and contamination free InSb(100) surfaces, with maintained stoichiometry and the characteristic c(8 × 2) surface reconstruction (see Supplementary Material). This achievement was crucial for the subsequent successful α-Sn films growth. The α-Sn films were grown using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), by evaporating Sn from a Knudsen cell onto a InSb(100) substrate held at 5 • C. Some of the samples were also grown on slightly heated substrates (30, 50 and 80 • C) for the sake of comparison (see Supplementary Material). Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) was used on calibration samples in order to precisely determine the Sn deposition rate. In this way, a film thickness accuracy in the range of ±1 nm was achieved. Sn films of 10, 20 and 30 nm thickness were successfully grown while being monitored using RHEED. During the Sn deposition, RHEED oscillations were recorded (Fig. The chemical purity of the surface in the case of 20 and 30 nm thick Sn films grown at a substrate temperature of 5 • C is confirmed by AES (Fig. The STM topography images (Fig. In contrast to the shown LEED, RHEED and STM data (for non-heated substrates), the films grown on slightly heated InSb(100) exhibited disturbed epitaxial growth (see Supplementary Material). Figure (1) The significantly higher δ value for α-Sn in our samples, compared to bulk samples Excellent crystallinity and phase purity of the α-Sn samples in this study are crucial for the success of the further ex-situ measurements (ARPES and STS). The robustness of the samples allowed using Ar + sputtering to clean the surface before these measurements. Even if the samples were kept under normal ambient conditions for several weeks, it was still possible to remove contamination by low-energy Ar + sputtering, observing only Sn in the AES spectrum and fully recovering the two-domain (2 × 1) reconstruction of α-Sn, as reflected by LEED and RHEED (see Supplementary Material). This implies prominent stability and robustness of the sample surface, which seemingly becomes passivated in air, not leading to further degradation of the grown film. Combined with the previous reports on the enhanced temperature stability of strained α-Sn films (up to 170 • C) After growth, α-Sn film samples were exposed to ambient conditions and transferred to the ARPES setup of the BaDElPh beamline As in the case of the ARPES experiments, the same type of samples were, after growth, transferred in nitrogen atmosphere to the low-temperature STM/STS setup (4.5 K). The samples were carefully cleaned by Ar + sputtering and a stable tunneling current was achieved. The acquired STM topography images (Fig. The STS technique, in contrast to ARPES, can also probe the electronic states above the Fermi level. Hence it was possible to observe the existence of the surface state at the positive bias voltages in the acquired STS characteristics of our α-Sn samples (Fig. Finally, we further comment on the observed p-type electrical behavior in our ARPES and STS data (Fig. We successfully grew pure, strained 3D TDS α-Sn films on InSb(100). To achieve this, two crucial steps were required: modifying the substrate preparation procedure and lowering the temperature of the substrate during the film growth. The quality of the samples was examined using multiple complementary techniques, including STM, providing new insights into the α-Sn surface morphology. For the first time we report experimental evidence for the presence of compressive strain in α-Sn films by Mössbauer spectroscopy. We observed an excellent robustness of the film surface against ambient conditions, which could be crucial for possible future applications. We verified the existence of the topological electronic states in α-Sn using ARPES, and we characterized its electronic properties both below and above the Fermi level, using the STS technique. The MBE growth of the samples was performed by evaporating Sn (deposition/growth rate ≈ 10 Å/min) from a Knudsen cell (1170 • C) in UHV (< 5 × 10 -10 mbar). AES was conducted using an 8 kV electron beam while XPS was realized with the use of the Mg Kα X-rays (E = 1.254 keV). RHEED and LEED images were recorded using an electron beam energy of 10 keV and 48 eV, respectively. Screen voltage used for LEED measurements was 1 keV. In situ room temperature STM was performed using an Omicron Nanotechnology LS-STM setup (base pressure of 10 -10 mbar). The CEMS experiments were carried out at room temperature in a low-pressure acetone gas atmosphere, using a parallel plate detector and a 119m Sn/CaSnO 3 source. The spectra were analyzed relative to SnO 2 using the "VindaD" package XRD measurements were performed using an X'Pert 'PANalytical' X-ray diffractometer using Cu K α1 radiation The ARPES experiments (21 eV, 77 K) were performed at BaDElPh beamline Ex situ STM and STS were performed using an Omicron Nanotechnology LT setup operated at 4.5 K (base pressure of 10 -11 mbar). All of the STS dI/dV spectra were acquired using a sample bias voltage U = 0.5 V and a tunneling current I = 300 pA. The spectrum was averaged over 5 nm × 5 nm areas on top of the α-Sn grains and averaged over 6 grains. See supplementary material for the detailed information about the following: the InSb(100) substrate preparation process, XPS, LEED, RHEED and STM investigations of the α-Sn films grown on slightly heated InSb(100) substrates, the CEMS data of β -Sn grown on SiO 2 /Si substrate and the Ar + cleaning procedure for the α-Sn films grown at a substrate temperature of 5 • C. crotrone Trieste for providing access to its synchrotron radiation facilities. As stated in the main text, an appropriate substrate is needed to provide a seed for the growth of the alpha phase of Sn. In this case an InSb(100) substrate is used, which has a lattice constant of 6.479 Å. Comparing this value with the lattice constant of α-Sn (6.489 Å), we can assume that 0.14 % in-plane compressive strain is introduced in the α-Sn films grown on InSb(100) substrates InSb(100) substrates were cut to a size of approximately 7 × 7 mm 2 and prepared in UHV environment by consecutive cycles of Ar + sputtering and thermal annealing. The use of the low energy ion-beam mode (500 eV) allowed us to increase the sputtering time and successfully remove C and O contamination on top of the InSb(100), without introducing any irreversible damage to its surface. The higher energy ionbeam mode (1000 eV), used with the angle of incidence of 60 • , proved useful for the gentle polishing of the surface of the substrate. Specially defined short multi-step thermal annealing procedure (up to 300 • C) was used after every Ar + sputtering treatment (500 eV or 1000 eV), in order to reconstruct the surface of the substrate. Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) was systematically used before and after these cycles to monitor the chemical composition of the top layers of the substrate (Fig. During and after the above described in situ cleaning process, low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) and reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) were employed to monitor the surface reconstruction of the substrate. At the end of the preparation process, sharp LEED and RHEED images were acquired (Fig. Figure Figure Observed LEED and RHEED patterns (Fig. IV. MÖSSBAUER SPECTROSCOPY OF A REFERENCE β -Sn FILM Figure Now we present more details about the successful Ar + beam cleaning (after being exposed to ambient conditions) of the α-Sn films grown at a substrate temperature of 5 • C. This cleaning procedure was done under UHV conditions prior to the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) measurements. By us-ing the current of 6 × 10 -2 μA/mm 2 low-energy argon plasma (500 eV) during 1h, we were able to completely clean the 20 and 30 nm α-Sn films which were previously kept under ambient conditions for several weeks. Figure Importantly, after this cleaning treatment we also observe a complete recovery of the two-domain (2 × 1) surface reconstruction of α-Sn (Fig. 