The recently discovered APt3P (A=Sr,Ca,La) family of superconductors offers a platform to study frequency dependent superconducting phenomena as the electron-phonon coupling varies from weak to strong. Here we perform ab initio Eliashberg theory calculations to investigate two such phenomena, the occurrence of dip-hump structures in the tunneling spectra and the magnetic field induced coexistence of even and odd frequency superconductivity in these compounds. By calculating the superfluid density, we make predictions for the occurrence of the paramagnetic Meissner effect as a hallmark of odd frequency pairing. Our results provide a link between two seemingly uncorrelated aspects of even and odd frequency superconductivity and provide theoretical guidance for the experimental identification of bulk odd frequency superconductivity in this material's family. In his pioneering work on superconductivity A profound manifestation of Eliashberg theory is that the superconducting gap function acquires a frequency dependence due to the retarded nature of the pairing. Usually, the stronger the retardation, the stronger is the coupling between electrons and phonons (although not always An as yet less explored aspect of the frequency dependence of the gap function concerns the intriguing possibility of having Cooper pairing with wavefunctions that are odd in time, i.e. odd frequency superconductivity Clearly, this type of superconductivity is beyond the BCS picture but can naturally be described within Eliashberg theory Odd-frequency superconductivity has been previously proposed on several occasions In this respect, the recently discovered Here, taking as input the ab initio calculated electron, phonon and electron-phonon properties of the APt 3 P compounds, we numerically solve the Eliashberg equations for even and odd-frequency superconductivity in these materials. Starting with zero magnetic field properties, we accurately determine the STS spectra and predict how the dip-hump signatures vary across this family depending on the coupling strength. We subsequently perform calculations in the presence of magnetic fields and estimate the strength of the induced odd-frequency superconductivity across these compounds. Further, we calculate the superfluid density in the coexistence phase of ESS and OST pairing varying temperature and magnetic field and predict signatures of the paramagnetic Meissner effect for these materials. We observe that for the strong coupling material, SrPt 3 P, all effects are amplified while for the weak coupled, BCS-like compound LaPt 3 P, no significant dip-hump or paramagnetic Meissner effect are to be expected. Interestingly, collecting all of our observations, we find an intimate relation among the dip-hump structure, the paramagnetic Meissner effect, and the fraction of the ESS Cooper pairs that become OST with the applied magnetic field. We provide several predictions for future experiments that could ultimately lead to the identification of odd-frequency bulk superconductivity in these materials. The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present in detail the theoretical framework that we employed to obtain our results, namely Eliashberg theory in Matsubara and real frequency space and its extension to include magnetic fields, odd-frequency pairing and the derivation of the superfluid density in this case. In Section III.A we present solutions of the standard Eliashberg equations for the APt 3 P compounds and give a first discussion of standard phenomenology from weak to strong coupling. In Section III.B we present our real frequency Eliashberg solutions and our calculated tunneling spectra, focusing on dip-hump and related phenomena. In Section III.C we present calculated solutions of the Eliashberg equations including the effect of an external Zeeman field that have odd-frequency superconductivity as self-consistent solution. In Section III.D we present our calculations for the paramagnetic Meissner effect and discuss the possible link of our results with a single strong coupling ratio. Section IV concludes this article with a short discussion and outlook. Our starting point for a microscopic description of electrons, phonons, electron-phonon and Zeeman inter-actions in a metal is the Hamiltonian, where q = kk, σ denotes the electron spin and ν indexes the different phonon branches. In the above ξ k is the electron energy dispersion, h is an external magnetic field, ω q,ν are branch-resolved phonon frequencies, g ν q is the branch-resolved electron-phonon coupling vertex and V q is the electron-electron Coulomb interaction. As usual, c k (c † k ) and b qν (b † qν ) are the second quantized electron and phonon annihilation (creation) operators, respectively. It is worth mentioning that ξ k , ω q,ν and g ν q are quantities that can nowadays be reliably calculated ab initio with the use of Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Density Functional Perturbation Theory (DFTP) methods By introducing the Nambu spinor, that acts on the Pauli basis spanned by ρi ⊗ σj , with i, j = 0, 1, 2, 3, Eq. ( Rewriting the Hamiltonian in the so-called Nambu formalism whose 2 × 2 off-diagonal blocks have as elements anomalous propagators that describe scattering in the particleparticle channel and therefore superconductivity. As usual, Eq. (3) gives rise to the following coupled Dyson equations for the electron and phonon Green's functions, respectively, where Ĝ(0) (k, iω n ) is the full (bare) electron Green's function, D(q, iq n ) is the full and is the bare phonon Green's function, respectively. The free matrix propagator has the form, Ĝ0 Here, ω n = (2n + 1)πT , q n = 2nπT are fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequencies, respectively. The electron and phonon self-energies are denoted as Σ(k, iω n ) and Π(q, iq n ), respectively. Adopting now Migdal's theorem where ω n -ω n = q n . The Coulomb interaction is included in Eq. ( A. Zero magnetic field case: standard Eliashberg equations From Eq. ( where Z(k, iω n ), χ(k, iω n ) are the respective mass and chemical potential renormalization functions and φ e (k, iω n ) is the superconducting pairing function in the spin-singlet, even frequency channel. For non-doped systems whose electronic Density of States (DOS) does not vary rapidly around the Fermi level, it is possible to integrate out the electron degrees of freedom away from the Fermi level and by doing so, one obtains χ(k, iω n ) = 0 . Such an approximation is well justified for many superconductors where the electron-phonon interaction is almost isotropic Taking all discussed approximations into account, the electron self-energy now has the simple form, where ∆ e (iω n ) = φ e (iω n )/Z(iω n ) is the superconducting gap function and is the electron-phonon coupling that depends on the Eliashberg function, with N (0) the DOS at the Fermi level. For the APt 3 P family, the ab initio calculated Eliashberg function turns out to be almost proportional to the phonon DOS, F (Ω) = qν δ(Ω -ω qν ) In addition, ab initio methods for the calculation of μ * have been developed Equations ( where Once the real frequency gap function is calculated, we can compute the normalized super-conducting DOS using the following expression which is directly proportional to the normalized differential conductance measured in STS experiments. C. Eliashberg theory for the coexistence of even and odd frequency superconductivity in the presence of external Zeeman fields We now return to the full Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where Z(iω n ) and φ e (iω n ) are the same quantities as defined before. However, due to the presence of the magnetic field there are two additional self-energy terms: Σ h (iω n ) is the self-energy that renormalizes the external magnetic field and iφ o (iω n ) describes the possibility of realizing s-wave, odd-frequency spin triplet superconductivity From equations ( In the above, H(iω plete analogy with its even frequency counterpart. By inspection of Eqs. ( Setting ∆ e (iω n ) = 0 and ∆ o (iω n ) = 0 on the rhs of Eqs. where the left-hand-side gap functions are to be under-stood as induced due to the rhs counterparts being non-zero. Setting now the effective magnetic field H(iω n ) to zero on the rhs of above yields exactly zero after the ±-sum is performed. Thus, it becomes evident that even and odd frequency solutions can be induced and therefore coexist once a magnetic field is turned on. We shall see below that this is indeed the case in our numerical solutions of Eqs. ( We complete our Methodology section with the derivation for the expression of the magnetic penetration depth in the case of coexisting even and odd-frequency superconductivity under external Zeeman fields. The magnetic penetration depth, λ, is related to the superfluid density of the superconductor, ρ s , via ρ s ∝ λ -2 whereas ρ s is itself proportional to the so-called London kernel that describes the local, static current response to an applied transverse vector potential, J α = -Q αβ A β , with α, β = x, y Since Q(T, h) is a static response function, it can be calculated by taking the double derivative with respect to the vector potential of the system's free energy where F is the free energy that contains the effect of the magnetic field coupling to the electron orbital motion. The effect of the vector potential can be incorporated using the Peierls substitution k → k -qA, so that the bare Green's function becomes modified as: and the relevant expression for the superconducting free energy has the form, Using then Eqs. ( Assuming an isotropic medium and turning the k-sum into an energy integral, the second term of the above expression vanishes and we are left with: where υ F is the Fermi velocity. After performing the integral and rearranging the terms we arrive at the final expression, One can show that the above quantity is identically real and it scales as ), so that the odd-frequency term has a paramagnetic contribution. When the odd-frequency term dominates over the even frequency one, the London kernel and therefore the superfluid density becomes negative and the superconductor no longer exhibits diamagnetic properties. In other words, according to λ ∝ n , the penetration depth becomes purely imaginary and magnetic fields are no longer screened by the superconductor. Lastly, as a crosscheck, it is straightforward to show that setting h = Σ h (iω n ) = φ o (iω n ) = 0 in Eq. ( The sets of coupled self-consistent equations ( provides an estimate of the characteristic phonon energy scale A. Zero magnetic field solution of the Eliashberg equations on the imaginary axis In this section we present our zero magnetic field numerical solution of the Eliashberg equations using as input the DFT and DFPT data reported in Ref. The calculated Eliashberg functions for SrPt 3 P, CaPt 3 P and LaPt 3 P Note that CaPt 3 P and SrPt 3 P are The area of the functions (weighted by 1/ω) corresponds to the coupling strength so that SrPt3P is strongly coupled with λ = 1.33 due to strong retardation effects, while LaPt3P is in the weak-coupling BCS regime with λ = 0.57. Bottom: Calculated energy gap, ∆(ω ≈ 0, T ) in meV for SrPt3P, CaPt3P and LaPt3P. Observe the size differences with the gap of LaPt3P being an order of magnitude smaller than the other two. μ * can be expected for these compounds. LaPt 3 P has a different electronic structure, since La contributes one more electron to the electronic bands. In the same Table However, as we move from LaPt 3 P to SrPt 3 P, the spectral weight at low energies develops a pronounced peak which stems from the softening of the Pt in-plane breathing mode From the above, it is evident that the APt 3 P family of compounds presents a rare example of materials where the superconducting phenomenology not only varies from weak to strong coupling but also in a simple, intuitive way by increased retardation. This makes them ideal for studying the evolution of phenomena that depend on retardation and are therefore absent in weaklycoupled (BCS) superconductors, such as the dip-hump effect in the tunneling spectra and the occurrence of oddfrequency superconductivity as we will show below. As discussed above, evidence of strong coupling effects across the phosphide family can already be obtained by considering the gap over T c . Here, we make a decisive step forward by studying how the differential conductance behaves for these materials within Eliashberg theory. It is known that this quantity can deviate greatly from the one calculated within BCS theory for frequencies higher than the gap-edge. Specifically, the stronger the coupling is, the more structure dI/dV has as a function of frequency for ω > ∆ To obtain the tunneling spectra we first analytically continue the results of the previous section following the self-consistent analytic continuation method There are two well separated regions where ∆(ω) peaks for all three compounds. These correspond to the energies where the respective Eliashberg functions peak as shown in Fig. With the real frequency Eliashberg results, we proceed to calculate the normalized tunneling spectra from Eq. As seen in in Fig. For energies higher than the characteristic phonon energy scale, SrPt 3 P and CaPt 3 P exhibit dip-hump structures between 10-23 meV and 14-27 meV, respectively (see also insets of Fig. From Figs. Having analyzed in detail the predicted signatures of strong coupling superconductivity in the tunneling spectra for the phosphides, we now focus on a different aspect of the non-trivial frequency dependence in strongly coupled superconductors, which is the possibility of magnetic field induced odd-frequency pairing For even-frequency superconductivity ∆ e (iω n=1 ) coin-cides with the maximum gap and is therefore usually chosen as representative quantity for the order parameter. In the case of odd-frequency pairing, ∆ o (iω n=1 ) is small due to the oddness of the gap function and the odd gap acquires its maximum value at finite frequency. One can then select as an indicative order parameter the maximum value of the gap Our calculated (H,T) phase diagrams for ∆ e (iω n ) and ∆ o (iω n ) in the case of SrPt 3 P are shown in Fig. The calculated phase diagrams for CaPt 3 P and LaPt 3 P are shown in Figs. Here it should be mentioned that the orbital depairing effect is not included in our theory. Given that this is a tremendously difficult task below T c while also including odd-frequency pairing Inserting the results from the solution of Eqs. ( As a closing remark, we collect our findings from the previous sections regarding the location of the dip-hump structures in the tunneling, the strength of the magnetic field induced odd-frequency superconducting gap and the field region where the concomitant paramagnetic Meissner effect appears as the coupling strength varies from strong in SrPt 3 P to weak in LaPt 3 P in Table Even more interestingly, it connects the outcome of a zero magnetic field tunneling experiment with the formation of odd-frequency superconductivity at high magnetic fields. Whether the above trends are a peculiarity of the phosphides series or may have more a general application remains as an intriguing question for future investigation. TABLE II. Frequency dependent phenomena in relation to the strong to weak coupling phenomenology in the APt3P superconductors. For each material are shown the coupling strength λ, the logarithmic phonon frequency ω ln , the transition temperature Tc, the ratios 2∆(0)/Tc and Tc/ω ln , and, additionally, the ratio of the energy width of the dip-hump region over ∆(0), the ratio between the maximum magnetic field induced odd-frequency superconducting gap over it's even-frequency counterpart, and the relative difference between the paramagnetic critical field and the field where the paramagnetic Meissner effect sets in. All values were calculated based on the ab initio input from Ref. As one traverses the APt 3 P series of superconductors retardation and coupling strength vary from weak to strong, as is evidenced by the increasing 2∆(0)/T c and T c /ω ln ratios in Table Our predictions could serve as a multi-check exper-imental protocol for the ultimate detection of oddfrequency superconductivity in this family of superconductors. Thus, they pave a way towards the unambiguous observation of this so far elusive state in a bulk superconductor isoelectronic, and therefore an equal Coulomb potential