Strictly speaking, Newton's second law of motion is only an approximation of the so-called relativistic dynamics, i.e., Einstein's modification of the second law based on his theory of special relativity. Although the approximation is almost exact when the velocity of the dynamical system is far less than the speed of light, the difference will become larger and larger (and will eventually go to infinity) as the velocity approaches the speed of light. Correspondingly, feedback control of such dynamics should also take this modification into consideration (though it will render the system nonlinear), especially when the velocity is relatively large. Towards this end, we start this note by studying the state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics. We then investigate on how to employ the feedback linearization approach for such relativistic dynamics, based upon which an additional linear controller may then be designed. As such, the feedback linearization together with the linear controller compose the overall relativistic feedback control law. We also provide discussions on, e.g., controllability, state feedback and output feedback, as well as PID control, in the relativistic setting. Consider a feedback control system where the motion of a dynamical system moving in one dimension is to be controlled. When the velocity v of the moving object is far less than the speed of light c (i.e., when v ≪ c), which is the case for most such feedback control systems in practical use, Newton's second law of motion where m 0 denotes the rest mass which reduces to the classical Newton's second law. Accordingly, feedback control design for such dynamics should also take this inherent nonlinearity into account, particularly when its velocity is relatively high. In this note, we begin by introducing the state-space representation The rest of the note is organized as follows. Section II introduces Newton's second law of motion and Einstein's modification, i.e., the relativistic dynamics based on the special relativity. In Section III, we examine the state-space representation of the one-dimensional relativistic dynamics. We also propose the relativistic control design for such relativistic dynamics based on the feedback linearization method. We present discussions on various further topics such as controllability as well. Section IV is devoted to the three-dimensional case. Concluding remarks are provided in Section V. Note that parallel results have been presented in For simplicity, we first consider a one-dimensional acceleration system with mass m ∈ R. Denote its position as p (t) ∈ R, its velocity as v (t) ∈ R, and its acceleration as a (t) ∈ R. Denote the net force that is acted on the system as F (t) ∈ R. According to Newton's second law of motion In addition, by letting the following state-space representation where Based on (3) and ( According to the special relativity Still consider a one-dimensional acceleration system. Denote its position as p (t) ∈ R, its velocity as v (t) ∈ R, and its acceleration as a (t) ∈ R. Denote the net force that is acted on the system as F (t) ∈ R. According to the special relativity, Newton's second law of motion should be modified as Herein, c denotes the speed of light, while m 0 denotes the rest mass A detailed derivation of (5) can be found in, e.g., which in fact renders the system of (5) nonlinear; note that the system is (1) is linear. Moreover, when v (t) ≪ c, which reduces to (1) meaning that it will take infinite force to accelerate when the velocity approaches the speed of light In this section, we discuss the state-space representation and feedback control of relativistic dynamics. We first introduce the state-space representation of (5). By letting we obtain the following state-space representation of (5): where and This can be equivalently rewritten as where and it may be viewed as the state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics. We summarize the previous discussions of this subsection in the following proposition. Proposition 1: The state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics ( We will now linearize It can be verified that the transformation in ( In addition, both (15) and ( As a matter of fact, with transformations (15) and (16), the system from w (t) to y (t) will then be linear with its statespace model given by where We now summarize the previous discussions of this subsection in the following theorem. Theorem 1: If we choose w (t) as in ( As such, we may first design a controller for the linearized dynamics ( In this subsection, we provide a series of discussions concerning relativistic control. 1) Relativistic Controllability: Although the system of ( We next propose the notion of relativistic controllability to differentiate whether the system is controllable or not for |v (t)| < c. Definition 1: We say the system is relativistically controllable if the system input u (t) : [t 0 , T ] → R can be designed to steer any initial state x (t 0 ) with |v (t)| < c to any other final state x (T ) with |v (t)| < c in a finite time interval T < ∞. It may then be verified that although the system given in (13) and ( any initial state x (t 0 ) with |v (t)| < c can thus be steered to any other final state x (T ) with |v (t)| < c in a finite time for the system given by ( On the other hand, relativistic observability may be defined and analyzed in a similar spirit. 2) Relativistic State Feedback: If the state feedback controller for the system of ( then, noting also that the overall relativistic state feedback controller is given by We summarize the discussions on state feedback in the following definition. Definition 2: The relativistic state feedback controller is given by (22). 3) Relativistic Output Feedback: If the output feedback controller for the system of ( then, noting as well that with the overall relativistic output-feedback controller is given by We next summarize the discussions concerning output feedback in the following definition. Definition 3: The relativistic output feedback controller is given by (26). We now consider a special case of output feedback: PID control. Suppose that w (t) is designed using PID control as where Note that herein r is given in the controller frame; see discussions in Section III-C5 for more details. Meanwhile, As such, noting also that the overall relativistic PID controller is given by We summarize the discussions about PID control in the following definition. Definition 4: The relativistic PID controller is given by (31). Note that herein we assumed that r is a constant and thus ṙ = 0. If this is not the case, we can invoke the fact and obtain a similar result. It is worth emphasizing that in this note, the time t as well as a (t), v (t), p (t), F (t) and so on are all defined and measured in the controller frame, and the analysis and design are carried out in the controller frame as well due to length contraction For simplicity and clarity of the presentation, we separate the three-dimensional case completely from the previous onedimensional case, and we collect all the discussions concerning the three-dimensional case into this individual section. It will be seen that although the results for the three-dimensional case are organized in a way similar to that of the one-dimensional case, they are not trivial extensions and the implications (and accordingly the feedback control design as well) are more sophisticated. In particular, the direction of the acceleration is in general not the same as that of the net force in threedimensional relativistic dynamics, which is fundamentally different from the classical Newton's second law of motion in the three-dimensional case; for more details on this as well as how it might affect the overall control design, refer to the theoretical deviations in what follows. We now consider a three-dimensional acceleration system with mass m ∈ R. Denote its position as p (t) ∈ R 3 , its velocity as v (t) ∈ R 3 , and its acceleration as a (t) ∈ R 3 . Denote the net force that is acted on the system as F (t) ∈ R 3 . According to Newton's second law of motion It is clear that direction of a (t) will always be the same as that of F (t). In addition, by letting the state-space representation of the system may be obtained as where Herein, 0 3 denotes the zero matrix of dimension 3 × 3 while I 3 denotes the identity matrix of dimension 3 × 3. Again, (34) is only an approximation. Its relativistic modification will be presented as follows. Still consider a three-dimensional acceleration system. Denote its position as p (t) ∈ R 3 , its velocity as v (t) ∈ R 3 , and its acceleration as a (t) ∈ R 3 . Denote the net force that is acted on the system as F (t) ∈ R 3 . In addition, let c denote the speed of light, and let m 0 denote the rest mass, i.e., the mass when v (t) = 0. According to the special relativity, Newton's second law of motion should be modified as or equivalently, It is then implicated while This means that it is as if the system manifests different inertial resistances (different "masses"; see discussions in As such, if we let we may rewrite (38) and (39) as where f [x (t) , u (t)] is given by (44) (for the long equations such as (44), see the last page of this note) and This is equivalent to (46) (see the last page), where and it may be viewed as the state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics. We next summarize the discussions of this subsection in the following proposition. Proposition 2: The state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics (38) is given by ( We will now linearize where We now summarize the previous discussions of this subsection in the following theorem. Theorem 2: If we choose w (t) as in ( It is worth mentioning that if u (t) is splitted into a component u (t) parallel to 0 3 I 3 x (t) and the other u ⊥ (t) orthogonal to 0 3 I 3 x (t) while w (t) is also splitted into a component w (t) parallel to 0 3 I 3 x (t) and the other w ⊥ (t) orthogonal to 0 3 I 3 x (t), then it holds that while As such, it is as if the relativistic feedback linearization is composed of different transformations longitudinally and transversely, as a result of the fact that the "longitudinal mass" and "transverse mass" of the system are different We may then analyze the properties of the system of ( Definition 5: We say the system is relativistically controllable if the system input u (t) : [t 0 , T ] → R n can be designed to steer any initial state x (t 0 ) with |v (t)| < c to any other final state x (T ) with |v (t)| < c in a finite time. For another two examples, the relativistic state feedback controller may be obtained as (54) (see the last page), while the relativistic output feedback controller can be derived as (55) (see the last page). In this note, we have introduced the state-space representation of the relativistic dynamics and investigated how to design the relativistic feedback controller based on the feedback linearization of the relativistic dynamics. Potential future research directions include analysis and design of state estimation (e.g., relativistic observer, relativistic filtering such as relativistic Kalman filter) of the relativistic dynamics. 