We analyze the evidence of Majorana zero modes in nanowires that came from tunneling spectroscopy and other experiments, and scout the path to topologically protected states that are of interest for quantum computing. We illustrate the importance of the superconductor-semiconductor interface quality and sketch out where further progress in materials science of these interfaces can take us. Finally, we discuss the prospects of observing more exotic non-Abelian anyons based on the same materials platform, and how to make connections to high energy physics. Topological superconductivity is distinct from other kinds of superconductivity in subtle yet profound ways. What makes it a crown jewel among topological phases is its capacity to harbor non-Abelian (i.e. neither fermionic nor bosonic) states In fact, a traditional way of introducing topological superconductivity is through Majorana zero modes which are edge, end or defect states The genesis of Majorana modes takes place when the spinless superconducting ring is cut open, and thereby transformed into a one-dimensional wire. Let us do this gradually by inserting a barrier into the ring (Fig. While spinless fermions do not exist, one strategy to obtain an effectively spinless superconductor is to spinpolarize all electrons. But this destroys conventional spin-singlet superconductivity making the most common superconductors not suitable. A workaround is to induce superconductivity in a spin-polarized semiconductor by proximity to a spin-singlet superconductor (Fig. In order to localize MZMs it is necessary to implement a one-dimensional system, such as a nanowire (Fig. Superconducting proximity effects in low dimensional semiconductors have been studied for a two decades prior to the first 2012 wave of Majorana experiments The field took a surprise swing when resonances that similarly did do not shift from zero energy in magnetic field were identified due to Andreev bound states (ABS) in quantum dot devices (Fig. In light of these realizations, more nuanced attributes predicted for Majorana ZBCPs were considered in experiments on improved nanowire devices which aimed to eliminate or separate out trivial ABS. Signatures such as 2e 2 /h quantized conductance, topological phase diagram in Zeeman energy and chemical potential, nearzero bias oscillations of conductance resonances, degree of zero-bias pinning for different length segments, closing of the apparent superconducting gap, etc. were considered While collectively ZBCPs were explored extensively, each individual experiment demonstrates only one or two of the predicted signatures of MZM, while not at the same time finding all expected features. Given that the similarities between ABS and MZM are so striking, the prospects of coming up with a clear single-figure 'smoking gun' evidence of MZM is unlikely. Instead, a comprehensive set of internally consistent measurements performed on the same sample will be needed to unambiguously establish the existence of Majorana modes. One advantage of the super-semi system is in the large number of control parameters that allow for elaborate testing of the MZM hypothesis: through gate voltages, magnetic field magnitude and orientation, device geometry, materials and interface tailoring. One property which may, if clearly demonstrated, definitively distinguish ABS from MZM is the non-local nature of Majorana wavefunctions, which is the correlation between left and right MZM. Majorana nonlocality has been indirectly explored in two-terminal devices Topological superconductivity at superconductorsemiconductor interfaces is strongly dependent on the materials and interface properties. In contrast with conventional superconductivity, topological superconductivity is highly sensitive to any disorder, including scattering on non-magnetic impurities One of the recent highlights with large potential for the future is the development of two dimensional superconductor-semiconductor heterostructures. Clean interfaces are created between an s-wave superconductor (typically aluminum) and a two-dimensional electron gas with strong spin-orbit coupling within the ultrapure molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) environment (Figs. Sustained progress will rely on deepening our understanding of electronic properties specific to superconductor-semiconductor interfaces using a combination of theory and also spectroscopy tools beyond electron transport. It is expected that the established strengths of MBE growth of semiconductor heterostructures, including in-situ diagnostics, high chemical purity, interface control with monolayer precision may be leveraged to yield even lower defect density and interfaces maximally optimized for MZM generation. Undeniably, what continues to fuel interest in topological superconductivity is the predicted non-Abelian statistics of Majorana zero modes, and its potential utility for quantum information processing Coherence of a Majorana qubit depends on the magnitude of the induced superconducting gap which is a measure of topological protection. It is also important to avoid non-equilibrium effects known as quasiparticle poisoning, which lead to fluctuations in charge parity and thereby scramble the two states of a Majorana qubit The same superconductor-semiconductor interfaces inspire rich topological physics that goes beyond Majorana zero modes, and may offer pathways to universal topological quantum computing Topological superconductivity with the addition of Coulomb interactions has been a highly motivating topic for theorists and may lead to interesting experiments. Here we highlight an Ising topological phase What lies ahead is a unique opportunity to realize and study supersymmetry on a semiconductor chip Coulomb interactions in a one-dimensional chain lead to phase fluctuations, inviting the possibility of a topological version of a superconductor-insulator transition. It has recently been shown theoretically Another exotic phase deserving of attention is the socalled Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model Clearly the effort to realize Majorana modes, quite apart from the potential for quantum computation, will likely have broader implications for deeper concepts in quantum many-body physics. The path forward lies through improved understanding of materials science of super/semi interfaces, advanced quantum engineering and methodical partnership between experiment and theory.