the generation and measurement of optical vortex (OV) are the basis for a variety of related applications. However, the special case of high-order OVs has not been sufficient addressed yet. Herein, a generation and measurement method of high-order OV via utilizing the CP is investigated. In the experiment, we generate OVs with 60 l  , 20 p  and successfully measure OVs with 200 l  , 0 p  , where experimental results agree well with simulation outcome. On this basis, the intensity distributions of LG and HG beams (corresponding to the generation and measurement) versus waist radius of initial light beams is discussed. This work provides an alternative method to generate or measure high-order OV, which will facilitate applications in optical micro-manipulation, quantum entanglement and rotation speed detection. An Optical vortex (OV) with the spiral wavefront is a kind of structured light which carries an orbit angular momentum (OAM) per photon of l , where topological charge l (TC) and radial node p (RN) are two key parameters thereof. In 1989, Coullet et al. proposed a kind of optical field bearing some analogy with the superfluid At present, the commonly used generation ways of OV are based on the spiral phase plate (SPP), the spatial light modulator (SLM) or fibers Many methods have been proposed to measure the TCs of OV and relevant measurement methods can be mainly sorted into three categories Especially, similar to the measurement of the large TCs, there are no ideal method to measure the large RNs even if the method based on the mode conversion could handle this but it's still hampered by the drawbacks which are same as the measurement of OV with large TCs as described earlier. Recently, the cross phase (CP), a kind of phase structure, has been involved in LG(Laguerre-Gauss) beams and HG(Hermite-Gaussian) beams that opens up a new horizon for generation and measurement of high-order OV LG beams are a set of solutions to the paraxial wave equation in cylindrical coordinates while HG beams are another set of solutions in Cartesian coordinates. By adding the CP, the interconversion between two beams above can be done after propagating at a certain distance, which means these two kinds of beams are converted to non-eigenmodes, performing in radially dependent rotation during the propagation. This interconversion can be engaged in generation and measurement of LG beams. The generation and measurement via CP are not confined to LG beam, but also suitable for arbitrary high-order OV. For simplicity and without loss of generality, typically, we only consider the situation that the generation and measurement of high-order OV happen in the interconversion between LG beams and HG beams. The method with the CP and the method of the mode conversion are both based on the astigmatism principle, while the former avoids the use of optical elements such as cylindrical lenses but holograms instead, which is more conducive to the precise manipulation of the light field and greatly evades the harsh requirements of relative position for cylindrical lenses. In this paper, we investigate a generation and measurement method of high-order OV through utilizing the CP, which has been experimental achieved and the experimental results agree well with simulation outcomes. The distributions of LG and HG beams (corresponding to the generation and measurement) versus waist radius of initial light beams is discussed. To our best knowledge, it has not been reported on the experimental generation and measurement of high-order OV via the CP. The form of the CP  in Cartesian coordinates ( , ) x y is where the coefficient u controls the conversion rate, and the higher the value of u , the faster the conversion rate. The azimuth factor  characterizes the rotation angle of converted beams in one certain plane. It is noteworthy that Eqs.(1) could be simplified to uxy and we only take this typical situation into count in this article. On one hand, we can regard that the light field carrying the CP is a new type of light field. On the other hand, we can say that the CP is attached to the light field at a certain plane in the process of propagation. we would like to choose the latter view We firstly consider the generation of high-order OV in the situation where the HG beams carry the CP. When 0 0 z  , the light field can be expressed as where 0 0 ( , ,0) x y denotes the initial plane,   H denotes the Hermite Gaussian polynomial, n and m are mode numbers, 0  is the waist radius. According to the Fresnel diffraction integral, when the light field mentioned above propagates a certain distance z , the output can be expressed that where ( , , ) x y z denotes the observation plane, Under the condition of the coefficient 1 m  , 0 n  and the 0   0.2mm, the generation of high-order OV via HG beams with the CP is simulated in Fig. Akin to the generation of high-order OV in the situation where the HG beams carry the CP (cf. Fig. where l p L denotes the Laguerre polynomial. The relationship between parameters of HG and LG beam is where l is the TC and p denotes the RN of the generated HG beams. By substituting Eqs.(4) into Eqs.( The experimental setup for generation and measurement of high-order OV by utilizing the CP is shown in Fig. Based on the setup shown in Fig. Then we consider the measurement case of high-order OV in the situation where the LG beams carry the CP with the coefficient 50 u  . The LG beams used in the experiment are simulated in Fig. where 2 / k    , f denotes the focal length and  denotes the wave length of the incident light. Thus, if / (2 ) k f is set to u , we can derive the expression of u as However, actually, one CP cannot be simply equivalent to a cylindrical lens. The phase term of a cylindrical lens can be expressed as Eqs.( which can be expanded into The term   Namely, a vertically placed cylindrical lens can be equivalent to one spherical lens plus one CP which is rotated by 45 degrees, which is the reason why one CP cannot be simply equivalent to a cylindrical lens. We noticed that the waist radius of initial HG beams does affect the generation of high-order OV. An interesting finding is that the larger the radii, the larger the ellipticity. Fig. where D is all the diameter of a certain LG beam, the ellipticity  of generated LG beams versus the waist radii of initial HG beams is calculated, as shown in Fig. Similarly, the choice of the waist radius will also have an effect on the measurement of highorder OV. The larger the waist radius of LG beams, the greater the slope of the converted HG beams. Fig. We try to change the parameters of HG and LG beams in the generation and measurement of high-order OV to verify our explanations above. It shows that changing the HG mode number does not affect the ellipticity of resulting LG beams while keeping the waist radius constant. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, a generation and measurement method of high-order OV via utilizing the CP is investigated and the schematic of generating a hologram by the complex amplitude modulation is introduced. In the experiment, we generate OVs with 35 l  , agree well with simulation outcome. On this basis, the distributions of LG and HG beams (corresponding to the generation and measurement) versus waist radius of initial light beam is discussed. It is found that waist radius does have an impact on the intensity distributions: the larger the waist radius of initial beams, the greater the slope of the converted HG beams and the larger the ellipticity of the converted LG beams. However, once the radius is settled, the shape (the ellipticity or slope) of the intensity distributions remains unchanged even though other parameters are altered.