The properties of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures are drastically altered by a tunable moiré superlattice arising from periodic variations of atomic alignment between the layers. Exciton diffusion represents an important channel of energy transport in semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). While early studies performed on TMD heterobilayers have suggested that carriers and excitons exhibit long diffusion lengths, a rich variety of scenarios can exist. In a moiré crystal with a large supercell size and deep potential, interlayer excitons may be completely localized. As the moiré period reduces at a larger twist angle, excitons can tunnel between supercells and diffuse over a longer lifetime. The diffusion length should be the longest in commensurate heterostructures where the moiré superlattice is completely absent. In this study, we experimentally demonstrate that the moiré potential impedes interlayer exciton diffusion by comparing a number of WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructures prepared with chemical vapor deposition and mechanical stacking with accurately controlled twist angles. Our results provide critical guidance to developing "twistronic" devices that explore the moiré superlattice to engineer material properties. Van der Waals (vdW) materials provide exciting opportunities to create new heterostructures with vastly expanded choices of materials as the strict requirement of lattice matching between adjacent layers has been lifted A type-II band alignment is typically found in a TMD hetero-bilayer (hBL), leading to rapid electron-transfer to one layer and hole-transfer to the other layer, and the formation of interlayer excitons (IXs) In this paper, we investigate the influence of the moiré potential on IX diffusion in WSe2/MoSe2 hBLs using spatially-and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements. We carefully compare experiments performed on two types of samples either grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or created by the mechanical exfoliation and transfer (MET) with a wellcontrolled twisted angle. IX diffusion length in the rotationally aligned CVD grown hBL exceeds the size of the heterostructure and is estimated to be a few microns. In contrast, no IX diffusion beyond the excitation laser spot is observed in the stacked hBL with ~ 1° twist angle, suggesting that IXs may be localized by the moiré potential. In another MET sample with ~ 3.5° twist angle, IXs diffusion is observed but with a short diffusion length ~ 1 μm despite nearly ~ 100 fold longer lifetime than that in the CVD grown sample. These experiments suggest that IX diffusion is highly controllable via engineering the moiré superlattice and provide valuable guidance to extensive effort in searching for IX Bose-Einstein condensate We briefly describe the samples investigated here. We focus on WSe2/MoSe2 hBLs with Rstacking style or near this stacking style where a deep moiré potential is expected IX diffusion is investigated using spatially-and spectrally resolved PL in all three samples as shown in Fig. IX diffusion can be quantitatively analyzed using the following equation where n(r, t) is the IX density, D 89 is the diffusion coefficient, μ is the exciton mobility, u < is the IX interaction energy, τ 89 is the IX lifetime, and G(r, t) is the exciton generation term, respectively (more details in SI). To avoid the complications arising from exciton-exciton annihilation and repulsive interaction at high excitation density This solution is a convolution between the Gaussian profile of incident laser and the modified consistent with the previous experiments The absence of the moiré pattern in sample A is directly proven by a high-resolution STEM image as shown in Fig. Recognizing that the quality of hBLs can vary, we repeated these measurements on different samples and on different locations of the same sample (more data in SI). All experiments yielded consistent observations. The longest diffusion length is always observed in the CVD grown commensurate WSe2/MoSe2 hBLs. A finite diffusion length of ~ 1 μm is observed in a stacked hBL with a relatively large twist angle while no diffusion beyond the laser spot is observed in stacked hBLs with a small twist angle (θ = ~ 1°). The strikingly different IX diffusion in CVD and MET hBLs is most naturally explained by taking into account the absence/presence of the moiré potential. While there are other differences between CVD grown and MET hBLs, e.g., substrates and defect density, these differences cannot account for the different IX diffusions. The CVD samples are not grown on an atomically smooth substrate and likely exhibit higher defect density. Both factors should lead to a shorter diffusion length than the MET samples The difference between two MET hBLs arises from the expected changes in moiré periods and measured exciton lifetimes. For a moiré crystal with a small periodicity, excitons may tunnel between different supercells, and diffusion is observable over a long IX lifetime. For a moiré crystal with a relatively large periodicity, the tunneling between different supercells is exponentially reduced. IXs become localized within a moiré supercell due to a reduced lifetime and decreased velocity. Our conclusion is qualitatively consistent with previous experiments Moiré potential has been demonstrated to have a profound influence on the electronic and optical properties of vdW heterostructures. However, its role in exciton diffusion has been largely ignored in previous studies on hBLs consisting of TMD monolayers with rather different lattice constants or with larger twist angles For the CVD grown sample A, PL measurements were taken at T = 4 K inside a cryogen-free lowvibration cryostat equipped with a three-axis piezo-positioner, and an objective lens (N.A. = 0.82) mounted inside the cryostat. The excitation sources at 632 nm (750 nm) were provided by a He-Ne (continuous-wave, CW Ti: Sapphire) laser. The PL signal was then sent to a 0.75 m monochromator and detected by a nitrogen-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. For TRPL measurements, a 635-nm pulsed laser diode (~90 ps width, 40 MHz repetition rate) was used as the excitation source, and the PL was detected by a fast avalanche diode. The PL decays were recorded using the time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique with a temporal resolution of ~100 ps. Slightly different experimental conditions for measurements performed on sample B and C can be found in the SI. Single-crystal WSe2/MoSe2 hBLs were grown on sapphire substrates by CVD following a previously developed one-step growth process During the growth, the flow rates for H2/Ar gas were set to 6/60 sccm. For STEM measurements, the samples were capped with poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) (950K A4) by spin-coating and then baked at 100°C for 60 min. The WSe2/MoSe2 hBLs were then transferred onto a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grid by PMMA-based wet transfer procedures. ADF-STEM images were obtained using a spherical aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope (JEOL-2100F). The detailed growth and characterization processes can be found in ref. We obtained the phase image using the tapping mode of AFM (NX10, Park Systems) with a conductive cantilever (PPP-EFM) at ~ 28 °C and ~ 68% relative humidity. To obtain the image, the tip was brought to the sample as close as possible, i.e., if the setpoint was lowered further, a large oscillating noise appeared due to the tip-sample interaction. The hexagonal pattern was only observable in selected areas of the sample due to surface contaminants. The inverse FFT of an AFM phase image was obtained using XEI (Park Systems) software. 