We use neutron scattering to study vanadium (hole)-doped LiFe1-xVxAs. In the undoped state, LiFeAs exhibits superconductivity at Tc = 18 K and transverse incommensurate spin excitations similar to electron overdoped iron pnictides. Upon vanadium-doping to form LiFe0.955V0.045, the transverse incommensurate spin excitations in LiFeAs transform into longitudinally elongated in a similar fashion as that of potassium (hole) doped Ba0.7K0.3Fe2As2, but with dramatically enhanced magnetic scattering and elimination of superconductivity. This is different from the suppression of the overall magnetic excitations in hole doped BaFe2As2 and the enhancement of superconductivity near optimal hole doping. These results are consistent with density function theory plus dynamic mean field theory calculations, suggesting that vanadium-doping in LiFeAs may induce an enlarged effective magnetic moment S ef f with a spin crossover ground state arising from the inter-orbital scattering of itinerant electrons. The flexible spin states of Fe 2+ ions are interesting due to its extensive distribution, from the lowermost mantle in the earth The total moment sum rule within a Heisenberg model for system with spin S requires m 2 = (gμ B ) 2 S(S + 1), where g ≈ 2 is the Landé g-factor, when magnetic scattering is integrated over all energy and momentum space within the Brillouin Zone (BZ) While it is easy to dope holes in BaFe 2 As 2 family of iron pnictides by substituting Ba 2+ cation with K 1+ , replacing Fe with Cr/Mn introduces impurities and/or disorders instead of holes We report the magnetic excitations in hole-doped nonsuperconducting LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As, which has nearly nested hole-electron Fermi surfaces with d xz/yz and d xy orbital characters, respectively, and exhibits non-Fermi-liquid behavior We first plot in Figure To compare the magnitude of spin fluctuations in LiFeAs, LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As, and LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As, we calculate in Fig. The differences between LiFeAs, LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As, and LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As can be further confirmed in Fig. Figures Theoretically, the reduction of effective spins in iron pnictides/calcogenides can be understood in either an itinerant or a localized moment picture. The former considers Fe 2+ ions embedded in a Fermi sea of conduction electrons In insulating copper oxides, local moments are locked into the S = 1/2 state by the elimination of doubly occupied states with a large charge gap , of LiFeAs and 10% hole doped LiFe 0.967 V 0.033 As by DFT+DMFT d xy orbital character To conclude, we performed time-of-flight neutron scattering measurements on LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As and did DFT+DMFT calculation on the corresponding 10% hole-doped LiFeAs system. We found that the low energy spin fluctuations are influenced by itinerant electrons following the same doping dependence of spin excitations in BaFe 2 As 2 . More importantly, both the experimental and theoretical results suggest that magnetic excitations are dramatically enhanced by doping holes with Vanadium. We discuss the possible origin of such enhancement and argue that the inter-orbital scattering between d xz/yz and d xy orbitals are bad for superconductivity and may dynamically mix the spin states of Fe 2+ ions. We grew single crystals of LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As by self-flux method Neutron Scattering experiments Our inelastic neutron scattering measurements on LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As were carried out on the neutron time-of-flight Four-Dimensional (4D) Space Access Neutron Spectrometer (4SEASONS) at Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility (MLF), Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) Background subtraction and data analysis The background subtraction processes were shown in Fig. 6 Absolute neutron-scattering intensity normalization We performed our inelastic neutron scattering on LiFeAs and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As at the wide Angular-Range Chopper Spectrometer (ARCS) and Cold Neutron Chopper Spectrometer (CNCS) at Spallation Neutron Source, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and on LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As at Four-Dimensional (4D) Space Access Neutron Spectrometer (4SEASONS), Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility (MLF), Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC). The neutron scattering intensity of the LiFeAs and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As have already been normalized by standard vanadium sample. The neutron scattering intensity of LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As is normalized by phonon intensities since a standard Vanadium is unavailable during the experiment. As discussed in the main text, V-normalization is actually less reliable in V-doped LeFeAs because of the unknown amount of V-containing flux in the sample. Therefore, phonon normalization using the same phonon for LiFeAs, which we re-analyzed from using previous data, and V-doped LiFeAs should be more reliable than the standard Vanadium scan when comparing the results from different spectrometers We identified two phonons, one is around (1, 1) and the other originates from (2, 0). The incident neutron energy is almost the same, about 39 meV for LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As and 35 meV for LiFeAs and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As. The onedimensional (1D) cuts of these phonons are shown in Fig. Alternatively, the incoherent nuclear scattering can be used as another reference to normalize the data. In Fig. More importantly, we emphasize that even with this smaller scale ratio, we can still observe the enhancement of magnetic scattering in LiFe 0.955 V 0.045 As Transport results Figure DFT+DMFT calculations We use density functional theory combined with dynamical mean field theory (DFT+DMFT) 