Nonlinear interactions between phonon modes govern the behavior of vibrationally highly excited solids and molecules. Here, we demonstrate theoretically that optical cavities can be used to control the redistribution of energy from a highly excited coherent infrared-active phonon state into the other vibrational degrees of freedom of the system. The hybridization of the infrared-active phonon mode with the fundamental mode of the cavity induces a polaritonic splitting that we use to tune the nonlinear interactions with other vibrational modes in and out of resonance. We show that not only can the efficiency of the redistribution of energy be enhanced or decreased, but also the underlying scattering mechanisms may be changed. This work introduces the concept of cavity control to the field of nonlinear phononics, enabling nonequilibrium quantum optical engineering of new states of matter. Phonon modes describe the vibrational behavior of atoms that experience a harmonic increase of the potential energy when they move away from their equilibrium positions in a crystal lattice. When the dipole moment of a phonon mode is resonantly driven with the electric field component of an ultrashort laser pulse, the amplitudes of the vibrations become so large that anharmonic corrections to the potential energy are essential. The vibrational dynamics of the solid are then governed by nonlinear interactions between the phonon modes which allow for the electronic correlations in the material to be modified, leading to emergent states of matter that do not exist in equilibrium At the same time, developments in the field of strong light-matter coupling have made it possible to engineer the optical properties of materials in optical cavities. An electromagnetic mode sustained in the cavity hybridizes with optically active states of the material to form polariton states as shown schematically in Fig. We therefore synthesize the physics of nonlinear phononics and strong light-matter coupling in this work to overcome the frequency mismatch in nonlinear phononic processes. Specifically, we demonstrate that we can tune the polaritonic splitting of an IR-active phonon mode in the cavity such that one of the polariton branches is pushed into resonance with nonlinearly coupled Raman-active phonon modes. As a result, we are able to greatly enhance the efficiency of energy redistribution through the nonlinear interaction and even change the underlying process entirely. We sketch the principle of our technique for the example of a parametric downconversion process in Figs. We begin by analyzing the dominating nonlinear phononic mechanisms of energy redistribution from a coherently excited IR-active phonon mode to a Ramanactive one, of which we provide an overview in Table Here, Ω IR and Ω R are the eigenfrequencies of the IR and Raman-active phonon modes in 2πTHz, and Q IR and Q R are their respective amplitudes in Å√ amu, where amu is the atomic mass unit. c, d, and e are the phonon coupling coefficients in meV/( Å√ amu) n , where n is the order of expansion in the phonon amplitudes Nonlinear phononic mechanisms can be classified by those linear and squared in the Raman-active phonon amplitude. In the linear case, the square of the IRactive phonon amplitude Q 2 IR acts as an effective driving force on the Raman-active phonon mode. If Q IR ∼ A IR sin(Ω IR t) follows a sinusoidal shape with a decaying amplitude A IR , then Q 2 IR ∼ A 2 IR [1 -2 cos(2Ω IR t)] possesses one static component and another oscillating at twice the frequency. Depending on whether the IRactive phonon mode has a higher or smaller frequency than the Raman-active one, this coupling leads to either difference-frequency (DF) or sum-frequency ionic Raman scattering (SF-IRS), see Table , see Table In order to evaluate the interaction of the phonon modes with the cavity, we consider a quasi-1D model, in which a slab sample is placed at position z 0 into a cavity formed by two parabolic mirrors at positions z = 0 and L, see Fig. We begin by considering Ampere's law in the Lorenz gauge expressed via the transverse vector potential A: where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, c the speed of light, and J is a volume current density generated by the IRactive phonon mode. J is related to the macroscopic polarization P generated by the IR-active phonon mode by where we have assumed the mode effective charge Z IR of the IR-active phonon mode, polarized along the unit vector e p , to be time independent, and where V c is the volume of the unit cell associated with Z IR . (Note that for very strong driving, the mode effective charge can be dependent on the phonon amplitude where k m = mπ/L, m is a natural number, and A m,p are time-dependent, but spatially invariant amplitudes. The two transverse polarizations p = {x, y} of the cavity mode are degenerate. In the following, we pick the relevant polarization direction aligned with the dipole moment of the IR-active phonon mode and take into account only on the fundamental cavity mode, m = 1, whose frequency ω 1 = πc/L is assumed to be close to Ω IR . We justify this assumption a posteriori, as our results turn out to remain unchanged when we take into account higherorder cavity modes. Integrating over the spatial coordinate z, the equation of motion coupling the IR-active and cavity mode can be written in a scalar form, with where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, and ∆z is the thickness of the slab. More details of the derivation and the general form including multiple cavity modes are provided in the Supplementary Material Here is the electric field component of the terahertz pulse, where E 0 is the peak electric field, ω 0 is the center frequency, and τ is the full width at half maximum duration of the pulse We now investigate how the coherent nonlinear phonon dynamics change when we tune the cavity mode in and out of resonance with the IR-active phonon mode in the geometry shown in Fig. We demonstrate our technique at the example of a 15 THz IR and a 6.75 THz Raman-active phonon mode that are detuned by ∆Ω IR /(2π) = 1.5 THz such that Ω IR -∆Ω = 2Ω R . We numerically solve Eqs. ( In order to separate the contributions from the mechanisms of difference-frequency ionic Raman scattering and parametric downconversion, we show the FFT spectra F IR and F R of the respective phonon modes at the points marked "OFF" and "ON" in Figs. 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. [THz] Cavity frequency [THz] 3. 7. 9. 11. 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. [THz] Cavity frequency Raman scattering when the cavity is out of resonance. When the cavity is tuned into resonance, this static component decreases, but a large peak at its eigenfrequency of Ω R /(2π) = 6.75 THz emerges. The cavity-induced resonance becomes even more distinct when looking at the time-dependent evolutions of the phonon amplitudes Q IR and Q R in Figs. The IR-active phonon mode shows the common evolution of a resonantly driven and slowly decaying phonon mode in Fig. We now investigate the case of a 7.5 THz IR and a 16.5 THz Raman-active phonon mode that are detuned by ∆Ω IR /(2π) = 0.75 THz such that 2(Ω IR -∆Ω IR ) = Ω R . We show the numerical results for an excitation of the phonon modes by a terahertz pulse with a peak electric field of E 0 = 2 MV/cm and a duration of τ = 500 fs in Fig. We find that the term dQ IR Q 2 R is negligible in this regime, as the dynamics remain unchanged when we set d = 0. The features of the FFT spectra F IR and F R of the respective phonon modes in Figs. The IR-active phonon amplitude Q IR in Fig. The ultimate goal of the technique presented here is to broaden the range of materials in which resonant nonlinear phononic processes can be exploited to yield nonequilibrium states of matter. Concepts in cavity control of nonlinear processes enable a new pathway for quantum optical engineering of new states of matter. The analysis presented here is applicable to resonant coupling mechanisms between IR-active phonon modes and other fundamental excitations in solids and molecules. In particular, we anticipate that it will be used to enhance processes involving the amplification of Goldstone excitations 