Inspired by the seminal, ground-breaking work of Abrikosov in 1957, we developed a new approximation to the interaction between two widely separated superconducting vortices. In contrast with Abrikosov's, we take into account the finite size of the vortices and their internal magnetic profile. We consider the vortices to be embedded within a superconducting, infinitely long hollow cylinder, in order to simplify the symmetry and boundary conditions for the mathematical analysis. We study this system in the context of a magnetic Ginzburg-Landau functional theory, by solving for the magnetic field profile inside each vortex, as well as in the superconducting region, subject to physical boundary conditions inspired by the classical analogue of two mutually inducting coils. Under isothermal conditions, the effective force between these vortices is given by the gradient of the Helmholtz free energy constructed from the Ginzburg-Landau functional. From our results, we explicitly show that, in agreement with well established theoretical arguments and experiments, the interaction between widely separated vortices is repulsive in this context, and their equilibrium positions are constrained by the fluxoid's conservation. Moreover, we find that the equilibrium positions of the vortices' centers are stable due to the convexity of the Helmholtz free energy profile. Remarkably, the effect of the boundaries of the region over the effective interaction between the vortices is important in the chosen geometric configuration. In conventional superconductivity,the phenomenological magnetic Ginzburg-Landau model reproduces the macroscopic behavior of superconducting samples near their critical temperature T c Superconducting vortices are related to the flux quantization (or fluxoid quantization in non-bulk samples) phenomena predicted by F. London & H. London in 1950 Abrikosov shows in his seminal work of 1957 where δ 2 ( x) is a two dimensional delta-function describing the concentration of the fluxoid at the center of the vortex. The explicit solution for Eq. ( with K 0 (x) the modified Bessel function of the second kind and zero order. For κ >> 1, if x 1 and x 2 are the locations of the small vortices, the magnetic field at the position x in the system is given by the superposition of the magnetic fields generated by each of them: In this approximation, the vortex energy per unit length is and combining Eq. ( The interaction between widely separated vortices must be repulsive in Type II superconductivity, since the contribution of the magnetic energy is bigger than the effects of the quantum currents We suggest a new approximation to the interaction between two single superconducting vortices, inside a superconducting domain with the shape of an infinitely long hollow cylinder. We choose this geometry for two reasons: First, it represents the cross section of a long and thin superconducting coaxial cable, which is suitable for experimental applications. Second, but not less important, the cylindrical symmetry of the domain simplifies the calculations related to the boundary conditions, which uniquely define the magnetic field at each vortex and in the superconducting region and, as we show later, are essential in determining the effective force. We propose an ansatz for the order parameter, and we solve the magnetic field inside each vortex as well as inside the superconducting region, subjected to physical boundary conditions. The main feature of this approach is to recognize the contribution of the magnetic structure of each vortex and the superconducting region. In this sense, our model employs the electrodynamic analogue for the problem of two mutually inducting coils, where the magnetic flux inside the first coil is in part produced by the second coil, and viceversa. The magnetic field inside each vortex is determined by the boundary conditions related to the regularity of the magnetic vector potential, the continuity of the magnetic field inside and outside each vortex, and a self consistent solution for the magnetic field and the magnetic flux inside each vortex. We neglect the small physical effects of the vortices over the coaxial cylindrical boundaries, in order to preserve mathematical simplicity. Besides, each vortex is assumed to be submitted to the magnetic field imposed by the superconducting region and by the other vortex. Under isothermal conditions, the effective force between the small vortices is determined as the gradient of the Helmholtz free energy. Due to the complexity of the analytical expressions, a numerical evaluation of these results is shown in Fig. Our article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present the context of the problem and we describe our strategy for its solution. In Section 3, we calculate self-consistently the magnetic vector potential and the magnetic field inside each vortex and within the superconducting region. In Section 4, we show the general form of the Helmholtz free energy profile and the effective force acting on each vortex. In Section 5, due to the complexity of the expressions for the energy profile and the force, we develop a numerical evaluation of our analytical results, with plots that illustrate the physical behavior of the vortices. Let us consider a superconducting region with the shape of an infinitely long hollow cylinder, with internal and external radii R 0 < R, respectively. We further assume that this sample contains two identical single vortices, with radius ξ in the κ >> 1 limit. An external magnetic field H 0 is applied to the sample, with H p ≤ H 0 ≤ H u . Here, H p and H u are the first and the upper critical magnetic fields, respectively, for type II superconductivity. These critical fields are straightforward to obtain in the κ >> 1 limit The local coordinate system for each vortex (k = 1, 2), as illustrated in Fig. with and where we have defined the unitary vectors θk = -sin Two vortices inside a superconducting, hollow cylindrical domain. The unit vectors î, ĵ, k, describe the usual basis in cartesian coordinates. Considering the following definitions: the effective force acting on the vortex Ω k , under isothermal and reversible conditions, is given by In equation with the functional and the gradient in the coordinates defined by Eq. (6b), For each vortex Ω k , for k = 1, 2, the order parameter ψ k and the magnetic vector potential A k depend on the cylindrical coordinates (s k , φ k ), while inside the hollow cylindrical region Ω \ (Ω 1 ∪ Ω 2 ), we denote these quantities with the k = 0 index. Looking for a saddlepoint of the energy functional, we obtain the Ginzburg-Landau equations for the order parameters ψ k on each region Similarly, a saddle point of the functional with respect to the vector potential components δF leads to a generalization of Ampere's law Solutions for Eq. ( Using Eq. ( Here, c 1 and c 2 are constants that depend on the boundary conditions (see Appendix A). On the other hand, the magnetic field must be continuous at r = R 0 and r = R. If we take into account that the external magnetic field is constant outside Ω, and assuming that the effects of each vortex at the coaxial cylindrical boundaries are sufficiently small to be neglected for κ ≫ 1 (ξ ≪ λ < R-R 0 ), then the boundary conditions are Then, in terms of the auxiliary functions 2H 0 λ the constants c 1 and c 2 are given by 3.2. Order Parameter and Magnetic Field for Each Vortex. In terms of the cylindrical coordinates related to each vortex (s k , φ k ), for k = 1, 2, we develop a self consistent solution for the magnetic field at each vortex, that determines their internal and external profile. In this sense, we assume that each vortex is subjected to a superposition of the magnetic field produced by the superconducting, hollow cylindrical region, and the external profile of the magnetic field generated by the other vortex. The mathematical expression for this statement will be presented in detail when we describe the continuity and boundary conditions for the magnetic field in Section 3.3. Vortex. The magnetic field generated by each vortex in the region s k > ξ, as a solution of Eq. ( Here, for k = 1, 2, n k is the number of fluxoids piercing each vortex. Besides, d k,E and e k,E are constants that depend on the boundary conditions (for explicit expressions, see Appendix D), as will be discussed in the next section. Internal Profile of the Magnetic Field at Each Vortex. For s k < ξ and k = 1, 2, the order parameter that describes its internal structure can be approximated, in the κ >> 1 limit, for a winding number n k This ansatz shows that the density of superconducting electrons is zero at the center of each vortex, s k = 0, and increases to ψ ∞ at s k = ξ. With Eq. ( or, in terms of w k = s k λ -1 , for k = 1, 2, one obtains: Equation ( where d k,I and e k,I are constants that depend on the boundary conditions (for explicit expressions, see Appendix D), as will be discussed in the next section. 3.3. Boundary Conditions. for Each Vortex. We must discard divergent contributions at s k = 0 in Eq. ( 3.3.2. Continuity of the Magnetic Field. The magnetic field at the boundary of each vortex ∂Ω k , for k = 1, 2, must be continuous. Furthermore, by selfconsistency, its value is given by the superposition of the magnetic field generated by the superconducting domain and the magnetic field produced by the other vortex, Here, we defined of all possible balls of infinitesimal radius ǫ, centered at any point at the boundary ξ k ∈ ∂Ω k . From the system of coordinates displayed in Fig. where ξ k = s k | s k =ξ , following the definition in Eq. (6b). Here, we have considered that in the κ ≫ 1 limit, ξλ -1 ≪ 1, and hence Therefore, the continuity conditions stated in Eq. (31) can be reduced to the system of equations Self Consistent Magnetic Flux. The selfconsistent continuity conditions for the magnetic field stated in Eq. (31), whose approximate expression for κ ≫ 1 is given by Eq. (34), imply similar considerations for the vector potential at the boundary of each vortex. It is convenient to express those conditions in terms of the circulation of the vector potential along the boundary of each vortex By Stokes' theorem, these equations state that the magnetic flux piercing the surface of each vortex is given by the superposition of the flux due to the field of the superconducting region, and the flux produced by the other vortex, in clear analogy with the classical model of two conducting, mutually inducting coils. For κ >> 1 and ξ << | a k |, by similar considerations as those leading to Eq. (34), the boundary conditions in Eq. ( The boundary conditions established in Eq. (34) and Eq. ( With the order parameters, magnetic vector potentials and magnetic fields determined before, the Helmholtz free energy for the model can be expressed using Eq. where the first term F B does not depend on the sign of the winding numbers n k , while the second term F V does depend on it. (See the computations of the relevant terms in Appendix E). Using Eq. ( where we defined If we analyze the radial component of the effective force on each vortex, defined as we notice that f R for n 1 = -n 2 , thus yielding an effective attractive interaction for opposite winding numbers, and an effective repulsive interaction for identical winding numbers, respectively. However, since the total effective force is not only determined by this contribution, but also from the f R Bk interaction defined in Eq. ( 5.1.1. Surface Energy. We remark that, in the limit κ ≫ 1, the surface energy can be estimated at H = H C , where H C is the thermodynamic critical field. Following the analysis shown in As we can see from Eq. (40), σ ns ≪ 0. Therefore, it is energetically favourable for the system to maximize its interfacial surface, and hence to avoid for the vortices to attract each other and eventually coalesce. Hence, the thermodynamic analysis of the problem is consistent with an effective repulsive force between the vortices, as will be shown and discussed in the examples in Section 5.5. Besides, the previous integral and the explicit forms of the magnetic fields and the order parameters show that the magnetic terms are the most important contribution to the surface energy (For more details, see Appendix F). Experimental Considerations. In Type II superconductivity, suitable values for the critical magnetic fields are given by H p = 10 2 G and H u = 10 5 G Concerning the typical sizes of the coaxial region, we notice that in order to reproduce the effect of the London penetration depth, the internal and the external radii of the sample must satisfy R -R 0 > 2λ. In addition, since we are exploring the strong influence of the magnetic profile in the superconducting region on the effective interaction between the vortices, we cannot impose a big difference between the radii of the coaxial cylinders. For all the previous reasons, we illustrate the model in the case R 0 = 4λ and R = 8λ. We represent the plots in terms of the dimensionless parameters: where A = πξ 2 is the area of each vortex. In order to understand the effective force over each vortex, it is instructive to first analyze the radial pattern of the current in the superconducting region Ω. Here, we can identify two contributions to the total current: where J s is the superconducting current and J d is the diamagnetic current. Firstly, for J s and using the order parameter ψ 0 = ψ ∞ e iθ : For the diamagnetic current J d , we have: In terms of the dimensionless variables defined in Eq. (41), the total current is reduced to the expression In Fig. V k and f R Bk , respectively. As already discussed in section 4, the component f R V k depends on the sign of the winding number n k , and thus reverts its relative sign for the case n 1 = -n 2 = 1 (see Fig. V k of the force (as defined in Eq. (39) and Eq. ( From equation (38), we calculate the interaction between vortices with the relative tangential component of the force, for a = a 1 = a 2 : Now, with the change of variables: Eq. ( The behavior of the force between vortices is illustrated in the vector field plot displayed in Fig. For 4.0 < a ′ < 6.5, corresponding approximately to the condition a < R 0 + (R -R 0 )/2, the influence of the outer boundary is weak as compared with the interaction between vortices, and hence Fig. Here, a critical case can be appreciated when χ -→ 1, corresponding to coalescence of the vortices. This limit cannot be reached in our model due to the assumption that the vortices are widely separated. From equation (48) and Fig. For γ * = -1, the radial equilibrium positions of the vortices, a * 1 and a * 2 , change with the size of the coaxial cylindrical boundaries. In order to illustrate the dependence between these variables, we keep fixed R 0 = 4λ and we change R, for the cases n 1 = n 2 = 1 and n 1 = 1, n 2 = -1, respectively. Figure In conclusion, our model predicts the repulsive interaction between single vortices in extreme Type II superconductivity, in agreement with the experiments and the theoretical developments until today. These results are obtained by solving for the magnetic profile everywhere, including the interior of each vortex. Our model preserves the convex shape of the general Ginzburg-Landau free energy, thus allowing for the search of an equilibrium configuration of the system as an absolute minima of the functional. We find that the angular equilibrium positions of the vortices are symmetrically related to cylindrical geometry of the sample, and the radial equilibrium positions are constrained by the fluxoid's conservation. In general, vortices maximize their distance when they come to the equilibrium, in correspondence with an effective repulsive force. This last conclusion is also supported by a direct calculation of the thermodynamic surface free energy within our model. , after dropping negligible terms, (B.1) can be reduced to The particular solution for (B.2) is given by Besides, the homogeneous solution for (B.2) is Therefore, using the fundamental relation B = ∇ × A, the magnetic vector potential and the magnetic field inside vortex k, for k = 1, 2, is given by Appendix C. Self Consistent Magnetic Flux A vortex of radius ξ << λ, located in r = a, is affected by the magnetic flux generated by an external magnetic potential of the form A = A(r) θ. Then, the magnetic flux through the vortex, with internal coordinates (s, φ) and internal magnetic vector potential A v = A v (s) φ, satisfies the condition: In the limit ξ << a, the last equation can be written as Therefore, we conclude that Defining the following function for the distance between the vortex's centers: and the auxiliary functions: the constants related to the boundary conditions can be written as: In fact, the Helmholtz free energy functional only contains terms that depend on a 1 and a 2 , and are related to the magnetic vector potentials and the magnetic fields of each vortex. Therefore, for k = 1, 2, the first relevant term is: Substituting the internal magnetic field profile of the vortex, we have In the same spirit of Considering the geometrical structure of the domain Ω, we have In the limit κ >> 1, if we define the following integrals as : R 0 λ uI 0 (u)K 0 (u)du, (F.3) In terms of the expressions above, we define the parameters γ 1 π = R 2 0 -R 2 -2λ(R + R 0 ) + 2(J 1 -J 2 + J 3 ), (F.6) In terms of the definitions above, the surface energy is: Equation (F.8) can be approximated to a value that does not depend of each vortex's position, as presented for instance in < 0. 2(|nk |+1) k