Focusing waves inside inhomogeneous media is a fundamental problem for imaging. Spatial variations of wave velocity can strongly distort propagating wavefronts and degrade image quality. Adaptive focusing can compensate for such aberration, but is only effective over a restricted field of view. Here, we introduce a full-field approach to wave imaging based on the concept of the distortion matrix. This operator essentially connects any focal point inside the medium with the distortion that a wavefront, emitted from that point, experiences due to heterogeneities. A time-reversal analysis of the distortion matrix enables the estimation of the transmission matrix that links each sensor and image voxel. Phase aberrations can then be unscrambled for any point, providing a full-field image of the medium with diffraction-limited resolution. Importantly, this process is particularly efficient in random scattering media, where traditional approaches such as adaptive focusing fail. Here, we first present an experimental proof-of-concept on a tissue mimicking phantom, and then apply the method to in vivo imaging of human soft tissues. While introduced here in the context of acoustics, this approach can also be extended to optical microscopy, radar or seismic imaging. Light travelling through soft tissues, ultrasonic waves propagating through the human skull, or seismic waves in the Earth's crust are all examples of wave propagation through inhomogeneous media. Short-scale inhomogeneities of the refractive index, referred to as scatterers, cause incoming waves to be reflected. These backscattered echoes are those which enable reflection imaging; this is the principle of, for example, ultrasound imaging in acoustics, optical coherence tomography for light or reflection seismology in geophysics. However, wave propagation between the sensors and a focal point inside the medium is often degraded by: (i ) wavefront distortions (aberrations) induced by long-scale heterogeneities of the wave velocity, or (ii ) multiple scattering if scatterers are too bright and/or concentrated. Because both phenomena can strongly degrade the resolution and contrast of the image, they constitute the most fundamental limits for imaging in all domains of wave physics. Astronomers were the first to deal with aberration issues in wave imaging. Their approach to improve image quality was to measure and compensate for the wavefront distortions induced by the spatial variations of the optical index in the atmosphere; this is the concept of adaptive optics, proposed as early as the 1950s Conventional adaptive focusing methods generally require the presence of a dominant scatterer (guide star) from which the signal to be optimized is reflected. While it is possible in some cases to generate an artificial guidestar, the subsequent optimization of focus will nevertheless be imperfect for a heterogeneous medium. This is because a wavefront returning from deep within a complex biological sample is composed of a superposition of echoes coming from many unresolved scatterers (resulting in a speckle image), and its interpretation is thus not at all straightforward. A first alternative to adaptive focusing, derived from stellar speckle interferometry The reflection matrix has already been shown to be a powerful tool for focusing in multi-target media Spatially-distributed aberrations have not been addressed under a matrix approach until very recently In this paper, we develop the distortion matrix approach for acoustic imaging. In view of medical ultrasound applications, this requires a method that can go beyond imaging specular reflectors in order to tackle the more challenging case of random scattering media. Ultrasonic wave propagation in soft tissues gives rise to a speckle regime in which scattering is often due to a random distribution of unresolved scatterers. Apart from specular reflections at interfaces of tissues and organs, the reflectivity of the medium can be considered to be continuous and random. In this paper, we demonstrate: (i ) how projecting the reflection matrix into the far-field allows the suppression of specular reflections and multiple reverberations (clutter noise), enabling access to a purely random speckle regime, (ii ) how, in this regime, the farfield correlations of D enables discrimination between and correction for input and output aberrations over each isoplanatic patch, (iii ) how a position-dependent distortion matrix enables non-invasive access to the transmission matrix T between the plane wave basis and the entire set of image voxels, and (iv ) how a minimization of the entropy H enables a quantitative measurement of the wave velocity (or refractive index) in the field-of-view. Throughout the paper, our theoretical developments are supported by an ultrasonic experiment using a tissuemimicking phantom, and further applied to in vivo ultra-sound imaging of the human body. Due to its experimental flexibility, ultrasound imaging is an ideal modality for our proof-of-concept. Nevertheless, the distortion matrix approach is by no means limited to one particular type of wave, but can be extended to any situation in which the amplitude and phase of the medium response can be recorded between multiple inputs and outputs. This study thus opens important perspectives in various domains of wave physics such as acoustics, optics, radar and seismology. The sample under study is a tissue-mimicking phantom with a speed of sound c p = 1542 ± 10 m/s. It is composed of a random distribution of unresolved scatterers which generate an ultrasonic speckle characteristic of human tissue (gray background in Fig. Our matrix approach begins with the experimental acquisition of the reflection matrix R using an ultrasonic transducer array placed in direct contact with the plexiglass layer (Fig. We first apply a temporal Fourier transform to the experimentally acquired reflection matrix to obtain R uθ (ω), where ω = 2πf is the angular frequency of the waves. To project R uθ (ω) between different bases, we then define free-space transmission matrices, P 0 (ω) and G 0 (ω), which describe the propagation of waves between the bases of interest for our experimental configuration. Their elements correspond to the 2D Green's functions which originate in the plane wave basis where H (1) 0 is the Hankel function of the first kind. k = ω/c is the wave number. x and z describe the coordinates of the image pixel positions r in the lateral and axial directions, respectively (Fig. where the symbols * , † and × stands for phase conjugate, transpose conjugate and matrix product, respectively. Equation (2) simulates focused beamforming in postprocessing in both emission and reception. For broadband signals, ballistic time gating can be performed to select only the echoes arriving at the ballistic time (t = 0) in the focused basis. This procedure is described in more detail in Ref. A coherent sum is then performed over the frequency bandwidth δω to obtain the broadband focused reflection matrix where ω ± = ω 0 ± δω/2 and ω 0 is the central frequency. Each element of R xx (z i ) (z) contains the signal that would be detected by a virtual transducer located at r out = (x out , z) just after a virtual source at r in = (x in , z) emits a brief pulse of length ∆t = δω -1 at the central frequency ω 0 . Importantly, the broadband focused reflection matrix creates virtual transducers which have a greatly reduced axial dimension compared to the monochromatic focusing of R xx (z i ) (z, ω) (Eq. 2). This significantly improves the accuracy and spatial resolution of the subsequent analysis. Note that this matrix could have been directly formed in the time domain from the recorded matrix R uθ (t). A coherent sum of the recorded echoes coming from each focal point r could be performed to synthesize virtual detectors inside the medium. In practice, this would be done by applying appropriate time delays to the recorded signals In a recent work, the broadband focused reflection matrix R xx (z i ) (z) was shown to be a valuable observable to locally assess the quality of focusing and to quantify the multiple scattering level in the ultrasonic data Figure Figure Removing multiple reverberations with the far-field reflection matrix Reverberation signals are a common problem in medical ultrasound imaging, often originating from multiple reflections at tissue interfaces or between bones in the human body. Here, we observe strong horizontal artifacts at shallow depths of the image (Fig. x out (mm) x in (mm) x out (mm) To project the reflection matrix into the far-field, we define a free-space transmission matrix, T 0 , which corresponds to the Fourier transform operator. Its elements link any transverse wave number k x in the Fourier space to the transverse coordinate x of any point r in a supposed homogeneous medium: Each matrix R xx (z) can now be projected in the far field via the matrix product where the symbol stands for matrix transpose. The resulting matrix R kk (z) = [R(k out , k in , z)] contains the reflection coefficients of the sample at depth z between input and output wave numbers k in and k out . An exam-ple of far-field reflection matrix R kk (z) is displayed at depth z = 25 mm in Fig. where Γ(z) = [Γ(x, x , z)] describes the scattering processes inside the medium. In the single scattering regime, Γ(z) is diagonal and its elements correspond to the medium reflectivity γ(x, z) at depth z. T(z) is the true transmission matrix between the Fourier basis and the focal plane at depth z. Each column of this matrix corresponds to the wavefront that would be recorded in the far-field due to emission from a point source located at r = (x, z) inside the sample. In SI Appendix (Section S1), a theoretical expression of R kk is derived in the single scattering regime under an isoplanatic hypothesis. Interestingly, the norm-square of its coefficients R(k out , k in , z) is shown to be independent of aberrations. It directly yields the spatial frequency spectrum of the scattering medium at depth z: where γ(k x , z) = dxγ(x, z) exp(-ik x x) is the 1D Fourier transform of the sample reflectivity γ(x, z). In the single scattering regime, the matrix R kk displays a deterministic coherence along its antidiagonals We can take advantage of this sparse feature in R kk to filter out signals from reverberation, independently of aberrations induced by the plexiglass (see Methods). Then, the inverse operation of Eq. 6 can be applied to the filtered matrix R kk to obtain a filtered focused reflection matrix: Fig. In Ref. In Fig. where We refer to H(z) as the focusing matrix To isolate and correct for these aberration effects, we build upon a physical phenomenon often referred to as the memory effect To isolate the effects of aberration in the reflection matrix, R xx (z) is first projected into the Fourier basis in reception using the free-space transmission matrix T 0 : Since the aberrating layer under consideration is laterally invariant, we might expect the memory effect to cause long-range correlation in R kx (z), i.e. repeating patterns amongst the rows and/or columns of R kx (z). However, this is not the case: as sketched in Fig. which, in terms of matrix coefficients, yields The matrix D = [D(k out , r in )] is the distortion matrix defined over the field-of-illumination (FOI) mapped by the set of input focusing points r in . It connects any input focal point r in to the distorted component of the reflected wavefield in the far-field. Note that, unlike conventional adaptive focusing techniques, no bright scatterer is used as a guide star in our matrix approach. In fact, this is why a normalized reflection matrix Rkx is considered in Eq. 11. All input focusing points r in have the same weight in D, regardless of their reflectivity. Hence, the eight bright targets contained in the phantom (Fig. do not play the role of guide stars. Compared to R kx (Fig. where the matrix S is the set of incoherent virtual sources re-centered at the origin such that x = x -x in represents a new coordinate system centered around the input focusing point. These virtual sources are spatially incoherent due to the random reflectivity of the medium, and their size is governed by the spatial extension of the input focal spot. The physical meaning of Eqs. 13 and 14 is the following: Removing the geometrical component of the reflected wavefield in the far-field as done in Eq.11 is equivalent to shifting each virtual source to the central point x in = 0 of the imaging plane. D is still a type of reflection matrix, but one which contains different realizations of virtual sources all located at the origin (Fig. The next step is to extract and exploit the correlations of D for imaging. In the specular scattering regime, D is dominated by spatial correlations in the input focal plane C can be decomposed as the sum of a covariance matrix C and a perturbation term δC: C will converge towards C if the incoherent source term S of Eq. 13 is averaged over enough independent realizations of disorder, i.e. if the perturbation term δC tends towards zero. In fact, the intensity of δC scales as the inverse number M of resolution cells in the FOV In the present case, M = L x L z /(δxδz) ∼ 10000, where (L x , L z ) is the spatial extent of the overall FOV and (δx, δz) is the spatial extent of each resolution cell (see Fig. Let us now express the covariance matrix C theoretically. This allows C to be written as (see SI Appendix, Section S4) where Γ H is diagonal and its coefficients are directly proportional to |H(x)| 2 . Γ H is equivalent to a scattering matrix associated with a virtual coherent reflector whose scattering distribution corresponds to the input focal spot intensity |H(x)| 2 (Fig. By the van Cittert-Zernike theorem This operation is illustrated by Fig. In contrast to the operator Γ H of Eq. 17, Γ δ is a scattering matrix associated with a point-like (diffractionlimited) reflector at the origin (Fig 4E ). A reflection matrix associated with such a point-like reflector is of rank 1 Beyond the isoplanatic case, the eigenvalue decomposition of Ĉ can be written as follows: Σ is a diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues σ i in descending order: U is a unitary matrix that contains the orthonormal set of eigenvectors U i . In a conventional iterative time reversal experiment We now apply our theoretical predictions to the experimental ultrasound imaging data. Figure Shannon entropy yields the least biased estimate possible for the information available, i.e. the data set with the least artifact for a given signal-to-noise ratio. Thus, it can be used here as an indicator of how many eigenstates are required to create an adequate ultrasound image without being affected by the perturbation term in Eq.16 The normalization of U p ensures an equal contribution of each spatial frequency in Tp . Then, the transmission matrices Tp can be used to project the reflection matrix into the focused basis: Figures The resulting ultrasound images, calculated from the diagonal elements of R p , are displayed in Figs where the symbol • • • denotes an average over the variable in the subscript (which here is the output transverse wave number k out ). The Strehl ratio ranges from 0 for a completely degraded focal spot to 1 for a perfect focusing. The maps of Strehl ratio corresponding to the confocal images I p are shown in Figs. 5E, G and I. These maps enable direct visualization of the isoplanatic area in which each different aberration correction is effective, allowing quantitative confirmation of our previous qualitative analysis of confocal images. Moreover, S p enables an estimation of the focus quality at each point of the image. Compared to the initial value S 1 displayed in Fig. The results displayed in Fig. The first path towards full-field imaging is based on a minimization of the distortion entropy H(σ i ) (Eq. 21). The logic is as follows: (a) In the speckle regime, there is a direct relation between the Shannon entropy H(σ i ) of Ĉ and the number N p of isoplanatic patches supported by the FOI (shown in the previous section). (b) When the propagation model inside the FOI gets closer to reality, the number N p of isoplanatic patches within the FOI decreases (see SI Appendix, Fig. Figure Note that while the entropy H 1 (σ i ) displays a minimum, it does not reach the ideal value of 1. A first reason for this is the perturbation term in Eq. 16: experimental noise and an insufficient number of input focal points can hinder perfect smoothing of the fluctuations caused by the random sample reflectivity. Another potential reason is that imperfections in the probe or plexiglass layer could induce lateral variations of the aberrations upstream of the FOV. To obtain a spatial map of the speed of sound and a full-field image of a heterogeneous medium, one would need to repeat the same entropy minimization process described above, but over a finite and moving FOI. The value of c which minimizes the entropy would be the speed of sound averaged over this FOI. However, a compromise must be made between the spatial resolution (FOI size) and the precision of the speed of sound measurement (see SI Appendix, Section S5). Moreover, note that for highly-resolved mapping, this approach may prove prohibitively computationally expensive. The second route towards full-field imaging is more general, and goes far beyond the case of spatiallyinvariant aberrations. It consists in locally estimating each coefficient of the transmission matrix T that links the far-field and focused bases. The idea is to consider a sub-distortion matrix D (r p ) centered on each pixel r p of the image over a limited FOI: where W (r) is the spatial window function The extent (∆x, ∆z) of this FOI should be subject to the following compromise: It should be large enough to average the fluctuations linked to disorder, but sufficiently small to enable a local measurement of aberrations (see SI Appendix, Section S5). Here, the dimensions of this window have been empirically set to ∆z = 5 mm, with ∆x = 25.6 mm (the lateral extent of the image). For each image pixel r p , a normalized correlation matrix Ĉ (r p ) can be deduced from D (r p ). The first eigenvector U 1 (r p ) yields a local aberration phase law for each pixel of the image. It can then be used to build an estimator T of the global transmission matrix T: T is then used to compensate for all of the phase distortions undergone by the incident and reflected wavefronts. Mathematically, this is accomplished by applying the phase conjugate of T to both sides of the far-field reflection matrix R kk : The diagonal elements of the full-field reflection matrix R F yield the confocal image I F (r) displayed in Fig. We now apply the aberration correction technique to a dataset acquired in vivo from a human calf (see Methods). The uncorrected image is shown in Fig. To correct for aberration, we apply the technique described in previous sections. Due to the heterogeneity of the tissues examined, it can be expected that there are multiple isoplanatic patches, which should not be assumed to be laterally invariant or of the same spatial extent. For full-field imaging, we thus extend the FOI scanning method to an iterative approach that consists in gradually decreasing the spatial extent of the FOI. Specifically, this entails correcting as in Eq. 27, recalculating a new D, and performing a new correction with a smaller window size. The process is iterated until optimal focusing is achieved -maximization of the Strehl ratio for each focal point. Four window sizes were used: W (∆x, ∆z) = [(10, 20), After correction (Fig. Unlike conventional adaptive focusing whose efficiency range is limited to a single isoplanatic patch (Fig. x (mm) -10 0 10 x (mm) M δ = δx/δx 0 . This is why the FOI can be reduced after each iteration of the aberration correction process. As the imaging PSF narrows, M δ becomes smaller and the required number N of input focusing points decreases. The distortion matrix approach provides a powerful tool for imaging inside a heterogeneous medium with a priori unknown characteristics. Aberrations can be corrected without any guide stars or prior knowledge of the speed of sound distribution in the medium. While our method is inspired by previous works in ultrasound imaging The first is its primary building block: the broadband focused reflection matrix that precisely selects the echoes originating from a single scattering event at each depth. This operation is decisive in terms of signal-to-noise ratio since it drastically reduces the detrimental contribution of out-of-focus and multiply-scattered echoes. Equally importantly, this matrix captures all of the input-output spatial correlations of these singly-scattered echoes. The approach presented here also introduces the projection of the reflection matrix in the far-field. This enables the elimination of artifacts from multiple reflections between parallel surfaces, revealing previously hidden parts of the image. Here, we have only examined reflections from surfaces which are parallel to the ultrasound array, which is more relevant for imaging layered materials than it is for imaging human tissue. While signatures of other flat surfaces should be identifiable as correlations in off-antidiagonal lines of R kk or in other mathematical bases For aberration correction, projection of the reflection matrix into a dual basis allows the isolation of the distorted component. Then, all of the input focal spots can be superimposed onto the same (virtual) location. The normalized correlation of these distorted wavefields, and an average over disorder, then enables the synthesis of a virtual reflector. Unlike related works in acoustics It is important to note that, although the first experimental proof-of-concept involved a relatively simple multi-layered wave velocity distribution, our approach is not at all limited to laterally-invariant aberrations. As shown by the in vivo imaging experiment, the distortion matrix approach also corrects for complex positiondependent aberrations caused by an unknown speed of sound distribution in the medium. Last but not least, we furthermore exploit concepts from information theory. In particular, we introduce the idea that, by minimizing the Shannon entropy of the correlation matrix Ĉ, the local acoustic velocity c can be estimated for a chosen field of illumination. Further work will focus on refining this technique for detailed mapping of c even through strong inhomogeneities. The wave velocity is actually a quantitative marker for structural health monitoring or biomedical diagnosis. A particularly pertinent example is the measurement of the speed of sound in the human liver, which is decisive for the early detection of non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases To conclude, the distortion matrix concept can be applied to any field of wave physics for which multi-element technology is available. A reflection matrix approach to wave imaging has already been initiated both in optical microscopy The experimental setup consisted in an 1D ultrasound phased-array probe (SuperLinear TM SL15-4) connected to an ultrafast scanner (Aixplorer®, SuperSonic Imagine, Aix-en-provence, France). The array contains 256 elements with pitch p = 0.2 mm. The acquisition sequence consisted of emission of plane waves at 49 incident angles θ in spanning -24 o to 24 o . The emitted signal was a sinusoidal burst of central frequency f 0 = 7.5 MHz and bandwidth of 2.5 to 10 MHz. In reception, all elements were used to record the reflected wavefield over a time length ∆t = 124 μs at a sampling frequency of 30 MHz. The in vivo ultrasound dataset was collected by the Su-perSonic Imagine company on a healthy volunteer from which informed consent had been obtained. Before being put at our disposal, this dataset was previously fully anonymized following standard practice defined by Commission nationale de l'information et des libertés (CNIL). The experimental setup consisted in a 1D 5-18 MHz linear transducer array (SL18-5, Supersonic Imagine) connected to an ultrafast scanner (Aixplorer Mach-30, Supersonic Imagine, Aix-en-Provence, France). The array contains 192 elements with pitch p = 0.2 mm. The probe was placed in direct contact with the calf of the healthy volunteer, orthogonally to the muscular fibers. An informed consent was obtained from the healthy volunteer. The ultrasound sequence consisted in transmitting 101 plane waves at incident angles spanning -25 o to 25 o , calculated using a speed of sound hypothesis of c 0 = 1580 m/s. The pulse repetition rate was 1000 Hz. The emitted signal was a sinusoidal burst of three half periods of central frequency f c = 7.5 MHz. For each excitation, all elements recorded the backscattered signal over a time length ∆t = 80μs at a sampling frequency of 40 MHz. This ultrasound emission sequence meets the FDA Track 3 Recommendations. The multiple reflection filter consists in applying an adaptive Gaussian filter to remove the specular contribution that lies along the main antidiagonal of R kk , such that (28) The width δk of the Gaussian filter scales as the inverse of the transverse dimension ∆x of the field of view: δk = ∆x -1 . The parameter α defines the strength of the filter: where the symbol • • • denotes an average over the couples (k out , k in ) separated by a distance ∆k = |k out -k in | smaller or larger than δk. When the specular component dominates, the parameter α tends to 1 and the Gaussian filter is fully applied: The main antidiagonal of R kk is then set to zero (see Fig. Data used in this manuscript have been deposited at figshare (https://figshare.com/projects/Distortion matrix approach for fullfield imaging of random scattering media 2020/78141). Here, however, this is far from being the case. The eigenvalue decomposition of B yields a set of eigenmodes which focus on different parts of the same virtual scatterer over restricted angular domains The distortion matrix D(z) is defined as the Hadamard product between the reflection matrix R kx (z) and the reference transmission matrix T * 0 . In terms of matrix coefficients, this can be written Injecting Eqs. S2 and S7 into the last equation yields the following expression for D(k out , r in ): (S13) To investigate the far-field correlations of the distorted wavefield, the spatial correlation matrix C = DD † is investigated. As previously observed with B, C should converge towards the covariance matrix C for a large number of independent realizations, i.e. a large number N of input focusing points. Assuming this condition is fulfilled in the speckle regime, the correlation coefficients C(k out , k out ) can be expressed as follows Equation S14 can be rewritten as the following matrix product where Γ D is a diagonal scattering matrix associated with a virtual object centered at the origin. Its coefficients γ D (x) correspond to the input focal spot intensity |H(x)| 2 . Expressed in the form of Eq. S16, C is analogous to the time-reversal operator obtained for a single scatterer of reflectivity γ D (x) As we will see now, this virtual reflector can even be made point-like by considering a normalized correlation matrix (Eq. 18 of the accompanying paper). To demonstrate this assertion, Eq.S16 is rewritten with the help of Eq. S2: ) where the symbol * stands for a correlation product. This correlation term in Eq. S17 results from the Fourier transform of the input focal spot |H(x)| 2 in Eq.S16. This formulation is reminiscent of the Van Cittert Zernicke theorem for an aberrating layer, which links the spatial correlation of a wavefield to the Fourier transform of the intensity distribution from an incoherent source (here the input focal spots) The approach for reducing the size of this virtual scatterer is to render the autocorrelation term flat. Since |H(k x )| = 1, this can be done by considering the normalized correlation matrix Ĉ (Eq. 17) whose coefficients are given by This last equation is valid if the convergence of C towards the covariance matrix C is achieved, i.e. if a large enough number N of input focusing points is considered. Equation S18 can be rewritten as the following matrix product where Γ δ is a diagonal scattering matrix associated with a point-like scatterer centered at the origin, such that γ δ (x) = δ(x) (see Fig. Expressed in the form of Eq. S19, Ĉ is analogous to the time-reversal operator obtained for a point-like scatterer. Equation S18 confirms that Ĉ is of rank 1 and the corresponding eigenvector U 1 directly provides the aberration phase law: An estimator T of the transmission matrix can then be deduced (Eq.22 of the accompanying paper). Until now, for sake of simplicity, we have assumed that Ĉ converges towards the covariance matrix Ĉ . However, this is not always the case for restricted fields-ofillumination. Even if this convergence is not achieved, the covariance matrix Ĉ can still be retrieved by means of the eigenvalue decomposition of Ĉ. In the isoplanatic limit, the covariance matrix Ĉ is indeed of rank 1 (Eq. S18). We expect the aberration transmittance Ĥ(k out ) to be contained in first eigenvector Û1 of Ĉ. To derive a necessary condition for this, the matrix Ĉ should be written as a sum of the covariance matrix Ĉ and a perturbation term δ Ĉ: The matrix Ĉ is of rank 1 and associated with a single eigenvalue σ1 . The matrix δ Ĉ can be considered as a correlated random matrix. Its rank is equal to the number M δ of independent speckle grains in the far-field. In first approximation, the eigenvalues of δ Ĉ can be assumed to follow the eigenvalue distribution of a Hermitian random matrix of size M δ . Ĉ will emerge along the first eigenstate of Ĉ if The factor 4 comes from the superior bound of the Marcenko-Pastur law To make this last inequality more explicit, we express the first eigenvalue σ1 of the covariance matrix and the mean sum of the squared eigenvalues of C, M δ i=1 σ 2 i . On one hand, because Ĉ is of rank 1, the square of its eigenvalue σ2 1 is equal to the trace of Ĉ Ĉ † : where N k is the dimension of the matrix C. On the other hand, the mean sum of the squared eigenvalues σ 2 i is equal to the trace of CC † : Injecting Eq. S21 into the last equation yields Since the coefficients Ĉ(k out , k out ) are of modulus 1, their variance is directly given by their phase fluctuations: (S26) For a large number N of input focusing points, the variance δ Ĉ(k out , k out ) of the normalized correlation matrix coefficients can be expressed as follows (S28) For analytical tractability, we will replace |C(k out , k out )| by its average over all pairs (k out , k out ). Interestingly, this mean correlation value scales directly as the inverse of M δ , where M δ is the number of independent speckle grains in the far-field Injecting Eqs. S23 and S29 into Eq. S22 yields our final expression of the success condition: The number N of input focusing points in the field-ofillumination should be large compared to the number M δ of independent speckle grains in the far-field. The latter quantity is equal to the ratio between the support ∆k of the distorted wavefield in the spatial frequency domain, and its correlation width δk: Each distorted wavefield is produced by a virtual incoherent source in the focal plane whose size is given by the extension δx of the input focal spot. By the van Cittert Zernike theorem, the correlation width δk scales as the inverse of δx. Reciprocally, the spatial frequency support ∆k scales as the inverse of the coherence length of the wavefield in the focal plane, i.e the resolution cell δx 0 . M δ is thus equal to the number of resolution cells δx 0 mapping the aberrated focal spot: The condition of Eq. S30 can thus be translated as follows: the number N of input focusing points forming the field-of-illumination should be one order of magnitude larger than the number of resolution cells mapping the aberrated focal spot. This result is fundamental since it governs our strategy for full-field imaging. An iterative procedure is employed and consists in progressively correcting aberrations over smaller and smaller fields-ofillumination. ) is calculated, the sample reflectivity is smoothed out (spatially averaged). B thus mimics the time reversal operator associated with a virtual specular reflector of scattering distribution γR(x) that scales as the field of view Ω(x) (Eq. S10).