The manipulation of two-dimensional materials via their dielectric environment offers novel opportunities to control electronic as well as optical properties and allows to imprint nanostructures in a non-invasive way. Here we asses the potential of monolayer semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) for Coulomb engineering in a material realistic and quantitative manner. We compare the response of different TMDC materials to modifications of their dielectric surrounding, analyze effects of dynamic substrate screening, i.e. frequency dependencies in the dielectric functions, and discuss inherent length scales of Coulomb-engineered heterojunctions. We find symmetric and rigid-shift-like quasi-particle band-gap modulations for both, instantaneous and dynamic substrate screening. From this we derive short-ranged self energies for an effective multi-scale modeling of Coulomb engineered heterojunctions composed of an homogeneous monolayer placed on a spatially structured substrate. For these heterojunctions, we show that band gap modulations on the length scale of a few lattice constants are possible rendering external limitations of the substrate structuring more important than internal effects. We find that all semiconducting TMDCs are similarly well suited for these external and non-invasive modifications. 1 2 3 d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 1 2 3 y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 (b) -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 ∆W (eV) 0 1 2 3 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 1 2 3 |R| (a) 1 2 3 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 d xy /d z 2 d xy /d xy d xy /d x 2 -y 2 d x 2 -y 2/d z 2 d x 2 -y 2/d xy d x 2 -y 2/d x 2 -y 2 d z 2/d z 2 d z 2/d xy d z 2/d x 2 -y 2 In (quasi) two-dimensional (2D) materials the Coulomb interaction is enhanced due to weak intrinsic screening Here, we extend our previous studies For homogeneous substrates, as depicted in Fig. subsequently construct an efficient approach to describe Coulomb-induced heterojunctions as depicted in Fig. The band structure of any solid-state material results from single particle contributions and is influenced by the many-body Coulomb interaction W . In the following we aim to understand how changes to W of a monolayer TMDC induced by modifications of its dielectric environment affect its electronic quasi-particle band structure and particularly its band gap. The screened Coulomb interaction W is in general non-local and frequency-dependent. For a freestanding TMDC monolayer it reads in momentum space: where v(q) is the bare Coulomb interaction, ε TMDC (q, ω) the dielectric function of the monolayer including only internal screening effects, and q the in-plane momentum. To also consider external screening effects resulting from, e.g., dielectric substrates or capping layers, coating molecules or other layered materials in the environment, we introduce the fully screened Coulomb interaction as: Here, the full dielectric function ε TMDC env (q, ω), which accounts for the screening from the TMDC layer and from the environment, is derived using the WFCE approach In order to study how environmental screening influences the band structure of the TMDC monolayer, we make use of the so-called G∆W with G TMDC (ω) = [ω1 -H TMDC ] -1 and using the selfenergy Σ G∆W = iG 0 ∆W defined by the product of the non-interacting Green function G 0 (corresponding to the Kohn-Sham DFT results as used in the initial G 0 W 0 step) and which is the difference between the full Coulomb interaction (including internal and external screening) and the Coulomb interaction of the free-standing TMDC. Similar to the standard GW self-energy where α/β and λ are orbital and band indices, respectively, δ is a small broadening, while E λ k and c λ α (k) are eigenenergies and expansion coefficients of the eigenfunctions of the G 0 W 0 Hamiltonian H TMDC , and n λ F (k) and n B (ω) are fermionic and bosonic occupation functions. Note, that the G∆W self-energy defined in the equation above describes the changes induced by the dielectric environment and does not explicitly involve the bare, purely real, and non-retarded Coulomb interaction v q 28 . The latter is unaffected by the environment and is already implicitly acounted for in G TMDC (ω). We use Eq. ( The TMDC internal dielectric function is only weakly frequency dependent as long as ω is small compared to the TMDC band gap. In the case of instantaneous external screening ε env (q, ω) ≈ ε env (q) we can thus consider the total dielectric function ε TMDC env (q) to be frequency independent as well. This allows us to use the static Coulomb-hole plus screened-exchange approximation for the self-energy In the static approximation, Eq. ( Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) can additionally be considered by a Russel-Saunders coupling with a k-dependent coupling parameter as described in Ref. [37]. The coupling parameters are chosen such that the SOC splittings at the valence-and conduction bands at high symmetry points match results of GGA calculations. We get W TMDC (q, ω = 0) in the orbital basis by projecting W 0 from our full G 0 W 0 calculations in the Kohn-Sham basis to three Wannier orbitals, which are also used to represent H TMDC . Afterwards, we calculate W TMDC env using our WFCE approach We start by investigating the situation depicted in Fig. In Fig. In the following, we concentrate on the comparison between different TMDCs and their reactions to their dielectric environments. To this end we calculate the band gaps E g (ε sub ) (considering spin orbit coupling) for different dielectric constants for all four TMDCs and show the absolute band-gap differences ∆E g (ε sub ) = E g (ε sub ) -E g (ε sub = 1) as well as the relative ones in Fig. The sulfides are slightly stronger affected than the selenides with larger absolute changes in their band gaps, as was also found by Winther and Thygesen for the comparison between MoS 2 and MoSe 2 In realistic experimental situations the screening by substrates, capping layer, or molecular adsorbates will be dynamic, i.e. the external dielectric function will be frequency dependent. Generally, phonons with a small broadening η = 0.1 eV and sub ], where we introduce ω p as a single substrate resonance frequency and the static limit of the substrate dielectric function sub as model parameters. Large ω p as compared to all electronic TMDC energies, and in particularly compared to the TMDC band gap and band width, leads to the anti-adiabatic limit sub at all ω of interest, which is covered by the static approximation discussed before. In the limit of small ω p we regain the freestanding monolayer situation, i.e. lim ωp→0 ε sub (ω) = 1 at finite ω > 0. Generally, in between, we need to utilize the full self-energy defined in Eq. ( In Fig. In Fig. and the total band-gap modification and E ε,v/c K (ω p ) are the renormalized quasi-particle energies at K of the freestanding monolayer and for the substrate-screened one, respectively. We see a negative shift of the conduction band and a positive shift in the valence band, yielding a decreasing band gap with increasing ω p . The band gap is always symmetrically reduced and the screening induced changes are generally slightly bigger in the sulfides than in the selenides, as discussed for the static dielectric function above. Based on these monotonous symmetric shifts we can define for each frequency ω p an effective static dielectric constant ε eff (ω p ) which leads to the same renormalization of the quasi-particle band structure as the frequencydependent external dielectric function. To this end, we combine the data from Fig. A mapping of this kind can generally be performed as long as the quasi-particle approximation holds, idependently of the number of poles in ε sub (ω). Multiple poles in ε sub (ω) will, however, likely create a more complicated dependence of ε eff on the pole positions and strengths. Also, it is important to note that this mapping is optimized to reproduce the single-particle band gap and might not be appropriate to capture modifications to two-particle excitations, such as excitons, induced by the dynamic substrate screening. For our further discussions of the Coulomb engineered heterostructures and their spatially varying band gaps we can thus stick to the static limit of the G∆W approach utilizing effective instantaneous dielectric constants ε eff as along as we assume that the relevant substrate plas-mon frequencies entering ε sub are in the optical frequency range. For Coulomb engineered heterostructures not only the band gap reduction but also the length scale on which this reduction takes place is important. As the extent of the self-energy is an intrinsic measure for how sharp an interface in a Coulomb engineered heterostructure as depicted in Fig. In Fig. In the static Coulomb-hole plus screened-exchange approximation Σ G∆W can also be interpreted as the renormalization of the hopping matrix elements of the TMDC Hamiltonian due to screening effects from the environment. We find that all hopping elements are renormalized due to screening effects, i.e. intra-(Σ αα G∆W ) as well as inter-orbital (Σ αβ G∆W ) terms. Most importantly we find not only local renormalizations Σ αβ G∆W (R = 0) but especially non-local hopping terms are changed. The renormalization due to non-local inter-orbital terms change the hybridization of the system and are mainly responsible for the change of the band gap of TMDCs in dielectric environments (as was also discussed in c.f. Ref. [10]). In fact, we see that the local diagonal elements Σ αα G∆W (R = 0) have opposite signs (positive for α = d z 2 and negative for α = d xy /d x 2 -y 2 ), which shift d z 2 states up in energies and d xy /d x 2 -y 2 states down. The local terms alone (note that off-diagonal local, i.e. R = 0, terms are zero) would thus enhance the band gap at K upon increasing the environmental screening In real space, the self-energy is the direct product of the Coulomb interaction ∆W (R, ω) and the non-interacting Green's function G 0 (R, ω) convoluted in the frequency domain 48 As ∆W is a strongly peaked function in momentum space around q = 0, it is nearly constant in real space as can be seen in Fig. In the following we aim to describe Coulomb engineered heterostructures from spatially structured dielectric environments as, for example, shown in Fig. mimicking an abrupt change in the dielectric environment. Here Σ εi αβ is calculated from Eq. ( using the free-standing Hamiltonian H FS αβ (R) from our initial G 0 W 0 calculation. The resulting local density of states (LDOS) for WS 2 encapsulated by a sub/superstrate with two dielectric interfaces (ε 1 = 1 and ε 2 = 10) is shown in Fig. Based on a combination of the G∆W and WFCE approaches we were able to develop a material-realistic description of Coulomb-engineered heterojunctions in semiconducting TMDC monolayers. We found that all investigated TMDCs are similarly susceptible to screeninginduced band-gap reductions, which can be on the order of several hundred meV. Retardation effects in the environmental screening as expressed by the frequency dependence affect the magnitude of the band gap renormalizations in such a way, that dielectric environments with high plasmon frequencies turn out to be most effective for external band structure manipulations. The electronic quasi-particle band structures in presence of frequencydependent external dielectrics can be described in terms of effective instantaneous dielectric functions. From an analysis of the self-energy in real-space we showed, that the spatial extent of the self-energy is a material-intrinsic property. In the case of semiconducting TMDCs this spatial extent is limited to neighboring unit cells. This localization together with the effective handling of retarded environmental screening effects, allowed us to derive a tight-binding based modeling scheme to describe Coulomb-engineered heterojunctions resulting from dielectric interfaces in the substrate. Based on these material-realistic simulations we found that spatial bandgap modulations reminiscent of type-I heterojunctions can be externally and non-invasively induced in a monolayer of WS 2 . This renders TMDCs promising candidates for future applications based on Coulomb engineering. where v 1 (q) = e 1 |v(q)|e 1 is the leading (i.e, largest) eigenvalue and e i are the eigenvectors of v(q) in the longwavelength limit q → 0: The leading eigenvalue can be interpreted as long wavelength charge-density modulations to which screening effects due to environments are supposed to be strongest. For this limit, a macroscopic treatment within continuum medium electrostatics is possible. We can thus connect the leading eigenvalue to macroscopic properties where we use the area of the 2D hexagonal unit cell 2 a 2 and the form factor γ which describes how the effective height of the orbitals influences short wavelengths. The screened Coulomb matrix W (q) is assumed to have the same eigenbasis as v(q) so that we can define its eigenvalues via the eigenvalues of the bare interaction and the dielectric function: The (leading) macroscopic eigenvalue of the dielectric function is given by 29,58 which includes the dielectric functions of the material above and beneath the monolayer ε env,i (q, ω). The microscopic screening effects described by ε 2/3 are again assumed to be momentum independent, i.e. local, constants. Thus, by fitting all ε i to the ab intio values for the free standing monolayers (setting ε env,i (q, ω) = 1) we gain fully analytic and material-realistic models for the Coulomb interaction matrix elements W TMDC in the orbital basis. The corresponding fitting parameters are given in Tab. I. By modifying ε env,i (q, ω) we can additionally include external screening effects from some material below or above the monolayer yielding analytic descriptions of W TMDC env . In the main text we mostly consider a single substrate, i.e., we set ε env,1 (q, ω) = ε sub (q, ω) and ε env,2 (q, ω) = 1. In Section III A we use a dielectric constant ε sub (q, ω) = ε sub and in Section III B we incorporate the frequency dependence via the plasmon-pole approximation and set ε sub (q, ω) = ε sub (ω) according to Eq. (7). Additionally, the WFCE approach allows us to correct the artificially introduced self-interaction effects within the super-cell setup used in the ab initio calculations. To do so, we performed RPA calculations for freestanding monolayer for different vacuum heights h vac between 15 Å and 40 Å and extrapolated the results to infinite vacuum heights The fitting parameter listed in Tab. I results from fits to these extrapolated Coulomb interaction matrix elements. At any dielectric interface image charge effects arise if there are source charges on at least one side. The image charges alter the original potential created by the source charges. Hence, the Coulomb interaction within the homogeneous monolayer will be altered by the dielectric interfaces in the environment. In the heterojunctions depicted in Figs. To this end, we turn to the zero-height limit of the layer [i.e. d → 0 in Eq. (B5)], where we can solve the dielectric problem analytically. The potential due to a source charge q at x 0 < 0 on the left side of the interface (with dielectric constant ε L ) evaluated at x < 0 and y = z = 0 reads: It contains the effect of the lateral interface through the image charge q = q ε L -ε R ε L +ε R on the right side (with ε R at x > 0) at x = -x 0 . From this, we can estimate the nearest-neighbour Coulomb interaction, W nn (x 0 ) = q Φ x≤0 ε L |ε R (x 0 , x 0 + a 0 ), (E2) for our lattice model by setting x 0 to some lattice position and x = x 0 + a 0 < 0 to a corresponding nearestneighbour distance on the ε L side (a similar expression can be dervied for x = x 0 + a 0 > 0). From this, we recover the limit of a laterally homogeneous dielectric environment for |x 0 | → ∞: At finite distance x 0 from the lateral interface, we find a dependence of the nearest-neighbor interaction strength W nn (x 0 ) on x 0 as depicted in Fig. From the comparison to the approximation we used in the main text (here indicated by the red crosses), we thus see that taking these lateral image-charge effects into account will slightly smoothen the band gap modulations at the interface. However, the band gap modulation will still take place within about 6 to 7 lattice constants. 