In conventional fluid mechanics, the chemical composition and thermodynamic state of a fluid-solid interface are not considered when establishing velocity-field boundary conditions. As a consequence, fluid simulations are usually not able to generate different outputs when interfacial materials are varied. By considering an atomistic description of matter, theoretical determination of material-specific boundary conditions becomes possible, thereby providing an improved alternative to the completely-invariant no-slip condition. Such a scheme constitutes a multiscale approach to fluid dynamics involving essentially two transitions between space-time scales: the first concerns the derivation of macroscopic boundary conditions by means of molecular assessment of slip lengths; the second concerns the construction of interatomic force fields, required by molecular dynamics simulations, from quantum theory. In this introductory overview we discuss some of the fundamental aspects of these problems. The purpose of fluid mechanics is to predict the motion of a fluid in a given domain when boundary and initial conditions are given. Mathematically, the fluid is regarded as a set of continuum fields -density ρ, velocity u, and internal energy ε -and these must obey balance equations that account for overall mass, momentum, and energy conservation. In their most general form, the balance equations, given below, are written in terms of the stress tensor σ and heat flux vector q, which describe, respectively, the exchange of momentum and energy between adjacent fluid elements, thus capturing the effects of dissipation. ∂ρ ∂t + ∇ • ρu = 0, (1.1a) In order to close the system of equations, the continuum formulation requires constitutive relations: phenomenological laws that connect σ and q to the basic field variables. Most liquids and gases behave as Newtonian fluids and obey the well-known constitutive laws 1 At this level of theory, different substances are therefore characterized by their transport coefficients: shear viscosity μ, volume viscosity η, and thermal conductivity κ. Additionally, an equation of state relating pressure p, temperature T , and density ρ must be supplied, also allowing ε to be expressed in terms of these quantities. On the other hand, from a microscopic perspective, the forces experienced by a fluid element, the work done on it, and the amount of heat it absorbs or gives are a result of momentum and energy exchange with the surrounding elements due to molecular diffusion and collisions. Therefore knowledge of the local molecular state of the fluid, in statistical terms, should suffice to specify both σ and q at each point in space. For example, in the case of rarefied gases, the Newtonian constitutive laws emerge from the Boltzmann equation, the fundamental equation of physical kinetics, when non-equilibrium fluctuations are accounted for in the balance equations by means of the Chapman-Enskog and other related procedures. In addition to constitutive relations, an appropriate choice of boundary conditions at the fluid-solid interface must be supplied so that the problem expressed in equations (1.1a)-(1.1c) is mathematically well posed. Despite the manifest importance of interfacial boundary conditions, they can not be fully determined within the theoretical framework of macroscopic fluid mechanics. Instead their specification usually relies on empirical observation -in the case of the velocity field of a viscous fluid, the condition at the contact surface between a fluid and a fixed solid wall can be suitably approximated by the no-slip condition, which states, on the grounds of vast experimental evidence, that the flow velocity vanishes at the interface. Again, from a more fundamental standpoint, the actual condition to be imposed on the flow variables at the fluid-solid interface would be more naturally formulated in terms of the momentum and energy exchange between adjacent fluid and wall elements, being thus determined by the molecular state of the contact region. The information required for specifying this type of boundary condition is out of reach of continuum theories -it can only be accessed if the structure of the interface is described at a microscopic level. It then becomes clear, from the above considerations, that direct microscopic-continuum coupling schemes might be devised where specific constitutive rules and boundary conditions for a given substance are obtained by means of atomistic simulation methods 6-10 such as molecular dynamics, a term which comprises a set of computer-simulation tools capable of assessing physical properties of materials by performing statistical evaluations on the trajectory of a representative many-molecule system governed by classical equations of motion. This type of approach, once complemented with protocols that correctly communicate the information across the micro and macro scales, enables a more detailed fluid-dynamical description, one which is expected to be important not only in the case of unconventional fluids, but also when critical phenomena takes place (e.g. shock waves, phase transitions) in otherwise Newtonian fluids, or when modeling particular regions of the flow such as fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interfaces. The present contribution provides an overview of the rich physics encountered in such a multiscale framework, taking the boundary-condition specification problem as a guideline. We begin, in section 2, by examining the continuum-molecular link: the key concept of slip length is introduced and the issues related to its evaluation on a fluid-solid interface are discussed, following a brief account of numerical studies on the subject. Then, in section 3, we explore the quantum-mechanical origin of the force fields utilized in molecular simulations, and describe in broad terms the strategies employed for their construction. Final remarks are made in section 4. The investigation of viscous flows past solid surfaces is a central concern of fluid mechanics, as this fundamental issue is ubiquitous in engineering problems. In numerous situations of practical interest the equations governing the flow are solved using the no-slip condition, which asserts that the tangential velocity of the fluid, in the rest frame of the solid surface, is zero at their interface. As one might expect, the underlying limitations of the no-slip condition do lead to unphysical or incorrect results in several cases of scientific and technological significance. Furthermore, the no-slip condition is material invariant, that is, its prescribed interfacial velocity does not depend on the molecular composition, spatial structure, and thermodynamic conditions of the fluid or the solid surface. For instance, as a consequence of the no-slip condition, the same velocity field would be predicted for the flow of water over hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces. The no-slip condition also does not take into consideration whether the fluid is a liquid or gas, whether the solid surface is remarkably rough or perfectly smooth, whether the interface is at an extremely high or particularly low temperature, and so on. Determination of material-specific boundary conditions can be achieved with the aid of molecular dynamics. In this case, the velocity field at a fluid-solid interface is not preliminarily specified, but obtained as a statistical result arising from the collective behavior of many interacting atoms. That is, by considering a suitable choice of interaction forces between a relatively large number of particles, molecular dynamics simulations are able to accurately determine physical properties of fluids, solids, and their interfaces. Once obtained, materialspecific boundary conditions can guide the development or selection of materials with desired interfacial characteristics for particular applications. For example, an accurate interface modeling could assist in the design of internal coatings capable of reducing the head loss in ducts carrying gas or oil. All issues associated with the no-slip condition, including its material invariance, can be addressed by introducing the concept of fluid slip, that is, by allowing a mismatch between the tangential velocities of the fluid and the solid surface at their interface. In mathematical terms, this procedure amounts to replacing the no-slip condition, which constitutes a Dirichlet or first-type boundary condition, by the following relation: which represents a Robin or third-type boundary condition for the fluid velocity field. In the above equation, u t symbolizes the tangential component of the interfacial fluid velocity, considering the solid surface at rest, and ∂u t /∂n denotes the shear rate at the interface or, equivalently, the derivative of the tangential velocity with respect to the surface normal direction. The parameter L s , for which identity (2.1) establishes a definition, is known as slip length. According to equation (2.1), the slip length can be interpreted as the distance from the interface by which the fluid velocity field needs to be linearly extrapolated in order to achieve the velocity of the solid surface. This geometric interpretation is depicted in figure 2.1. Note that, by setting L s = 0 in identity (2.1), the no-slip condition is recovered. On the other hand, when L s goes to infinity, perfect slip is obtained. In general, the slip length establishes a proper quantification for the magnitude of fluid slip over a solid surface. Moreover, the slip-length value can incorporate information about the materials composing the fluid-solid interface, such as roughness and chemical constituents, and also details about the flow itself, such as local shear rate and thermodynamic conditions. The slip length, for a particular choice of interfacial materials and their thermodynamic states, can be evaluated by a direct application of equation (2.1) to a molecular dynamics simulation of a simple flow configuration, such as a planar Couette i or a Poiseuille ii flow, as portrayed by figure 2.2. The procedure of extracting the slip-length value from a molecular dynamics simulation begins by performing local time averages over the particle velocities in a steady flow regime. As a result, the fluid velocity field is obtained, thus making readily available the interfacial values of fluid velocity and shear rate, which are then used to calculate the slip length according to its definition. Once the slip-length value is determined by an atomistic simulation, identity (2.1) can then be employed in the macroscopic context, this time as a third-type boundary condition. However, three subtle issues must be considered before transitioning from the molecular domain to a continuum description of viscous flows. First, in order to enable the slip boundary condition to be used in an arbitrary macroscopic problem, regardless of its interface geometry, the slip length must not depend on the flow configuration in which its value is evaluated. That is, for a single choice of interfacial materials and thermodynamic conditions, molecular dynamics simulations of, for example, a Couette or a Poiseuille flow must provide the same slip-length value. This is indeed the case, as shown in published works. As consistently reported in the literature, Originally, Navier introduced identity (2.1) as a constitutive relation, establishing a linear correspondence between the interfacial values of velocity and shear rate. iii That is, a property whose value is determined only by the variables characterizing the structure and dynamics of the fluid-solid interface and, therefore, does not depend on the state of the fluid flow outside the immediate vicinity of the solid surface. nonlinear relation between velocity and shear rate at the interface. Surprisingly, molecular dynamics simulations also indicate that slip length is not shearrate invariant even for Newtonian fluids. Material-specific boundary conditions are obtained by an accurate representation, from a statistical-physics viewpoint, of the substances composing a fluid-solid interface. In a molecular dynamics simulation, the description of materials is primarily determined by the choice of effective interaction potentials. This basic statement compels the investigation of the slip length through variations of the interatomic force fields. In view of the many different aspects directly involved in evaluating slip length from an atomistic perspective, several efforts have been directed towards understanding the physical mechanisms underlying interfacial slip. Running a molecular dynamics trajectory requires knowledge of the forces experienced by each molecule inside the simulation box. These forces act, by construction, on specific sites of a molecule, most often coinciding with nuclear positions, though other possible locations include bond midpoints or, when dealing with large biomolecules, coarse-grained atomic clusters. Since forces are repeatedly evaluated at every time step of the simulation, computational efficiency demands that they be provided in explicit form. Hence, they are usually derivable from a potential energy E, a known function of M 'atomic positions', hereof meaning 'generic force centers', belonging to all molecules of the system, the force on atom A obtained through: Thus, in order to build a sensible force field, one searches for an all-atom energy expression capable of correctly describing the molecular interaction mechanisms most relevant for the substance at hand and which best suits the thermodynamic conditions at play. Despite the existence of many types of force fields, specifically designed for gases, liquids, metals, proteins, polymers, and so on, The energy function in equation (3.1) depends on nuclear coordinates only, implying that all information related to the distribution of electronic charge is somehow incorporated into its functional form. To understand how this comes about we start by considering the quantum description of a single molecule, 89;90 regarded as a collection of N e electrons and N n nuclei interacting through electrostatic forces. iv The ensuing theory rests on a crucial observation: since nuclei are much heavier than electrons, the time scale for nuclear motion is many times greater than that for electrons. It is then reasonable to assume that electrons immediately adjust to changes in nuclear positions, which allows for electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom to be handled separately in the Schrödinger equation -this is the essential content of the wellknown Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Under this framework, the nuclear coordinates {R} can be independently treated as classical variables that parametrize an effective Hamiltonian (the operator within square brackets in the left-hand side of equation (3.2) below) which acts on electron coordinates {r} only -thus, the molecular problem amounts to finding wave functions Ψ(r 1 , . . . , r Ne ; {R}) satisfying iv In practice only valence electrons need to be considered -core electrons and nuclei are combined into effective charge centers with the help of so-called pseudopotentials. Here, is the reduced Planck constant, m e the electron mass, e the elementary charge, k 0 Coulomb's constant, and Z A is the (effective) atomic number of A-th nucleus. The term U nn {R} is the electrostatic repulsion between nuclei and does not depend on electronic coordinates. The energy levels obtained by solving the eigenproblem posed by equation (3.2) are functions of the nuclear positions, varying as the molecular geometry changes -each level constitutes what is known as a potential energy surface, an invaluable concept for understanding many chemical processes (electronic transitions, structural changes, etc.). The surface formed by selecting the lowest energy value at each nuclear configuration is of particular interest, for it describes the normal state of the molecule: its gradients determine the intramolecular forces and its global minimum defines the equilibrium geometry. v Information concerning the molecule's electron charge distribution is built into this energy expression since the latter is an eigenvalue of the electronic wave function. Solving the eigenvalue problem (3.2) by standard diagonalisation techniques is not a viable option in a molecular context, except for very small systems, and one must resort to approximate schemes. The most popular and well-established methods employed for this task are the Hartree-Fock approximation The HF approach is based on the idea that each electron of the system can be approximately described as an independent particle experiencing an average external field due to the presence of the other electrons and nuclei. It outputs optimized single-particle molecular orbitals thus providing an intuitive understanding of electronic processes. The need to evaluate non-local (high-cost) exchange integrals constitutes its major drawback. Meanwhile, DFT rests on the fundamental Hohenberg-Kohn theorems which, in few words, state that the lowest energy of a many-electron system can be obtained through a variational procedure where the electronic density -a very concrete observable (as opposed to the many-body wave function) -is taken as the basic variable. DFT is an exact theory in principle but only approximate in practice because the precise form of the universal energy functional, the central object of the theory, is not known. Ideally, one would run an atomistic simulation by solving, at each time step, the electronic structure of the entire system in order to get the required forces: indeed, the formulation so far outlined for isolated molecules can be directly extended to a collection of molecules, in which case the output potential energy surface would be a function of the coordinates of all atoms contained in the simulation box. The envisioned function would then determine, through equation (3.1), both intra-and intermolecular forces at a fixed time instant -the resulting framework would constitute what is called an ab initio molecular-dynamics approach. In the simplest applications, however, one typically has tens of thousands of atoms in the simulation box, and the equations of motion need to be integrated for thousands of time steps. And, while it is still possible to handle the electronic problem for a snapshot of the system, it is simply not affordable to do molecular dynamics in this way, at least not for the sizes (number of atoms) and time spans needed for reliable statistics. Force field methods are precisely designed to overcome this difficulty, and they basically follow two types of strategies, which we may call 'perturbative approach' and 'parameter-fitting approach'. In a perturbative approach, the energy expression is derived from quantum mechanics by a systematic simplification of the many-molecule problem. In a parameter-fitting approach, on the other hand, the difficulties stemming from the complexity of the quantum problem are circumvented by adopting a completely different strategy. Here, one relies on physical intuition to write the energy as a sum of contributions whose functional dependence on atomic coordinates is designed to model specific types of interactions in an attempt to emulate the behavior that would follow from a complete quantum descrip-tion. Usually, bonded (intramolecular) interactions are set to describe simple classical motion -stretching, bending, torsion, vibration, etc. -whereas intermolecular terms involve electrostatic and van der Waals interactions, often including correction factors in order to account for charge-screening and other effects. Each energy term depends on a set of adjustable parameters chosen so that selected features of the substance are correctly reproduced. This optimization can be made with respect to experimental measurements of bulk properties and transport coefficients, or with respect to numerical results from a more sophisticated calculation -for instance, a short-time few-molecule DFT-assisted molecular dynamics simulation. By considering the particular problem of determining material-specific boundary conditions at fluid-solid interfaces, two transitions of space-time scale were discussed. First, by introducing the concept of slip length and, thus, establishing a third-type boundary condition, a methodology for the effective application of molecular-dynamics results in the context of macroscopic flows was delineated. In this way, unlike the situation prescribed by the no-slip condition, the dynamics of fluids constrained by solid surfaces acquires a description that depends not only on the chemical composition of the interfacial materials, but also on their thermodynamic states, as specified by field variables such as temperature and pressure, and microscopic spatial configuration, which influences physical characteristics such as surface patterning and roughness. The ability to perform material-specific simulations of macroscopic flows provides a very refined analytical tool, which can assist the design, development, and optimization of technologically relevant devices. In order to determine the interatomic force fields required for the accurate description of a particular material in a molecular dynamics simulation, a second scale transition was also examined. In this case, brief considerations were made on the employment of numerical methods of quantum mechanics in obtaining effective classical potentials of intra-and intermolecular interaction. In particular, two strategies were addressed: a perturbative approach, which relies on successive simplifications of the complete quantum problem of many interacting particles, and a parametric fitting of potential energy functions, which depends on the comparison with empirical observations or extensive quantum computations. The multiscale approaches presented in this elementary overview are based on the fact that calculations on different spatial scales can be done independently, that is, physical properties can be evaluated on a finer scale, by considering more fundamental theories of matter, and subsequently employed in solving problems on a larger scale, where insufficient theoretical details were initially available. This procedure is only possible because of the great difference also existing on the time scales characterizing distinct physical phenomena, so that the dynamics of a system and its small-sized subsystems can be treated as effectively decoupled. i Planar Couette flow is the drag-induced flow of a viscous fluid confined between two parallel-moving flat plates.ii Poiseuille flow is the pressure-induced flow of a viscous fluid confined in a straight duct. v When more than one potential energy surface is involved in the description, one enters the realm of nonadiabatic dynamics -in photochemistry, for example, laser-induced nuclear vibrations are capable of promoting transitions among otherwise adiabatic energy surfaces.