We study a two-dimensional model of an isolated narrow topological band at partial filling with local attractive interactions. Numerically exact quantum Monte Carlo calculations show that the ground state is a superconductor with a critical temperature that scales nearly linearly with the interaction strength. We also find a broad pseudogap regime at temperatures above the superconducting phase that exhibits strong pairing fluctuations and a tendency towards electronic phase separation; introducing a small nearest neighbor attraction suppresses superconductivity entirely and results in phase separation. We discuss the possible relevance of superconductivity in this unusual regime to the physics of flat band moiré materials, and as a route to designing higher temperature superconductors. Introduction.-What is the highest attainable superconducting temperature T c in a given system? This decadesold question has become all the more pressing with the recent discovery of superconductivity in two-dimensional materials with moiré superlattices In general, T c is limited by two different energy scales: the pairing scale associated with Cooper pair formation, and the phase ordering (or phase coherence) scale, set by the superconducting phase stiffness Intriguingly, it has been suggested that in certain cases, superconductivity can survive even in the limit where the active electronic bands become perfectly flat Within Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean-field theory, lower bounds on the phase stiffness in a topological band have been proven In order to address these fundamental questions, we study a sign-problem free lattice electronic-model (Fig. We summarize our main findings as follows: (i) For purely on-site interactions, the ground state is an swave superconductor, and in the limit where the electronic bandwidth W is much smaller than U , there is a broad regime of parameters where T c ∝ U (Fig. Model.-We consider the Hamiltonian, H = H kin +H int , defined on a 2D square lattice: Here, c † i,σ (c i,σ ) are fermion creation (annihilation) operators, n i = σ c † iσ c iσ is the local density, and t 1 , t 2 , t 5 denote the first, second and fifth nearest neighbor hopping parameters (see Fig. It is convenient to define the vectors a 1 ≡ (1, 1) and a 2 ≡ (1, -1); k then denotes momenta in the Brillouin zone dual to the lattice spanned by a 1 , a 2 (see Fig. where ) and τ ≡ (τ x , τ y , τ z ) are the Pauli-matrices that act on the sublattice index (A, B). This leads to two bands, For the remainder of this study, we fix our hopping parameters t 1 = 1, t 2 = 1/ √ 2 and measure all quantities in units of t 1 . For t 5 = 0, the gap between the upper and lower band is ∆ gap = 4 and the bandwidth of the lower band is W = 0.828 (Fig. where the bandwidth for the lower band, W ≈ 0.035, while the gap remains at ∆ gap = 4, such that F = 0.009. For most of our study, we focus on the following parameter values: (a) F = 0.2, and, (b) F = 0.009 for a range of values between U = 1 -4, and the case of quarter-filling (ν = 1/4), corresponding to a half-filled (lower) Chern band. Superconductivity.-In order to diagnose the possible onset of SC, we compute the phase stiffness D s . We evaluate the paramagnetic current-current correlation function, Λ xx (q, iω m = 0), at zero external Matsubara frequency and use the relation Here, is the diamagnetic current contribution, where A x is a vector potential in the x direction, introduced via minimal coupling, and the 1/4 prefactor is due to charge-2 Cooper pairs The BKT transition temperature as a function of U is shown in the inset of Fig. The dependence of T c on U is hence markedly different both from the conventional weak-coupling BCS behavior, T c ∼ W e -W U , and from the strong coupling behavior found in the attractive Hubbard model, T c ∼ W 2 /U . To shed more light into the origin of this behavior, we present in Fig. Normal-state properties.-Let us now examine the properties of the normal (non-superconducting) state for T > T c . In the limit where the bare band is very narrow, the key question is whether the normal state should be understood in terms of coherent quasi-particle excitations whose bandwidth is set by the interaction strength, or as an incoherent liquid of Cooper pairs In order to probe the single electron spectral function, A(k, ω) = -π -1 Im G(k, ω), we recall that the imaginary time Green's function, G(k, τ ) = α=A,B c αk (τ )c † αk (0) , for 0 < τ < β has the following property Thus, G(k) ≡ G(k, τ = β/2) is the integrated spectral weight around the Fermi level over a width of ∼ T . In particular, lim T →0 β G(k) = πA(k, ω = 0). Fig. For the more dispersive band (F = 0.2, Fig. with Ô being the total z-component of the spin (S z = j c † j σ z c j ), charge (N = j (n j -ν)), and s-wave pairing (∆ = j c j,↑ c j,↓ + h.c.), respectively. For the orbital magnetic susceptibility, we use the notation Λ t xx (q) = Λ xx (q x = 0, q y = q) and Λ l xx (q) = Λ xx (q x = q, q y = 0) for the transverse and longitudinal components The spin and orbital magnetic susceptibilities are presented in Fig. Finally, we present the reciprocal pairing and charge susceptibilities, χ -1 ∆ , χ -1 N , in Fig. In our system, the SU(2) symmetry is weakly broken, both due to the finite U/∆ gap and the non-zero bandwidth The close competition between superconductivity and phase separation suggests that the superconducting state is fragile to small perturbations. To demonstrate this fragility, we studied the effect of adding nearest-neighbor interactions to our original Hamiltonian, H int → H int -V i,j (n i -1)(n j -1). Fig. Discussion & Outlook.-We have demonstrated explic-itly that superconductivity is possible in the limit of a nearly flat bare band in the presence of local attractive interactions. In this strong coupling regime, the interaction strength is the dominant energy scale in the problem; consequently, T c ∝ U . Moreover, the superconducting state emerges from a pseudogap regime, where single-particle and spin excitations are gapped, and superconducting as well as particle number fluctuations are strongly enhanced. As a result of an approximate SU(2) symmetry, a minimal low-energy response can be captured in the intermediate temperature regime in terms of the thermal fluctuations of a non-linear sigma model (NLSM) for a multi-component order parameter. However, as a result of the weak SU(2) symmetry breaking, the order parameter manifold is not perfectly symmetric and the NLSM needs to be supplemented with a slight easy-plane anisotropy, which may favor either SC or phase separation Clearly, an essential ingredient for superconductivity in the flat band regime is the geometric character of the band; it is crucial that the wavefunctions spanning the band are not completely localizable Finally, we speculate about the relevance of the physics discussed here to superconductivity in two-dimensional moiré materials. In these systems, superconductivity is indeed found in extremely narrow, topologically nontrivial bands. It would be interesting to look for a pseudogap regime above the superconducting T c , characterized by strong pairing fluctuations and an enhanced electronic compressibility. Incidentally, indirect signatures of a possible pseudogap above T c have been reported in twisted bilayer graphene with the lattice vectors a 1 = (1, 1) and a 2 = (1, -1) (see Fig. It is straight forward to calculate the total diamagnetic contribution K x = L -2 I,α K α x (I). To extract the paramagnetic current-current correlation function Λ xx (q), we have to include the spatial resolution within the unit cell. Respecting the two-orbital unit cell, the Fourier transformation is done with respect to the position of the unit cells r I ≡ r I,A such that we keep the different current terms separate and define the correlation matrix e -i(r I -r J )q ˆβ 0 dτ J α x (I, τ )J β x (J , τ = 0) . We can then include the position of the bonds within the unit cell by an additional phase factor e -iqd α such that The d α of the center of bond α are given by: Numerical data of the current susceptibility The difference of the transverse and longitudinal contributions of the current susceptibility [Λ t xx -Λ l xx ](q)/4 (recall the shorthand notation Λ t xx (q) = Λ xx (q x = 0, q y = q) and Λ l xx (q) = Λ xx (q x = q, q y = 0)) is presented in Fig. Note the data for T /U = 0.04 in the flat-band limit Fig. We comment here on the definition of D s in Eq. ( The dramatic enhancement of the charge susceptibility with lowering temperature, especially in the case of a nearlyflat band (Fig. We start from an attractive Hubbard Hamiltonian with a single, perfectly flat partially-filled band. In the limit U ∆ gap , the effective low-energy Hamiltonian to leading order in U/∆ gap can be obtained by projecting the interaction term onto the flat band. The projected annihilation operator is given by where ψ kσ (r) is the Bloch wavefunction of the active band, and ψ k↓ (r) = ψ * -k↑ (r) by time reversal symmetry. We have used the fact that the Hamiltonian (1) conserves the z component of the spin. The projected interaction is thus of the form, Let us perform a particle-hole transformation in the active band as follows: under which the projected Hamiltonian in Eq. 24 transforms to, where P σ (r i , r j ) = k ψ k,σ (r i )ψ * k,σ (r j ) is a single-particle projection operator onto the active band with spin σ. If P σ (r j , r j ) = const. = P 0 , i.e. the diagonal of the projector onto the flat band is site-independent In our model (Eq. 1 in the main text), the condition P σ (r j ) = const. is satisfied because the A and B sublattices of the square lattice are related by a inversion centered at a nearest-neighbor bond followed by a gauge transformation. The second term in ( slightly above T c and within the superconducting phase below T c . At low temperatures, we recognize a sharp peak at q = 0 that signals the onset of s-wave singlet pairing order. In order to detect possible competing instabilities, we also study the charge (N ), spin (S z ), and the bond-density (N b = 1/4 i,j c † i c j + h.c.) correlation functions. Note that the latter probes, e.g., for valence-bond-solid states. The absence of enhancement of these correlators at any non-zero wavevector indicates that there is no competing density wave ordering tendency. The enhancement of charge fluctuations and the associated tendency towards phase separation are indicated by the broad peak around q = 0 in the density correlation function at intermediate temperatures in the flat band limit (Fig. This condition is termed the "uniform pairing condition" in