In this work, we analyze the ferroelectric (FE) domain-wall (DW) induced negative capacitance (NC) effect in Metal-FE-Insulator-Metal (MFIM) and Metal-FE-Insulator-Semiconductor (MFIS) stacks. Our analysis is based on 2D phase field simulations, in which we self-consistently solve time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TDGL) equation, Poisson's equation and semiconductor charge equations. Considering Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 (HZO) as the FE material, we study 180 o FE domain formation in MFIM and MFIS stacks and their voltage-dependent DW motion. Our analysis signifies that, when FE is in multi-domain (MD) state with soft-DW, the stored energy in the DW leads to non-hysteretic NC effect in FE, which provides an enhanced charge response in the MFIM stack, compared to Metal-Insulator-Metal. According to our analysis, the DW-induced NC effect yields local negative permittivity in FE in the domain and DW regions, which leads to an average negative effective permittivity in FE. Furthermore, we show that the NC trajectory of FE is dependent on its thickness, the gradient energy coefficient and the in-plane permittivity of the underline DE material but not on the DE thickness. Similar to MFIM, MFIS also exhibits an enhancement in the overall charge response and the capacitance compared to MOS capacitor. At the same time, the MD state of FE induces non-homogenous potential profile across the underlying DE and semiconductor layer. In the low voltage regime, such non-homogenous surface potential leads to the co-existence of electron and hole in an undoped semiconductor, while at higher voltages, the carrier concentration in the semiconductor becomes electron dominated. In addition, we show that with FE being in the 180 o MD state, the minimum potential at FE-DE interface and hence, the minimum surface potential in the semiconductor, does not exceed the applied voltage (in-spite of the local differential amplification and charge enhancement). The negative capacitance (NC) effect in ferroelectric (FE) materials has attracted an immense attention because of its potential to overcome the fundamental limits in field-effect transistor (FET) operation 1 . In conventional Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS)-FET, only a fraction of the applied gate voltage (VAPP) appears as semiconductor surface potential (Ψ) due to a voltage drop across the positive gate dielectric capacitance (dΨ/dV APP <1). Therefore, the attainable subthreshold swing (SS) in MOSFET is always higher than the 60 mV/decade at room temperature (T=300K) 1 . However, it has been proposed that an FE layer at the gate stack of FE-FET (or NC-FET) can act as a negative capacitor and thus, can amplify the internal potential so that dΨ/dV APP >1 and SS < 60 mV/decade at room temperature 1 . According to Landau's free energy equation 1 , FE polarization (P) vs electric-field (E) characteristics exhibit an unstable negative slope. According to ref. 1, such an unstable (negative dP/dE) region in FE can be stabilized in a heterogeneous system (i.e. FE-DE stack) so that a homogeneously suppressed polarization (P=0) can be obtained by suppressing the depolarization energy. However, under certain conditions it may be more natural to form multiple domains with positive and negative P separated by domain-walls (DWs) to suppress the depolarization energy of the system In our phase-field simulation framework, (Fig. Let us start by considering an MFIM stack with an applied voltage (VAPP=0). It is well known that in MFIM stack, spontaneous polarization (P) appears at the FE-DE interface, which leads to a voltage drop across the DE. As a result, an Efield appears in FE opposite to the P direction (called depolarization field, EFE,Z), which leads to an increase in the depolarization energy density, fDEP (= -EFE,Z×P). However, fDEP can be suppressed with the formation of periodic 180 o domains of alternating P-directions (P↑ and P↓) ) due to stray fields, where ε FE,X is the in-plane background permittivity of FE and (b) gradient energy density (fGRAD,X=g×(dP/dx) 2 ) due to the spatial variation in P along the x-axis. Subsequently, we will refer to the sum of fGRAD,X and fELEC,X over the FE region as the DW energy (FDW=∫∫ f DW dxdz, where, f DW = f GRAD,X + f ELEC,X ). Note that the magnitude of P inside of a domain also varies along the z-axis exhibiting a minima at the DE interface and gradually increasing in the bulk FE (away from the DE interface). This induces a bound charge density ρb=-dP(z)/dz and further suppresses the EFE,Z (and hence, fDEP) inside of the domain. However, this additional suppression of EFE,X occurs at the cost of an increase in fGRAD,Z (=g×(dP/dz) 2 ). Our simulations show that fGRAD,Z occurs in FE both in the MD (co-existing P↑ and P↓) and poled (either P↑ or P↓) states. In the MD state (achieved by suppressing fDEP at the cost of fDW and fGRAD,Z while minimizing the overall system energy), the intricate interactions of these energy components with each other (and the free energy, fFREE) play a key role in determining the NC response of FE and its dependence on the device/material parameters, as discussed subsequently. Let us first describe the implication of FE thickness (TFE) on the formation of MD state. The P configuration of FE in MFIM stack for different TFE, shown in Fig. 2(e)) as fDW decreases and therefore, needs a lower TFE to go beyond fFREE. Note that if g is very small (~0.1x10 -9 m 3 V/C), the critical TFE can potentially become so small (~0.25nm) that the SD state may not be physically realizable (see Fig. Let us begin by discussing P-switching in MFIM stack with soft-DW (TFE=5nm, TDE=4nm (Al2O3), g=1x10 -9 m 3 V/C). The simulated charge density (Q) vs applied voltage (VAPP) characteristics is shown in Fig. The DW-motion induced negative effective permittivity can be described as follows. When VAPP=0V, the P↓ and P↑ domains in FE are equal in size and the local EFE,Z (depolarizing field) is directed opposite to the local P (i.e. P↓ domains exhibit E↑ and P↑ domains exhibit E↓). Note that fGRAD,X is non-zero inside of the domain (due to DW diffusion in soft-DW) and that causes the P to decrease in magnitude (discussed earlier). Now, with the increase in VAPP, P↓ domains grow and P↑ domains shrink in size, due to positive stiffness of DW motion As we have identified that the FDW plays a crucial role in providing εFE,EFF<0, therefore, it is easy to understand how the NC behavior is dependent on the fGRAD,X (=g×(dP/dx) ) in the FE. To investigate such dependency, the NC path in the Q-EFE,EFF (where, EFE,EFF=VFE,EFF/TFE) responses of MFIM stack for different g are shown in Fig. Hence, as long as FE remains in the 180 o MD state (i.e. does not switch to the poled state), the min(max)-VINT is always lower(higher) than VAPP in MFIS (see Fig. . As a result, min-Ψ of MFIS becomes higher than the Ψ of MIIS at VAPP>1V) as shown in Fig. In summary, by performing phase field simulation, we show that the energy stored in FE DW can be harnessed to enhance the capacitance of the MFIM and MFIS stack, where the soft-DW displacement leads to a static and hysteresis-free negative capacitance in MD FE. Our analysis indicate that the effective negative permittivity of the FE layer is dependent on the FE thickness, gradient energy coefficient, in-plane permittivity of the DE and is independent of DE thickness. Further, the DWinduced NC can lead to an enhanced charge/capacitance response in MFIS stack compared to MIS/MIIS stack. However, such a charge/capacitance enhancement in MFIS does not guarantee an enhanced local Ψ in Si compared to MIS. In fact, Ψ becomes spatially varying due to the MD nature of FE and the variation is higher at low applied voltages. In addition, we discuss that the minimum Ψ in MFIS can exceed the Ψ in MIIS but remains smaller than the MIS. Nevertheless, considering the local differential amplification of VINT (i.e. d(min-VINT)/dVAPP>1), the on/off current ratio of FEFET can potentially exceed the MIS/MIIS-FET. Since the non-homogeneity in Ψ is absent in conventional MOS capacitor (and MOSFET), therefore, as future work, it will be important to investigate the impact of such potential profile on the low voltage conduction of FEFETs. (b) ) stored in the DW. Therefore, the FDW increases and hence, NC effect increases with the decrease in ε DE as shown in Fig. 3(f). From this analysis, we can summarize that, (i) an FE material with higher g, (ii) TFE