A semiconducting nanowire proximitized by an s-wave superconductor can be tuned into a topological state by an applied magnetic field. This quantum phase transition is marked by the emergence of Majorana zero modes at the ends of the wire. The fusion of Majorana modes at a junction between two nanowires results in a 4π-periodic Josephson effect. We elucidate how the 4π-periodicity arises across the topological phase transition in a highly-transparent short nanowire junction. Owing to a high transmission coefficient, Majorana zero modes coming from different wires are strongly coupled, with an energy scale set by the proximity-induced, field-independent pairing potential. At the same time, the topological spectral gap-defined by competition between superconducting correlations and Zeeman splitting-becomes narrow in the vicinity of the transition point. The resulting hybridization of the fused Majorana states with the spectral continuum strongly affects the electron density of states at the junction and its Josephson energy. We study the manifestations of this hybridization in the energy spectrum and phase dependence of the Josephson current. We pinpoint the experimentally observable signatures of the topological phase transition, focusing on junctions with weak backscattering. Single-mode semiconductor nanowires proximitized by a conventional s-wave superconductor have emerged as a leading candidate for the implementation of topological quantum computing Quantum computing operations require controllable fusion of pairs of MZMs belonging to different wires (or to different proximitized portions of the same wire) into a single Dirac fermion The peculiarity of the topological phase transition in a proximitized nanowire is that the natural energy scale of the coupling between the MZMs remains large (of the order of the proximity-induced pairing potential) even while the spectral gap closes at the transition. This occurs because the MZMs are formed out of the ±k out helical states, while the smallest gap in the spectral continuum lies within the states adjacent to the k in = 0 momentum. The presence of a continuum with a narrow gap strongly modifies the Dirac fermion formed by fusion at the junction. This modification affects the density of states at the junction and results in an unsual current-phase relation of the Josephson effect. In this work, we investigate the energy spectrum and zerotemperature thermodynamic properties of the junction as it is tuned through the topological phase transition. We focus on the experimentally important case of short, almost-transparent junctions In the absence of backscattering (D = 1), a junction does not mix the states near k in with those near ±k out , which we will refer to as the inner and outer modes respectively, at any φ. If the induced gap ∆ exceeds the Zeeman energy B for the inner modes, the wires are in a topologically trivial state. At finite φ, both inner and outer modes carry an Andreev bound state localized at the junction. These states cross zero energy and simultaneously change their ground state occupation once the phase crosses φ = ±π (due to periodicity, it is sufficient to consider an interval φ ∈ [-2π, 2π]). Such a change of the occupation is allowed, as it does not violate fermion parity conservation. The discontinuous change in the ground state leads to discontinuities of the Josephson current I(φ) at φ = ±π. At the critical value of the magnetic field, B = ∆, the gap in the inner modes closes and then reopens at B > ∆ without the bound state. The remaining bound state (associated with the outer modes) does cross zero energy at φ = ±π, but this time its occupation cannot change, due to fermion parity conservation. The occupation of the bound state may change only at larger phases, φ = ±(π + φ 0 ), at which placing a quasiparticle in the continuum above the gap in the inner-mode spectrum is energetically favorable. The peculiarity of the resulting ground state is that it contains a quasiparticle at the edge of the continuum, and therefore is not separated by a gap from the excited states. The appearance of φ 0 = 0 at B > ∆ signals that the properties of the junction are 4π-periodic in the topological phase. While the change of the periodicity in φ at B = ∆ is associated with a dramatic qualitative change of the eigenstates, the quantitative changes in observables-such as the Josephson current-are more subtle. Indeed, the inner-mode spectral gap scales linearly with |B -∆| and is small near the transition. Therefore the discontinuities in I(φ) shift from the points ±π by small amounts, φ 0 ∝ (B -∆)Θ(B -∆). The effect of weak scattering on the energy spectrum and the Josephson current is different-at the qualitative as well as the quantitative level-on the two sides of the topological transition. In the topologically trivial state, backscattering couples the bound states of the inner and outer modes. As a result, the bound state energies are repelled from zero in the vicinity of φ = ±π. This leads to the smearing of the discontinuity in the Josephson current over a phase interval δφ B<∆ ∝ √ 1 -D, similar to the standard case of a short SNS junction Throughout the paper, we pay particular attention to the contribution of the continuous part of the spectrum to the Josephson properties. In the short junction limit, the continuum contribution to the ground state energy and to the Josephson current vanishes at zero magnetic field, as is well known, but it becomes nonzero at finite magnetic field. This contribution is 2π-periodic in both the trivial and topological phases. Yet, it carries an imprint of the transition in the form of a non-analytic dependence on the magnetic field close to the critical point. < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " n Z i b 0 b v w G x b J v q 8 v I F 4 b q A X G 6 0 M = " > A s j g Z / A 7 + F P 7 W I M a q / E F 9 N 7 G 0 u d l s H Z q 0 3 8 t N J J y < / l a t e x i t > outer < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " O 3 p K Z 0 f K 9 B I X I w x n b e f l P e A S 3 o q 3 w X b b a d 2 w l O T k n O 9 8 5 9 d J w a j S 3 e 7 f j X u b t f s P H m 4 9 q j 9 + 8 s j g Z / A 7 + F P 7 W I M a q / E F 9 N 7 G 0 u d l s H Z q 0 3 8 t N J J y < / l a t e x i t > k E < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " i z a O a Q / n 3 K e t 2 u h L 9 5 y A e s 8 t P / 0 = " > A A A E s H i c b V N f b 9 M w E P d Y g V H + b f D I S 0 Q 3 q U W l a s K k T U K T i g Y S j x t i f 6 S 6 m h z n 2 p g m d m Q 7 a z s v n 4 B X e O C j 8 W 2 w 3 X Z a N 0 5 K c r n 7 3 e / O d + e 4 y J j S 3 e 7 f t Q f r t Y e P H m 8 8 q T 9 9 9 v z F y 8 2 t Xe i↵P = e i↵P (X + ↵) 1 dx 0 @✓(x ) / e i✓(x) =) † (x) / e i(± (x) ✓(x)) The manuscript is structured as follows. In Section II, we introduce and motivate the model of a proximitized wire used in the rest of the work. In Section III, we study the properties of a perfectly transparent junction. We deal with scattering at the junction in Section IV, paying particular attention to the coupling it induces between the bound states and the continuum in the topological phase. We conclude in Section V with a few remarks about experiments and future directions of research. Technical calculations are left as Appendices. Throughout the work, we use units with h = 1. We consider a Josephson junction in a proximitized nanowire with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling. The wire is placed in a magnetic field parallel to its axis. We assume that the orbital effect of the field can be neglected, and account only for the Zeeman effect of the field. We also assume that the junction is short, i.e., its length is much smaller than the superconducting coherence length ξ (see Fig. where Ψ = ( ψ↑ , ψ↓ , ψ † ↓ , -ψ † ↑ ) T , ψσ is the annihilation operator of an electron with spin σ = ↑ or ↓, and the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by (2) Here σ i and τ i are Pauli matrices in spin and Nambu space, respectively; m is the effective mass, α is the spin-orbit coupling constant, μ is the chemical potential, B is the Zeeman energy (without loss of generality we take B ≥ 0), and ∆(x) is the proximity-induced superconducting order parameter: where φ is the phase difference across the junction. The potential V (x) accounts for a barrier that scatters electrons at the junction. Instead of specifying a particular functional form for V (x), we will, in the following, account for its effect by imposing suitable boundary conditions at x = 0; these boundary conditions will be formulated directly in terms of the mesoscopic scattering parameters (transmission probability and scattering phases) of the junction in the normal state. We study the evolution of the junction properties as the Hamiltonian is tuned across the topological phase transition by changing the magnetic field. In the model defined by Eq. ( Throughout this work, we assume, for simplicity, that the chemical potential is set at the optimal point μ = 0 where the critical field is minimal, B c = ∆. Following Ref. Here ΨL and ΨR denote left-and right-moving components of the field, which both have Fermi velocity given by α. Then, by inserting the decomposition (4) into Eq. ( Notice that the Zeeman energy drops out from the BdG equations for the outer modes. This is a consequence of a large energy separation ∼ mα 2 B between spin subbands in the vicinity of k = ±k out = ±2mα. As discussed above, Eqs. ( Here, D is the normal-state transmission probability, γ ∈ [-π/2, π/2] is the forward scattering phase in the normal state, and δ is the reflection phase in the normal state for a particle incoming from x = -∞. Notice that the reflection phase δ can be eliminated from Eqs. ( For future reference, we mention that in the particular case of a (repulsive) delta function barrier, V (x) = κ δ(x), the parameters D and γ are given by However, in general, there is no rigid connection between D and γ like the one provided by Eq. ( In the next section (Sec. III) we study the spectrum of the junction and its thermodynamic properties (at T = 0) in the limit of perfect transmission, D = 1 and γ = 0. Then in Sec. IV we discuss the effects induced by scattering at the junction, D < 1 and γ = 0. If D = 1, the inner and outer modes decouple from each other, as follows from Eq. ( We start by considering the bound state in the outer modes. In this case, the BdG equations are similar to those of a proximitized helical edge in a quantum spin Hall state Evolution of the single-particle excitation spectrum of the junction with increasing Zeeman energy, in the limit of perfect transmission, D = 1, γ = 0. Solid curves represent the discrete energy levels. Shaded regions mark the continuous spectrum. The latter consists only of inner modes for E < ∆, and of both inner and outer modes for E ≥ ∆. In the trivial phase, B < ∆, there are bound states in the inner and outer modes (black and blue curves in panel (a), respectively). At B = ∆ the gap in the inner modes closes and the corresponding bound state vanishes, see panel (b). In the topological phase, B > ∆, only the outer-mode bound state remains [panel (c)]. As long as B < 2∆ the energy of the bound state in the outer modes overlaps with the inner-mode continuum in some domain of phase φ. γ = 0), we obtain the equations for the bound state energies in the form Λ o,σ (E, φ) = 0, where with e iη(E) = E/∆ + i 1 -(E/∆) 2 and σ = ±1 defining the eigenvalue of σ z . Eq. ( independent of B. For the inner modes, solving the BdG equations is more cumbersome due to the presence of the Zeeman term in Eq. (5a). Bound states may appear at |E| < |∆ -B|. The bound state energy is a solution of the equation Λ i (E, φ) = 0, with (see Appendix A 1) The phase dependence of this expression is encoded in the function The equation Λ i (E, φ) = 0 admits solutions only in the topologically trivial phase, B < ∆. Indeed, at B > ∆ and |E| < |∆-B|, the quantity (E 2 +∆ 2 -B 2 ) in the second line of Eq. ( This expression has several notable features. First, E 1 (φ) = E 0 (φ) at B = 0, i.e., the Andreev spectrum is two-fold degenerate in the absence of the magnetic field. Second, E 1 (φ) crosses zero at φ = π, simultaneously with the energy of the outer-mode bound state E 0 (φ). The presence of such a crossing is a peculiarity of the perfect transmission limit, which is not robust to the presence of backscattering. Third, the energy |E 1 (φ)| is bounded by ∆ -B, so its phase dispersion is suppressed by the magnetic field, until the bound state merges with the continuum at B = ∆, in concurrence with the topological phase transition. In the topological phase, B > ∆, the bound state is no longer present in the inner modes; only the outer-mode bound state, which can be considered as two fused Majorana modes, remains at the junction. For B < 2∆ the energy of the latter, E 0 , overlaps with the inner-mode continuum, intersecting its edge at φ = π ± φ 0 , where This coexistence of a bound state with the continuous part of the spectrum is another peculiarity of the perfect transmission limit. The evolution of the Andreev spectrum upon increasing Zeeman energy is shown in Fig. To conclude this section, we note that for B > 2∆ the gap in the inner modes, B -∆, exceeds the gap in the outer modes, ∆. Consequently, the bound state energy E 0 is separated from the continuum at all phases (except at the points φ = 0, 2π). In this high-magnetic field topological regime, the low-energy spectrum of the model becomes identical to that of the Fu-Kane model of a proximitized quantum spin Hall edge. Then, on a qualitative level the properties of the junction at B > 2∆ are similar to those described in Ref. The continuous part of the Andreev spectrum consists of scattering states that appear at energies above the threshold values |∆ -B|, ∆, ∆ + B. The total density of continuum states at energy E, ρ(E, φ), can be represented in the form Here L is the system size, g(E) is the bulk density of states per unit length, and δρ(E, φ) is the correction to the density of states due to the presence of the junction. g(E) is given by a sum of three BCS-like terms with gap parameters determined by the threshold energies: where and Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. The phase-dependent contribution δρ(E, φ) can be recovered from the quasiparticle scattering matrix of the junction, S(E, φ), via the relation We note that at finite φ the scattering matrix is non-trivial even in the perfect transmission limit D = 1, γ = 0. For |∆ -B| < E < ∆ the scattering states reside in the inner modes only. In this case, the determinant of the scattering matrix S ≡ S i is given by (see Appendix A 2 for details) where denotes complex conjugation, and where the function Λ i , defined in Eq. For larger energies, E > ∆, there are scattering states both in the inner and in the outer modes. Owing to perfect transmission, the scattering matrix is block-diagonal in these subspaces. Therefore, its determinant is multiplicative, , where det S i is given by Eq. ( From Eq. ( where F (φ) is defined in Eq. The detailed description of the Andreev bound states and continuum states in the nanowire junction setup, provided in Secs. III A and III B, sets the stage for the discussion of thermodynamic properties of the system. In this section we calculate the ground state energy of the junction, E gs (φ) (Sec. III C 1), and with its help establish the current-phase relation I(φ) of the Josephson effect at T = 0 (Sec. III C 2). In view of the periodicity of these properties, hereafter we constrain the phase difference across the junction to the interval φ ∈ [-2π, 2π]. We start by investigating the structure of the many-body ground state of the system. To this end we express the manybody Hamiltonian (1) in its eigenbasis: Here the sum in the first term runs over the bound states. In the trivial phase, B < ∆, the index b = 0, 1, with E 0 (φ) and E 1 (φ) given by Eqs. ( To find the ground state energy E gs (φ) we minimize the Hamiltonian The first part, E gs (φ), incorporates the contributions to the ground state energy from the bound states and from the term c E c nc in the Hamiltonian gs (φ), is a residual contribution due to the quasiparticle continuum arising from the c-number term -1 2 c E c . By introducing the correction to the continuum density of states δρ(E, φ) (see 3. Evolution of the many-body spectrum with increasing Zeeman energy, in the limit of perfect transmission, D = 1, γ = 0. The panels are in one-to-one correspondence with the panels of Fig. (2) gs (φ) in the form E (2) gs (φ) = - where we added a constant shift to ensure that We begin the investigation of E gs (φ) by considering a junction in a topologically trivial state, B < ∆. For concreteness, we focus on the even fermion parity sector. As a first step, we establish the structure of the ground state in terms of occupation numbers at different phases φ. In the interval φ ∈ [-π, π] neither of the bound states is occupied in the ground state. At φ = ±π the energies E 0 and E 1 of Eq. ( (1) gs at B < ∆ reads E (1) gs where the bound state energies E 0,1 are given by Eqs. ( gs (0) = 0. Next, we discuss the continuum contribution to the ground state energy, E gs . It may be found by performing the integration in Eq. ( with F (φ) defined in Eq. In principle, such non-analytic behavior may be probed experimentally, for instance in the dependence of the Josephson plasma frequency on the magnetic field, and may serve as an additional signature of the topological phase transition. In addition to the ground state energy, Eq. ( The structure of the ground state in the topological regime, B > ∆, is radically different from that in the trivial state. At B > ∆ there is only one Andreev bound state, which comes from the outer modes. At small phase differences φ, this state is not filled. When the phase reaches φ = ±π the bound state energy E 0 crosses zero, but the level occupation cannot change as that would violate fermion parity conservation. At φ = ±(π + φ 0 ), where φ 0 = 2 arcsin((B -∆)/∆) [see Eq. ( feature is in a sharp contrast to the case of the topologically trivial junction, where a gap is present at all values of the phase difference. The structure of the ground state implies that in the topological state E gs is given by Here the second line describes the simultaneous occupation of the Andreev bound state and a state at the edge of the continuum, E c = B -∆, occurring at φ = ±(π + φ 0 ). Expression ( In contrast to E gs (φ), the continuum contribution to the ground state energy, E gs , is 2π-periodic even in the topological phase [as follows from Eq. ( gs is described by Eq. ( Having discussed the ground state structure and E gs (φ) on both sides of the topological transition, we proceed to the evaluation of the Josephson current, I(φ). At zero temperature, I(φ) is related to the ground state energy via where e is the electron charge, and thus can be calculated at arbitrary ratio B/∆ by employing the results of Sec. III C 1. First, we compute I(φ) in the topologically trivial state, B < ∆. An example of the current-phase relation obtained from Eqs. The first term on the right comes from the outer-mode bound state and is independent of the Zeeman energy B. The second term originates from the inner-mode bound state. At the topological transition (B = ∆) it vanishes along with the inner-mode bound state, and see Fig. In the topological regime, B > ∆, the zero-temperature Josephson current can be calculated from Eq. ( Close to the topological transition, B -∆ ∆, Therefore, for |∆ -B| ∆ the positions of the steps and their magnitude differ only by small amounts on the two sides of the transition. Consequently, in spite of the dramatic change in the ground state wave-function, the Josephson current I(φ) changes gradually across the topological phase transition. More generally, the 4π-periodic Fourier harmonics in thermodynamic quantities build up continuously at B > ∆, departing from zero at B = ∆. To conclude this section, we highlight an additional interesting property of the Josephson effect in the presence of Zeeman splitting. On both sides of the transition, there exists a nonzero, 2π-periodic, contribution gs /dφ that comes from the continuum states. For B ∼ ∆ this contribution is of the same order as the one coming from the Andreev bound states. We note, however, that I (2) (φ) is smooth and thus has no effect on the discontinuities in the current (see pale dashed lines in Fig. In this section we discuss the influence of scattering on spectral (Sec. IV A) and thermodynamic (Sec. IV B) properties of the junction, focusing primarily on the case of weak backscattering. The backscattering couples inner and outer modes, modifying the structure of the Andreev states below the gap (Secs. IV A 1, IV A 2) as well as of the states above the continuum edge (Sec. IV A 3). However, unlike the normal state (zero-field) conductance, which is solely determined by the backscattering strength, 1-D, the spectrum of the junction is also sensitive to the forward scattering phase γ. Such sensitivity is especially prominent in the topological regime. There, even for weak backscattering, a large forward scattering phase can have a dramatic qualitative impact on the Andreev levels (see Fig. The boundary condition The structure of the function Λ(E, φ) in the complex energy plane contains full information about the spectrum of the Josephson junction. The branch cuts of Λ(E, φ) situated at the real axis correspond to the states of the quasiparticle continuum with |E| > |∆ -B|. In this range, the scattering induced correction to the continuum density of states δρ(E, φ) can be found from Λ(E, φ) through Eqs. ( To determine Λ(E, φ) we solve the BdG equations ( 1. Bound states in the presence of scattering in the trivial phase, B < ∆ In the topologically trivial phase, B < ∆, the inner and outer-mode bound states are hybridized by the scattering. The degenerate zero-energy crossing which was present for the transparent junction at φ = π splits and gets pushed away from E = 0 at D < 1, γ = 0 [cf. Fig. The hybridization of the bound states near φ = π can be addressed quantitatively in the limit i.e., close to the topological transition threshold and for perturbatively weak scattering. In this limit, the general expression for Λ(E, φ) [given by Eq. (C14)] can be substantially simplified at |E| ∆ -B and |φ -π| 1 [see Eq. (D2)]. Then, within the leading-order approximation, Eq. ( Here E 0 (φ) and E 1 (φ) are given by Eqs. ( Notice that E sc 0,1 (φ) reaches the minimum ∼ (∆ -B) √ 1 -D at points symmetrically shifted away from φ = π by ∼ √ 1 -D [see Fig. We note that within the accuracy of Eq. ( 2. Bound states in the presence of scattering in the topological phase, B > ∆ On the topological side of the transition, B > ∆, the energy of the outer-mode bound state crosses zero at φ = π despite the presence of scattering [see Fig. To describe the repulsion of the outer-mode Andreev state from the continuum analytically, we again concentrate on the vicinity of the topological transition and assume that the scattering is perturbatively weak [Eq. and φ 0 defined in Eq. ( Expression (39) verifies that the bound state energy is almost unperturbed far from the continuum: the level hybridization with the continuum is effective, and E sc 0 (φ) reaches the continuum edge at φ = π + φ sc 0 with a zero slope. Close to φ = πφ sc 0 the behavior of E sc 0 (φ) can be obtained from Eq. ( Another interesting feature of the Andreev spectrum at B > ∆ is that weak scattering induces shallow bound states at φ = 0 and 2π [see inset in Fig. To quantify how these states peel off from the continuum, we compute Λ(E, φ) for B -∆ -|E| B -∆ in the limits φ 1 and 2πφ 1 (see Appendix D 3) under the assumption of weak scattering, 1 -D 1, |γ| 1. Then, through Eq. ( At φ ∈ [0, φ s ), we find the energy of the shallow state E = ±E sc s (φ) with Near φ = 2π the energy of the shallow bound state satisfies E = ±E sc s (2πφ). The shallow bound states are remarkably sensitive to the forward scattering phase γ. As one can see from Eq. (40), they appear in the energy spectrum even in the sole presence of forward scattering (D = 1, γ = 0). This case, for arbitrary γ, is considered in Appendix B. In addition to detailed calculations, we provide there a qualitative explanation of the shallow states' origin. The domain of φ containing shallow states broadens with the increase of |γ|, as indicated by Eq. (40). When γ gets sufficiently close to ±π/2, the shallow states hybridize with the outer-mode bound state due to weak backscattering (near the transition, B -∆ ∆, this requires |γ ± π/2| ∼ (B -∆)/∆, see Appendix B). As a result of the hybridization, an energy level is formed that is separated from the continuum at all phase differences, see Fig. Next, we discuss the influence of scattering on the structure of the spectrum above the continuum edge. In Sec. III A we observed that, in the transparent junction limit, the Andreev state in the outer modes coexists with the inner-mode continuum at |E| > |∆ -B|, see Fig. Precisely at the transition, B = ∆, the bound state is broadened at all phase differences [see Fig. Then, for the corresponding contribution to the density of states we get where Γ ≈ (1-D)∆. This implies that δρ is a superposition of two Lorentzian peaks with width ∼ ∆(1 -D) centered around E = ±E 0 (φ). In the subleading order, a small forward scattering phase, |γ| 1, changes the prefactor in the expression for the width of the peaks, Γ ≈ ∆(1 -D)(1 + γ 2 ). However, it does not alter δρ qualitatively: the broadening of the bound state into a resonance relies on a coupling between inner and outer modes, which is provided by D < 1. We note that expressions (42), (43) are equally applicable away from the transition at |∆ -B| ∆, for energies |∆ -B| E ∆. In this section we discuss how scattering affects the thermodynamic properties of the junction. We focus on the ground state energy E gs (φ) (Sec. IV B 1) and Josephson current I(φ) (Sec. IV B 2) in the even fermion parity sector on the two sides of the topological transition. We begin by studying the influence of scattering on E gs (φ) and on the many-body excitation energies of the junction. In the trivial regime, B < ∆, the ground state at D < 1 is separated from the excitations by a gap at all phase differences. The effects of the scattering on the many-body spectrum are more intricate in the topological regime, B > ∆. There, weak scattering does not destroy the phase domain (previously identified at D = 1, γ = 0) where the gap between the ground state and the excited states is absent, see Fig. This gapless domain might vanish completely if the scattering is sufficiently strong. In particular, at large forward scattering phase close to ±π/2 the shallow bound states strongly hybridize with the outer-mode bound state, as discussed in Sec. IV A 2. As a result, the excitation spectrum is gapped at all phases [see Fig. The Josephson current I(φ) can be obtained from E gs (φ) through Eq. ( In the trivial phase, B < ∆, the discontinuity at φ = π smears symmetrically in φ [see Fig. Here we neglected a small contribution of the continuum states to I(φ), as it weakly alters the result close to φ = π (see Appendix E 2 a for details). Eq. ( The influence of weak scattering on the ground state energy and many-body spectrum in the topological regime, B = 1.25∆. Solid (dashed) curves represent many-body states with even (odd) fermion parity belonging to the discrete spectrum. Shaded grey regions represent the continuous part of the spectrum, of either fermion parity. The solid red curves denote the ground state energy in the even parity sector. At weak scattering [D = 0.925, γ ≈ -0.09π, panel (a)] there exists a phase region φ ∈ (π + φ sc 0 , 2π -φs) where the energy gap between the ground state and the excited states is absent. For a larger forward scattering phase [D = 0.925, γ = 0.3π, panel (b)] the gap is present at all phases φ. current interpolates between +e∆/2 and -e∆/2 gradually over the phase interval The scaling of the smearing, δφ ∝ √ 1 -D, is similar to the case of a regular short SNS junction Next, we discuss how scattering smears the discontinuity in I(φ) in the regime of the 4π-periodic Josephson effect, B > ∆ [Fig. Backscattering replaces the discontinuity in the Josephson current at φ = π + φ 0 by a kink at φ = π + φ sc 0 . The resulting function I(φ) does not have a symmetry around φ = π + φ 0 . The overall smearing of the discontinuity occurs within the interval 8. The influence of weak scattering on the Josephson current I(φ). Solid black curves depict I(φ) at D = 0.925, γ ≈ -0.09π (the relation between the parameters corresponds to the case of a delta function barrier, see Eq. ( Comparing Eq. (47) with Eq. (45), we see that the step in the Josephson current becomes sharper upon the transition to the topological phase, see Fig. At small backscattering, the kink in I(φ) persists for almost all values of γ. It may vanish only at γ close to ±π/2, when the shallow bound states merge with the outer-mode bound state and the many-body excitation spectrum becomes gapped at all phases [see Figs. Finally, it is illuminating to consider how weak scattering influences the Josephson current at the topological transition threshold, B = ∆. At this point, there are no bound states in the system; only the broadened resonances are present. Thus, the behavior of the ground state energy and Josephson current is fully determined by the contribution from the continuum states. In particular, the smearing of the discontinuity in I(φ) [see Fig. smeared on the scale This intermediate scale matches both with Eq. (45) and Eq. ( The Josephson effect is one of the most important probes of a superconductor since it directly measures the order parameter. It can also be used to distinguish topological superconductors from conventional ones, but the distinction is smeared by fluctuations of the junction's fermion parity caused by unpaired fermions in the bulk, such as those induced by disorder, quasiparticle poisoning, or finite length of the wire. In this paper, we have shown that, even in the absence of such fermion parity fluctuations, the behavior of a highly-transparent Josephson junction is quite subtle near the magnetic-field-driven topological transition in a proximitized semiconducting nanowire. A qualitative distinction remains between the topological (B > B c , where B c = ∆ in our model) and non-topological (B < B c ) phases: the ground state energy and the Josephson current, I(φ), are 2π-periodic in the latter case and 4π-periodic in the former. However, the 4π-periodicity of the Josephson current just above the transition emerges as a shift of the zero-crossing in I(φ) away from φ = π by a small amount ∝ (B -B c )/B c . Consequently, the 4π-periodic component of I(φ) develops gradually on the background of a larger 2π-periodic component as the Zeeman energy B is increased past B c . For a multi-channel junction, the 4π-periodic component of the Josephson current will be accompanied by an even larger 2π-periodic component due to the non-topological bands in the wire, further masking the topological phase in the vicinity of the transition. Nevertheless, there is an unusual and robust signature of the topological transition in a nanowire Josephson junction at high transmission. In the topological state, the excitation spectrum (within a fixed parity sector) is gapless over a range of phase differences, |φ| > π + φ sc 0 . This feature survives in the presence of weak scattering. The gaplessness arises because, in that range of φ, the bulk gap is smaller than the coupling between the two Majorana modes at the junction. Consequently, the system lowers its energy by changing the fermion parity of the coupled Majorana modes (relative to their parity at |φ| < π + φ sc 0 ) and creating an above-gap fermionic excitation. An additional even number of channels cannot change this conclusion: it is possible to flip the parities of channels in pairs, but there will always be one channel left over that cannot change its parity to minimize the energy without creating an above-gap excitation. The gaplessness has observable implications for the Josephson current. It leads to kinks in the current-phase relation at the boundaries of the gapless domains, φ = ±(π + φ sc 0 ). The presence of kinks in the topological phase is in contrast to the smooth I(φ) dependence in the non-topological regime. Finally, consistent with the notion of a phase transition, the ground state energy and critical current are non-analytic functions of (B -B c ); we find a non-analytic contribution ∝ (B c -B) ln B c /|B c -B| to I(φ). Some signatures of the 4π-periodic Josephson effect have so far been reported in dynamic properties of the junction, such as Shapiro steps As we already mentioned, the inner and outer modes decouple from each other at D = 1. The Andreev spectrum of the outer modes is independent of the forward scattering phase γ; this follows from the fact that γ can be eliminated from the outer-mode problem [Eqs. (5b) and (6b) with D = 1] by a unitary transformation Φ o (x) → e -i(γ/2) sgn(x)σz Φ o (x). Thus, the contribution of the outer modes to the energy spectrum is not affected by γ. The same unitary transformation applied to the inner modes absorbs the forward-scattering phase at the price of rotating the magnetic fields on the two sides of the junction in directions opposite to each other (the angle between the two directions is proportional to the forward-scattering phase shift). At some phase shift, the fields point in opposite directions. In the absence of superconductivity (∆ = 0), the corresponding Hamiltonian is identical to a Dirac Hamiltonian in 1D with a mass m(x) which changes sign at x = 0. That brings about a localized zero-energy state. At an arbitrary magnetic field rotation angle, the localized state moves away from zero energy, but does not vanish. Inclusion of a finite but small gap (∆ < B) does not destroy this state. The Andreev spectrum of the inner modes depends sensitively on γ. The inner-mode bound state energy is a solution of the equation Λ i (E, φ, γ) = 0, with Λ i given by Eq. (A20) (in which αk In order for the equation Λ i (E, φ, γ) = 0 to admit a solution, the second term of Eq. (A20) must be negative. Simple algebra shows that this condition is equivalent to (B1) In the trivial phase, ∆ > B, the inner-mode bound state exists for φ ∈ (φ 1 , 2πφ 1 ), where Its energy, E = ±E 1 (φ, γ), may be obtained analytically by solving Λ i (E, φ, γ) = 0 (squaring this gives a quadratic equation in E 2 , of which precisely one root satisfies 0 < E 2 < (∆ -B) 2 in the specified range of φ). The result is more complicated than Eq. ( Then for the solution to Λ i = 0, we obtain As discussed in Sec. IV of the main text, weak backscattering, 1-D 1, may cause the inner-mode level(s) to hybridize with the outer-mode bound state. Recall that, at D = 1, the outer-mode bound state E 0 (φ) reaches the edge of the inner-mode continuum at φ = π ± φ 0 , where φ 0 is given by Eq. ( Near the transition, B -∆ ∆, this reduces to |γ ± π/2| < ∼ (B -∆)/∆, i.e., the condition stated in Sec. IV A 2 of the main text. Finally, let us consider the effect of weak backscattering when |γ| > arcsin( ∆/B) is so large that the bound state in the inner modes is already separated from the continuum at all phases φ. Now hybridization with the outer-mode bound state may lead to the situation depicted in Fig. At energies E > |∆ -B|, the determinant of the S-matrix of the inner modes is given by (see Appendix A 2) with Λ i , defined in Eq. (A20), analytically continued into the appropriate range of above-gap energies by taking . The scattering-induced contribution to the continuum density of states is then given by Eq. ( where F (φ) and G(φ, γ) are defined in Eq. (A21). Equations (B6) and (B7) generalize Eqs. ( Here, 0 4 = (0, 0, 0, 0) T , and As before, we choose branches so that k ν (E) always lies in the upper-right quadrant of the complex k-plane (Re k ≥ 0, Im k ≥ 0), and so that η ν (E) is a continuous function of E that approaches -i∞ as E → ∞. Thus, η ν (E) is purely imaginary for E > |∆ + νB|, and real for |E| < |∆ + νB|. Any function Φ(x; E) that satisfies Eq. (C2) can be expressed as a linear combination of the generalized plane waves at that energy E: where a summation over ν = ± is implicit, k ν (E), Φ χ σ,ν (E) (χ = i, o) are given in Eqs. (C5), (C6) respectively, and we have suppressed all arguments for brevity. When the wavevectors are real, the coefficients a χ σ,ν (b χ σ,ν ) multiply incoming (outgoing) plane waves. When the wavevectors are imaginary, a χ σ,ν (b χ σ,ν ) multiply the generalized plane waves that grow (decay) exponentially at infinity. The boundary condition at x = 0, Eq. (C3), then yields a linear system of equations to be satisfied by the coefficients: where and Ω a , Ω b are 8 × 8 matrices, given by As before, [Φ, Ψ, • • • ] denotes the matrix whose first column is Φ, second column Ψ, and so on. T = T (φ, D, γ) is the transfer matrix across the junction, defined in Eq. (C3) above. The wavefunction Φ(x; E, φ) in Eq. (C8) represents a valid solution of the linearized BdG problem if and only if (i) the coefficients a χ σ,ν , b χ σ,ν satisfy Eq. (C9), and (ii) Φ(x; E, φ) satisfies appropriate conditions at x = ±∞. We first consider states belonging to the discrete spectrum (bound states), which correspond to normalizable wavefunctions Φ(x; E, φ). Normalizability requires that the wavevectors σk ν (E) appearing in the expansion (C8) all have positive (negative) imaginary part for x > 0 (x < 0). A similar analysis to that in Appendix A 1 shows that bound states can only exist at energies |E| < min(|∆ -B| , ∆), where all the k's are imaginary. The bound state wavefunction then has the form (C8) with a χ σ,ν ≡ 0. The b χ σ,ν coefficients must still satisfy Eq. (C9), which reduces to: + αk -αk + 2∆ 2 cos 4 (φ/2) -E 2 (1 + cos 2 (φ/2)) , (C15b) First, we discuss how the hybridization of the bound states, which happens near φ = π in the trivial phase, B < ∆, can be described quantitatively by approximately solving the equation for the bound state energies, Λ(E, φ) = 0. To begin with, we simplify the general expression for Λ(E, φ), Eq. (C14), under the assumptions To leading order in the small parameters we find Here E 0 (φ) ≈ -∆(φπ)/2, E 1 (φ) ≈ -(∆ -B)(φπ) are the expressions for the energies of outer and inner-mode bound states [Eqs. ( 2. Hybridization between the outer-mode bound state and the states of the spectral continuum in the topological phase Next, we employ the general expression for Λ(E, φ), Eq. (C14), to describe how the energy of the outer-mode bound state, E sc 0 (φ), is affected by scattering in the topological phase, B > ∆, near the continuum edge. In that, we focus on the vicinity of the topological transition and on phases φ close to π, Furthermore, we assume that the scattering is weak, Given these approximations, Eq. (C14) can be simplified considerably at |E| ∆. Performing a lowest-order expansion in small parameters, we find Here E 0 (φ) ≈ -∆(φπ)/2 is the energy of the outer-mode bound state in a transparent junction. switches from even to odd [see Fig. The origin of the shallow states upon the topological transition