High-temperature superconductivity in Fe-based pnictides and chalcogenides has been one of the most significant recent discoveries in condensed matter physics and has attracted remarkable attention in the last decade. These materials are characterized by a complex fermiology and, as a result, feature a wide range of electronic properties as a function of different tuning parameters such as chemical doping, temperature and pressure. Along the path towards the comprehension of the physical mechanisms underlying this rich phenomenology, NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and NQR (nuclear quadrupole resonance) have played a role of capital importance that we review in this work. In particular, we address how NMR has contributed to the current understanding of the main regions of the electronic phase diagram of Fe-based pnictides, that is, the -sometimes coexistingantiferromagnetic spin-density wave and superconducting states. We evidence the unique capability of NMR as local-probe technique of investigating the effect of quenched disorder and chemical impurities. Then, we review the NMR signatures of low-frequency fluctuations associated with the development of electronic nematicity as well as with the motion of superconducting flux lines. Finally, we discuss recent contributions of NMR and NQR which evidence an intrinsically inhomogeneous electronic charge distribution as well as an orbitally-selective behaviour. 1. Introduction to iron-based superconductors 2 PIETRO CARRETTA and GIACOMO PRANDO 28 5. The superconducting state 28 5 . 1. The superconducting order parameter 30 5 . 2. Probing the lattice of flux lines with nuclear spins 33 6. Summarizing It is said that rules are made to be broken, and often the implications of this attitude for transgression have been highly beneficial for the advancement of Science. A good example comes from the research on superconductivity, a thermodynamical phase of matter characterized by perfect diamagnetism and infinite electrical conductivity. The value of the critical temperature T c -separating superconductivity from the high-temperature conventional (or "normal") state -is the most immediate quantifier of the potential of the considered superconductor for technological applications. Accordingly, the discovery of materials characterized by higher and higher T c values has been the main goal of the fundamental research on superconductivity since its discovery by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911 The discovery of high-T c superconductivity in iron-based pnictides and chalcogenides also marked a clear departure from the Matthias's rules. Most remarkably, the very presence of stoichiometric amounts of paramagnetic Fe within the considered materials could be deemed as detrimental to the development of superconductivity just in view of the lapidary prescription "stay away from magnetism". For this reason, the report in 2006 of T c ≃ 4 K in LaFePO 1-x F x Several review articles have been published over the last decade discussing the physics of IBSs (iron-based superconductors) from a broad perspective . 1. Structural properties. -To date, all the known classes of iron-based materials displaying high-T c superconductivity share common structural properties. In particular, the fundamental crystallographic units are bi-dimensional arrays of Fe ions arranged at the vertices of a square lattice and sandwiched between two similar layers composed of a pnictogen or chalcogen element -typically As or Se, respectively. Every Fe ion is -Representative crystallographic structures for the high-temperature tetragonal phases of iron-based 1111 (left-hand panel, space group P 4/nmm) and 122 (right-hand panel, space group I 4/mmm) pnictides. The dashed lines delimit the unit cell, which contains two formula units for both 1111 and 122 materials. Images generated with the software VESTA The simplest structure is observed in the so-called 11 family of chalcogenides -with FeSe as representative material, whose relative stoichiometric weights justify the name of the family -where the Fe-Se layers described above are simply stacked one on the top of the other More realistic approaches must be followed in order to go beyond the idealized properties of the lattices described above. For the specific example of alkaline iron selenides belonging to the 122 family, the chemical formula A x Fe 2-y Se 2 should be used in order to take the atomic vacancies at the A and Fe sites into account. In fact, interesting struc- . The labels of significant high-symmetry points are reported for clarity. Images adapted from tural effects are associated with these defects. In particular, it is known that vacancies on the Fe layer tend to give rise to ordered superstructures which are long-ranged for specific compositions In most iron-based pnictides and chalcogenides, a structural distortion develops at a critical temperature T s . At high temperatures, compounds belonging to the 1111, 11 and 122 families belong to tetragonal space groups (primitive P 4/nmm and bodycentred I 4/mmm for 1111/11 and 122, respectively) but the symmetry is lowered to orthorhombic for T < T s (base-centred Cmme and face-centred F mmm for 1111/11 and 122, respectively), making the two in-plane lattice parameters inequivalent (b/a > 0.99). As discussed later on in detail, major effects are reported for the anisotropy of the electronic properties below T s in spite of the quantitatively small effect on the structure. . 2. Electronic band structure and magnetism. -The physical properties of pnictide compounds belonging to the 1111 and 122 families are generally modelled by considering the Fe-As layers as the electronically-active elements. Experiments and band-structure calculations evidence that the Fermi level is crossed by the five bands originating from the d-orbitals from Fe, with minor contributions to the density of states from those associated with As orbitals Experiments evidence that a commensurate antiferromagnetic SDW (spin-density wave) phase develops below the critical temperature T N ∼ 140 K in 1111 and 122 pnictide materials However, the phenomenology described above is not universal for all the iron-based materials. In general, it is known that the fermiology of iron-based chalcogenides does not include hole pockets at the Γ point, suppressing the nesting effects which are relevant in pnictides. At the same time, several studies have shown that the relative degree of electronic correlations vs. kinetic energy in iron-based materials is highly variable depending on the actual compound being considered. It is widely accepted that correlations in parent 1111 and 122 pnictides are of moderate intensity -leading to a "badmetallic" state characterized by high values of electrical resistivity and enhanced effective electron mass -yet not strong enough to bring the systems to a Mott-insulating state The multi-orbital fermiology of iron-based materials leads to exotic physical properties . 3. Effect of chemical substitutions. -The most spectacular physical properties of iron-based materials develop upon perturbing the parent compositions by means of different approaches. This is shown in Fig. In general terms, progressive chemical substitutions can have several consequences in condensed matter. The most natural effect is the introduction of quenched disorder, normally with detrimental repercussions on superconductivity. Fig. Additionally, chemical dilutions normally generate internal strains leading to changes in the structural parameters (chemical pressure) but they may also introduce or remove additional free electrons and/or localized magnetic moments (charge and magnetic doping, respectively). Such a complicated interplay of different effects can be partially disentangled in specific cases -for example, isovalent substitutions such as As 1-x P x give the possibility of studying the effect of disorder and chemical pressure alone, and this strategy has been used extensively for iron-based pnictides. In this context, an intrigu- -Electronic phase diagrams for representative materials belonging to the 122 family under the effect of different chemical dilutions and/or external hydrostatic pressure (see the text for details). The labels "M" and "SC" refer to the magnetic and superconducting phases, respectively. The up-pointing triangles denote the critical temperature for the M phase estimated by means of neutron scattering experiments. This holds also for the down-pointing triangles which, however, correspond to a magnetic phase developing within a tetragonal crystalline environment -hence the label "MTet". The diamonds and the squares denote the critical temperature for the M and SC phases, respectively, estimated by means of dc magnetometry. The data for Ba1-xKxFe2As2 are taken from ing result is that the development of the magnetic phase looks correlated with structural parameters such as the distance of the pnictogen element from the Fe layer (the so-called pnictogen height h Pn ), the distance between Fe ions and the Pn-Fe-Pn angle within the distorted FePn 4 tetrahedra regardless of the actual family of compounds The common case of non-isovalent chemical substitutions affects the occupation of the electronic bands as well and both the situations of electron-and hole-doping can be realized, as shown in Fig. A simplified approach to the description of charge doping is the so-called rigid-band approximation. Within this framework, the band structure of parent compounds is assumed to be not altered by the charge doping, which only affects the band occupancy and the position of the Fermi energy E F in turn. It is then immediate to realize that a change in E F can easily affect the relative sizes of hole and electron pockets and destabilize a condition of good nesting for the Fermi surface, and suppress the SDW phase upon increasing the doping level. In fact, in view of the discussion above concerning isovalent substitutions, more realistic approaches should consider the combined effect of charge doping and structurally-induced tweaks in the band structure -however, this may well turn out to be too simplistic as well. It is remarkable that a common scaling for the suppression of the SDW state induced by the Fe 1-x Tm x substitution can be realized by considering the amount of dilution x rather than the effective charge doping . 4. Superconducting phase. -Small values for the superconducting coherence length and large penetration depths -typically ξ ∼ 1 -10 nm and λ ∼ 0.1 -1 μm, respectivelycharacterize IBSs as type-II superconductors. Additionally, typical values for the upper critical field H c2 are as high as 10 6 Oe The most remarkable similarity between IBSs and cuprates is that the superconducting phase emerges in close proximity to the suppression of an antiferromagnetic phase, leading to fundamental questions about the possible interplay between these two states. In fact, several theoretical proposals have been put forward in the last decades addressing the role of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations as glue for the Cooper pairing in most unconventional superconductors, ranging from cuprates to heavy-fermions The model outlined above is neither the unique theoretical proposal to describe the mechanism underlying superconductivity in IBSs nor is it universal for all IBSs. In fact, it has been proposed that orbital fluctuations would also lead to high-T c superconductivity and, in view of the attractive-like character of the interaction, the arising multi-gap scenario would not require relative sign changes among different portions of the Fermi surface (s ++ symmetry) . 5. Electronic nematicity. -A peculiar feature of the microscopic magnetic stripy arrangement sketched in Fig. As mentioned above, the structural transition has minor quantitative effects on the crystallographic properties. However, it is remarkable that characteristic electronic properties exhibit a marked in-plane anisotropy in the nematic state NMR and NQR have played a key role in the understanding of the normal state excitations and of the superconducting state. In this section we shall introduce the very basic quantities which can be measured with these techniques in order to allow a deeper understanding of the subsequent sections dedicated to the findings of NMR and NQR in iron-based superconductors. . 1. Basic principles. -NMR and NQR are spectroscopies relying on the use of nuclei as local probes of their nanoscopic environment where H Z is the Zeeman term of interaction with external or internal magnetic fields. The diagonalization of H N leads to a set of eigenvalues for the nuclear system and a typical NMR experiment is designed in such a way as to induce transitions among these energy levels resonantly with a radio-frequency magnetic field, subject to the relevant magnetic dipole selection rules. In NMR, H Z is the dominant term in Eq. 1 and the quantization axis -conventionally aligned with z -is set by the direction of the magnetic field H 0 . In the idealized limit leading to energy levels defined by the quantum number m I , i.e., the projection of I along H 0 . The separation between adjacent levels turns out to be ∆E = hγH 0 = hω 0 , with ω 0 the Larmor frequency. Thus, if H Z is the only term of the Hamiltonian, a single NMR line at ν 0 = ω 0 /2π is detected. On the other hand, H Q is the dominant term in NQR and the principal axes of the EFG tensor define the quantization axis. An ideal physical system governed by H N = H Q would then lead to the Hamiltonian where V xx , V yy and V zz are the principal components of the EFG tensor verifying the Laplace equation α V αα = 0 (α = x, y, z). Additional relations between these components reflect the crystallographic symmetries of the system under investigation. For the specific case of iron-based materials in the tetragonal phase, the principal axes of the EFG tensor at the 75 As nuclei coincide with the crystallographic axes and the relation |V zz | > |V xx | holds as well as the equality V xx = V yy . This latter condition is broken by the small structural transition to the orthorhombic phase. These structural changes can be described by the asymmetry parameter η (see Eq. 3), which is zero when the EFG tensor is characterized by a cylindrical symmetry and non-zero when such symmetry is lowered. For I = 3/2 the above Hamiltonian leads to a single NQR resonance line at Thus, NQR is an important tool to monitor locally the development of abrupt structural phase transitions [134] through a splitting or a shift of the line. At the same time, sudden modifications of the EFG may also stem from the development of ordered states for the distribution of electrical charges, such as in charge-density wave phases . 2. Shift and broadening of the resonance line. -Variations in the external thermodynamical parameters lead to valuable information on the crystalline environment of the nuclei. For instance, changes in temperature and pressure affect the crystalline structure and the induced progressive shrinkages/expansions are reflected directly by changes in the EFG, readily detected by quadrupolar nuclei. At the same time, these parameters may also influence the local static uniform spin susceptibility χ(q = 0, ω = 0) [or, in short, χ(0, 0)] which affects the nuclei in turn via H NE , causing a change in the local field at the nuclei with respect to H 0 . Hence, the resonance frequency ω r is shifted with respect to the Larmor frequency ω 0 = γH 0 . The paramagnetic shift ∆K (often called Knight shift in metals) allows one to measure the local static uniform spin susceptibility. In fact, by taking H NE = γhIAS, with A the (tensorial) hyperfine coupling of the nuclear spin I with the electronic spin S, one can write in the linear response regime. Long-range ordered magnetic phases may lead to significant shifts or even splittings of the resonance line, the details depending, for example, on the orientation of the internal magnetic field with respect to the quantization axis and on the degree of commensurability of the ordered phase with the underlying lattice symmetry. Every possible transition between a couple of energy levels is associated with a finite lifetime τ coh . Under ideal conditions, this quantity is measurable in an experiment as an intrinsic broadening of the resonance condition around the resonant frequency by an amount ∆ν ∼ τ -1 coh . When performing an experiment on a real sample, one deals with a macroscopic amount of nuclei and the quantum mechanical conditions of all the nuclei must be rigorously identical and homogeneous across the sample if one needs to detect the intrinsic broadening. This is the reason why the intrinsic term ∆ν is conventionally referred to as homogenous broadening. A prototypical, temperature-independent source of homogeneous broadening for NMR resonance lines is given by the dipolar interaction between like nuclei -i.e., between the same isotopes. However, in real samples, the microscopic interactions often lead to inhomogeneous conditions mostly associated with the disorder and/or the anisotropic nature of the couplings. The situation is particularly severe in solids and, as a result, the broadening normally detected for resonance lines in solids is often much larger than the limit set by τ -1 coh . This condition is referred to as inhomogeneous broadening. Typically, the interaction with unlike nuclei and paramagnetic centres cause an inhomogeneous broadening. In type-II superconductors, the modulation of local magnetic fields induced by vortices in the mixed Shubnikov state is an example of temperature-dependent source of inhomogeneous broadening (see Sect. 5 . 2), from which interesting information can be extracted . 3. Spin-lattice and spin-spin relaxation times. -Considering a macroscopic nuclear system described by Eq. 1, the populations of the energy levels at the thermodynamical equilibrium are described by Boltzmann statistics. The resulting configuration is characterized by an equilibrium value of the nuclear magnetization M eq I that can be calculated from a Curie-like treatment of the paramagnetic susceptibility. The statistical occupancy of the energy levels makes it possible to define a spin temperature T spin that, under thermodynamical equilibrium conditions, is equal to the temperature T L of the surrounding medium -conventionally referred to as the "lattice". Sudden changes in the conditions of the external parameters (e.g., reversals of the magnetic field) or suited pulsed protocols can bring the system out of equilibrium and T spin can take values from -∞ to +∞. The characteristic time by which the population on the energy levels goes back to equilibrium is T 1 , the spin-lattice relaxation time. T 1 is directly related to the transition probability among the energy levels driven by the time-dependent part of H N . Since in NMR, for H 0 //z, the population difference between the energy levels is proportional to (M I ) z , T 1 is determined by the recovery of (M I ) z back to its thermal equilibrium value. If the time-dependent part of H N is associated with fluctuations of the local magnetic field h, determined for example by electron spin fluctuations or by the flux lines dynamics, then where h ± (t) = h x (t) ± ih y (t). The Fourier transform at the resonance frequency is involved owing to the conservation of energy, while the magnetic dipole selection rules involve only the components of the fluctuating field perpendicular to the quantization axis. It is often possible to write h ⊥ exp(-t/τ c ) and accordingly, based on Eq. 6, leading to a peak in 1/T 1 when the frequency of the fluctuations ω c = 1/τ c matches the resonance frequency ω r . If the fluctuations are driven by electron spins localized at lattice sites labelled by the index j, one can write A j S q (t)e iq•rj (8) which, after substitution in Eq. 6, leads to Here, |A q | 2 is the form factor giving the hyperfine coupling of the nuclei with the spin excitations at the wavevector q and S αα (q, ω r ) is the component of the dynamical structure factor at the resonance frequency. Accordingly, 1/T 1 is determined by the q-integrated amplitude of the low-frequency fluctuations, properly filtered by the form factor. The local fluctuations do not affect only the longitudinal component of the nuclear magnetization but also the transverse component, whose time evolution is determined by the characteristic spin-spin relaxation time T 2 . While 1/T 1 can be defined unambiguously, the estimate of 1/T 2 depends very much on the radio-frequency pulse sequence being used. T 2 is often defined as the characteristic decay time of the echo after the π/2 -τ -π Hahn sequence, where π/2 and π are the nuclear spin flip angles. This sequence is very effective Fig. The presence of two peaks has been associated with the presence of charge-poor and charge-rich regions segregated at the nanoscale in generating an echo as far as the magnetic field is static over a time of the order of τ , otherwise the echo amplitude is reduced. For example, for a correlation function of the fluctuations decaying exponentially over a time τ c , the echo amplitude decays according to the following expression (τ being the separation between the π/2 and π pulses) The presence of very low-frequency fluctuations can be evidenced by recording echo combs using the CPMG (Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill) pulse sequence with different separations among the radio-frequency pulses The different quantities measured in NMR-NQR experiments, i.e., the spectra and the relaxation rates, can be used to investigate the normal state excitations of ironbased materials. In fact, the study of the normal state excitations has always been central for the understanding of the mechanism driving superconductivity. Akin to the cuprates T N Fig. The inset enlarges the divergence of the spin-lattice relaxation rate at the magnetic ordering temperature in LaFeAsO. Remarkably, the 1/T 1 measured on both peaks is the same In the most studied electron-doped IBSs -such as those belonging to 1111 and 122 families -it has become clear since the early days that, in spite of the presence of weaker electronic correlations with respect to the cuprates, a Fermi liquid description is not appropriate. In fact, clear deviations are observed from the standard Korringa behaviour observed in metals of 122 compounds a peak is observed, but only for H 0 ⊥ c (see Fig. Also the temperature dependence of the paramagnetic shift is not Pauli-like as expected for a Fermi liquid. In the electron-doped 122 compounds, for example, an activated increase of the paramagnetic shift with temperature is observed A significant interest was drawn by the observation of a nematic order in FeSe The breaking of the C 4 symmetry is expected to lead to a divergence of the so-called ) ) Fig. nematic susceptibility which can be probed by perturbing the material with an external uniaxial strain ǫ While the studies of the nematic susceptibility have concentrated on 122 compounds owing to the possibility of growing large detwinned single crystals, an extensive study of the nematic transition under strain with NMR has not been carried out in other IBS. Remarkably, signatures of nematic fluctuations are present throughout the whole phase diagram of BaFe 2 As 2 , both in the electron It is interesting to notice that further signatures of very low-frequency fluctuations, possibly associated with nematic fluctuations, were detected also in the case of electrondoped BaFe 2 As 2 . In particular, in the normal state of Rh-doped BaFe 2 As 2 , displaying properties very similar to Co-doped BaFe 2 As 2 the similarities in the magnetic structure of IBS and vanadates, it has been argued that these fluctuations are nematic ones 2. Charge order . -One of the most debated issues in the field of high-T c superconducting cuprates is the role of the charge order which has been extensively probed by X-ray scattering techniques over the last decade ) What about the iron-based superconductors? As remarked previously, in 1111 compounds 75 As NQR spectra are characterized by double peaks for certain fluorine doping levels which evidence a nanoscopically-modulated charge distribution, possibly pinned by disorder In the cuprates the charge order phase gets enhanced in the underdoped regime where the effects of the strong electronic correlations are more pronounced. Accordingly, it is convenient to search for an analogous phase in the alkali-doped 122 compounds where the substitution of Ba with an alkali ion causes a reduction in the number of e -/Fe to 5.5, approaching the half-filling condition where eventually a Mott insulating phase could arise. 75 As NQR experiments in RbFe 2 As 2 and in CsFe 2 As 2 showed that 75 As 1/T 1 shows a crossover below a characteristic temperature T * from a high-temperature T -independent behaviour to a low-temperature power-law behaviour (see Fig. In spite of the presence of a charge order in the IBSs, akin to the one detected in the cuprates, the nature of the charge order is still unclear. Namely, it is not established if there is a CDW, an orbital order or another type of inhomogeneous charge distribution. Indeed also the mechanism driving that inhomogeneous charge distribution could differ between the two families of superconductors. In particular, in the IBS the pronounced Hund coupling J could drive a charge unbalance. In fact, Isidori et al. to promote high-spin configurations would favour a transfer of charge between different sites and generate a charge disproportionation. In that case, as pointed out by Moroni et al. . 3. Orbital selectivity. -Within an orbitally-selective scenario, if a nucleus is coupled with different electron bands then 1/T 1 would be the sum of independent contributions from each of these bands. A first clear evidence of such a behaviour came from 75 As NMR study of the magnetically ordered LaFeAsO On the other hand, one would expect that different nuclei could be more or less coupled with different bands depending on the hybridization of the orbitals of the atoms to which they belong to and, accordingly, show a behaviour of 1/T 1 which is more characteristic of strongly correlated or weakly correlated metals. Since the orbital selective behaviour -Doping dependence of the density of states at the Fermi level in LaFe1-xRuxAsO as deduced from the doping dependence of 139 La 1/T1 around room temperature (squares) and from band structure calculations (circles) is expected to become more pronounced with increasing electronic correlations it is likely that a more clear signature of this behaviour is evidenced in the alkali-doped BaFe 2 As 2 , with an average electron doping of 5.5 e -/Fe. Indeed, Zhao et al. The understanding of the effect of impurities in superconductors is relevant for many aspects The decrease of T c upon doping with impurities can be significantly different if one considers the substitution of Fe with a diamagnetic atom as Ru high as ≃ 60 % of Ru In fact, one observes an initial suppression rate for the magnetic ordering temperature (1/T N (x = 0))(dT N /dx) which is very close to that of spin-diluted Li 2 VOSiO 4 On the other hand, the effect of Mn doping on the optimally F-doped LaFeAsO superconductor has a dramatic effect on the superconducting phase: it is enough to introduce a tiny Mn doping, as low as 0.2 % to fully suppress the superconducting transition temperature from 26 K to zero Indeed, a careful study of the temperature and Mn-dependence of 75 As 1/T 1 showed that as the Mn content increases towards x c ≃ 0.002, the value leading to the suppression of T c , 1/T 1 T increases at low temperature and eventually diverges at x c for T → 0 (see Fig. with T 0 a temperature describing the characteristic frequency of the spin fluctuations with S the electron spin. From the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 at x c = 0.002 of Mn one derives ξ ∼ 1/ √ T , the temperature dependence of the correlation length expected for a 2D correlated antiferromagnetic metal close to a quantum critical point (see Fig. 5. -The superconducting state . 1. The superconducting order parameter . -NMR has proven to be one of the most powerful tools to unravel the microscopic mechanisms leading to superconductivity Fig. Thanks to the hyperfine coupling of the nuclei with the electron spins, the measurement of the paramagnetic shift is basically the only direct way to probe the spin-state of the Cooper pair and to clarify whether singlet or triplet superconductivity is realized. In the first case a decrease in the absolute value of ∆K is observed below T c The temperature dependence of 1/T 1 allows to investigate the symmetry of the superconducting gap as well. In the presence of a wavevector-dependent gap ∆(k), one can write 1/T 1 in terms of ∆(θ, φ) M (E) is the coherence term in the density of states. Generally, the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 for T → 0 in IBSs is characterized by a power-law behaviour which indicates either the presence of nodes and/or of more than one superconducting gap. The overall behaviour of 1/T 1 is also consistent with an s ± symmetry of the superconducting gap. It is remarked that in F-doped LaFeAsO no Hebel-Slichter peak . 2. Probing the lattice of flux lines with nuclear spins. -Nuclear spins act as nanoscopic Hall sensors of the magnetic field distribution within the FLs lattice (see Fig. The field distribution generated by the FLs lattice causes an additional broadening of the NMR spectrum which is directly related to the second moment of the distribution and hence to the penetration depth λ with Φ 0 the flux quantum and k FL a number which depends on the unit cell of the FLs lattice with the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter, with the presence of more than one gap, or even with the dynamics of the FLs causing a motional narrowing of the NMR spectrum Bossoni et al. Remarkably, a temperature dependence of the correlation time compatible with the VTF law was derived in the same compound also from ac susceptibility measurements The weak perturbation approach used in NMR and even more in NQR, where no magnetic field is needed, combined with the local nature of the nuclear probe make these techniques rather unique and powerful for the understanding of the properties of superconductors. In this review we have presented some of the most recent achievements obtained by these technique in iron-based superconductors. In the superconducting state we have shown how NMR allows to detect the even s ± symmetry of the superconducting order parameter and remains a rather unique approach to detect the related singlet spin state of the Cooper pair. Below T c the nuclei allow also to probe the local field fluctuations induced by the flux lines dynamics and the combined investigation with 1/T 1 , 1/T 2 and NMR spectroscopy allows to estimate the London penetration depth, the progressive slowing down of the dynamics on approaching a vortex liquid-glass transition and to draw the H -T phase diagram of the flux lines lattice in IBS from a nanoscopic point of view. The mechanism leading to the formation of the Cooper pairs likely involves the spin excitations and 1/T 1 studies allow to follow the evolution of the spin excitations throughout the phase diagram of the IBS and to evidence how the changes in the spin excitations manifest themselves in the superconducting state. More interestingly, several peculiar phenomena characteristic of strongly correlated electron systems have also been evidenced thanks to NMR: the orbital selective behaviour and charge order in the holedoped IBS, the nematic order and fluctuations extending over a significant region of the phase diagram. Similarly to the cuprates, the presence of several competing energy scales make iron-based superconductors phase diagram rather rich and complex, with several open questions still to be answered, as the mechanisms driving the inhomogeneous charge distribution, the nematic phase and superconductivity. The hunting for those responses will trigger further NMR and NQR research activity in iron-based superconductors in the future.