The paradigmatic Migdal-Eliashberg theory of the electron-phonon problem is central to the understanding of superconductivity in conventional metals. This powerful framework is justified by the smallness of the Debye frequency relative to the Fermi energy, and allows an enormous simplification of the full manybody problem. However, superconductivity is found also in many families of strongly-correlated materials, in which there is no a priori justification for the applicability of Eliashberg theory. In these systems, superconductivity emerges out of an anomalous metallic state, calling for a new theoretical framework to describe pairing out of a non-Fermi liquid. In this article, we review two model systems in which such behavior is found: a Fermi sea coupled to gapless bosonic fluctuations, and a system of fermions with local, strongly frustrated interactions. In both models, there is a well-defined limit in which the Eliashberg equations are asymptotically exact even in the strongly coupled regime. These models thus provide tractable examples of how superconductivity can emerge in the absence of coherent electronic quasiparticles; they also demonstrate the surprisingly wide applicability of the Eliashberg formalism, well beyond the conventional regime for which it was originally designed. Superconductivity (SC) is often regarded as one of the most striking examples of a macroscopic collective quantum phenomena in a many-electron system. Since the original discovery of SC in mercury in 1911, it took nearly fifty years and the trio of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) to arrive at a microscopic theory of phonon mediated superconductivity in conventional metals Remarkably, Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) theory is controlled in a well-defined limit, which does not necessarily rely on the smallness of the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling λ, but rather on a small (λθ D /ε F ), where θ D and ε F are the Debye temperature and Fermi energy, respectively. In this limit, Migdal and Eliashberg showed that the full many-body problem can be reduced to solving a set of non-linear self-consistent equations. These equations capture a host of physical effects, including the retardation of the phonon-mediated electronphonon interaction, its interplay with the bare Coulomb repulsion, and the renormalization of both the electronic and phononic quasi-particles; see Ref. One of the holy grails in the field is the nature of pairing instabilities out of such NFL states that host a critical Fermi surface (CFS)-a sharp electronic Fermi surface without any low-energy Landau quasiparticles. There are a number of pertinent questions, which include: (i) Is there an underlying Cooper instability for a CFS and is it an essential ingredient for superconductivity? (ii) Can a CFS be unstable to superconductivity as a result of the same electronic interactions that lead to the destruction of the quasiparticles in the first place? (iii) Are there generic 'intertwined' ordering tendencies that compete with superconductivity in the regime of strong interactions? (iv) What is the role played by the Fermi surface geometry ('fermiology') in determining the nature of these instabilities? The answers to many of these questions in models with purely electronic interactions remain poorly understood for the most part. Finding concrete examples of electronic models, either defined on the lattice or in the continuum (as effective field theories), where the emergence of NFL behavior and superconductivity can be analyzed through reliable theoretical means is challenging and remains of paramount importance. In this short article, we review some of the recent understanding of superconductivity in two classes of electronic models. We begin by discussing the low-energy effective field theory for a FL coupled to the fluctuations of a gapless bosonic field, that can arise, e.g., at a quantum critical point (QCP) to some form of broken symmetry, or for (non-local) fermions that are charged under an emergent gauge field. Next we discuss a solvable example of a lattice electronic model with frustrated interactions. In both of these two cases, there is a well defined limit where a NFL regime emerges. Since there is no separation of scales between the Fermi energy and the characteristic energy scale of the bosonic fluctuations in the problem, a Migdal type argument does not apply. Nevertheless, in both problems there is a well-defined theoretical limit where Eliashberg theory becomes exact, and captures the emergence of a non-Fermi liquid state and its interplay with superconducting instabilities, or lack thereof. We focus on some of the recent conceptual advances, addressing specifically the questions raised above. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we review the lowenergy field theoretic formulation for a Fermi surface coupled to the fluctuations of a gapless bosonic field. We focus specifically on a controlled setup to treat the problem at strong-coupling in Sec. 2.1 and consider the pairing instabilities of the CFS thus obtained in Sec. 2.2. In Sec. 3, we introduce lattice models with the hope of describing non-Fermi liquids at strong coupling. We review a relatively recent approach that utilizes a solvable limit in Sec. 3.1 to describe different non-Fermi liquid regimes, including an incoherent metal and a marginal Fermi liquid (Sec. 3.2). In Sec. 3.3, we describe the instabilities of these states to pairing and other forms of order. We summarize these results and discuss them in a broader context in Sec. 4. In this section, we review the classic problem of a Landau Fermi liquid coupled to the fluctuations of a collective mode, i .e. a bosonic field. The framework often goes under the name of Hertz-Millis-Moriya (HMM) criticality The former example (i .e. Q = 0 boson) includes the problem of a Fermi surface coupled to a gapless transverse gauge boson, which appears as a lowenergy description of a U(1) spin-liquid with a spinon Fermi surface In all of the above setups, it is important to address the fate of the infra-red fixed point structure of the theory, if there exists one. In particular, does the Fermi surface survive down to zero temperature realizing a T = 0 NFL with a sharp Fermi surface, or is there a pre-emptive instability to pairing (possibly even other competing orders) due to the interactions mediated by the same gapless boson? As it turns out, the answer to this question depends on the underlying microscopic details, as we shall review below. The example with Q = 0 describes the problem of an onset of a 'densitywave' (i .e. a spin, charge or pair-density wave) in a Landau Fermi liquid. In the ordered-phase, as long as |Q| < 2|k F |, the Fermi-surface gets reconstructed where the gap opens up near a set of points (in two spatial dimensions) referred to as 'hot-spots'. At the critical point, the gapless boson leads to an enhanced scattering near these hot-spots, where NFL behavior sets in; regions far away from these points retain their FL-like behavior. We will not discuss the subtle interplay between the hot and cold regions along the Fermi surface, and how they interact with the gapless boson (as well as various composite operators We are interested in describing the low-energy physics of the fermionic states near the Fermi surface at k = k F coupled to the long-wavelength/low-frequency modes of the gapless Q = 0 boson. The minimal Euclidean action is given by, where ψ kα with α = 1, ..., N represents an N component fermion (N = 2 in most cases of physical interest for spinful fermions) and a is the gapless boson. Depending on the details of the specific underlying problem, a is either the transverse component of a gauge-field, or the nematic order parameter. In the former example, O(x, τ ) represents the transverse current density for the ψ fermions, while in the latter it is the ψ-bilinear that transforms with the same symmetry as the order parameter. There is a long history of treating the problem within random-phase approximation (RPA), which can be systematically organized within a 1/N -expansion (Fig. on the case of two-dimensions, such an RPA treatment leads to, where D, Π, and Σ are the boson propagator, boson self-energy and fermion selfenergy, respectively, ν is the density of states near the Fermi energy, and v F is the Fermi velocity (see Fig. In the absence of the subtleties explained above, formally the expansion would only be of order 1/N m at each order, m. However, controlling the divergence leads to the said enhancement by the factor of N m-1 . The resulting low-energy structure of the theory thus becomes far more complicated than can be reliably treated within the simple 1/N expansion and the eventual fate of the possibly singular nature of the diagrams remains unclear. An alternative way in which the theory can be made controlled is to make it non-local by a 'small' amount and study the problem in the limit of a small (= z b -2) 1; thus = 0 ( = 1) corresponds to the HLR problem with Coulomb interactions (spinon Fermi surface and nematic QCP). How does this modification provide us with a controlled route towards describing a NFL regime, and more importantly, when is it legitimate to introduce a small parameter to vary the dynamical exponent? To begin with, for the one-patch theory, the modified expression for the selfenergy after including the sum over the same set of planar diagrams is of the form The advantage of this setup is that as long as (= z b -2) ∼ 1/N , the above expression becomes controlled in the N → ∞ limit and is dominated by the first term in the expansion (i .e. m = 1, which is essentially the one-loop result). As was argued earlier It turns out that there is an important distinction, tied to the "Amperean" interaction between two fermions mediated by the boson, in the two cases. For the gauge-field problem, the particle current associated with one patch is parallel to the hole current in the antipodal patch; the gauge-mediated interaction for the "2K f " particle-hole pair is therefore attractive. On the other hand, the currents for the fermions, but now with one from either patch are antiparallel and the resulting gauge-mediated interaction is repulsive in the particle-particle Cooper channel. Due to the precise form of the Yukawa coupling in both the cases, the situation is exactly reversed for the nematic problem. Thus, it is not difficult to imagine that the gauge-field fluctuations suppress tendency towards an instability in the Cooper channel but the nematic field enhances the same tendency. We discuss this in a little more detail in the next section. Before focusing our attention on quantum critical metals, let us first briefly review the problem of pairing in conventional metals. As is well known for ordinary Fermi liquids, forward and BCS scattering are the only kinematic processes that survive after carrying out a Wilsonian RG transformation where V s(a) represent functions of momenta that are symmetric (antisymmetric) under exchanging Focusing specifically on the BCS case and superconducting solutions at zero center of mass momentum, we choose Restricting these momenta to lie on the FS for a rotationally invariant system, these coupling constants can be simplified to m e im(θ1-θ2) , where we have expanded the interaction in terms of all the allowed harmonics. Upon carrying out the usual Wilsonian RG for a FL where the coupling constants have been rescaled by a factor of (k F /v F ) to make them dimensionless. Clearly, if we start with a repulsive V In order to address this question within the two-patch formalism, it is useful to first define the dimensionless coupling constant, α ≡ e 2 v F Λ -/(2π) 2 . Within a one-loop RG, the coupling has the flow Thus, depending on whether = 0 or > 0, α either flows logarithmically to zero or to a fixed point value, α * = N/2. We now have an interesting situation where naively one expects the gapless fluctuations of the boson (which mediate long-range interactions between the fermions) to enhance the tendency towards pairing while the same boson also destroys the quasiparticles near the Fermi surface. The key question boils down to which of these two effects dominates. To examine this question, we add a local interaction of the form of Eq. 11 to the action of the critical metal, Eq. 1. In the large-N and weak V m limit, the primary effect of the gapless boson is to renormalize the effective BCS interaction. This is shown as the one-boson exchange process in the pairing vertex in Fig. where ζ = +1 (-1) for the nematic (gauge-field) problem and D > (ω, k) denotes the bosonic propagator which includes contributions from 'high-energy' modes, Λ e -/2 < |k| < Λ. The RG flow for the BCS coupling thus becomes where the first term, which is independent of m, arises from the gapless boson (and has an interesting sign-structure) while the second term is the same as Eq. 12. The combination of Eqs. 13 and 15 determines the fate of the NFL and its potential instability to pairing. For the problem of a Fermi surface coupled to a nematic order parameter (ζ = +1), where the gapless boson mediated interactions in the pairing channel become attractive, the above analysis leads to an interesting result. In the regime where the calculation is controlled (i .e. when 1), if one compares the scale (Λ NFL ) at which the NFL behavior sets in and the quasiparticles get destroyed with the pairing scale (∆ pair ), one finds Λ NFL ∆ pair The problem of a metal near a nematic quantum critical point is free of the sign problem, thanks to the presence of two spin flavors. This problem has been studied extensively Let us now return to the problem of Fermi surface coupled to a gauge field (ζ = -1). In contrast to the nematic problem, the gauge field fluctuations now drive the interaction in the pairing channel repulsive. For small and positive (corresponding to the problems of spinon Fermi surface and HLR with short-ranged interactions), the fixed-point structure from Eqs. 13 and 15 leads to α * = N /2 and V * ± = ± /2. The fixed point (α * , V * + ) is stable in the infrared. Thus the spinon Fermi surface and HLR phase are stable against pairing as long as the initial value of V is greater than V * - It is important to note that we have focused primarily on conventional BCS pairing of spinons with zero center of mass momentum in this review. To the best of our knowledge, within the -expansion, the spinon fermi surface is stable against pairing towards more exotic states with a finite center of mass momentum, such as the one considered in Ref. The RG analysis of the pairing instabilities, controlled within the double expansion in and 1/N , is identical to studying the pairing vertex within the Eliashberg approximation In the previous section, we discussed a concrete example of a NFL and its propensity towards a superconducting instability within a low-energy field theoretic approach. In this section, we present a departure from this paradigm and instead focus on a complementary framework constructing lattice models for NFLs. We consider multi-orbital electronic models with a single globally conserved density and interacting with strong local SU(2) invariant interactions. Let us start with a generic model defined on the sites, r, of a hypercubic lattice in an arbitrary number of dimensions The hopping parameters are denoted, t rr , the chemical potential, μ d , can be tuned to adjust the total conserved U (1) density for the d-electrons and U ijk represent the on-site interaction matrix-elements. It is useful to consider an additional multi-orbital system of c-electrons (with an independent globally conserved density) coupled to the d-electrons as, The hopping parameters for the c-electrons are ζ rr and the chemical potential is denoted μ c . The couplings V ijk represent inter-species interaction matrixelements. We will always be interested in the regime where the bandwidth of c-electrons is much bigger than the corresponding bandwidth of d-electrons, i .e. W c W d -a situation that is often encountered in mixed-valence compounds At weak-coupling, i .e. when U, V W d , W c , a simple perturbative approach is sufficient to conclude that the system is described by a Fermi liquid (for a generic density of c, d-electrons) over a broad range of temperatures. On the other hand, the fate of the metallic state at strong-coupling, where a perturbative treatment is no longer justified, is unclear. Controlled theoretical progress, be it analytical or numerical, is impossible without imposing additional structure on the interaction matrix elements. In order to draw concrete conclusions for the above model in the regime of strong-coupling, we introduce a specific structure that makes the model 'solvable' in the limit of large-N . Let us return to Eqs. 18, 21 and treat the interaction matrix elements as independent Gaussian random variables. We further make the following assumptions: where ' ' denotes 'disorder' averaging. Notice that while the above choice implicitly assumes that we are averaging over different disorder realizations, each realization as defined by Eq. 18 and 21 has exact translational symmetry, i .e. we choose U ijk , V ijk to be identical at every lattice site Let us briefly review the structure of the large-N saddle point equations, after averaging over the different realizations (each of which have perfect translational symmetry), which reduce to a set of self-consistent equations for the electron Green's function, G c (k, iω), G d (k, iω), and the interacting self-energies, The dispersions for the d and c electrons are denoted ε k and k , respectively. The equations above can be represented in a compact fashion diagramatically in terms of the 'melonic' series in Fig. From a purely scaling point of view, the hopping terms are relevant compared to the SYK interaction terms. It is thus not surprising that the system at asymptotically low temperatures will be described by a Fermi liquid; remarkably the scale at which the crossover to the FL regime sets in for the d-electron system is T coh ∼ W 2 d /U , with T coh finite. In this limit, the solution for the Green's function upon solving Eq. 26 has the form where W * ∼ T coh ∼ W 2 d /U is also the renormalized bandwidth for the d-electrons, Z is the quasiparticle residue, ε k is the renormalized dispersion (ε k /ε k is of order unity in the strong coupling limit), and γ is a number of order unity (the log appears only in two-dimensions). The factor of B(ω), that descends from the "spectral asymmetry" There are a number of remarkable features associated with the above solution, which can be obtained analytically in two asymptotic regimes. As we already discussed, the appearance of a FL at low-energies, while interesting, is not entirely surprising. However, the FL is not a plain-vanilla metal; the quasiparticle weight is strongly renormalized as Z ∼ 1/(ν 0 U ), where ν 0 ∼ 1/W is the single-particle density of states (we use units where the lattice spacing a = 1) and is accompanied by a strong mass-renormalization, m * /m ∼ U/W (∼ Z -1 ). Within the above model, the FL has a dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) like character The metallic regime at scales above W * is completely incoherent-there is no sharply defined surface in momentum space (resembling a Fermi surface) and there are no long-lived quasiparticles At this point, we may ask if both of these metallic regimes are stable against pairing (and possibly other) instabilities, or if all of the interesting NFL properties are masked by such ordering tendencies? This will be the primary subject of discussion in the following section. But before we do so, let us investigate the possible role played by the c-electrons once they are coupled to the strongly interacting d-electrons by turning on a finite V . It is clear that when the strongly renormalized heavy FL is coupled to the non-interacting c-electrons at scales below T coh , the resulting state remains a FL with two independently conserved densities. On the other hand, when the c-electrons scatter off the fluctuations associated with the SYK-like d-electrons, the self-energy becomes, This is the celebrated marginal Fermi liquid (MFL) form of the self-energy A number of recent works Imposing this constraint does not modify the solution for the single-particle Green's function (Eq. 31). The linearized gap equations in the spin-singlet orbital diagonal pairing channel, that originate from the full Eliashberg equations (valid to leading order in 1/N ), take the simple form which can also be expressed diagramatically as in Fig. When U ijk = +U ikj , the NFL regime at T > T coh is unstable to on-site s-wave pairing with a finite T c . The momentum dependence in the above equation can then be ignored as the physics is completely local and emerges at the level of a single site. Moreover, since there is only one scale in the problem, T c ∼ U (with an O(1) prefactor). The interesting sign structure of the matrix elements essentially generates attraction in the pairing channel, thereby masking the onset of any NFL regime. The spin-dependent structure of the model here is crucial -a spinless version of the same problem would not show the same phenomenology, since (i) there is no on-site orbital diagonal 'triplet' order that can be similarly defined, and, (ii) a true transition at T c (with a diverging susceptibility) in the spatially extended spin-triplet channel can not emerge due to a finite hopping (t rr ), as long as the latter can be treated perturbatively. On the other hand, when U ijk = -U ikj , the NFL regime is stable against pairing all the way down to T coh , even though the pairing susceptibility grows in strength (without diverging) as a function of decreasing temperature. However, once there is a crossover into the incipient heavy FL regime, a generalized Kohn-Luttinger type mechanism The linearized self-consistent equations for the instabilities in the particlehole channel, describing density-wave instabilities, also have a solution in this regime Finally, consider the pairing instabilities for the two-band model upon turning on a finite V . Assume the following additional structure on the interaction matrix elements, and, unlike Eq. 33, treat U ijk and U ikj as statistically independent (we do this in order to avoid any intrinsic SC instability associated with the d-electrons). The linearized gap equations in the spin-singlet orbital diagonal pairing channel for the c-electrons takes the form, Let us first focus on the case where there is a positive sign in Eq. 35, in which we can get a non-trivial solution to Eq. 36 even neglecting the (weak) momentum dependence of Π d . After integrating over the momentum perpendicular to the Fermi surface, we obtain the following equation for the pairing vertex: Here, Σ c (iω) is given by Eq. 32, and Π d has the SYK form: Π d (iω) ∼ 1 U log U |ω| . It is instructive to examine the limit V W c ∼ U . In this limit, we can show that the superconducting T c , where a solution to Eq. 37 first appears, is parametrically larger than the marginal Fermi liquid scale Ω MFL , defined as the energy scale at which |Σ c (iΩ MFL )| = Ω MFL . This follows from an analysis along the lines of Ref. ν 0 V 2 . In this limit, therefore, the marginal Fermi liquid regime is preempted by superconductivity. In the intermediate coupling case, V ∼ U ∼ W c , both Ω MFL and T c are of the order of W c , and there is no parametrically broad MFL regime. In contrast, for the case of a negative sign in Eq. 35, there is no solution to Eq. 36 if the polarizability Π d is momentum independent. In the limit W d → 0, Π d is completely momentum-independent to leading order in 1/N (Π d is a convolution of the two d electron Green's functions, Eq. 30), and for W d = 0, G d is completely momentum independent Migdal-Eliashberg theory was designed to treat the electron-phonon problem, where the separation of scales between the Fermi energy and the Debye frequency provides a small parameter. Unfortunately, in strongly correlated electronic systems, there is no such natural small parameter that allows theoretical control. Finding special controlled limits -even artificial ones -could provide a useful handle on the rich non-perturbative physics that may emerge in these systems. In this article, we have reviewed two such controlled limits: the double expansion in small and 1/N for the problem of a Fermi surface coupled to a gapless boson, and the large N limit for the problem of lattice fermions with N -orbitals and frustrated interactions. Interestingly, in both limits, Eliashberg theory becomes exact, and describes the competition between the destruction of Landau quasiparticles and the pairing tendency, both effects arising from the same underlying mechanism. It may well be that, in many situations, Eliashberg theory is valid far beyond its formal range of validity In all of the examples discussed in this review where Eliashberg theory is applicable, the superconducting transition is fundamentally described within a generalized 'mean-field' type approach. In settings where the interactions are much larger than the bandwidth and the superfluid density is small, fluctuation effects near the superconducting transition are bound to be significant and a mean-field description is likely to fail. The recent discovery of superconductivity in a number of two-dimensional graphene based Moiré superlattices A natural follow-up question is if there is a bound on how large Tc can be, which has recently been addressed To be clear, for the problem of the spinon Fermi surface, the spinons are non-local fractionalized quasiparticles and are not 'Landau' quasiparticles' to begin with; as a result of the coupling to the gauge-field even the spinons are no longer well-defined quasiparticle excita- tions. These results are based on certain "resistivity proxies", obtained from an analytic continuation of imaginary time Monte Carlo data. This is consistent with some of the previous numerical studies Eliashberg theory has been applied to the problem of pairing of the HLR state in past We will be primarily interested in (2 + 1)-dimensions, but our constructions work in any number of dimensions. These notions can be made precise by taking the limit of W * → 0 followed by T → 0. Though it is important to note that there is no real 'bath' as the number of degrees of freedom in the two systems is comparable. Formally defined as the solution to G -1 c (k, ω = 0) = 0 as W * → 0 followed by T → 0. Note that it is also possible to consider these to be statistically independent, in which case there are no solutions to the linearized gap equation to leading order in 1/N . The precise ordering temperatures are determined by the numerical prefactors, which are controlled by the microscopic details of the specific model. In this case, Eq. 37 is essentially identical to Eq. 9 of Ref. This follows from the fact that when W d = 0, the number of d electrons is conserved on every site seperately. As the physicists' saying goes, a good theory is one that works at least an order of magnitude beyond its range of validity.