The development of memristive device technologies has reached a level of maturity to enable the design of complex and large-scale hybrid memristive-CMOS neural processing systems. These systems offer promising solutions for implementing novel in-memory computing architectures for machine learning and data analysis problems. We argue that they are also ideal building blocks for the integration in neuromorphic electronic circuits suitable for ultra-low power brain-inspired sensory processing systems, therefore leading to the innovative solutions for always-on edge-computing and Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications. Here we present a recipe for creating such systems based on design strategies and computing principles inspired by those used in mammalian brains. We enumerate the specifications and properties of memristive devices required to support always-on learning in neuromorphic computing system and to minimize their power consumption. Finally, we discuss in what cases such neuromorphic systems can complement conventional processing ones and highlight the importance of exploiting the physics of both the memristive devices and of the CMOS circuits interfaced to them. Neuromorphic computing has recently received considerable attention as a discipline that can offer promising technological solutions for implementing power-and size-efficient sensory-processing, learning, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications Another recent and very promising trend in developing dedicated hardware architectures for building accelerated simulators of artificial neural networks is related to the field of machine learning and AI storing network states and parameters. While this approach is producing amazing results in a wide range of application areas, the computing systems used to simulate these networks use significant amount of compute resources and power, especially for the training phase: the learning algorithms rely on high precision digital representations for calculating high accuracy gradients, and they typically require the storage (and transfer from peripheral memory to central processing areas) of very large data-sets. Furthermore, they often separate the training from the inference phase, dismissing the ability to adapt to novel stimuli and changing environmental conditions, typical of biological systems. While there are examples of hybrid memristive-CMOS hardware architectures being developed to provide support for AI deep network accelerators Our recipe (Fig. a. Lay out the ingredients in parallel on the worktop. To minimize power consumption and maximize robustness to variability, it is important to use physically distinct instantiations of neuron and synapse circuits, distributed across the silicon substrate b. Take your time. By eliminating the need to use timemultiplexed processing elements, these neuromorphic processing architectures can be designed to run in real physical time (time represents itself) as it happens in real biological neural networks. This is a radical departure from the classical way of implementing computation, that has decoupled computer simulation time from physical time since the very early designs of both computing systems and artificial neural networks d. Play it by ear: variability and randomness. Memristive devices are affected by both device-to-device and cycleto-cycle variability One important source of variability in the operational parameters of memristive devices is in their switching mechanism. In filamentary memristive devices, this mechanism exhibits stochastic behavior which stem from the underlying filament formation process e. Don't (hard) limit your devices. In the context of deploying always-on learning systems (both artificial and biological) in real-world applications, a critical feature is their memory storage capacity The thorough theoretical analysis on the limits of memory capacity in neural processing systems presented by Fusi and Abbott in 2007 Even though it is clear that in real physical systems hard bounds are unavoidable (e.g., the supply rails in an electronic system), there is evidence that memristive devices exhibit soft bounds To best implement the recipe we proposed it is necessary to use the right list of ingredients: a combination of memristive devices with multiple complementary features. The recipe shopping-list should comprise devices with different properties on retention, endurance, variability, switching currents, on-off ratios, that can be interfaced to analog and digital electronic CMOS circuits. However, even before attempting to bake the final hardware neural processing system, it is important to have access to realistic and faithful device models, so that during the design phase it will be possible to specify the characteristics of both the CMOS and memristive components and understand how to best exploit their processing features for properly modeling the different aspects of plasticity and neural information processing systems. Once fabricated, these neuromorphic processing systems should implement always-on life-long learning features so that they can adapt to changes in their input signals and keep a proper operating regime. This implies that the hybrid CMOS-memristive neuromorphic system would be updating its synaptic weights continuously, with every learning event. This requires the use of memristive devices that support small gradual conductance changes, and very small currents (e.g., < 1 μA), to minimize power consumption. In this case, the retention rate of such devices does not need to be extremely long, but should be compatible with the rate of weight update (which can be seen as a "refresh" operation) in the system. For example, in typical "edge" sensory-processing applications (wearable devices, home automation, surveillance, environmental monitoring, etc.) this could range from milliseconds to seconds or minutes. On the other hand, once the learning process has terminated or if there is a long pause in the rate of input signals (e.g., during the night in ambient monitoring tasks), then it will be useful to be able to consolidate the memories formed in nonvolatile memristive devices with high on-off ratio and long-retention rates. In this case, since this operation would not be as frequent as the weight-update one for the on-line learning case, it would be acceptable to use devices that require larger switching currents, and that have a small number (even two) stable states To match the time constants of the neural processing system to the dynamics of its input signals, to maintain a stable operating region over long time scales, and to optimize the learning of complex spatio-temporal patterns, it is necessary to implement both fast (short term depression, long term potentiation, long term depression, etc.) and slow (intrinsic, homeostatic, structural) plasticity mechanisms, "orchestrating" multiple time-scales in the learning circuits In addition, to increase the memory-capacity of such a system by introducing soft bounds for the synaptic weights, it is necessary to provide a mechanism that can realize the desired state dependence in the synaptic weight-update transfer function As evident from the list of ingredients and recipe provided, it is now possible to build ultra low power massively parallel arrays of processing elements that implement "beyondvon Neumann", "in-memory computing" mixed signal hybrid memristive-CMOS neural processing systems. It is important to realize that for data-intense processing applications these neuromorphic systems should be used to complement, rather than replace, traditional von Neumann architectures. They could be considered as the cherry on the cake of a complex AI inference engine, that enables alwayson neural processing, with life-long learning abilities. In this scenario, the hybrid memristive-CMOS neuromorphic computing system would carry out low-power computation acting as alow accuracy predictive "watch-dog" to quickly activate more powerful von Neumann architectures for high accuracy recognition, as soon as events of interest are detected. On the other hand, there are many applications where these hybrid neuromorphic systems would represent both the cherry and the cake together: these are IoT, edge-computing, and perception-action tasks that are solved efficiently by biological systems but have been proven to be "difficult" for artificial intelligence algorithms 