The synthesis conditions of SrTiO3(Co) samples in which cobalt predominantly enters the A or B sites of the perovskite ABO3 structure are found. EXAFS studies show that the Co impurity at the A site is off-center and is displaced from the site by 1.0 Å. XANES studies reveal two predominant oxidation states of Co: Co 2+ at the A site and Co 3+ at the B site. First-principles calculations of a number of possible cobalt-containing structural defects reveal defects whose properties are compatible with the experimentally observed Co oxidation state, its local structure, magnetic, electrical, and optical properties. The discovery of the room-temperature ferromagnetism in cobalt-doped anatase TiO 2 The functional properties of magnetic materials can be substantially improved if another type of ordering, for example, the ferroelectric one, can be realized in these materials. One of the approaches to creating materials with such a "double ordering" may be doping them with magnetic off-center impurities. The search for new magnetic off-center impurities, which simultaneously possess dipole and magnetic moments, is an actual problem because the interaction of these moments can result in the onset of interesting magnetoelectric properties In order to get a high Curie temperature in a dilute ferromagnet, magnetic atoms should have high magnetic moments. However, the magnetic moments of magnetic impurities can significantly depend on the structural position and the local environment of the impurities. Moreover, the impurities of 3d transition elements can exist in several oxidation states, which depend on their structural position, local environment, and on the presence of other donors and acceptors in the sample. In practice, the structural position, oxidation and magnetic states can be changed by varying the synthesis conditions. Our previous studies have shown that in the case of the Mn impurity in SrTiO 3 , the distribution of the impurity between A and B sites of the perovskite ABO 3 structure and the impurity oxidation state can be controlled by varying the annealing temperature and the stoichiometry of the samples Cobalt-doped strontium titanate has been studied for a long time. The similarity of crystal structures of SrTiO 3 (perovskite) and SrCoO 3-x (oxygen-deficient perovskite) suggests the existence of a continuous series of solid solutions between them. According to Ref. To determine the oxidation state of cobalt in SrTiO 3 , optical absorption, EPR, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) as well as the study of the near-edge structure in X-ray absorption spectra (XANES) were used. The optical absorption spectra of doped single crystals revealed absorption lines characteristic of the Co 3+ ion in the octahedral environment It should be noted, however, that the spread of the XPS peaks in different Co compounds exceeds the magnitude of their systematic chemical shift when changing the oxidation state The most interesting effect revealed in SrTiO 3 (Co) is the appearance of ferromagnetism at room temperature. Studies of magnetic properties have shown that the ferromagnetism is absent in weakly doped dielectric samples The structure and magnetic properties of SrTi 1-x Co x O 3 epitaxial films grown by PLD were studied in Ref. A weak ferromagnetism at 300 K was also observed in nanofibers prepared at T < 650 • C In Ref. Single-phase samples of SrTi 1-x Co x O 3 (x < 0.5) obtained by the solid-phase synthesis method at 1250-1400 • C were studied in Ref. In addition to the experimental studies of the roomtemperature ferromagnetism, the theoretical studies that discuss possible mechanisms of this phenomenon were performed using the HSE06 hybrid functional An important role of the oxygen vacancies forming the Co 2+ B -nearest vacancy complexes whose magnetic mo-ment is 1μ B B ions (S = 1/2) is ferromagnetic (2J = 60 meV/cell) and becomes very weak for second and third neighbors. This disagrees with the results of Ref. It should be noted that the properties of the SrTiO 3 (Co) samples essentially depend on the method of their preparation. The samples synthesized at high temperatures (close to thermodynamic equilibrium) are characterized by the presence of trivalent cobalt and the absence of room-temperature ferromagnetism. In contrast, in the samples prepared under conditions which can be considered as non-equilibrium (hydrothermal synthesis, PLD, nanofibers), the cobalt ions become divalent and the room-temperature ferromagnetism appears. This makes the problem of determining the real structure of the Co impurity complexes very actual. In this work, the structural position and the oxidation state of the Co impurity in SrTiO 3 prepared by the solid-phase synthesis method under various conditions are studied by XAFS (X-ray absorption fine structure) spectroscopy. It is shown that, depending on the preparation conditions, cobalt can enter either the B sites of the perovskite structure in the trivalent state or the A sites in the divalent state, forming an off-center impurity in the high-spin state (3μ B ). An analysis of the results of first-principles calculations of the structure of different Co-containing defects reveals the defects whose properties are compatible with the experimentally observed Co oxidation state, its local structure, magnetic, electrical, and optical properties. Cobalt-doped SrTiO 3 samples with impurity concentration of 2-3% and different deviations from stoichiometry were prepared by the solid-phase synthesis method. The starting components were SrCO 3 , nanocrystalline TiO 2 obtained by hydrolysis of tetrapropyl orthotitanate and dried at 500 • C, and Co(NO 3 ) 2 • 6H 2 O. The components were weighed in the required proportions, ground in acetone, and annealed in air in alumina crucibles at 1100 • C for 4 hours. The obtained powders were ground again and re-annealed under the same conditions for 4 hours. Some samples were additionally annealed in air at 1500 • C or 1600 • C for 2 hours. To incorporate cobalt into the A or B sites of the perovskite structure, the composition of the samples was deliberately deviated from the stoichiometry towards the excess of titanium or strontium. All obtained samples had a dark brown color. X-ray absorption spectra in the extended fine structure (EXAFS) and near-edge structure (XANES) regions were recorded in fluorescence mode at the K-edge of Co (7.709 keV) at 300 K at the KMC-2 station of the BESSY synchrotron radiation source. The radiation was monochromatized by a (111)-oriented two-crystal Si 1-x Ge x monochromator. The intensity of the incident radiation was measured using an ionization chamber. The intensity of the fluorescent radiation was measured by a R ÖNTEC silicon drift detector operating in an energy-dispersive mode. The powders were placed on the surface of adhesive tape which was then folded to provide an optimal thickness of the sample. The EXAFS spectra were processed using the widely used IFEFFIT software package where the sum runs over a few nearest shells j of the Co central atom and R j , N j , and σ 2 j are the radius, coordination number, and Debye-Waller factor for the jth shell, respectively. The parameter S 2 0 describes the reduction of the oscillation amplitude resulting from multi-electron and inelastic scattering effects. The backscattering amplitude f j (k) and phase shift φ j (k) for all single-and multiple-scattering paths, the phase shift of the central atom δ 1 (k), and the mean free path of a photoelectron λ(k) were calculated using the FEFF6 program. For each sample, 3-4 spectra were recorded, they were then independently processed, and the obtained χ(k) curves were averaged. The data processing details are given in Ref. First-principles calculations of geometry, magnetic and electronic structure of impurity centers were performed using the ABINIT software package in the LDA+U approximation. PAW pseudopotentials X-ray diffraction studies of SrTiO 3 (Co) samples showed that all samples are single-phase and have the cubic perovskite structure at 300 K (Fig. To determine the oxidation state of the Co impurity in the samples, the position of the absorption edge in the XANES spectra of doped samples was compared with those in the Co(NO 3 ) 2 • 6H 2 O (divalent cobalt) and LaCoO 3 (trivalent cobalt) reference compounds (Fig. A comparison of the XANES spectra of all samples annealed at 1100 • C and also of the sample which had a deviation from stoichiometry toward an excess of strontium and was annealed at 1500 • C shows that their absorption edges are close to each other and practically coincide with the absorption edge in the LaCoO 3 reference compound. This means that cobalt in these samples is predominantly in the +3 oxidation state. The absorption edges of the Sr-deficient SrTiO 3 (Co) XANES spectra of five SrTiO3(Co) samples and three reference compounds. (1) Co2A1600, (2) Co2A1500, (3) Co2A1100, (4) Co3B1500, (5) Co3B1100, ( In order to determine the structural position of the Co impurity, the EXAFS spectra were analyzed. When analyzing data and choosing structural models, the lattice parameter obtained from X-ray measurements was taken into account. In the perovskite structure, the impurity atoms can replace atoms both at the A and B sites Comparison of the EXAFS spectra of two groups of samples in which Co atoms have different oxidation states revealed their qualitative difference. For all samples in which cobalt is trivalent, a reasonable agreement between the experimental spectra and theoretically calculated curves was obtained in the model in which the Co 3+ ion replaces the Ti 4+ one with the formation of a distant oxygen vacancy. In this model, the Co-O distance in the first shell is 1.909(12) Å, the Co-Sr distance is 3.342(16) Å, and the Co-Ti distance is 3.892 An analysis of the EXAFS spectra of the Co2A1500 and Co2A1600 samples using the model in which cobalt enters the B site showed that the experimental and calculated spectra are very different. According to the XANES data, Co atoms in these samples are mainly in the +2 oxidation state and so they can replace the A site in SrTiO 3 . However, there is a big difference in the ionic radii of Co 2+ and Sr 2+ ions. An analysis of the EXAFS spectra using models in which the Co 2+ ion replaces the Sr 2+ ion showed that a reasonable agreement between the experimental and calculated curves is obtained in the model in which the Co 2+ ion is displaced from the A site along the [100] axis by approximately 1.0 Å (the nearest Co-O distance is 1.993(42) Å). Unfortunately, the agreement between the experimental and calculated EXAFS curves for all samples was not very good. The agreement criteria were low values of R factor, good correspondence of obtained coordination numbers to those of the model, and agreement between Fourier transforms in R space. In order to understand the reasons for the observed discrepancies, it is necessary to consider microscopic models of Co impurity centers with atoms at the A and B sites. When formulating theoretical models of the impurity centers, the data on the Co oxidation state and the interatomic distances obtained from the EXAFS data were taken into account. We note that the earlier firstprinciples calculations First, we calculated the geometry of the impurity center for the Co 2+ ion at the A site in SrTiO 3 . This is a simplest impurity center since the substitution of Sr 2+ with Co 2+ does not require any charge compensation. Calculations that took into account the full relaxation of atoms showed that the on-center position of the Co 2+ ion at the A site is energetically unstable and the impurity displaces into an off-center position (Fig. B -O distance in our case is 1.897 Å. For an isolated Co 2+ B -nearest V O complex, our calcula-tions predict the magnetic moment of 1μ B , in agreement with Ref. The impurity centers with trivalent cobalt at the B site suggest the existence of defects that compensate for the difference in ionic charges. Calculations for a model, in which an additional electron was supplied to an isolated Co ion by a distant donor F atom at the oxygen site (Fig. B ion yielded a rather close result (see Table The finding that the isolated Co 3+ B ion has no magnetic moment contradicts the experimental data. An effective magnetic moment of Co atoms of 1.96-2.85μ B was obtained from the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility in bulk samples with Co concentration close to that in our samples We considered an isolated Co 3+ B -nearest V O complex in which the required Co oxidation state is provided by a distant acceptor impurity (Rb at the Sr site, Fig. The calculations of energies of different complexes containing two Co 3+ B ions and one oxygen vacancy (Fig. (1) To have a non-zero magnetic moment, the Co 3+ B ion should have a nearest vacancy (isolated Co 3+ B ions and oxygen vacancies have zero magnetic moment); (2) the total energy of a system with two nearest Co atoms is higher than that for a system with two distant Co atoms (there is no tendency to clustering, in agreement with Ref. B ions with a distant vacancy. This result disagrees with the results reported in Ref. All distances obtained in the models in which the Co 3+ ion enters the B site (Table Insufficiently good agreement between the experimental and calculated EXAFS spectra stimulated us to consider more complex models. First, we considered the model in which the Co 3+ B ion forms a complex with the nearest oxygen vacancy. In this model, the distances obtained for the Co3B1100 sample were not much different from those for the model of Co 3+ B ion with a distant vacancy considered in Sec. III, but the S 2 0 factor in this model became much closer to that in the reference compounds. Using the results of first-principles calculations of the local environment for the off-center Co 2+ A ion (Sec. IV), we reanalyzed the EXAFS spectrum of the Co2A1600 sample. It appeared that the configurations with atomic displacements along the [100] and [111] axes give the lowest values of R factor. The calculated Fourier transform of the EXAFS spectrum for the model with [110] displacement exhibited a strong peak resulting from the Ti atoms in the third shell, which is absent in the experimental EXAFS spectrum. This means that this model can be excluded from further analysis. Taking into account the significant energy difference between the configurations with [100] and [111] displacements, we believe that Co atoms displace along the [100] axis, and will use this model in the future analysis. The determination of the structural parameters for a two-component model in which the EXAFS spectrum for each sample is composed of two above-considered contributions, which act simultaneously, was performed using an iterative technique described in detail in the Appendix. The experimental EXAFS spectra and their best fits for the Co2A1600 and Co3B1100 samples are shown in Fig. A ion displaced from the site in the [100] direction, the Co-O distance in the first shell (2.040(6) Å) and the distances to other shells are also in qualitative agreement with the calculated data. The data analysis showed that in the Co2A1600 sample 76% of the incorporated cobalt is at the A site, whereas in the Co3B1100 sample only 18% of impurity atoms enter the A site. The same iterative procedure was applied to the Co2A1500 sample. The structural parameters for this sample were close to those obtained for the Co2A1600 sample, but the fraction of Co atoms that enter the A site was 75%. We note that the behavior of cobalt in SrTiO 3 is very different from that of its neighbor in the Periodic Table -nickel The electronic structure of all considered Co impurity centers in SrTiO 3 is shown in Fig. The electronic structure of the paramagnetic Co 3+ Bnearest V O complex (Fig. The electronic structure of the paramagnetic Co 3+ B -V O -Co 3+ B complex (Fig. B -V O complex. In the forbidden gap it also has a pair of energy levels formed from d xz and d yz orbitals (Fig. The paramagnetic Co 2+ A ion (Fig. An interesting effect is observed when studying the configuration containing the Co 2+ A ion and the Co 3+ B -V O complex simultaneously. It turned out that the equilib- One can expect that under the interband optical excitation, the Co 3+ A ion and the Co 2+ B -V O complex can be transformed back to the Co 2+ A and Co 3+ B -V O centers as a result of capturing of the light-excited electrons and holes on the oppositely charged centers. As the magnetic moments of these centers increase to 3μ B and 2μ B , we can anticipate an interesting effect: optically-induced changes of magnetic properties of Co-doped SrTiO 3 . As far as we know, this effect was not studied so far. The possibility of this effect is confirmed by photochromism (optically-induced reversible changes in optical absorption spectra) observed earlier in Co-doped SrTiO 3 Based on our previous studies of Ni-doped SrTiO 3 and BaTiO 3 In Ref. A can donate one electron, whereas the Co 3+ B -V O complex can accept it. Therefore, the properties of the Co 3+ B -V O complex which is present in all samples according to our EXAFS data are consistent with the observed electrical properties. In considering optical transitions involving local energy levels in the forbidden gap, we should concentrate on the p-d transitions between the valence band (which is formed primarily from the O 2p states) and unoccupied d states. The intracenter d-d transitions and transitions between occupied d levels in the forbidden gap and the conduction band (which is formed primarily from the Ti 3d states) are always weaker because the initial and final states have the same parity. Our electronic structure calculations (Fig. B -V O and Co 2+ B -V O complexes are probably the main defects whose properties are consistent with magnetic, optical, electrical, and structural data obtained from the experiment. Other defects considered in this work can also affect these properties. We would like to draw attention to the fact that the preparation conditions of the SrTiO 3 (Co) samples in which the room-temperature ferromagnetism was observed are far from equilibrium. We can suppose that a significant amount of the off-center Co 2+ A ions which have a large magnetic moment (3μ B ) can appear in these samples in non-equilibrium conditions. An increase in the lattice parameter experimentally observed in these sam-ples A center is the only structural defect we have modeled which increased the unit cell volume upon doping. We think the question about the local structure and oxidation state of structural defects in these samples needs further experimental investigation. XAFS technique combined with first-principles calculations has been demonstrated to be a very fruitful approach for studying the structure of impurity-induced defects in crystals. In this work, the local structure and the oxidation state of the Co impurity in ceramic SrTiO the B site are trivalent. It was revealed that the Co 2+ A ions are off-center and are displaced from the A site by 1.0 Å. First-principles calculations of the properties of different structural defects in Co-doped SrTiO 3 were used to determine the defects whose oxidation state, local environment, magnetic, electrical, and optical properties agree with experiment. In particular, it was shown that the off-center Co 2+ A ions have a magnetic moment of 3μ B . As concerns to Co at the B site, only the impuritynearest vacancy complexes have a non-zero magnetic moment. Electronic structure calculations of different Cocontaining defects show that the Co 3+ B -V O complexes as well as Co 3+ A ion and the Co 2+ B -V O complex can produce strong optical absorption which can explain the brown color of Co-doped samples. A new effect, the optically-induced change of magnetic properties, was predicted for samples containing Co 2+ A and Co 3+ B -V O defects simultaneously. And the last, the reorientation of dipole moments associated with off-center Co 2+ A ions by an external electric field can strongly affect the interaction of their magnetic moments with other magnetic Co 3+ B complexes, thus inducing magnetoelectric effect in the samples. (0,0,0) (0.5,0.5,0) (0.5,0.5,0.5) Fig. 