Based on ab initio band structure calculations we formulate a general theoretical method for description of the temperature dependence of electric field gradient in solids. The method employs a procedure of averaging multipole electron density component (l = 0) inside a sphere vibrating with the nucleus at its center. As a result of averaging each Fourier component (K = 0) on the sphere is effectively reduced by the square root of the Debye-Waller factor [exp(-W )]. The electric field gradient related to a sum of K-components most frequently decreases with temperature (T ), but under certain conditions because of the interplay between terms of opposite signs it can also increase with T . The method is applied to calculations of the temperature evolution of the electric field gradients of pristine zinc and cadmium crystallized in the hexagonal lattice. For calculations within our model of crucial importance is the temperature dependence of mean-square displacements which can be taken from experiment or obtained from the phonon modes in the harmonic approximation. For the case of Zn we have used data obtained from single crystal x-ray diffraction. In addition, for Zn and Cd we have calculated mean-square displacements with the density functional perturbation treatment of the Quantum Espresso package. With the experimental data for displacements in Zn our calculations reproduce the temperature dependence of the electric field gradient very accurately. Within the harmonic approximation of the Quantum Espresso package the decrease of electric field gradients in Zn and Cd with temperature is overestimated. Our calculations indicate that the anharmonic effects are of considerable importance in the temperature dependence of electric field gradients. The electric field gradient (EFG) is a very sensitive characteristic of electron structure The methods are utilized in a wide range of applications. The time differential perturbed γ -γ angular cor-relation (TDPAC) spectroscopy On the other hand EFGs measured by these techniques, can be confronted with theoretical values obtained from ab initio calculations In the present paper following the ab initio path we formulate a novel theoretical approach to this problem, which on the basis of crucial band structure parameters The paper is written as follows: in the section II we give details of our approach, in section III we describe our results for the T reduction of EFG in hcp zinc and cadmium, discussing separately the possibility of increasing EFG with T in Sec. III C. Our conclusions are summarized in section IV. The EFG tensor V ij is defined as the second partial spatial derivatives of an electric self-consistent-field potential V evaluated at the nuclear site, i.e. where i = x, y, z. Since V ij is a symmetric (traceless) second rank tensor, it can be further diagonalized by transforming coordinates to the principal system of axes where |V zz | ≥ |V yy | ≥ |V xx |. (Thus, the number of independent parameters for EFG in the principal axis system is reduced to two.) The principal component (V zz ) is called the electric field gradient, and the second independent parameter is the asymmetry η defined as η = (V xx -V yy )/V zz (0 ≤ η ≤ 1). Very often EFGs demonstrate a strong temperature (T ) dependence which can often be described by a equation of this form: where the coefficient B > 0 implying smaller EFG with increasing T , and the coefficient α is usually 3/2 , also gave good quality fits Since the discovery of strong T dependence of EFG, the problem has been considered theoretically where V latt zz is the field gradient due to the non-cubic arrangement of ions in the lattice (excluding the central site), corrected by the antishielding factor γ ∞ and V el zz is due to the conduction electrons corrected by the shielding factor R where V in zz is the local contribution due to EFG, for example, from the charges inside a muffin-tin (MT) sphere, whereas V out zz is from the charges outside the MT-sphere [more details on Eq. ( Here T D is an effective Debye temperature and the function φ is the Debye integral Nowadays, while we can successfully obtain the T = 0 value of V zz by performing ab initio band structure calculations, the problem of finding its T dependence from first principles remains. It is a difficult and laborious problem because it requires an accurate calculation of both electronic and phonon properties. Probably, the first attempt is done by Torumba et al. in Ref. Surprisingly, in some studies an increase of V zz with T has been reported. For example, in 5% Fe-doped In 2 O 3 Here θ x and θ y are small rotations about the x-and yaxis, respectively, and θ x = θ y = 0. Notice that Eq. ( The temperature dependence of EFG is clearly a manifestation of both electron and phonon properties. To evaluate correctly V zz we have to effectively average it over atomic vibrations, because a typical frequency of the lattice vibrations (1 THz = 10 12 Hz) is large compared to a typical quadrupole frequency (100 MHz = 10 8 Hz) experienced by nuclear probes in solids. The electron density of a solid ρ( R) is a translationally invariant quantity, where a i (i=1, 2, 3) are the basis vectors of the Bravais lattice. Therefore, ρ( R) can be expanded in Fourier series, where the vectors K belong to the reciprocal lattice. Fourier components ρ( K) are usually found quite naturally from solutions of the Schrödinger (or Dirac) equation for an electron in a periodic mean field potential of the solid. According to the Bloch theorem, the solution for the electron band j has the form where the vector k lies in the first Brillouin zone, φ K+ k are basis functions and c k, j ( K) are the coefficients of expansion in the basis set. Almost in all computational methods the basis functions are modified plane waves, which in the interstitial region are simply φ K+ k ( R) ∼ where E F is the Fermi energy, we obtain Eq. ( The electron density in the interstitial region is only weakly dependent on the amplitudes of the vibrations since the band electron on average experiences a periodic potential from the regular arrangement of the ions. On the other hand, the electron density around a nucleus being attached to it by the Coulomb interaction is expected to follow adiabatically the vibrating ion. To reconcile these apparently contradictory viewpoints we consider a model of vibrating spheres [called below muffintin or MT-spheres], Fig. The electron density on an MT-sphere of the radius R MT centered at a site n and displaced from the equilibrium position X(n) = {X x (n), X y (n), X z (n)} by the vector u n can be expanded in the multipole series where Λ ≡ (l, τ ) stands for A 1g irreducible representations of the crystal point group, S Λ (θ, φ) are corresponding symmetry adapted functions (SAFs), l is the multipole orbital index and τ counts functions with the same l (if there are few such functions). The polar angles Ω = (θ, φ) are specified by the vector r from the nuclear position ( X + u). S Λ (θ, φ) are linear combinations of real spherical harmonics (Y m,c l ∼ cos mφ and Y m,s l ∼ sin mφ) defined by the crystal site symmetry and tabulated in , etc. Thus, we have only one quadrupolar function where z = cos θ. Then the general equation ( Rewriting the plane wave expansion in spherical harmonics [e.g. Eq. ( Here j l are spherical Bessel functions and K specifies the direction of K, i.e. K ≡ (θ K , φ K ). From Eq. ( where u ≡ u n and Here we have taken into account that for vectors K and X(n) belonging to the reciprocal and direct lattice respectively, e i K X = 1. In the case u = 0 (i.e. at the equilibrium position X) we get ρ u ( K) = ρ( K), where ρ( K) is defined by Eq. where Notice that Eqs. ( where Since the usual Debye-Waller factor is exp(-2W ) where the summation runs over all vectors k in the first Brillouin zone and the phonon branches s, while u s ( k) stands for the corresponding phonon amplitudes. From space symmetry considerations it follows that the function W ( K) is the same for a set of (non-equivalent) vectors (rays) K i obtained from K 1 = K by the application to K 1 all rotational or mirror symmetry elements of the crystal point group (i.e. for the vectors K i belonging to the same star). In the harmonic approximation W implicitly depends on the temperature through the number of thermally excited phonons n K,s . In the Debye approximation at high temperatures (T ≫ T D ) W ∼ T . For the calculation of EFG we need the quadrupole component (Λ = (2, 1)) of the electron density and potential, Appendix A. For that purpose, with the final expressions This expression will be used later in Sec. II D. Since for all K = 0 we have W ( K) > 0 even for zero temperature, the corresponding averaged Fourier components ρ( K) in Eqs. ( As will be discussed below in Sec. II D the effective decrease of ρ Q occurs also in the interior of the MT-sphere, r ≤ R MT , and finally leads to a reduction of EFG. In some rare cases as a result of the interplay between terms of opposite signs in Eq. ( The reduction or increase of ρ Q however does not affect the total charge of the sphere because the integral over the polar angles for SAFs S Q , Y 3,c 3 and the others with l = 0 are zero. The total charge of the sphere is due to the monopole term (l = 0), which is closely related to the K = 0 term in the Fourier expansion of density, Eq. In the following we shall apply our approach to the case of the hexagonal close packed structure, although in principle the consideration is general and can be used for other non-cubic lattices. In this section we demonstrate that the reduction (or increase) of ρ Q inside the MT-sphere results in a corresponding change of the quadrupole component of the potential and the electric field gradient. Similarly to the density expansion, Eq. ( Notice that the coefficients V Λ (r) for the potential and ρ Λ (r) for electron density, Eq. ( From a scrupulous analysis of the multipolar components of the potential (see Appendix A and Ref. where v Λ is a constant. This in particular implies that for quadrupolar component [Λ = (2, 1)] we have , etc. This dependence of V Q (r) is illustrated in Fig. Details are given in Appendix A. Notice that Eq. ( Here, V S, out Q and V S, in Q are the potentials due to all charges outside the MT-sphere and inside it, respectively. Correspondingly, for the quadrupole potential V Q at any point r = (r, θ, φ) inside the MT-sphere we have where (for hcp lattices S Q = Y 0 2 ) and Here ). It can be shown Here v out Q and v in Q are obtained from V out Q /r 2 and V in Q /r 2 when r → 0. As a result of the reduction of ρ Q (r) with temperature, v out Q and v in Q also become reduced, and V zz decreases with temperature. As shown in Sec. II B the average quadrupole density component ρ Q (R MT ) on the vibrating MT-sphere as a rule is reduced, Eq. ( Accoring to Eqs. (29a) and (29b), the reduced quadrupolar density component ρ Q (r, T ) for all r ≤ R MT changes the quadrupole charges as q . This in turn leads to the reduction of . We then for the temperature evolution of EFG have [compare with Eq. ( Eqs. ( The SRDW factor, Eqs. ( x , u 2 y and u 2 z , which are functions of temperature. For the hcp lattice u 2 x = u 2 y , and for calculations of SRDWF we need to know only two functions: U 11 (T ) = u 2 x and U 33 (T ) = u 2 z (for hcp lattice U 33 > U 11 ), The functions U 11 (T ) and U 33 (T ) can be calculated within the harmonic approximation or extracted experimentally as illustrated in Fig. In Fig. In this section we apply the method described earlier to calculations of the temperature dependence of the electric field gradient of solid zinc and cadmium crystallized in the hexagonal close packed lattice. For that we need data on the Fourier expansion of the electron density in the interstitial region, quadrupole components of electron density and potential obtained from the electron band structure calculations. Electron density functional calculations have been performed with the Moscow-FLAPW code x (T ) and u 2 z (T ) as given in Ref. x (T ) and u 2 z (T ) (or directly related to them temperature factors B x (T ) and B z (T ) For the phonon part (2) of calculations the firstprinciples pseudopotential method as implemented in the Quantum Espresso (QE) package the standard solid-state pseudopotential (SSSP) library Mean-square displacements for hcp structure of zinc are shown in Fig. On the other hand, our calculations of the temperature evolution of EFG using experimental data for U 11 (T ) and U 33 (T ) demonstrate a good correspondence with the measured values of V zz , Fig. growing with T according to experimental data tions. The calculated reduction is 0.6% with the mean square displacements from Ref. Results for cadmium are given in Figs. The calculated absolute value of EFG is V zz = 7.82 × 10 21 V/m 2 . The zero point vibration contribution to V zz amounts to 0.8% according to DFPT-QE and 0.4% in the model The most important factor in the T dependence of EFG is R = U 33 /U 11 . As discussed in Sec. III A, B and shown in Fig. Here the T dependent SRDWFs are incorporated in the weight factors W i = exp(-W ( K i , T )) and c i , ρ( K i ) > Individual K-star contributions to electric field gradient at T = 300 K [each term ∝ j2(KRMT )SQ( K)( ρ( K) T =300 -ρ( K) T =0), Eq. ( Both W 1 and W 2 reduce with T , but if W( K 2 , T ) drop fast enough in comparison with W( K 1 , T ), one can have a resulting increase of the expression in the square brackets of (36) and of the whole sum. Our detailed numerical analysis for the situation is illustrated further in Fig. We have presented a new method which can describe the temperature evolution of electric field gradient V zz in metals. The consideration is based on the fact that the average value of the quadrupole component ρ Q of electron density on a sphere vibrating with the nucleus, Eq. ( We have applied our method to hexagonal close packed structures of pristine zinc and cadmium. In the case of zinc where the mean-square displacements U 11 (T ) and U 33 (T ) are known experimentally from single crystal xray diffraction In addition, we have performed calculations of the mean-square displacements in Zn and Cd in the harmonic approximation by using the DF perturbation treatment of the QE package In our studies we have not found an intrinsic mechanism for the T 3/2 dependence of EFG, Eq. ( Finally, we mention that even at zero temperature the measured EFGs are smaller than V zz calculated by ab initio methods. The zero temperature reduction however is small: 0.6% in Zn and 0.4% in Cd.