Van der Waals materials and heterostructures manifesting strongly bound room temperature exciton states exhibit emergent physical phenomena and are of a great promise for optoelectronic applications. Here, we demonstrate that nanostructured multilayer transition metal dichalcogenides by themselves provide an ideal platform for excitation and control of excitonic modes, paving the way to exciton-photonics. Hence, we show that by patterning the TMDCs into nanoresonators, strong dispersion and avoided crossing of excitons and hybrid polaritons with interaction potentials exceeding 410 meV may be controlled with great precision. We further observe that inherently strong TMDC exciton absorption resonances may be completely suppressed due to excitation of hybrid photon states and their interference. Our work paves the way to a next generation of integrated exciton optoelectronic nano-devices and applications in light generation, computing, and sensing. Control of light-wave dispersion at the nanoscale is of great importance for applications ranging from lasing to sensing to computing. Plasmonic and high contrast dielectric nanostructures We begin by systematically exploring optical reflectance spectroscopy, first in unpatterned (Fig. Periodic patterning provides an additional degree of control for light-exciton interaction and dispersion engineering (Fig. (1),owever, here due to the complex nature and multipartite interactions involved, we avoid making any such categorical classifications. Period is fixed at 500 nm, and thickness is fixed at 15 nm (critical thickness). The plasmonic peak emerges from the lower exciton-polariton (LEP) of the unpatterned case indicating a hybrid mode. Reflectance color scale is the same for a, c and e. (B) Experimental reflectance spectra of the WS 2 grating structure with t = 15 nm and p = 500 nm, and widths of 200 nm and 300 nm. Corresponding mode peaks are coded with matching symbols in a. Inset is the E Z field profile of the first order plasmon mode. (C) Width dependence of simulated TM reflectance spectra. Period is fixed at 500 nm, and thickness is fixed at 20 nm (above critical thickness i.e. uncoupled regime). Since the thickness is sufficient to support cavity modes in the unpatterned case, plasmon modes (marked with square symbols) start emerging from the cavity mode. (D) Experimental reflectance spectra of the WS 2 grating structure with thickness and period fixed at 20 nm and 500 nm respectively. Spectra for widths of 200 nm and 300 nm are compared. For a width of 300 nm, a second-order plasmon mode emerges. Inset are the E z field profiles of the two plasmonic mode. (E) Width dependence of simulated TM reflectance spectra. Period is fixed at 500 nm, and thickness is fixed at 30 nm, way above the critical thickness regime. The WS 2 resonators provide index discontinuity for resonant SPR excitation. For a photon wavelength of 750 nm, the resonant widths are equal to 100 nm (A), 300 nm (B), and 470 nm (C), forming 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd order SPR modes. The plasmon mode (D) stands at the lowest-energy resonance. The circle marked at the crossing point of the 2 nd order plasmon mode (B) and (D) indicates a hybrid mode with characters of both. (F) E Z , H Y field profiles of the plasmonic modes labelled with corresponding points in e. The above discussion summarizes the emergence of various plasmonic modes above critical thickness and their hybridization with each other. Thus far there has been no mention of the dielectric grating mode and its interaction with the exciton. This interaction is strong and notably observed for thicknesses below the critical value. The incident wave couples to the guided mode, and the dielectric-grating mode is formed under the momentum matching condition between the incident light-frequency (ω) and in-plane wave momentum (k x ) component generated by the 1D dielectric (WS 2 ) gratings. (See supplementary 6 for in-depth discussion of the model and parameters). To calculate the splitting energy, we assume a near-zero value of g d-LEP so the splitting energy can be expressed in terms of the coupling strengths g d-LEP and g UEP-LEP . From the experimental spectrum corresponding to the zero-detuning point (p = 600 nm), g d-UEP and g UEP-LEP are taken to be 116 meV and 89 meV respectively (Fig. The evolution of the strong coupling with thickness (Supplementary 7) and resonator width (Fig. Our results highlight a previously unexplored aspect of TMDC excitons and optics, and opens a new regime in exploring strong light-matter interactions where the TMDC serves as a host for both excitonic and cavity modes, without the need for an external cavity. Prior studies have focused on either monolayers or very thick (>100 nm) TMDCs. Measurements were performed on a template stripped Au substrate Patterning of the WS 2 flakes was achieved by a combination of electron-beam lithography (Elionix ELS-7500EX) exposure of poly methyl metha acrylate (PMMA A4) and dry etching process. Dry-etching was performed using a combination of XeF 2 and Ar for 210 seconds, which is suitable for all the samples with varying thickness from 6 nm to 20 nm to be fully etched. Since XeF 2 is highly selective, the etching process does not affect the Au substrate. Finally, the samples were cleaned in acetone to remove the 250 nm-thick PMMA resist. The grating region exhibits a clear change in color compared to the unpatterned region when viewed under an optical microscope in reflection mode under white-light illumination. The WS 2 reflectance spectra were obtained using a microscope with external white-light illumination (AvaLight-HAL) under normal incidence. The reflected light signals were collected from the microscope objective (Olympus SLMPLN 50X N.A.=0.35) and analyzed using a grating spectrometer coupled to a Si focal plane array (FPA). All these instruments are integrated in the LabRAM HR Evolution Confocal Microscope. In order to avoid the signals from the system background and the gold bulk plasmon resonances, the reflectance spectra are normalized by the reflectance of a silver mirror (Thorlabs PF30-03-P01) which can be considered a spectrally uniform high reflector. While the reflectance from the Ag reference mirror is not unity, the minor (few-percent) absorption by the reference mirror will translate to a similarly minor uncertainty in absolute reflectance calibrations. We assume minimum scattering of the incident light due to normal incidence illumination, small sample roughness and very thin features compared to wavelengths. The separated TM and TE polarization signals are obtained using a linear-polarizer (Edmund Linear Glass Polarizing Filter #43-783) for the incident white light. The incident whitelight spot size is ~4 μm in diameter (shown in supplementary S1.c). Numerical simulations of the electromagnetic response of the WS 2 gratings were achieved with the Lumerical FDTD and COMSOL Multiphysics solvers. 1-dimensional heterostructures were solved using the transfer matrix method. The reflectance spectra and field distributions were calculated by simulating incident plane waves with TM or TE polarizations. The anisotropic permittivity of bulk WS 2 reported in ref. 5&12 , where g EC represents the coupling strength between the exciton mode and the cavity mode. The exciton mode and cavity mode evolve into the exciton-like polariton and photon-like polariton respectively by strong coupling. At zero detuning, the critical thickness is 15 nm and the Rabi splitting is evaluated as ћΩ ~170 meV (marked as the arrow in the plot).