In this paper, We present an improved deep convolutional neural network, Guided-Resnet, to design low-cost surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) based nanophotonic films. The input of Guided-Resnet is the two dimensional spectrum map that has the optical response required by the user. Two dimensional map has much more information and features than one dimensional curve. The deep CNN has powerful ability to extract features and learn models from these maps. We use the guided sample replacement algorithm in the training process, which would gradually learn from samples with lower cost. The experiment shows that the average relative accuracy of spectrum is higher than 90%. More importantly, the cost of predicted structure is much lower than standard deep CNN. Our work shows that deep learning would not only design multi-layer films with high accuracy but also learn how to reduce the cost. That is, our model learned to replace precious metals with ordinary metals. Surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) are two-dimensional electromagnetic waves confined at the metal-dielectric interfaces We mainly investigate low-cost multilayer metal/dielectric nanocomposite films that support surface plasmon polaritons. Usually users want SPP at specified incident angle and wavelength, which could be described by two dimensional heat maps of reflectance. The most used metal types are gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu) and aluminium (Al). The cost of Au is much expensive than Ag, Cu and Al. So not only the films' spectrum should meet the users' requirements, but the lower the cost, the better. That is,user want to design films with as less au as possible. Recently, machine learning methods showes great power in design nano-photonics The reverse design of nanophotonic devices has been widely studied in the last year Compared to recent works We also have made breakthroughs in the following two novel points. 1) We use novel guided algorithm in training processes, which would work for any user-need cost functions. So this method would meet users' guideline. The author of To verify the guided deep learning method, we use a specific structure showned in Figure We use deep CNN to learn 2D heat maps of SPP films. This is the one of main difference between us and The X axis is the wavelengths from 300nm to 2000nm and Y axis is the incident angle δ from 0 ̊ to 90 ̊ The generation process of heat maps is as following.Given the material properties η and incident angle δ, we can get the characteristic matrix for each intermediate layer: All intermediate matrices are then multiplied to get the total matrix: In the case of on-demand design of low-cost multilayer films, users hope to get a low cost structure with correct optical response. We solve this proble in the framework of deep learning. The input O i is the spectrum map that has the optical response required by the user. The output Y i is the structure paramters vector, which represents the thickness and type of each layer. We trained a novel Guided-Resnet network for this problem. As shown in figures 3, the backbone of Guided-Resnet is classical residual network Resnet-18 Only with Resnet, the learned model does not take price into account. 在这种情况下,The design results may be too expensive to be accepted by customers. In order to solve this problem, we enhance Resnet-18 with guiding mechanism to find low cost solutions.We present an low cost sample replacement algorithm to find optimal solutions. For each N-layer sample i in training set, formula (1) define its structure vector Y i , which includes the thickness h l and material type m l of each layer. The dielectric m l at metal layer is always one of Au,Ag,Cu and Al. Y i = {h l , m l } l = 1,2, ⋯ , N (1) Based on the structure vector Y i , we define the cost c i as formula c i = ∑ h l × cost(m l ) l l = 1,2, ⋯ , N (2) From the structure vector Y i , we generate the 2D map O i by the the characteristic matrix method. In each step of training process, the network would generate new structure vector Y ̃i ,which is the result of output layer at the current step. Generally, the corresponding structure of Y i and Y ̃i is different. The corresponding cost is also different.We use the following algorithm to pick low cost sample. Oi Yi Algorithm 1 Low cost sample replacement algorithm In the training process, we would generate new 2D map O ̃i and its cost c̃i from Y ̃i . If O ̃i nearly the same as O i , and c̃i is lower than current c i , we repalce its original structure Y i with Y ̃i. At each training epoch, some samples would be replaced by low cost alternatives. As the training goes on, the average cost of training set will gradually decline, while spectrum remains essentially same. With the gradually declining cost of training samples, the cost of prediction samples would lower and lower. Then we can get much better solution, which spectrum has same accuracy and its cost much lower than classical network. For each sample i , the target Y i represents thickness and material type of each layer, to compare the loss between Y i and Y ̃i(output of network) , we use a hybrid loss function as following: Loss = Loss(thickness) + Loss(material type) (3) The loss function of thickness is defined as follows: where t i , t ̃i is the target thickness and predicted thickness of each layer The loss function of material type is defined as follows: Loss(material type) = 1 -(softmax(m ̃i) equal to m i ) (5) where m i is the target material type of each layer. We use softmax function We can see that loss of thickness is regression metric and loss of material type is a classification metric. So in some sense, the Guided-Resnet is a hybrid CNN. One regression CNN to predict the thickness and other classification CNN to predict the material type. And two CNNs share the same backbone(Resnet-18) to extract features. For more details, the latest package can be accessed by the website https://github.com/closest-git/MetaLab. We hope this tool kit would facilitate the optical engineering and application of nanophotonics devices. To train the Guided Resnet, we first generate 5000 samples as the training set. Each sample has 10 metal/dielectric layers. The types of metal layers are random selected from gold (Au), silver (Ag), copper (Cu) and aluminium (Al). The material of dielectric layer is all SiO2. To get the two-dimensional map, we use 170 evenly distributed wavelengths from 300nm to 2000nm and 900 incident angle from 0 ̊ to 90 . So 153,000 curves for each map. We also generate 1000 additional samples as the testing set, which are different from the training set. We train the network by Adam method Finally, we demonstrate two examples. Table We present a novel guiding mechanism for the inverse design of SPP devices. Comparing with user requirements, the average relative error of spectrum is less than 10%. More importantly, the cost of predicted structure is much lower than standard deep CNN. The main difficulty in practical inverse design problems comes from the small sample problem. There are only several hundred or even fewer samples in many real applications. But deep learning is essentially a learning method based on huge samples. Its performance would decrease drastically with only a few samples. So we would use deep differentiable forest 