Plenoptic cameras use arrays of micro-lenses to capture multiple views of the same scene in a single compound image. They enable refocusing on different planes and depth estimation. However, until now, all types of plenoptic computational imaging have been limited to visible light. We demonstrate an x-ray plenoptic microscope that uses a concentrating micro-capillary array instead of a micro-lens array and can simultaneously acquire from one hundred to one thousand x-ray projections of imaged volumes that are located in the focal spot region of the micro-capillary array. Hence, tomographic slices at various depths near the focal plane can be reconstructed in a way similar to tomosynthesis, but from a single x-ray exposure. The microscope enables depth-resolved imaging of small subvolumes in large samples and can be used for imaging of weakly absorbing artificial and biological objects by means of propagation phase-contrast. Due to their large penetration depth and short wavelength, x-rays can be used to look deep inside matter at high spatial resolution. However, a single x-ray radiograph is a 2D projection of a 3D object. Therefore, some radiographs are too complex for analysis due to the overlap of shadows of features that are located at different depths of the sample. Threedimensional x-ray imaging with isotropic spatial resolution is possible using computed tomography (CT) In recent works, a close relation between limited-angle cone-beam tomography and the so-called plenoptic or lightfield camera has been identified Polycapillary devices consist of hundreds of thousands of such thermally shaped microcapillaries and can collimate or a) Electronic mail: pawel.korecki@uj.edu.pl. focus x-rays In the experimental setup [Fig. In the multi-point projection geometry, assuming a discrete array of equally intense point-sources at positions r i = (x i , y i ), the image in the detector at position R can be expressed as: where m = ( f -D)/ f , D is the optics-to-detector distance, f is focal length of the optics, T is the transmission of a planar object that is located at a plane d = f +∆z, and G describes the angular distribution of radiation that is generated by the point sources and has an angular width of γ ∼ 2θ c , where θ c is the critical angle for the total external reflection. A more exact version of Eq. ( The transformations for all i = 1..N beams were summed. Finally, a similar operation was performed for an image that was filled with ones, which was used for normalization. An optional bandpass filter could be applied to the final image for noise removal or background suppression. A schematic illustration of the transform is presented in Fig. To test the accuracy and resolution of the plenoptic x-ray reconstruction, x-ray plenoptic imaging was performed on a planar resolution chart (JIMA-RT-02B) as shown in Fig. An important example of x-ray plenoptic image is presented in Fig. To demonstrate that the plenoptic x-ray microscopy can be used to image details of complex biological samples at the cellular level we imaged an ivy leaf [Hedera helix, Fig. In conclusion, we extended plenoptic imaging to the hard x-ray range. Due to the penetrating nature of x-rays, it is suited not only for depth estimation, but enable 3D imaging of opaque objects and has a potential of much higher lat-eral resolution. Due to the limited angular apertures of polycapillary devices, the depth resolution will be always much worse than the lateral resolution. Therefore, plenoptic xray imaging is well suited for focusing at particular slices or regions of 3D volumes, in a way similar to zonography 42 or tomosynthesis This work was financially supported by the Polish National Science Centre (grant no. DEC-2017/25/B/ST2/00152). K. M. S acknowledges support from Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education (project no. 7150/E-338/M/2018). We thank B.R. Jany for performing the SEM imaging.