The basic features of multi-band superconductivity and its implications are derived. In particular, it is shown that enhancements of the superconducting transition temperature take place due to interband interactions. In addition, isotope effects differ substantially from the typical BCS scheme as soon as polaronic coupling effects are present. Special cases of the model are polaronic coupling in one band as realized e.g., in cuprates, coexistence of a flat band and a steep band like in MgB2, crossovers between extreme cases. The advantages of the multiband approach as compared to the single band BCS model are elucidated and its rather frequent realization in actual systems discussed. Shortly after the upcoming of the BCS theory It took another decade to get back to the issue of multi-band superconductivity which was predominantly advocated by K.A. Müller when considering the pairing mechanism in high temperature superconducting cuprates (HTSC) With the discovery of MgB2 A variety of limiting cases of the multi-band case exist which cover the weak interband coupling limit, the polaronic coupling In the following the two-band model is introduced. Polaron formation and its consequences for superconductivity are consecutively discussed. Isotope effects are further addressed and finally the extreme limiting case of the flat band/steep band scenario is considered. The Hamiltonian for the two-band model in its simplest form reads: where ξ ( / is the band energy ξ ( = ε -ε ( -μ , and ε 4 denotes the position of the c and d in bands i = 1, 2 and c + , c, d + , d are electron creation and annihilation operators in band 1, 2, with spin index σ. The interband and intraband interactions Hi and H12 are explicitly given by: The pairing potentials V 4 (k 4 , k 4 B ) are represented in factorized form as V 4 (k 4 , k 4 ′ ) = V 4 φ ( / ψ ( / ′ , where φ ( / , ψ ( / are cubic harmonics for anisotropic pairing which yields for dimension d = 2 and onsite pairing s-wave pairing: φ ( / = 1, ψ ( / = 1 , extended s-wave: φ ( / = cos k I a + cos k K b = γ ( / , and d-wave: φ ( / = cos k I a -cos k K b = η ( / where a, b are the lattice constants along x and y directions, with a ≠ b to account for arbitrary lattice symmetry. The individual intraband pairing interactions in the two channels may stem from different sources, namely lattice mediated, magnetic fluctuation driven or some other exotic origin. It is, however, assumed here, that the c channel pairing is of electron-lattice origin, while especially for cuprates the d channel pairing could have a magnetic interaction. With this assumption a combination of s+d wave pairing can result which has an additional Tc enhancement effect as compared to the s+s wave pairing (see below). The important intraband potentials provide the pairwise exchange between the two bands and are dominantly of electron-lattice interaction character. By performing a BCS mean-field analysis of the above equations the gap equations can be derived and the superconducting transition temperature evaluated. (2) from which the temperature dependencies of the two gaps and the superconducting transition temperature Tc have to be determined. As defined above, Φ ( / , i = 1,2 refers to the pairing symmetry in the respective channel. For cuprates d-wave pairing relates to the planar Cu derived bands, whereas s-wave pairing refers to out-of-plane oxygen bands which are hybridized with the planar bands through interband interactions. The effect of the interband coupling on Tc is demonstrated in Figure Within BCS theory the essential ingredient for the electron pairing mechanism is the electronphonon interaction. This is typically much smaller than the Fermi energy and is active within a small shell at the top of it. An important observation which led to the discovery of high temperature superconductivity was made by K. A. Müller who primarily was interested in superconductivity in oxides The first two terms refer to the pure electronic energies in the c and d channel, the third part corresponds to the interaction between both channels resembling a hybridization term. Further, the non-renormalized lattice part is considered and the two final terms are those where interactions between c and d electrons (holes) with the lattice are taken into account: Here ε is the site i dependent electronic energy, t the hopping integral, U the onsite Coulomb repulsion within the antiferromagnetic matrix. This term experiences important renormalizations caused by the electron lattice interaction, being strongly reduced and even be attractive especially within the hole rich distorted regions where metallic droplets are formed which appear as in-gap states in the vicinity of the Fermi surface A decoupling of lattice and electronic degrees of freedom can be obtained by a standard Lang-Firsov transformation It is, however, important to mention that the patterning remains dynamic in order to ensure the interplay between c and d dominated regions. Static stripes have been observed at around 1/8 doping in LaSrCuO4 where superconductivity is suppressed The verification of the BCS theory was definitely supported by the observation of an isotope effect on Tc. Since then one of the first experiments to identify the electron (hole) pairing mechanisms in newly discovered superconductors, was the measurement of an isotope effect. Even though many conventional superconductors show deviations from the BCS prediction of -dlnT • /dlnM = α = 0.5 , where M is the ionic mass, it was mostly accepted that these are due to e.g., increased Coulomb interactions, density of states effects, etc. In HTSC an apparent discrepancy between the BCS value and the actually measured one was reported early on Experiments on the isotope effect in cuprates have been performed early on, and have-in view of the absence of it at optimum doping-not been taken too seriously in identifying a pairing mechanism. Nevertheless, it was measured for diverse cuprates rather systematically as a function of doping in (Figure Besides of measuring the "global" oxygen isotope effect, it was also possible to determine it as a function of the local oxygen ion position, the so-called site selective oxygen isotope effect Further isotope effects have subsequently been explored where a huge and inverse one on the the pseudogap temperature T* Superconductivity in magnesium diboride Two phonon modes play a significant role to the electron pairing in MgB2, namely the E &t mode energy in the σ channel and an averaged phonon frequency ω † ‡ in the π channel A theoretical derivation of the isotope effect is based on the assumption that an average frequency ω † ‡ and the experimental E &t phonon mode frequency are dominant. The latter mode hardens with Al doping and splits at low doping levels into a hard and a soft component Two cases are considered for the calculation of the isotope effect on Tc, namely the harmonic isotope shift of the E2g phonon mode with ω ‰ -Š ≈ M :#.OE and the reduced one where ω ‰ -Š ≈ M :#.• . The results of the calculation are shown in Figure Further searches for more exotic isotope effects in MgB2, as, e.g., on the penetration depth In 2008 a new family of multiband and multi-gap high temperature superconductors called iron based superconductors Two groups have independently and almost simultaneously performed the Fe isotope exchange in nominally identical FeAs based compounds A special case of the Hamiltonian Equation ( with λii and λij being the product of the pairing potential and the density of states. The integrals are replaced by the logarithmic BCS expression and with λ %& = λ &% can be solved like: Equation ( Two possibilities are considered in the following, namely, that the flat band is realized either in the strong coupling band or in the weak coupling band. For both cases the interband interaction plays the dominant role in enhancing Tc. However, also the band 1 related intraband coupling is decisive and the corresponding Tc as a function of λ11 displayed in Figure In the above chapters we have shown that extensions of the BCS theory to more than one band have strong influences on TC, the isotope effects, the magnitude of the gap to TC ratio. In any case an enormous enhancement of TC can take place which is beyond any conventional strong or weak coupling case. This enhancement effect is suggested to occur also in the extremely low carrier density system STO where neither metallicity nor superconductivity should occur. However, upon treating this compound as a realization of the steep band/flat band scenario offers a way out of this dilemma. By including polaronic effects especially the isotope effect is affected which deviated strongly from the BCS value. Besides of varying from almost zero to exceeding large the BCS limit, additional isotope effects on the pseudogap temperature T*, the penetration depth and the whole phase diagram of cuprates are a consequence. This is in contrast to Fe based superconductors where almost conventional phonon type interactions occur also if bond fluctuations in a double well have been observed & ↑ , c :( ) , 8 & ↓ , & ↓ c ( ) ′ , 8 & ↑ ( ) ( ) ′8 & ↓ d ( -, 8 & ↑ ( ) ( -8