We characterize the dynamical states of a piezoelectric microelectromechanical system (MEMS) using several numerical quantifiers including the maximal Lyapunov exponent, the Poincaré Surface of Section and a chaos detection method called the Smaller Alignment Index (SALI). The analysis makes use of the MEMS Hamiltonian. We start our study by considering the case of a conservative piezoelectric MEMS model and describe the behavior of some representative phase space orbits of the system. We show that the dynamics of the piezoelectric MEMS becomes considerably more complex as the natural frequency of the system's mechanical part decreases.This refers to the reduction of the stiffness of the piezoelectric transducer. Then, taking into account the effects of damping and time dependent forces on the piezoelectric MEMS, we derive the corresponding non-autonomous Hamiltonian and investigate its dynamical behavior. We find that the non-conservative system exhibits a rich dynamics, which is strongly influenced by the values of the parameters that govern the piezoelectric MEMS energy gain and loss. Our results provide further evidences of the ability of the SALI to efficiently characterize the chaoticity of dynamical systems. In many cases the dynamical behavior of physical systems can be modeled by Hamiltonian systems. Over the years the Hamiltonian formulation has been successfully applied in numerous areas of physics such as statistical mechanics In this study, we focus our attention on the dynamics of piezoelectric micro-electromechanical systems (MEMSs), whose behavior can be described by conservative or non-conservative Hamiltonians depending on the assumptions made for the MEMSs performance. In MEMSs, the piezoelectric effect is used in one of the following ways: applying a mechanical stress to piezoelectric materials produces an electrical charge; or conversely, an applied electrical voltage produces a mechanical strain or motion in a piezoelectric material The study of the dynamical properties of Hamiltonian systems constitutes an important research topic in nonlinear physics, because such systems can exhibit very complex and quite interesting behaviors. Several theoretical and numerical tools have been developed and applied by many researchers in order to investigate the chaotic dynamics of Hamiltonian systems. Let us briefly present some of them. The numerical construction of the so-called Poincaré Surface of Section (PSS) has been used to reveal the chaotic properties of mainly non-integrable two degrees of freedom (2dof) Hamiltonian systems, as its extension to higher dimensional models can become problematic (see for example Sect. 1.2 of Ref. In the present paper we use the PSS, the mLE and the SALI techniques to investigate the chaotic dynamics of a time dependent piezoelectric MEMS. In A MEMS is a physical system whose dimensions are of the order of the micrometer. It is made of a mechanical part (flexible or rigid structures) and an electrical part. The model of the piezoelectric MEMS considered in this study is presented in Fig. in series with a resistor R, an inductor L and a nonlinear capacitor [see Fig. where C 0l and β e0 are respectively the linear value of the capacitor C 0 and the nonlinear coefficient. The piezo structure is also equipped at one end of a spring with nonlinear stiffness K 1 as presented in The total extension of the piezosystem ∆ can be expressed as: where b is a coefficient relating the end displacement of the transducer to the global coordinate system z. The total dissipation of the system which is the sum of the mechanical loss resulting from internal damping and the electrical loss due to the Joule's effect in the resistor R is given by the following function: where λ m0 is damping coefficient. The used piezoelectric actuator which is of lead zirconate-titanate (PZT) type commonly achieve a relative displacement of up to 0.2 0 / 0 . The values of the physical parameters of the piezoelectric transducer are presented in Table where q and z are variables respectively related to the electrical charge and the mechanical displacement which vary according to time τ . M is the mass of the structure, K a = Aν E /l is the stiffness with short circuited electrodes. We conduct some mathematical transformations of Eq. ( Here q, z are the generalized coordinates and p q , p z the generalized momenta of respectively the electrical and mechanical parts of the system. In addition, γ 1 and γ 2 are the electromechanical coupling coefficients, β 1 and β 2 are the nonlinearity coefficients, while ω 2 is the natural frequency of the mechanical part. The expressions of all these quantities are: . We note that Hamiltonian (4) is a 2dof autonomous system (i. e. it does not explicitly depend on the dimensionless time t), governed by the following equations of motion: where dot ( ̇) denotes the time derivative. In order to determine the regular or chaotic nature of orbits by the computation of the mLE and/or the SALI, we need to follow the time evolution of small deviations from the considered orbits. In other words, we need to consider in time a deviation vector w(t) having as coordinates the small variations δq, δz, δp q , δp z of variables q, z, p q , p z respectively, i. e. w(t) = (δq(t), δz(t), δp q (t), δp z (t)). The evolution of these deviations is governed by the so-called variational equations of the system (see for example We note that the variational equations ( Based on the analysis presented in where H(t) and H(0) are the values of Hamiltonian (4) at times t = 0 and t > 0 respectively, remains always below 10 -10 . This clearly indicates the very good accuracy of our computations. In Fig. For ω 2 = 4.5 [Fig. The mLE, χ, is an asymptotic measure characterizing the average rate of growth (or shrinking) of small perturbations to the solutions of a dynamical system and is computed as χ = lim t→+∞ Λ(t), where Λ(t) is the so-called finite time mLE In ( Let us now use the SALI method to characterize the dynamical nature of the orbits A, B and C. For the computation of the SALI we have to follow the time evolution of two initially different deviation vectors w 1 (t) = (δq 1 , δz 1 , δp q1 , δp z1 ) and w 2 (t) = (δq 2 , δz 2 , δp q2 , δp z2 ). Then the SALI at a time t > 0 is computed as the length of the smallest diagonal of the parallelogram formed by the unit vectors ŵ1 (t) = w 1 (t)/ w 1 (t) and ŵ2 (t) = w 2 (t)/ w 2 (t) as: For chaotic orbits, the SALI exhibits a fast decrease to zero (in practice, it reaches quite fast very small values around the computer accuracy, i.e. SALI ≈ 10 -16 ) because the two deviation vectors tend to become aligned to the direction associated to the mLE, while for regular orbits the index fluctuates around a positive value (for more details see A global study of the dynamics of Hamiltonian ( Setting a criterion for characterizing an orbit as chaotic the condition SALI 10 -8 at the final From the results of this figure we see that for the conservative piezoelectric MEMS the number of chaotic orbits is high, around 60%, for small values of the natural mechanical frequency ω 2 and decreases considerably to zero as ω 2 becomes large.In particular, for ω 2 = 1 up to 5 the system is practically exhibiting only regular motion as no chaotic orbits were found for the resolution of the used grid of initial conditions. In the presence of external forces, which are explicitly depending on time, the resulting Hamiltonian system is described by a time dependent Hamiltonian function. In this part of our work we will take into account the effect of not only such external forces but also the influence of friction or damping phenomena on the dynamics of piezoelectric MEMSs. The non-conservative Hamiltonian function is given by (see its derivation in Appendix B): where λ is a coefficient related to damping, while E 1 and ω denote respectively the external force amplitude and frequency. Since the Hamiltonian function ( The model equations of motions are: while the corresponding variational equations take the form Let us mention that from (10) we can easily obtain the typical set of equations of a piezoelectric MEMS with damping in the presence of a sinusoidal input voltage [see Eq. (B.5) in Appendix B] q + λ q + q + β 1 q 3 -γ We also note that in the remaining part of this work Eqs. ( We start the investigation of the non-conservative piezoelectric MEMS by studying the effect of the damping coefficient on the system's dynamics, assuming that there is no external force acting on it. For λ = 0 and E 1 = 0 Hamiltonian ( Let us now study the effect of the time periodic external force on the system's dynamics. For this purpose we set λ = 0 and first investigate the effect of the external force amplitude E 1 on the behavior of orbits A, B and C by plotting in Fig. Since the decrease of the SALI to small values, like SALI = 10 -8 , is sufficient to characterize an orbit as chaotic, we use this criterion to perform a more general investigation of the dynamics of the piezoelectric MEMS in the absence of damping by following the evolution of the percentage P of chaotic orbits as a function of E 1 for some particular cases. In other words, we perform a similar analysis to the one presented in Fig. From the results of Fig. In order to investigate the dynamics of the piezoelectric MEMS in the case of the simultaneous presence of damping and of an external driving force, we solve numerically Eqs. ( As we saw in Sect. 3.2 damping results to the eventual disappearance of dynamical evolution, while the external forcing of the system (Sect. 3.3) leads to extensive chaos. In order to check if we can obtain different dynamical behaviors when both factors (damping and external force) are present, we initially consider the case where the damping coefficient is λ = 0.05 and the value of the external force amplitude is E 1 = 0.05. To analyze the system's dynamics for these parameter values we consider its PSS. We remind that the PSS in a periodically driven system like ( In order to investigate the robustness of the appearance of regular motion when both damping and external force are present, we keep λ = 0.05 and examine how the external force's amplitude affects the behavior of one representative initial condition. In particular, we consider the initial condition of orbit A (q = 0, z = -0.042, q = 4.138, ż = 0.31), which corresponds to a regular orbit of the conservative system (4) [see Fig. The results of Fig. Fig. We numerically investigated the dynamics of a piezoelectric MEMS when the system is considered isolated from its environment, and consequently it is described by a conservative Hamiltonian model, as well as when damping and/or external forces are taken into account, leading to a time dependent Hamiltonian system. In our work we studied the behavior of individual orbits of these systems using the Poincaré Surface of Section technique to visualize their dynamics and evaluated appropriate chaos indicators, namely the maximum Lyapunov Exponent and the Smaller Alignment Index, to quantify their chaoticity. In addition, performing extensive simulations of ensembles of many orbits we studied the global dynamics of the considered models. Our results show that in the case of the conservative piezoelectric MEMS (4) the system predominantly exhibits regular motion for large values of the natural frequency of the system's mechanical part i.e. ω 2 > 1. However for small values of ω 2 a significant percentage of the considered initial conditions lead to chaotic motion. This percentage diminishes with the increase of ω 2 . On the other hand, the non-conservative version of the piezoelectric MEMS (9) exhibited a reacher dynamical behavior, which is mainly influenced by two factors: the energy loss due to damping and friction, quantified by the damping coefficient λ in (9), and the energy gain through the action of an external, time periodic force of variable amplitude E 1 . In all studied cases the motion was eventually led on regular or chaotic attractors. More specifically, when only damping was present the motion was dying out and the system ended up to a point attractor of zero energy, while the presence of the external force in the absence of damping resulted to extended chaos for sufficiently large values of E 1 . The coexistence of both energy loss and gain led to more complicated behaviors with the system undergoing transitions from regular to chaotic dynamics. Our results shed some light on the complicated dynamical behavior the piezoelectric MEMS can exhibit, indicating the necessity of a more detailed study of the system's dynamics in the parameter space (λ, E 1 ), a task we intend to undertake in a future publication. The current work, along with future studies of realistic piezoelectric MEMSs in the same vein, will be helpful for understanding the functioning of devices using piezoelectric actuators and eventually improving their efficiency; a goal which is of significant practical importance. As a final remark let us note that the SALI method has been mainly used to date for studying conservative systems, although some applications of the index to time dependent models have already appeared in the literature By considering the notation q 1 = q, q 2 = z, we obtain the Hamiltonian function corresponding to Eq. (A.1) through the relation to be: H ( q(τ ), ż(τ ), q(τ ), z(τ )) = α ż2 + b 1 q2 + cz 2 + dz 4 + eq 2 + f q 4 -gqz. (A. 3) The Lagrange equations of motion in the conservative case are obtained from the relation: Let us consider a dimensional time t so that: t = τ ω e with ω 2 e = e b 1 . (A.5) The system (A.4) can be rewritten in a dimensionless form as: and with new parameters as: q + q + β 1 q 3 -γ 1 z = 0 z + ω 2 2 z + β 2 z 3 -γ 2 q = 0, (A.7) where We have: , where E(τ ) is the voltage source intensity given in Eq. ( In dimensionless form using the transformation of Eq. (A.5), Eq. (B.3) gives: Thus, parameter λ denotes the dissipation coefficient in the piezosystem. Then Eqs. (B.4) can be rewritten as: q + λ q + q + β 1 q 3 -γ 1 z = E 1 cos ωt z + λ ż + ω 2 2 z + β 2 z 3 -γ 2 q = 0, (B.5) where Following the analysis of e.g. 