The central question in the field of two-dimensional (2D) materials is how a material behaves when it is patterned at nanometer scale with different edge geometries. Due to the anisotropy inherent in the puckered structure, black phosphorene nanostructures may have more varieties of edge geometries. Here, we present a comprehensive 2D planar crystallographic characterization of phosphorene uniformly by a chiral vector (angle), from which a new type of edge atomic configuration, the slope edge geometry is discovered. The phosphorene nanoribbons (PNRs) with slope edges, like previously noticed zigzag and skewed-armchair PNRs, also own interesting twofold-degenerate edge states. These three marginal directions, together with the skewed-zigzag and armchair directions without edge states, divide a phosphorene into four regions among which the electronic property is different from each other. Further, for a PNR cutting along any possible direction, by taking into account the z-direction in structure, whether or not it owns edge states depends on the existence of periodic zigzag-like morphology along the edges. For application, moreover, we propose a PNR-based z-shaped homogenous junction with scale ∼100 nm, where the central scattering region between two PNR electrodes is a phosphorene quantum dot (PQD) of PNR segment with various edge morphologies. Interestingly, the calculated conductance by Kwant code based on tight-binding combing with scattering-matrix for the junction relies sensitively on the central PQD edge states. In specification, for the junctions of PQD with edge states the conductance exhibit a terrace with resonant oscillations near Fermi energy, otherwise the electron transport is blocked due to the absence of edge states. Remarkably, the number of oscillating peaks exactly matches to the number of sawtooth along an edge of PQD, since the discrete energy levels of the zigzag-like edge provide the transporting channels for electrons. The results here may be extended to the group-VA 2D materials for observing the electronic property of nanostructures in experiments, and provide a reference for the preparation of better nano-devices. In this decade, two-dimensional (2D) materials have emerged as one of the most exciting class of materials since the arising of graphene Black phosphorus, with an anisotropic structure, is a van der Waals-bonded layered material where each layer forms a puckered surface due to sp 3 hybridization and possesses a direct band gap of 0.3 eV On the other hand, the nanostructures with various possible edge atomic configurations have become a hot topic since the rise of 2D materials. A central question in the field of graphene-related research is how it behaves as patterned at the nano-scale with different edge morphological geometry In this work, we first present theoretically the 2D planar crystallographic characterization on an anisotropic phosphorene. We define a chiral number (vector) or chiral (azimuthal) angle to uniformly describe the planar crystallographic directions. As the chiral angle increasing from 0 o to 90 o shown in Fig. Second, based on the 2D crystallographic characterization, we propose a two-terminal z-shaped homogenous junction based on PNR and calculate its transport property using the Kwant code based on TB Phosphorene is a typical orthorhombic-structured 2D material with two principal crystallographic directions, the zigzag and armchair directions, as shown in Fig. The low symmetry of phosphorene leads to higher structural complexity compared to other 2D materials The 2D crystallographic directions of phosphorene with chiral indexes and angles on the two U-lines in Fig. Here a 1 and a 2 are the primitive vectors of phosphorene, with amplitudes a 1 =3.32 Å and a 2 =4.38 Å along the x-and y-directions with which connects the chiral index (m, n). Therefore, a crystallographic direction on the phosphorene plane can be characterized by either a chiral vector T or index (m, n), or angle θ. Despite all this, however, the structural characterization is still much different from that for graphene with a regular hexagonal symmetry Based on the above description we conclude that, as shown in Fig. 2 ) 1/2 /2 and a 2 . We notice that, excepting for the new SL, the other four peculiar directions and their corresponding PNRs have been previously studied Further, there also exist other crystallographic directions within each region, which are exemplarily shown in Fig. Moreover, when we cut a 2D phosphorene sheet along a certain crystal direction, in fact, there exist two different manners for tangent to atoms due to the two nonequivalent phosphorus atoms per primitive cell. Therefore, the direction (1,1)52.84 o is very particular, behind/beyond along which the boundary edge is non-beard/beard when tangent to the lower atom, and viceversa when tangent to the upper atom of the primitive cell. That is to say, SZ is the demarcation line between with and without beard for the boundary edges. Further, for cutting manner by the solid lines in Fig. Actually, when we consider the phosphorene nanostructures the effect of the z-direction on the characterization must be taken into account. This effect can be reflected by the fact that there are two kinds of arrangement for the outermost atoms along each crystallographic direction. According to our definition for T , the chiral indexes satisfying m+n=even have defined the all directions for a phosphorene sheet shown in Fig. According to the structural characterization on phosphorene in the previous subsection, one can principally obtain PNRs with different edge morphologies by cutting a phosphorene sheet along different crystallographic directions. In addition to the extensively studied ZPNR and APNR The stability of PNRs is an important issue which has been previously studied by calculating the free energy Next, we propose a two-terminal z-shaped junction based . This type of homogeneous junctions may be etched on a sample sheet of 2D materials as the development of experimental technology, and it has been extensively studied for graphene, silicene, h-BN, and so on In this work, we further study this z-shaped PNR junction to explore the influence of the variation in edge geometrical morphology (corresponding to different tilting angle) on the transport property. The significance is that the connection between the different parts in homogeneous junction does not destroy the original lattice structure. This may be impossible for inhomogeneous heterojnuctions with another material electrodes because there is always a lattice mismatch. Furthermore, the z-shaped junction allows short ribbon with all possible edges embedded in the junction, in which the existence of resonant tunneling phenomenon The numerical calculations here are performed by using Kwant code based on the tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian, and the atomistic quantum transport simulations are based on the scattering-matrix approach from solving wavefunction In specification, the ribbons shown in Fig. The formal TB Hamiltonian for the considered system is where the summation runs over all lattice sites, ε i is the on-site energy at site i, t i j is the hopping energy between sites i and j, and c † i (c j ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at site i ( j). It has been shown that five hopping parameters (see Fig. where c is broadening parameter, Ψ n (r) and E n are the eigenfunction and eigenvalue, respectively, in which n denotes the energy band index and r the atom position. Further, the conductance of the junction at zero temperature can be calculated by using the Landauer formula where f 0 (E)=1/[e (E-E F )/k B T + 1] is the equilibrium distribution function with Fermi energy E F , L/R labels the left/right electrode of the system, and is the transmission coefficient through the junction from electrode L to R, in which G(G † ) is the retarded (advanced) Green function of the central region, and Γ L/R the coupling matrix between the scattering region and the left/right electrode. A. Electronic structure for PNRs By solving the difference Schrödinger equation corresponding to Hamiltonian on the proper basis for the supercell adopted in Fig. The calculated energy band (the left panel) and conductance (right panel) are shown in Figs. For a pristine PNR, in summary, with or without beard edge determines the existence of the zigzag-like edge morphology resulting in the edge state bands. The electronic localization caused by the edge zigzag-like atomic configuration may be from that phosphorene is a second-order topological insulator The proposed z-shaped junction in Fig. Next, to find the origin of the conductance oscillating peaks, in Fig. When the hypotenuse of PQD with edge behind/beyond SZ direction, such as (3,1)nb-and (1,3)b-edge, the junctions exhibit similar transport behavior due to existence of zigzag-like edge geometry. This is because that the outermost phosphorus atom along the zigzag-like edges of PQD form an electronic bound-state FIG. number of conductance peaks is less than that of the outermost phosphorus atoms, and the conductance value is also less than 2e 2 /h. On the other hand, the value of T also limits the conductance. By more calculations, we find that the conductance of the junctions with T less than 20 Å are effective in the low energy regime, otherwise the conductance value is extremely small as T is beyond this critical value. Finally, the data of the calculated conductance vs titling angle for our z-shaped junction whose central PQD with more possible edges with T less than critical value 20 Å are summarized in Fig. We have theoretically studied the 2D crystallographic characterization on an anisotropic phosphorene and its applications in nanostructures. A chiral number (vector) or chiral angle is defined to uniformly describe the planar crystallographic directions on a phosphorene. As the chiral angle increasing from 0 o to 90 o , the along boundary edge geometry varies from zigzag to armchair and sweep over all possible edge morphologies during the process. We find a phosphorene can be divided into four fan-shaped regions determined by boundary chiral angles 0 o , θ 1 (23.74 o ), θ 2 (52.84 o ), θ 3 (75.82 o ) and 90 o , among which the characteristics is different each other. Therefore, by cutting a phosphorene along these five regional boundary directions, one can obtain previously studied ZPNR, SAPNR, SZPNR, and APNR. Importantly, the new type of PNR with SL edge geometry along θ 3 has been discovered. Essentially, the SL direction is similar to SA one with a periodic zigzag-like edge morphology supporting edge states. Further, we then demonstrate the variation in electronic property for PNRs with different edge atomic geometries by using the Kwant tight-binding (TB) code, in which a particular attention is paid to the new SLPNR intrinsically with twofolddegenerate edge states. In addition, in each regional boundary direction the origin of beard and non-beard edges is discussed and related to the existence of edge states. We find that the (1,1) direction is the dividing line, below/beyand which the ribbon with nonbeard/beard edges. Second, we propose a two-terminal z-shaped homogenous junction based on PNR and calculate its transport property by using the scattering-matrix for treating large enough systems comparable with experimental samples. The two electrodes of the junction are semi-infinitive ZPNRs with the same width ∼100 nm, where the central scattering region of a segment of PNR with edge tilting angles from 0 to 90 o is sandwiched between them. In consequence the two hypotenuse edges of the central PQD sweep over all possible geometrical morphologies. Interestingly, the conductance spectrum sensitively depends on the tilting angle of z-shaped junction. For the junctions of PQD with edge states the transport exhibit a conductance terrace with resonant oscillation in the low energy regime, otherwise the electron transport is blocked due to the absence of edge states. Remarkably, the number of conductance oscillating peaks is exactly equal to the number of outermost phosphorus atoms in the zigzag-like edges of the center PQD, since the discrete energy levels of the zigzag-like atomic configurations provide the transport channels for electrons. The findings here may be extended to the group-VA 2D materials, such as 2D group-VA arsenene, antimonene and bismuthene, for observing the electronic property of nanostructures in experiments, and provide a reference for the preparation of better nano-devices. 11704118), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (Grant Nos. BX20180097, 2019M652777), and Hu-nan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 2019JJ40187).