Using fluorite oxides as an example, this study broadens high-entropy ceramics (HECs) to compositionally-complex ceramics (CCCs) or multi-principal cation ceramics (MPCCs) to include medium-entropy and/or non-equimolar compositions. Nine compositions of compositionally-complex fluorite oxides (CCFOs) with the general formula of (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1- x(Y1/2X1/2)xO2-δ (X = Yb, Ca, and Gd; x = 0.4, 0.148, and 0.058) are fabricated. The phase stability, mechanical properties, and thermal conductivities are measured. Compared with yttriastabilized zirconia, these CCFOs exhibit increased cubic phase stability and reduced thermal conductivity, while retaining high Young's modulus (~210 GPa) and nanohardness (~18 GPa). Moreover, the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity in the non-equimolar CCFOs shows an amorphous-like behavior. In comparison with their equimolar high-entropy counterparts, the medium-entropy non-equimolar CCFOs exhibit even lower thermal conductivity (k) while maintaining high modulus (E), thereby achieving higher E/k ratios. These results suggest a new direction to achieve thermally-insulative yet stiff CCCs (MPCCs) via exploring non-equimolar and/or medium-entropy compositions. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) have been developed since 2004 with the seminal works of Yeh et al. Since 2015, high-entropy ceramics (HECs) have been made in bulk form, including various high-entropy oxides Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) with different yttria contents has been widely used Particularly, YSZ has been used as thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) for gas-turbine engines due to low thermal conductivity In this study, we further expand the work to non-equimolar compositions to achieve better performance such as lower thermal conductivity for TBCs, which represent a new direction to further broaden the compositional space. A somewhat surprising (but fully explainable) and scientifically interesting result is that the thermal conductivity can be reduced further by exploring non-equimolar compositions. HEAs were initially defined as alloys containing five or more elements in equimolar ratios by Jien-Wei Yeh in 2004 Moreover, the concept of entropy-stabilized phases was proposed It is worth noting that (medium-entropy) multi-cation ceramics have already been studied by the ceramic community, e.g., BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2-xYbxO3-δ for solid oxide fuel cell applications Following the definitions of metallic HEAs, HECs typically refer to equimolar or nearequimolar compositions of five or more principal cations, which usually produce >1.5 R per mol. ideal configuration entropy ∆S conf , on at least one sublattice. However, like in the metallic HEAs, some researchers Here, we propose to loosely define a class of medium-to high-entropy compositionallycomplex ceramics (CCCs or C 3 ), which can alternatively and equivalently be named as "multiprincipal cation ceramics (MPCCs)," as single-phase ceramic solid solutions with at least three principal (meaning typically 5%-35% on a sublattice) cations (mixing on at least one sublattice, if there are more than one cation sublattice), which should generally have > R per mole of metal cations in the ideal ∆S conf (on at least one sublattice). Thus, HECs and entropy-stabilized ceramics Pursuing along the line to broaden HECs to CCCs or MPCCs to include medium-entropy non-equimolar compositions using fluorite oxides as an exemplar, this study explores the fabrication, phase stability, mechanical properties, and thermal conductivities of nine compositions of compositionally-complex fluorite oxides (CCFOs). These CCFOs have the general formula of (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2X1/2)xO2-δ where X = Yb, Ca, and Gd, respectively, and x = 0.4, 0.148, and 0.058, respectively. Notably, the medium-entropy non-equimolar CCFOs exhibit even lower thermal conductivity (k) and higher modulus-to thermal conductivity (E/k) ratios than their equimolar high-entropy counterparts. Thus, this study suggests a new direction to design, fabricate, and test stiff and insulative CCFOs (or explore CCCs or MPCCs in general) via exploring non-equimolar and/or medium-entropy compositions that also represent a largely unexplored, vast, compositional space (in addition to HECs). Three variants of three different cation combinations (i.e., nine compositions) of CCFOs were explored in this study. The "H" variant represents high cubic stabilizer concentration and equimolar composition of the maximum configurational entropy, i.e., (Hf1/5Zr1/5Ce1/5Y1/5X1/5)xO2δ, where X = Yb for Cation Combination #4, Ca for Cation Combination #5, and Gd for Cation Combination #7 (based on the numerical series used in the prior report by Gild et al. Each CCFO was synthesized from commercially-purchased HfO2 (99.99 %, 61 -80 nm, US Research Nanomaterials, Inc.), ZrO2 (99 %, 15 -25 nm, Alfa Aesar), CeO2 (99.5 %, 15 -30 nm, Alfa Aesar), Y2O3 (99.995 %, 25 -50 nm, Alfa Aesar), Yb2O3 (99.9 %, < 50 nm, MTI Corporation), CaO (98 %, ≤ 160 nm, Sigma-Aldrich), and Gd2O3 (99.99 %, 20 -40 nm, Alfa Aesar) nanopowders. The powders were weighed based on the targeted stoichiometries and placed inside a YSZ planetary mill jar with ethanol. YSZ grinding media was also added to the jar with the ball-to-powder mass ratio of approximately 10:1. The powders were then wet-milled in a planetary mill (Across International PQ-N04, NJ, USA) operating at 300 RPM for 24 hours. The milled slurry was transported to an 85°C drying oven to dry overnight. After drying, the powders were lightly ground using a mortar and pestle to break up any agglomerates that formed during the drying process. The powders were consolidated into pellets by using a 10 mm diameter graphite die inside a spark plasma sintering (SPS) machine (Thermal Technologies, CA, USA) to sinter at 1650°C for 5 min under 50 MPa, with a heating ramp rate of 100°C/min. The powder was loaded into a 10 mm graphite die that was internally lined with 125 μm thick graphite foil. The die was then insulated by covering all surfaces with graphite felt. The chamber was pumped down to at least 20 mTorr. The chamber was under this vacuum until approximately 700°C, when argon was filled into the chamber and remain for the rest of the sintering process. After the five-minute dwell at 1650°C, the pressure was immediately released, and power supply was turned off. Following cooling, the pellets were decarburized and homogenized at 1500°C for 24 hours and allowed to naturally cool in the furnace. Note that the 1500°C, 24 hours annealing in air is essential to oxidize the SPS specimens made in a reduced environment and homogenize the compositions to form single-high entropy oxide phases. The same fabrication procedure was used to sinter 3YSZ and 8YSZ as our benchmark specimens. A scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Apreo, OR, USA) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector was used to investigate the microstructure and homogeneity of polished samples. Before SEM examination, the samples were mounted and polished down to 40 nm with colloidal silica suspension and then coated with a thin layer of iridium to minimize charging. Following the homogenization step, each sample was pulverized into a powder with a mortar and pestle. The crystal structure of the sample was examined through an XRD (Rigaku Miniflex II, Tokyo, Japan) operating at 30 kV and 15 mA with a scan step of 0.01° 2θ and a dwell time of 3 s. The XRD was calibrated (peak position and breadth) with LaB6 purchased from NIST (SRM 660b). XRD analysis was conducted through MDI Jade 6. It is assumed that the material exhibits the stoichiometric amount of oxygen vacancies and that Ce is in 4+ oxidation state. The microstrain of each material was calculated by Williamson-Hall analysis The bulk density was calculated by both the ASTM C373-18 Standard boiling method Phase stability was tested by long furnace annealing (for 24 h) followed by rapid air quenching. After air quenching to room temperature, the pellets were ground into a powder and examined by XRD. A confocal Raman microscope (Renishaw inVia, England, UK) equipped with a 40 mW, 488 nm Ar + laser, and a 1 μm spot size was used to characterize the tetragonality of the selected specimens. The power was kept below 2 mW to avoid local heating. The experiments were performed on compacted powder samples after decarburization. The data were collected for 10 seconds and averaged over 10 scans. The Young's modulus was determined through a pulse-echo sonic resonance setup by an oscilloscope (TDS 420A, Tektronix, USA) following the ASTM C1198-09 Standard Subsequently, Young's modulus was corrected for porosity by: where E (i.e., E0 in the equations in Ref. The mechanical property of the CCFOs was also probed by nanoindentation by using a Hysitron TI 950 nanoindenter (MA, USA) based on the widely accepted Oliver-Pharr method Obvious outliers (e.g., an indentation on pores or scratches) were removed from the analysis after inspection. Thermal conductivity measured from room temperature to 1000°C was determined by the product of thermal diffusivity (α), density (ρ), and specific heat capacity (c p ) based on the following equation: The thermal diffusivity was measured by laser flash analysis (LFA 467 HT HyperFlash, NETZSCH, Germany). The heat capacity was estimated through Neumann-Kopp rule by the rule of mixtures of the constituent oxides Here, k (i.e. k 0 in equations in Ref. XRD was performed on all 11 compositions and the results are shown in Figure 8YSZ shows the expected cubic fluorite structure. 3YSZ shows a mixture of the tetragonal, cubic, and monoclinic phases. After annealing at 1500°C for 24 hours, 3YSZ exhibits the metastable tetragonal phase; however, it is known that this phase can transform into tetragonal and cubic phases after prolonged high-temperature annealing For the nine CCFOs annealed at 1500°C for 24 hours (furnace-cooled), all the "H" and "M" compositions, except for 5H, possess a single cubic fluorite phase (Fm3 ̅ m, space group #225). Composition 5H still predominantly contains a fluorite phase; however, there is a secondary Ca(Hf/Zr)O3 perovskite phase. Among the "L" variants annealed at 1500°C for 24 hours, 4L and 7L show a single bodycentered tetragonal (BCT) phase, similar to the tetragonal YSZ (P42/nmc, space group #137). Composition 5L (with Y and Ca as the stabilizers) exhibits a single cubic fluorite phase. The addition of every Ca 2+ cation generates an O 2-oxygen vacancy, doubling that produced by adding a 3+ cation. Since it is known that the formation of the cubic fluorite structure strongly depends on the concentration of oxygen vacancies with Ca 2+ stabilizers likely stabilize this cubic phase. On examination of the XRD spectra, the peaks widen as the stabilizer concentration decreases. In general, peak broadening can arise from small crystallite/domain size, residual strains, and inhomogeneity. The residual strains and small crystallite size effects can be excluded in this case based on the Williamson-Hall analysis and long annealing times. Furthermore, our samples are compositionally homogeneous (as shown by the EDS analysis later). Thus, we propose that the peak broadening observed here is likely resulted from partial/initial phase transformation. Specifically, an FCC to BCT transition will result in peak splitting when the c/a ratio in the BCT cell deviates from the √2 of the cubic phase. However, due to XRD instrumental broadening, the initial small splitting looks similar to peak broadening. Here, the microstrain parameter (ε) extracted from the Williamson-Hall plot can be used as a proxy for the degree of broadening due to the presence of the tetragonal phase, in which the effects can be seen in variant "L". As the stabilizer concentration increases, the broadening parameter decreases, suggesting that the tetragonality of the sample decreases. Table Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the presence of moderate tetragonality, which is more sensitive than XRD. This technique is susceptible to local short-range ordering. Figure Raman spectra indicate some tetragonality in all nominally cubic phase, we used XRD as our primary criterion to differentiate cubic and tetragonal phases (as the tetragonality revealed by Raman is small, yet universal). In summary, XRD suggested that 4L is tetragonal (in long-range order), while both 4M and 4H are cubic (exhibits long-range cubic order) according to XRD, but Raman spectroscopy revealed some tetragonality or possible presence of some short-range tetragonal order. In fact, 8YSZ is commonly known as a cubic phase. However, it is also known, and verified here, that the Raman spectra can reveal some tetragonality (short-range tetragonal order) even in the wellknown cubic 8YSZ The stability of 4L, 4M, and 4H (or (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2Yb1/2)xO2-δ) was examined further by utilizing specimens quenched from different temperatures. Here, each sample was first annealed at 1500°C for approximately 24 h in air (that is essential to oxidize and homogenize the specimens made by SPS in a reduced environment), and then rapidly air quenched to preserve the crystal structure. XRD revealed that all variants exhibited sharp fluorite peaks, including 4L that exhibited tetragonal phase in the slow furnace cooled specimen (Figure After quenching at 1500°C to form a single cubic phase, each sample was then annealed again at 1200°C -1400°C for 24 h -48 h. It was found that variants "H" and "M" remained cubic with sharp peaks for all temperatures examined and are shown in Figure Variant "L", however, underwent a BCT to FCC phase transition around 1400°C -1500°C. The XRD spectra for quenched 4L from all temperatures are shown in Figure The phase stability of the CCFOs is now compared to YSZ. The phase transition temperature (~1400°C) of 4L (stabilizer concentration = 5.8 at. %) is significantly lower than its 3YSZ counterpart (~ 2200°C). Also, the tetragonal phase is stable in 8YSZ from 600°C to 1300°C. Within the CCFOs, no phase change was detected down to 1200°C. Thus, the cubic phase stable region is enlarged in CCFOs in comparison with YSZ. A proposed phase diagram of the (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2Yb1/2)xO2-δ CCFOs is shown in Figure In comparison with the YSZ phase diagram Polished cross-sections were examined by SEM-EDS to investigate the microstructure and homogeneity on the microscale. All the compositions following the furnace anneal were solid compacts free of cracks with a random distribution of (low) porosity. All specimens are chemically homogeneous. SEM micrograph and the corresponding EDS maps on 4L, 4M, and 4H were selected as an example and shown in Figure The Young's modulus (E) and nanohardness data are shown in Table Nanoindentation revealed similar nanohardness values of all compositions to be 16-20 GPa, on par with that of 8YSZ (17.3  1.5 GPa). Specimen 5M (Hf0.284Zr0.284Ce0.284Y0.074Ca0.074)xO2-δ is the hardest (19.6  0.6 GPa), despite its lowest modulus. A representative load-displacement curve for each specimen is shown in Figure One of the most attractive properties of YSZ is its low thermal conductivity (k). Thermal conductivity measurements were performed from room temperature to 1000°C and are shown in Data. Noting that the measured room-temperature k values for 4H and 7H are greater than those previously reported The temperature-dependent thermal conductivity values give insight into the thermal conduction mechanism. 8YSZ exhibits a constant k around 2 W m -1 K -1 but increases slightly at T ≥ 800°C due to radiation heat transfer. From room temperature to 1000°C, the reduction in k for the CCFOs compared to 8YSZ is about 20 %. This reduction of the thermal conductivity is likely originated from the increased phonon scattering. Both equimolar 4H and 7H show the classical 1/T relationship representative of Umklapp scattering at low temperatures, which then rise at higher temperatures from radiative effects (like 8YSZ). Notably, at lower stabilizer concentrations, the temperature dependency changes to an amorphous-like or disordered trend Specifically, the presence of disordered vacancies may increase the distortion on the oxygen sublattice according to the point defect scattering theory This also explains an important finding of this study that the non-equimolar medium-entropy CCFOs exhibit even lower (and temperature-independent) thermal conductivities than their equimolar high-entropy counterparts. This is clearly demonstrated, e.g., in Figure The thermal conductivities of 5L and 5M (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2Ca1/2)xO2-δ specimens are lower than those of the composition 7 series (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2Gd1/2)xO2-δ specimens, which are slightly lower than that of the Composition 4 series (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2Yb1/2)xO2-δ specimens. The introduction of Ca 2+ reduced the conductivity of the system further. As shown in Figure Interestingly, the mechanical properties of the CCFOs are reasonably similar to YSZ, but the thermal conductivity is reduced. Traditionally, the modulus and conductivity are directly related because strong bonding increases both  4.3 GPamKW -1 is achieved for 4M Hf0.284Zr0.284Ce0.284Y0.074Yb0.074)xO2-δ. The properties of all CCFOs are summarized in Table Generally, as the concentration of oxygen vacancy concentration increases (from "L" to "H"), so does the thermal conductivity and modulus to an extent. The k appears to reach a minimum (and E/k reaches a maximum) around the composition of variant "M" which has a nominal oxygen vacancy percentage of 3.7 %. However, this trend is not upheld in Composition This study broadens high-entropy ceramics (HECs) to compositionally-complex ceramics (CCCs), which can be alternatively and equivalently called "multi-principal cation ceramics (MPCCs)," to explore medium-entropy non-equimolar compositions using compositionallycomplex fluorite oxides (CCFOs) as an exemplar. Nine compositions CCFOs with the general formula of (Hf1/3Zr1/3Ce1/3)1-x(Y1/2X1/2)xO2-δ (where X = Yb, Ca, and Gd) have been fabricated and eight of exhibit single solid-solution phases at 1500 C. In comparison with YSZ, these CCFOs exhibit increased cubic stability and lower thermal conductivity, while retaining comparable modulus and hardness. Moreover, the temperaturedependent thermal conductivity in the non-equimolar CCFOs shows an amorphous-like behavior. Most notably, the medium-entropy non-equimolar CCFOs exhibit even lower thermal conductivity (k) and higher E/k ratios than their equimolar high-entropy counterparts. Thus, these results suggest a new direction to design, fabricate, and test insulative yet stiff CCFOs specifically, as well as other high-performance CCCs or MPCCs in general, via exploring nonequimolar and/or medium-entropy compositions beyond HECs. This study has also demonstrated the importance of oxygen vacancies, particularly their clustering, in influencing the thermal conductivity, which is the underlying reason that nonequimolar medium-entropy CCFOs outperform their equimolar high-entropy counterparts. ), which can alternatively and equivalently be named as "multi-principal cation ceramics (MPCCs)." CCCs include high-entropy ceramics (HECs) and entropy-stabilized ceramics as subsets; moreover, CCCs also include medium-entropy and/or non-equimolar compositions that are not qualified as HECs. Following the definitions of metallic high-entropy alloys (HEAs), HECs typically refer to equimolar or near-equimolar compositions of five or more principal cations (usually producing >1.5 R per mol. of cations ideal configuration entropy) on at least one sublattice. We propose to broaden HECs to CCCs to further include non-equimolar and/or medium-entropy compositions of three or four principal (typically 5%-35%) cations or generally 1-1.5 R per mol. ideal configuration entropy on at least one sublattice. Note that different (mostly subjective) criteria exist so that the boundaries of high-or medium-entropy compositions are only loosely defined. We should further note that most non-equimolar and/or medium-entropy ceramics (based on the above definitions) also represent a largely unexplored compositional space (in addition to HECs). Figure The microstructure and corresponding elemental distribution maps for 5H, 5M, 5L, 7H, 7M, and 7L specimens (furnace-cooled from 1500°C) are shown in Figure A representative load-displacement curve from nanoindentation for each specimen furnacecooled from 1500°C is displayed in Figure The measured thermal diffusivities and calculated heat capacities from room temperature up to 1000°C for the eight single-phase specimens (including 8YSZ) are shown in Figures 