Recent developments of the pump-probe thermoreflectance methods (such as the beam-offset and elliptical-beam approaches of the time-domain and frequency-domain thermoreflectance techniques) enabled measurements of the thermal conductivities of in-plane anisotropic materials. Estimating the temperature rise of anisotropic layered structures under surface heating is critically important to make sure that the temperature rise is not too high to alias the signals in these experiments. However, a simple formula to estimate the temperature rise in three-dimensional (3D) anisotropic layered systems heated by a non-circular laser beam is not available yet, which is the main problem we aim to solve in this work. We first re-derived general formalisms of the temperature rise of a multilayered structure based on the previous literature work by solving the 3D anisotropic heat diffusion equation in the frequency domain. These general formalisms normally require laborious numerical evaluation; however, they could be reduced to explicit analytical expressions for the case of semi-infinite solids. We then extend the analytical expressions to multilayered systems, taking into account the effect of the top layers. This work not only enhances our understanding of the physics of temperature rise due to surface laser heating but also enables quick estimation of the peak temperature rise of 3D anisotropic layered systems in pump-probe thermoreflectance experiments and thus greatly benefits the thermoreflectance experiments in choosing the appropriate heating power intensity for the experiments. Thermal conductivity of anisotropic materials is a critical property that impacts their wide applications in modern devices such as microelectronics, TDTR typically uses ultrafast pulsed lasers (with pulse widths <0.5 ps) and FDTR typically uses continuous-wave (cw) lasers for the measurements. In both cases, the surface temperature rise ΔT should not be too high to invalidate the assumption of the linear temperature dependence of R . Besides, since both methods measure the thermal properties of the sample at the base temperature T , the surface temperature rise ΔT should not be too high to invalidate the assumption of constant thermal properties in the temperature range of T to T ΔT. This is particularly important at low temperatures where the heat capacities have the T temperature dependence. A general guideline is that the steady-state surface temperature rise ΔT should not exceed 10 K or 10% of the absolute temperature, whichever is smaller. For the steady-state temperature rise in thermoreflectance experiments, Cahill Here, P is the averaged laser power absorbed by the sample, k and k are the in-plane and through-plane thermal conductivities of the material, w and w are the 1/e 2 radii of the pump and probe laser spots, and ΔT is the temperature rise as averaged by the probe beam. While Eq. ( In this work, general formalisms of the peak temperature rise were first re-derived based on the previous literature work for both cw and pulsed laser heating of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems. These general formalisms were then reduced to simple semi-empirical correlations to enable fast and accurate estimation of the peak temperature rise in both FDTR and TDTR experiments. These simple analytical expressions were tested against the general formalisms for several different representative cases and the effect of thin-film layers on the peak temperature rise was discussed. The heat diffusion process in anisotropic media is governed by the following equation: Here C is the volumetric heat capacity, and k , k , k , k , k , k are the 6 independent components of the 2 nd rank thermal conductivity tensor, which must be symmetric by the reciprocity relation. Assuming a surface heat source boundary condition, the surface temperature rise Θ of a multilayered system could be solved in the frequency domain as ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) where G u, v, ω is the Green's function and Q u, v, ω is the surface heat flux in the frequency domain. Details on the derivation of the Green's function can be found in Refs. [10, 14] and also Supplementary Information Section S1 for the sake of completeness. We note that the assumption of a surface heat source boundary condition is not always valid due to the optical penetration of the laser beam into the sample. However, for most standard TDTR and FDTR experiments where the samples are coated with a metal transducer layer, most of the heat is absorbed by the thin transducer layer. Assuming the surface heat source boundary condition would only result in slightly higher temperature rise at short delay times (<10 ps) in TDTR but have no effect for the longer delay time range (>10 ps) in TDTR or FDTR. More detailed discussions can be found in Supplementary Information S2. In what follows, we continue to derive the temperature rise expressions under the assumption of a surface heat source boundary condition. For the case of cw laser heating in FDTR, the surface heat flux is x y q x y t P P t w w w w Here x w and y w are the φ is an arbitrary phase shift. Fourier transform of Eq. ( The case of pulsed laser heating in TDTR would be a little more complicated, with the surface heat flux expressed as   This is a train of pulses with Gaussian distribution in time and space, modulated by a sinusoidal function at frequency  0 . The laser pulses have a full duration at half maximum (FDHM) of p  . The laser repetition rate is frep with a period of Ts=1/frep, and t is an arbitrary time shift of laser pulses. Similarly, the frequency-domain surface heat flux for the case of pulse laser heating could be obtained from the Fourier transform of Eq. ( The surface temperature rise of the layered structure can thus be obtained by doing an inverse 2D Fourier transform of Eq. ( For the case of cw laser heating, the time-varying surface temperature rise is Here the symbol Re represents the real part of a complex number. For the case of pulsed laser heating, it would be The first terms of Eqs. ( Figure The general formalisms derived above (Eqs. ( Plugging Eq. ( The first term of Eq. ( with the anisotropy correction factor ξ expressed as Here the anisotropy parameters are defined as α k /k , β w /w , and the averaged in-plane thermal conductivity and laser spot size are defined as k k k and w w w , respectively. The anisotropy correction factor ξ α/β is a function of solely α/β and is plotted out as the solid curve in Fig. . could be used instead to approximate ξ with an error <5%, as shown by the dash-dotted curve in Fig. FIG. When α β which gives ξ 1, Eq. ( Equation (13) suggests that the steady-state temperature rise of the semi-infinite solid is proportional to both the heat flux and the square-root of the heated area, θ ∝ " √A, where A is the heated area and k k k is the averaged thermal conductivity. Therefore, even under the continuous heating of a constant heat flux without any heat loss, a steady-state temperature rise could still be established in the semi-infinite solid if the heated area is finite. On the other hand, for the case of 1D uniform heating with an infinitely large heated area, the surface temperature rise would be θ " ∝ √ t, where t is the heating time, The second term of Eq. ( The in-plane anisotropy in both the thermal conductivity α k /k and laser spot size β w /w also affect the amplitude of periodic temperature oscillation, as shown in Fig. We come up with an empirical correlation for the ratio between the amplitude of the periodic temperature oscillation at the frequency ω and the steady-state temperature rise of a semiinfinite solid under cw laser heating as cw cw ac dc 0.36 0.84 Predictions by the correlation Eq. ( In sum, the peak temperature rise of a semi-infinite solid under modulated cw laser heating could be estimated as The sign represents the range of the temperature oscillation due to the modulated heating. Note that the steady-state temperature rise due to cw laser heating depends only on the averaged thermal conductivity k k k but not the heat capacity of the material. Although the oscillating part of the temperature rise depends on the heat capacity, the amplitude of the oscillating part of the temperature rise is always less than or equal to the steady-state temperature rise. Therefore, the heat capacity of the material does not place a constraint on the temperature rise in FDTR experiments. The situation, however, is different in TDTR experiments, where a pulsed laser is used for the heating and the heat capacity could play a significant role in the transient temperature rise, see details below. Plugging Eq. ( The first term of Eq. ( Here t is the time after each pulse heating event. More details on deriving this semiempirical correlation can be found in Supplementary Information Section S3. The first term of Eq. ( From Eq. ( Therefore, only estimating the steady-state temperature rise would be insufficient in TDTR experiments especially when measuring materials with high in-plane thermal diffusivities k /C, an example of which is shown in Fig. The second term of Eq. ( The temperature oscillating range by the pulsed heating could thus be estimated as θ θ θ . The validity of Eq. ( As a demonstration, we used the analytical expressions Eqs. (16, 18, 19) to estimate the peak temperature rise of a Si semi-infinite substrate heated at 300 K and 70 K and compare them in Fig. The shadowed regions in Fig. The case of multilayered systems is more complicated than the semi-infinite solid mainly because the thin films could act as in-plane heat spreaders, making the heat flux intensity on the surface of the underlying layers different from the one originally supplied on the surface of the first layer. The in-plane heat spreading effect would be larger if the films have a larger k h, where h is the film thickness. Assuming a linear temperature gradient across the thin films (which could overestimate the temperature rise if the films are too thick to invalidate this assumption), the peak temperature rise of an n-layered system could be estimated as: where h is the thickness of the i-th layer, G is the interface thermal conductance between the i -th and the next layers, θ , and θ , are the temperature rise of the semi-infinite substrate evaluated using Eqs. (16, 18, 19). As a demonstration of Eq. ( The interface thermal conductance was assumed as G 300 MW/m K for all the interfaces. The thermal conductivities and heat capacities of all the layers used in the calculation are summarized in Supplementary Information Table In summary, we provide simple semi-empirical correlations for quick and accurate estimation of both the steady-state and transient temperature rise of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems heated by either a cw or a pulsed laser beam. General formalisms of the time-varying temperature rise of 3D anisotropic multilayered systems were first re-derived based on the previous literature work for both modulated cw and pulsed laser heating, the evaluation of which, however, requires laborious numerical calculations. We then extract simple semi-empirical correlations of the peak temperature rise of semi-infinite solids from the accurate numerical values of several thousand random cases. These correlations were further extended to multilayered systems, taking into account both the temperature drop across the thin films and their in-plane heat spreading effect. These semi-empirical correlations have been found to work well within the assumption of a linear temperature gradient across the thin films; otherwise, the temperature rise could be overestimated. These simple semi-empirical expressions not only serve the purpose of estimating the maximum temperature rise of 3D anisotropic layered systems in pump-probe thermoreflectance experiments and thus greatly benefits these experiments in choosing the appropriate heating power intensity for the experiments but also enhances our understanding of the physics of temperature rise of multilayered systems under both cw and pulsed laser heating. See supplementary material for the derivation of the Green's function, the discussion on the effect of optical penetration, the derivation of Eq. ( We start from the governing equation of heat diffusion in a 3D anisotropic multilayered system: This parabolic partial differential equation can be simplified by doing Fourier transforms to inplane coordinates and time, (x, y, z, t) (u, v, z, ) Or more compactly, where The general solution of Eq. (S1-3) is where , u u   are the roots of the equation 2 and , B B   are the complex numbers to be determined. The heat flux can be obtained from the temperature Eq. (S1-6) and Fourier's law of heat conduction It would be convenient to write Eqs. (S1-6) and (S1-8) as matrices as , where n stands for the n-th layer of the multilayer system, and z is the distance from the surface of the n-th layer. The constants , B B   for the n-th layer can also be obtained from the surface temperature and heat flux of that layer by setting z=0 in Eq. (S1-10) and performing its matrix inversion: For heat flow across the interface, an interface conductance G is defined. Therefore, the heat flux across an interface can be written as: From Eq. (S1-13) we also have: It is convenient to write Eqs. (S1-13) and (S1-14) as a matrix as The surface temperature and heat flux can thus be related to those at the bottom of the substrate as Applying the boundary condition of zero heat flux at the bottom of the semi-infinite substrate . The Green's function Ĝ , which is essentially the surface temperature response due to the applied surface heat flux of unit strength, can thus be solved as With the Green's function Ĝ determined, the detected temperature response is simply the product of Ĝ and the heat source function in the frequency domain. Throughout this work we have assumed a surface heat source boundary condition, i.e., the laser power was deposited on the very top surface of the first layer. In reality, because of the finite value of the extinction coefficient κ , the laser beam would penetrate into the material, giving a volumetric heat source. The Beer-Lambert law states that the intensity of the laser beam inside the material would have an exponential decay as exp z/δ , where δ λ / 4πκ is known as the optical penetration depth or skin depth. Figure Here we have made the following notation: Applying the same boundary condition , 0 n z Q   at the bottom of the substrate, we have . We can thus solve the surface temperature rise of the top layer 1  as   An alternative approach to model optical penetration can also be found in Refs. [1, 2], and they yield identical results with the current approach. Similarly, for θ , , we find that if we take the factor Expanding these correlations, we have the expression of θ as Eq. ( and could be approximated by the analytical correlation Eq. ( To evaluate the validity of Eq. ( only. The deviations between the estimated values and the accurate ones, η 100%, are plotted as a function of ξw Cf /k in Fig. We note that it is not practically useful to estimate the transient temperature rise at a short delay time of 10 ps in TDTR experiments because at such a short delay time the temperature rise is still complicated by factors including the non-equilibrium between hot electrons and phonons in the transducer layer, the deviation between the actual volumetric heat flux due to the optical penetration of the laser beam and the assumed surface heat flux boundary condition, etc. Nevertheless, we can still test our analytical expressions at any delay time within the framework of the simplified thermal model to demonstrate the consistency of the analytical expressions. Figure To evaluate the validity of Eq. ( Figure 