Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations are a powerful tool to study the dynamics of charge carriers in organic photovoltaics. However, the key characteristic of any photovoltaic device, its current-voltage (J-V ) curve under solar illumination, has proven challenging to simulate using KMC. The main challenges arise from the presence of injecting contacts and the importance of charge recombination when the internal electric field is low, i.e., close to open-circuit conditions. In this work, an experimentally calibrated KMC model is presented that can fully predict the J-V curve of a disordered 1 Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations have successfully been used to model the charge carrier dynamics in organic photovoltaics (OPVs) on the ps to μs time scale. For instance, it was shown that in thin-film OPV devices, thermalization in the disorder-broadened density of states (DOS) does not complete before charges are extracted. We show that this is only possible when correct assumptions are made on the injection barriers, the morphology of the active layer, and the charge recombination rate. All these properties are calibrated by independent experimental techniques such as charge extraction, electron microscopy and transient absorption. We are thereby introducing a device model that works on a multitude of length and time scales. As such it will be useful for future investigations on the interplay between elementary processes and device characteristics of organic solar cells and other optoelectronic devices. 2 Results and Discussion The aim of this work is to develop and experimentally calibrate a KMC model that fits both transient experiments and device J-V curves. Our material system for experimental calibration is TQ1:PC 71 BM, The KMC model, which is extended and experimentally calibrated in this work to fully describe OPV devices, has been introduced previously. where ν 0 is the attempt-to-hop frequency, α the inverse localization length, ∆E ij = E j -E i the energy difference between the sites, and kT the thermal energy. Hopping is assumed to take place in a Gaussian DOS, where E is the single particle energy, E 0 the mean energy, and σ the width of the Gaussian DOS or the energetic disorder. We note that without of loss of generality, also other energy distributions could be assumed in the model, such as an exponential DOS. From previous studies, however, it is known that a Gaussian DOS gives the most appropriate description for the present TQ1:PC 71 BM system both when describing transient and steadystate experiments. The core working principle of a KMC model is to simulate the time evolution of a system based on the transition rates of all possible events (here: hops, generation, recombination, injection). The event that occurs at a certain point in time is randomly selected with the transition rates used as weighting factors. The time step between single events is calculated as τ =ln(u)/Σ ν , where u is a random number drawn from a homogeneous distribution between 0 and 1, and Σ ν the sum of the rates of all possible events. A typical simulation starts with a number of photogenerated excitons. Excitons may separate into CT pairs/free charges or recombine after their lifetime. Diffusion of excitons by Förster and Dexter energy transfer are both accounted for. An additional on-site barrier of 0.8 eV is used to facilitate charge separation in molecularly mixed phases. Further details on the used KMC algorithm can be found in the Supplementary Information of Ref. 3. As mentioned above, the presence of injecting contacts causes computational challenges. Charge injection is mediated by the injection barriers, i.e., the energy offset between the contact Fermi level and the respective molecular orbital of the semiconductor. Especially for low barriers, carriers may oscillate multiple times across the contact interface before injection/extraction finally takes place. We mitigated this 'small barrier' problem by only allowing for a transfer if the number of charges next to the contact interface deviates from its equilibrium value. The transfer is modeled as hopping event with an attempt frequency ν 0,cont of the same order as for the transport of the faster carrier (here: electrons) in the semiconductor. This ensures that charge collection is not limited by the contacts. Both the cathode and anode were considered nonselective; hence, possible losses due to diffusion of carriers into the 'wrong' contact are implicitly accounted for. An advantage of KMC simulations is that no explicit assumptions about the formalism of charge recombination need to be made. Recombination of free charges involves the formation of a CT pair as intermediate. Exciton formation is explicitly allowed, but requires overcoming the relevant energy level offset between the TQ1 and PC 71 BM; as such, it can be interpreted as the inverse of charge separation, i.e., the splitting of (CT) excitons into free electrons and holes. As discussed in more detail below, it is then the inverse lifetime of the CT state that determines the recombination rate and must be calibrated experimentally. The filled circles in Figure The main result of this study is that a KMC model that can describe full J-V characteristics requires an appropriate description and calibration of the injection barriers and the morphology in the active layer. If wrong or too simple assumptions are made on these properties, our otherwise well validated KMC model can no longer describe the device (Figure The injection barriers set the carrier density in the device around the built-in voltage. To get a realistic estimate of the barrier height, we compare the results of charge extraction experiments in the dark with device simulations. As KMC calculations are computationally too expensive for this approach, we used a DD model instead. where q is the elementary charge, d the active-layer thickness, J 0 the displacement current measured at V pre = 0, and t f the time at which charge extraction is completed. Note that in the form of Equation ( Another interesting observation is that, as one would expect, lowering the injection barriers from 0.2 to 0.1 eV leads to an increase in V OC . But at the same time the fill factor becomes reduced, so that the overall power conversion efficiency stays roughly the same. Hence, we can deduce from our KMC simulations that reducing the injection barriers does not per se lead to a better performing solar cell device. Closer examination of this aspect, however, requires more extensive parameter studies, which are beyond the scope of the present paper and will be the subject of future work. In our previous KMC studies the photoactive blend was assumed as an effective hopping medium without any morphological features. This clearly confirms that the clusters seen in TEM are PC 71 BM aggregates, in agreement with earlier work on similar blend systems. Only with the inclusions in the effective hopping medium we were able to match the fill factor of the experimental devices. Figure The inset in Figure that in such a situation an equilibrium between CT states and free charge carriers is established. In order to do so, we use the results of transient absorption (TA) experiments. TA is a pump-probe technique that optically tracks a carrier population created by a short light pulse over time. As the experiment is carried out under flat-band conditions, the measured decay solely reflects the recombination kinetics. Figure On longer time scales, however, the fit between TA experiment and KMC model is not as good. The reason for this are the symmetrized transport parameters we use for computational effectiveness. As discussed in the Supporting Information, the disorder σ and attempt-to-hop frequency ν 0 are largely interchangeable, i.e., increasing the one parameter can be compensated by decreasing the other and vice versa. This interchangeability allows us to use the values given in Table We have presented a KMC model that fully describes the J-V curve of a disordered organic solar cell under solar illumination. The agreement between experiment and simulation is obtained by experimentally calibrating the injections barriers, the blend morphology, and the dynamics of the CT state involved in charge recombination. Our work clearly highlights the importance of contacts for a KMC model to describe operating OPVs. We find that seemingly small changes in the injection barrier height can have major impact on the device V OC and fill factor. This confirms that injected charges play a key role in the apparent recombination mechanism. Furthermore, we find charge recombination to be limited by the fate of the intermediate CT exciton, which can be influenced by the presence of aggregates in the active layer, and not by the transport of electrons and holes; our results indicate that the energy difference between the aggregated and mixed regions and the aggregate size is not that important, but the presence of aggregates is. The platform introduced in this work will be useful for future studies on properties of OPV materials that are not accessible via macroscopic, quasi-equilibrium modeling techniques such as drift-diffusion. Questions to be answered include but are not limited to how For the electrons σ e = 120 meV and ν 0,e = 1 × 10 13 s -1 was assumed and for the holes σ h = 83 meV and ν 0,h = 5 × 10 9 s -1 , according to previous experimental work. 