Strontium ruthenate (Sr2RuO4) has long been thought to host a spin-triplet chiral p-wave superconducting state. However, the singletlike response observed in recent spin-susceptibility measurements casts serious doubts on this pairing state. Together with the evidence for broken time-reversal symmetry and a jump in the shear modulus c66 at the superconducting transition temperature, the available experiments point towards an even-parity chiral superconductor with kz(kx ± iky)-like Eg symmetry, which has consistently been dismissed based on the quasi-two-dimensional electronic structure of Sr2RuO4. Here, we show how the orbital degree of freedom can encode the two-component nature of the Eg order parameter, allowing for a local orbital-antisymmetric spin-triplet state that can be stabilized by on-site Hund's coupling. We find that this exotic Eg state can be energetically stable once a complete, realistic three-dimensional model is considered, within which momentum-dependent spin-orbit coupling terms are key. This state naturally gives rise to Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces. Introduction. Based on early Knight shift Although it now seems unlikely that Sr 2 RuO 4 is a spintriplet chiral p-wave superconductor, the observation of broken time-reversal symmetry In this Rapid Communication, we show that local interactions can lead to a weak-coupling instability in the E g channel, once we consider a complete three-dimensional (3D) model for the normal state. Physically, this E g state is a local (i.e., s-wave) orbital-antisymmetric spin-triplet (OAST) state stabilized by on-site Hund's coupling. When the renormalized low-energy Hund's coupling J becomes larger than the interorbital Hubbard interaction U , this channel develops an attractive interaction Normal-state Hamiltonian. An accurate description of the normal-state Hamiltonian is crucial for understanding superconductivity in the weak-coupling limit. Our starting point is a tight-binding parametrization of the normal-state Hamiltonian that includes all terms allowed by symmetry The relevant low-energy degrees of freedom (DOF) are the electrons in the t 2g -orbital manifold d yz , d xz , and d xy of Ru. Using the spinor operator Φ , where c † k,γσ creates an electron with momentum k and spin σ in orbital γ, we construct the most general three-orbital single-particle Hamiltonian as where the λ a are Gell-Mann matrices encoding the orbital DOF and the σ b are Pauli matrices encoding the spin (λ 0 and σ 0 are unit matrices), and h ab (k) are even functions of momentum. Time-reversal and inversion symmetries allow only for 15 h ab (k) functions to be finite. The explicit form of the h ab (k) functions and the Gell-Mann matrices are given in the SM Interactions and superconductivity. We consider on-site interactions of the Hubbard-Kanamori type where c † iγσ (c iγσ ) creates (annihilates) an electron at site i in orbital γ with spin σ, and first two terms describe repulsion (U, U > 0) between electrons in the same and in different orbitals, respectively. The third and fourth terms represent the Hund's exchange interaction and pair-hopping interactions respectively. We take J = J In the context of Sr 2 RuO 4 , H int is usually taken as the starting point for the calculation of the spin-and chargefluctuation propagators which enter into the effective interaction Although a strong-coupling instability towards an OAST E g state in the absence of SOC has been predicted in Ref. In the spirit of Ref. We write a free-energy expansion up to second order in the superconducting order parameter given by the gap matrices ∆i = ∆ i λ ai ⊗ σ bi (iσ 2 ), where i and j sum over all channels of a chosen irrep, g i are the corresponding interaction strengths from Table Results. Weak-coupling OAST pairing states for an attractive Hund's interaction require nonvanishing SOC Here, we will ignore the anisotropy of the atomic SOC and set η z = η ⊥ = η. We have carried out a cursory exploration of the larger SOC parameter space and find that varying the other parameters within reasonable ranges such that the Fermi surfaces do not significantly deviate from the DFT predictions has little effect on the leading instability. Figure It is possible to understand why these SOC terms stabilize the respective ground states based on the notion of superconducting fitness In view of the Knight-shift experiments Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces. An E g state is expected to have horizontal line nodes at k z = 0 and 2π/c Conclusions. We have argued that an E g order parameter can be a realistic weak-coupling ground state for Sr 2 RuO 4 , once we consider a complete 3D model for the normal state and interactions of the Hubbard-Kanamori type. Key to our construction are the usually neglected momentum-dependent SOC terms in the normal state. These terms can completely change the nature of the superconducting ground state, despite being so small that they do not significantly change the Fermi surfaces. Our theory reconciles the recent observation of a singletlike spin susceptibility with measurements indicating a two-component order parameter and broken time-reversal symmetry. Supplemental Material for Stabilizing Even-Parity Chiral Superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 Han Gyeol Suh, Henri Menke, P. M. R. Brydon, Carsten Timm, Aline Ramires, and Daniel F. Agterberg In this section, we construct a 3D tight-binding model for Sr 2 RuO 4 . We take into account the full 3D Fermi surfaces (FSs) of Sr 2 RuO 4 , based on the DFT band structure obtained by Veenstra et al. We parametrize the orbital space by the the Gell-Mann matrices, which are the generators of SU(3). We use the convention We write the normal-state Hamiltonian in terms of the spinor In the presence of inversion and time-reversal symmetries, only a subset of fifteen h ab (k) terms are allowed. Table We now focus on terms corresponding to k-dependent SOC, usually not taken into account in the standard parametrization of the normal-state Hamiltonian. The first matrix in the list, λ 5 ⊗ σ 1 + λ 6 ⊗ σ 2 , which is of A 2g symmetry, will be ignored because the lowest-order polynomial basis function of this irrep is of order 4 (g-wave), which only appears at next-next-next-nearest-neighbor hopping and is therefore assumed to be negligible. We also take the other k-dependent SOC terms at the lowest order at which they appear. This concludes the construction of the microscopic model, which is characterized by a Hamiltonian with 26 free parameters. We employ the tight-binding model presented in the supplemental material of We extract the Fermi momenta kF of the DFT model and denote the eigenvalues by and the associated eigenvectors by V . We define the following measure where the sum is over momenta kF on the DFT Fermi surfaces formed by the bands n = α, β, γ, n (k) are the band energies, d n xy (k) is the d xy -orbtial content, p n SOC (k) is the spin polarization, and v n (k) the in-plane velocity. Quantities with a tilde are from the DFT model. The d xy -orbtial content is determined by the corresponding eigenvector components The spin polarization is determined from the expectation value of the atomic spin-orbit coupling Hamiltonian For the in-plane Fermi velocity we use a simple two-point central finite differences stencil where ε x,y are small We minimize the measure (S6) using the derivative-free optimization algorithm BOBYQA of dlib The fit yields very good agreement with the DFT model close to the Fermi energy, including good reproduction of the d xy -orbital content and the spin polarization. In Fig. It is important to note that because the different sheets of the Fermi surface have varying orbital and spin content, it is not possible to isolate one dominant band for superconductivity. The pairing state will in general have contributions from all three sheets. In this section, we outline our solution of the linearized BCS gap equation. For convenience, we repeat the second-order expansion of the free energy as given in Eq. ( where the gap functions are ∆i = ∆ i λ ai ⊗ σ bi (iσ 2 ) and the indices a i , b i , and interaction energies g i are given in Table where U is a unitary matrix that diagonalizes the normal-state Hamiltonian Ĥ0 , U = (iσ 2 ) † U , and a are band energies. We define new gap matrices by The frequency summation yields where β = 1/k B T . The linearized gap equations are obtained by differentiating the free energy with respect to the gap amplitudes, ∂F/∂∆ * i = 0, written explicitly as where i and j run over all gap-structure indices of a given irrep, a and b run over band indices, [Λ i ] ab is a matrix element of Λ i , and gi is the value of g i when s = 1. First, consider a = b intraband terms in Eq. (S16), the k-integration is written as with Use the Taylor expansion of F abij ( ) around the Fermi level, F abij (0) + F abij (0) + . . ., the derivative of Eq. (S17) with respect to β gives Note that when this is integrated with respect to β it yields the log β divergence in Eq. (S17). Next, consider the a = b interband terms, as β → ∞, S ab converges to θ( a b )/| a + b | , where θ is the Heaviside step function. Because this is a bounded function, there is no divergence in the interband contributions. In (S16) a non-trivial solution for the gap amplitudes ∆ j is found by considering i and j as matrix indices and taking the corresponding 6 × 6 matrix to be singular. Including both the intraband and interband contributions, the critical where ] ab S ab that remains after removing the log β divergent term. By definition, C ij (β) is convergent as β → ∞, so the last term in the determinant can be ignored when s is sufficiently large. More explicitly, in the weak-coupling limit s → ∞, T c is given in the form where δ is a constant and m is the smallest log β c /s solution found when C ij = 0. Different channels (irreps) have different values of m, and the channel with the smallest m is the leading instability in the weak-coupling limit. Note that the definition of m does not depend on C ij and all the interband contributions go into C ij . Thus we can drop the interband terms in Eq. (S16). This changes δ but does not change m. The resultant expression is which is the equation we solve numerically. The log β divergence originates from momenta near the Fermi surface, so we carry out the k-integration on adaptive meshes with finer resolution near the Fermi surface. We obtain log β c for several values of s and use linear regression to get the slope, which determines m. If the values of log β c at the sampling points are not linear in s we sample larger s values until we encounter linear behavior. In our calculation, an equidistant set of four sampling points is used for a linear regression and their R 2 measures are always greater than 0.999. Using this procedure, we get the slope m for each pairing channel and determine the leading instability at each point in the phase diagram displayed in Fig. In this section, we present details of the superconducting-fitness analysis. We start with the more realistic threeorbital model and then consider an effective two-orbital model, which dramatically simplifies the analysis but gives consistent results. In previous works quantifies how incompatible a given gap structure is for a specific normal state, namely, how much inter-band pairing there is. Here, H0 (k) = Ĥ0 (k)h 00 (k) λ 0 ⊗ σ 0 and we have defined a normalized gap matrix ∆(k) = ∆(k)/| ∆(k)| such that average over the normal-state Fermi surface is ∆(k) ∆ † (k) FS = . The second measure, quantifies how much intra-band pairing there is, or what fraction of the gap survives upon projection onto the Fermi surface. For the two-orbital scenario, these measures satisfy Tr F † A (k) FA (k) + Tr F † C (k) FC (k) FS = 1, up to normalization of the normal-state Hamiltonian, which highlights their complementarity. The proof of this relation relies on the fact that the matrices associated with the orbital DOF are Pauli matrices for the two-orbital scenario and therefore form a totally anticommuting set, which greatly simplifies the calculations. On the other hand, for n > 2 orbitals, the basis matrices are the generators of SU(n), which do not form a totally anticommuting set and therefore do not allow a direct generalization of this relation for models with more than two orbitals. However, the physical meaning of FC (k) and FA (k) is preserved within some approximations, as discussed below. For the three-orbital situation, the corresponding superconducting-fitness functions can be identified as Given that [A 2 , B] ± = A[A, B] ∓ [A, B]A, the core of the analysis still depends on the original form of the superconducting-fitness functions. Therefore, we use the form linear in Ĥ0 (k) to get some insight. Below, we will see that a simplified two-orbital model, for which the linear version of the fitness functions is valid rigorously, corroborates our analysis. We summarize the results for the complete three-orbital problem in Tables Considering now the two-dimensional order parameters, for { From this analysis, we can understand the tendencies observed in the numerical results as follows: the order parameters in A 1g , in particular [5, 2] -[6, 1], are strongly stabilized by atomic SOC, in particular by the term h 52-61 in the normal-state Hamiltonian, such that reducing the magnitude of this coupling is expected to weaken the superconducting instability in this channel. Moreover, the terms {h 53 , h 63 } primarily suppress the order parameter in this channel since their contribution to FC is larger than the one to FA . In contrast, the E g order parameters, in particular for { Effective two-orbital model in the kxkz-plane Sufficiently far from the Brillouin-zone diagonals k y = ±k x , the bands close to the Fermi energy are dominated by only two of the Ru d-orbitals. For concreteness, here we consider the k x k z -plane, but our conclusions remain qualitatively valid for general k, except close to k y = ±k x . In the k x k z -plane, the dominant orbitals at the Fermi energy are d xz and d xy . Projecting into this subspace, we obtain an effective two-orbital Hamiltonian which is parametrized by where the hab (k) are real functions of momentum, τ a and σ b are Pauli matrices for a, b = 1, 2, 3 and the 2 × 2 identity matrix for a, b = 0, encoding the orbital and the spin DOF, respectively. There are, in principle, 16 parameters hab (k) but in the presence of time-reversal and inversion symmetries these are constrained to only six, including the term proportional to the identity. The symmetry-allowed terms are listed in Table The irreps associated with each [a, b] combination are the same as for the normal-state Hamiltonian, given in the first two columns of Table The superconducting-fitness analysis, which is summarized in Table . List of the fifteen symmetry-allowed terms in the normal-state Hamiltonian Ĥ0(k) in Eq. (S2). For each (a, b), the basis function h ab (k) must belong to the same irrep of D 4h as the matrix λa ⊗ σ b . The table gives the irrep, the associated physical process ("Type"), where "k-SOC" means momentum-dependent (nonlocal) SOC, and the momentum dependence of h ab (k). For the two-dimensional irrep Eg, the entries are organized such that the first transforms as xz and the second as yz. x a cos k y a + cos 2k y a cos k x a) + 2t