We study bottom-up grown semiconductor indium antimonide nanowires that are coated with shells of tin. The shells are uniform in thickness. The interface between Sn and InSb is abrupt and without interdiffusion. Devices for transport are prepared by in-situ shadowing of nanowires using nearby nanowires as well as flakes, resulting in etch-free junctions. Tin is found to induce a hard superconducting gap in the range 600 -700 μeV. Superconductivity persists up to 4 T in magnetic field. A small island of InSb/Sn exhibits the coveted two-electron charging effect, a hallmark of charge parity stability. The findings open avenues for superconducting and topological quantum circuits based on new superconductor-semiconductor combinations. As we enter the era of intermediate-scale quantum circuits Only a few superconductors were explored for Majorana qubits, most notably aluminum which is also the material of choice for transmon quantum processors Here we present induced superconductivity in InSb nanowires We find that when InSb nanowires are coupled to tin they exhibit hard induced superconducting gap up to 700 μeV. Superconductivity persists to a significant magnetic field, up to 4 Tesla for 15 nm thick Sn shells. Most importantly, islands of tin do exhibit 2e-periodic charging patterns. This effect is a landmark requirement for topological quantum computing as well as for transmon qubits, as it is a pre-requisite for long quasiparticle stability times. Our results indicate that there are more superconductors compatible with quantum computing, opening future directions for heterostructure tailoring and ultimately for high fidelity quantum circuits. Our first goal is to investigate electron tunneling into Sn through InSb in the normal metal-superconductor (N-S) configuration. For this we need a nanowire with only one end covered by tin. We use the uncovered end to define a tunneling barrier and an N-contact. In order to avoid damage to InSb that results from etching away part of the Sn shell, we employ in-situ nanoscale shadowing To prepare an N-S device the tin-coated nanowire is positioned onto a doped Si/SiO x substrate which is used as a back gate (BG) (Fig. Next, we study superconductor-superconductor (S-S) devices with both ends of the nanowire covered by tin, and only a narrow break in the shell to define an InSb weak link (Fig. The resonance at zero bias in Fig. In Fig. The two-electron charging effect is central for topological quantum computing because the states of a topological qubit are distinguished by even/odd island charge parity. If only 1e charging periodicity were observed, it would mean that despite a well-defined superconducting gap, electrons can be added to an island one at a time and the ability to distinguish the states of a topological qubit is scrambled. 1e periodicity is also detrimental for transmon qubits where single electron tunneling is a decoherence mechanism Tin is an unusual material which has two different crystal phases with a phase transition at 13 • C. The lowtemperature α-Sn has a diamond cubic lattice, while the high temperature β-Sn is tetragonal. The electronic properties of both phases are very different. α-Sn is a semimetal which can also be a topological insulator in monolayer form For tin on InSb nanowires we assess the structural properties and elemental distribution using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). TEM images reveal a polycrystalline Sn shell of uniform thickness around the InSb nanowire (Fig. In addition to the uniform shell thickness, the nanowire shadow junctions used in S-S and N-S-N devices are sharp with Sn islands defined abruptly on each side of the junction (Fig. Our results illustrate that neither defect-free epitaxial wire-shell interfaces nor single vacuum cycle growth of nanowire and shell are crucial requirements for the demonstration of hard gap, field-resilient superconductivity and 2e charging. We conclude and discuss in the Methods section that the key components in attaining ro- bust induced superconductivity are (1) removal of InSb native oxide using atomic hydrogen prior to Sn growth, followed by (2) liquid nitrogen cooling of the nanowires during metal evaporation to produce a homogeneous ultrathin shell and (3) immediate passivation of the wireshell hybrid with a stable dielectric. We anticipate follow-ups of this work to be further research into the formation of Sn and InSb interfaces, and experiments in the Majorana geometry in search for robust signatures of topological superconductivity. Going forward, Sn/InSb nanowire system can be studied for applications in transmon and topological qubits. Beyond Sn, other metals can be tried as replacements of Al in search for decoherence free qubit materials Nanowire growth. InSb nanowires are grown using the vapor-liquid-solid technique in a horizontal metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy reactor. The first nanowires used in this work are stemless InSb nanowires with flakes as shadow objects (Fig. Sn shell growth. After transit in air, nanowire chips as grown are loaded into vacuum for subsequent growth of Sn shells. The chips are gallium bonded to molybdenum blocks. Atomic hydrogen cleaning is performed at 380 • C (thermocouple temperature) for 30 minutes, at an operating pressure of 5 × 10 -6 Torr consisting primarily of hydrogen ambient. Once cleaned, the samples are transferred in-vacuo to an ultra-high vacuum chamber dedicated for metal evaporation (base pressure < 5×10 -11 Torr). Here, the nanowire samples are cooled to 85 K (-188 • C) for 2 hours, prior to tin evaporation. 15nm-thick tin is then evaporated from an effusion cell at a growth rate of 7.5 nm/hr and an evaporation angle close to 60 • from sample normal. This shallow evaporation angle aids in-situ formation of Sn islands with nanowire or flake shadows. After Sn evaporation, while the sample is still expected to be at cryogenic temperatures (due to the thermal mass of the molybdenum block), a 3-nmthick shell of AlO x is electron-beam evaporated onto the nanowire sample, at normal incidence. The samples are then allowed to warm up to room temperature in vacuum. Device fabrication and measurements. Device fabrication is similar to previous work on wires with epitaxial Al film 