We report terahertz (THz) second harmonic generation (SHG) in superconductors (SC) with inversion symmetric equilibrium states that forbid even-order nonlinearities. Such SHG signal is observed in single-pulse emission by periodic driving with a multi-cycle THz electric field tuned below the SC energy gap and vanishes above the SC critical temperature. We explain the microscopic physics by a dynamical symmetry breaking principle at sub-THz-cycle by using quantum kinetic modeling of the interplay between strong THz-lightwave nonlinearity and pulse propagation. The resulting non-zero integrated pulse area inside the SC drives lightwave nonlinear supercurrents due to sub-cycle Cooper pair acceleration, in contrast to d.c.-biased superconductors, which can be controlled by the bandstructure and the THz pump field. The determination and understanding of symmetry breaking in superconducting states has been a central theme in condensed matter physics that remains challenging. A recent example is SHG at optical frequencies that is actively explored in cuprates and other inversionsymmetry-breaking superconductors Nevertheless, driven coherence by strong acceleration of macroscopic Cooper pair center-of-mass (CM) motion can transiently break the equilibrium inversion symmetry without pair breaking, via a periodically modulated superfluid momentum, p s (t) ∝ t -∞ dτ E ef f (τ ). Such time-dependent preferred direction can be introduced by phase-locked THz electric field pulses tuned below the 2∆ SC gap, which induce an effective local electric field E ef f (τ ) determined by the electromagnetic fields and by spatial gradients of the chemical potential and scalar fields. Fig. In this letter, we demonstrate single-pulse nonlinear emission SHG below the SC critical temperature (T c ). Such SHG is forbidden by the equilibrium symmetry of Nb 3 Sn. We present nonlinear quantum kinetic calculations, based on gauge invariant density matrix equations of motion, which are in excellent agreement with the experimental results. We thus underpin the photogeneration of a broken symmetry nonlinear supercurrent arising from THz lightwave propagation for a nonlinear s-wave BCS medium. More importantly, our results describe a microscopic mechanism for photogenerating lowfrequency components in the forward-and backwardtraveling THz electric fields in the presence of PS nonlinearity, controlled by the bandstructure and THz field. Our sample consists of a 20 nm thick Nb 3 Sn film grown by magnetron sputtering on an Al 2 O 3 substrate. T c ∼ 16 K and SC gap 2∆ SC ∼ 4.5 meV To demonstrate the second order nature of the nonlinear THz emission in Fig. Figure To model our proposed mechanism for nonlinear lightwave supercurrent photogeneration, we extend previous studies of quantum transport We thus derive gauge-invariant SC Bloch equations Based on Maxwell's equations, any physical source of electromagnetic waves cannot contain a zero-frequency dc component The predicted inversion-symmetry breaking in the nonequilibrium moving condensate is experimentally detectable via high harmonics emitted at equilibriumsymmetry-forbidden frequencies. This is demonstrated in Figs. Figure Here, the interplay of dynamical symmetry breaking due to p s (t) and HHG nonlinearities enhanced by the pairing interaction produce strongly nonlinear quantum dynamics beyond perturbation expansions To explore why nonlinear supercurrent phtogenera-tion by THz light-wave propagation is very effective in Nb 3 Sn SCs, we study the effect of the bandstructure on the photogeneration of the zero-frequency component of the transmitted electric field. For this we use a square lattice nearest-neighbor tight-binding model, ε(k) = -2 t 1 [cos(k x a) + cos(k y a)] + μ, with nearestneighbor hopping strength t 1 > 0, lattice constant a, and band-offset μ. We characterize the effects of the bandstructure by the density-of-states (DOS) close to the Fermi surface. A small electronic hopping parameter t 1 corresponds to flatter band dispersion and large DOS around the Fermi surface; large t 1 yields a small DOS. Figure This work was supported by National Science Foundation 1905981. The THz Instrument was supported in part by National Science Foundation EECS 1611454. Work at the University of Wisconsin was supported by the Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number DE-FG02-06ER46327 (structural and electrical characterizations) and Department of Energy Grant no. DE-SC100387-020 (sample growth). Theory work at the University of Alabama, Birmingham was sup-ported by the US Department of Energy under contract # de-sc0019137 (M.M and I.E.P) and was made possible in part by a grant for high performance computing resources and technical support from the Alabama Supercomputer Authority. † Equal contribution