When approaching the atomically thin limit, defects and disorder play an increasingly important role in the properties of two-dimensional materials. Superconductivity is generally thought to be vulnerable to these effects, but here we demonstrate the 1 Shortly after the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory was established, Anderson applied it to a disordered system, proving that superconductivity in three-dimensional materials is robust against non-magnetic impurities (conserving both the energy gap and the critical temperature). In this work, we have focussed on few-layer crystals of the ground-state H-phase of tantalum disulfide (TaS 2 ). The H-phase of TaS 2 comprises hexagonally symmetrical planes of Ta atoms sandwiched between two hexagonal sublattices of S atoms with trigonal prismatic coordination. In a metal, the formation energy of a point defect D is defined by where the first two terms are the difference in total energy between the pristine and defectcontaining supercells. The third term contains the chemical potentials of the exchanged atoms (n ν = 1 or n ν = -1 for a removed or added atom, respectively), which can be written as μ ν = μ elem ν + ∆μ ν with respect to the elemental phases of the exchanged atoms. In equilibrium conditions, variations in chemical potentials are limited by the heat of formation through H f (TaS 2 ) = ∆μ Ta + 2∆μ S , providing a range of chemical potentials between sulfurrich (∆μ S = 0, ∆μ Ta = -2.93 eV) and sulfur-poor (∆μ S = -1.47 eV, ∆μ Ta = 0), relating to different growth conditions. Since under typical experimental conditions oxygen is expected to be present in the form of O 2 , we focus on oxygen-rich conditions (∆μ O = 0). The obtained formation energies are summarized in Table or the film thickness (monolayer vs. bilayer). On the other hand, we find E f (O S ) < 0, i.e., oxygen substitutions on sulfur sites are energetically preferable regardless of the amount of available sulfur. This result indicates that, unlike e.g. NbSe 2 that has been reported to be resistant to oxygenation (at least in the absence of prior defects), 23 oxygenation of ultrathin TaS 2 samples can be expected to abundantly occur under realistic experimental conditions. To gain more insight in the effect of defects on the properties of ultrathin TaS 2 , we investigated the electronic band structures and density of states (DOS) of pristine ML TaS 2 (cf. Fig. In the preceding analysis, we established that S vacancies are the most likely intrinsic defects to form. A sample containing S vacancies shows a higher carrier density (1.51 • 10 15 cm -2 ) than pristine ML TaS 2 (1.01 • 10 15 cm -2 ), in agreement with a recent experimental finding where an increased carrier density was found in TaS 2 monolayers containing vacancy clusters. To quantify the effect of oxygen on the superconducting properties of TaS 2 , we have calculated the phonon modes and electron-phonon coupling (EPC) in both pristine and oxy-genated ML TaS 2 using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) for details]. In the oxygenated case we consider both an intermediate and a high level of oxygenation, with unit formulas of Ta 4 S 7 O and TaSO, respectively, corresponding to the structures depicted in Fig. The calculated phonon band structures and phonon DOS's (PHDOS) of these three cases are shown in Figs. As expected, the main changes due to O S substitution thus occur in the chalcogen-related optical modes. To evaluate the influence of these changes in the phonon modes on the superconducting properties we have used Eliashberg theory, which provides a quantitative description of phonon-mediated superconductivity beyond the BCS theory. which depends on the electronic DOS at E F (N F ), the electron-phonon scattering matrix elements (g ν k,k+q ), the phonon dispersion (ω ν q ), and the electronic dispersion ( k ), all obtained from DFT and DFPT. From the Eliashberg function the EPC constant can be obtained as The results for pure and oxygenated TaS 2 are shown in Fig. We evaluated the resulting change in the superconducting T c using the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formula, To relate our theory findings to the presence of defects in ultrathin samples of TaS 2 , we prepared mono-, bi-and few-layer TaS 2 crystals and studied them using atomic resolution annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) and electronenergy loss spectroscopy (EELS). Atomically thin TaS 2 is known to be unstable in ambient conditions. Therefore, to minimise degradation, the crystals were mechanically exfoliated from bulk TaS 2 in the inert atmosphere of a glovebox and encapsulated with monolayer graphene following the procedure reported in ref. 36. The encapsulation is known to provide reliable protection from moisture and oxygen in ambient conditions as long as the resulting graphene-TMD-graphene (or hBN-TMD-hBN) stack exhibits so-called self-cleaning, Fig. Under electron beam irradiation, new defects at both S and Ta sites were seen to form, migrate to nearby lattice sites, and heal back to a contiguous lattice. Sulfur vacancies in particular were prone to migrate, heal or coalesce into line defects (Fig. To investigate the evolution of the chemical composition of the encapsulated TaS 2 crystals with time, we performed STEM-EELS analysis over the course of 3 weeks and on a crystal aged for 7 months. To limit the effect of beam-induced contamination, consecutive measurements were made on similar but not identical regions of the sample. As demonstrated in Fig. The above findings provide strong support for our theory predictions: the presence of large numbers of vacancies, particularly S vacancies in freshly prepared samples, and at least partial 'healing' of the defects with oxygen, as the latter is seen to be incorporated into TaS 2 lattice. To verify the theoretically predicted enhancement of the superconducting properties due to oxygenation, we carried out transport measurements on TaS 2 samples with different numbers of layers N (N = 3 and N = 5), both freshly prepared (within a few days after fabrication) and stored in a desiccator for several weeks (we refer to the latter as 'aged'). The devices were made using an exfoliation and encapsulation procedure very similar to that used for STEM- EELS samples, except that few-layer TaS 2 flakes were encapsulated by hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) rather than graphene. The details can be found in ref. 20 and Supporting Note 4. The thickness of each sample was identified using optical contrast and the smallest step height measured over the TaS 2 edge by AFM (cf. Fig. Electrical contacts to TaS 2 were defined after encapsulation using e-beam lithography. To this end, top hBN layer was selectively etched using CHF 3 plasma, uncovering the surface of TaS 2 that was then immediately metallized by evaporating Cr/Au layer to form the electrodes (see Fig. The superconducting characteristics (T c , critical magnetic field H c2 ) of freshly prepared samples were found to be very similar to those reported in literature for TaS 2 crystals of the same thickness, After several weeks of storage the measurements were repeated using the same pairs of contacts. As predicted, we found that T c markedly increased, saturating at T c ≈ 3 K for both thicknesses of TaS 2 (see Fig. Although counter-intuitive, the above observations are in excellent agreement with our theoretical predictions. The 'intrinsic' per-layer carrier densities and sharp superconducting transitions in the aged samples, in combination with the steady increase in the oxygen content revealed by EELS and its incorporation into the TaS 2 lattice, provide experimental evidence of the predicted healing of the lattice by oxygenation. In turn, this can explain the enhancement of T c and the critical field after aging, due to the enhanced EPC inherent to oxygenation, as found in our calculations. The above results demonstrate that, contrary to widely held assumptions, superconductivity in two-dimensional materials can benefit from the effect of oxygenation and establish fewlayer TaS 2 as a system where 2D superconductivity is enhanced by oxygenation. This effect is distinctly different from that described for monolayer TaS 2 samples containing chemically etched nanopores, concluded that the density of states at the Fermi level must be equally enhanced, implying an increased electron-phonon interaction. However, as demonstrated by our transport measurements (Fig. Another mechanism of T c enhancement in ultrathin TaS 2 crystals compared to bulk Importantly, however, the nearly 50% further increase of T c as a result of oxygenation (for N = 5) and a smaller but still appreciable increase for N = 3 is a new effect, distinct from the previously discussed mechanisms of T c enhancement. It is also interesting to note that T c ≈ 3 K has been found in other studies where TaS 2 crystals were subject to oxidative environments such as H 2 O 17 or acids. We note that the highly-oxygenated limit in our study corresponds to an entire sulfur plane replaced by oxygen. Similar Janus structures, with two different chalcogen atoms on either side of a monolayer TMD (e.g., MoSSe Our density functional theory (DFT) calculations make use of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional implemented within the ABINIT code. TaS 2 samples were first exfoliated onto a SiO 2 /Si substrate coated with polypropylene carbonate (PPC) and flakes of suitable thickness were identified with optical microscopy. Subsequently, encapsulated hBN/TaS 2 /hBN (graphene/TaS 2 /graphene) heterostructures for transport (STEM and EELS) measurements were prepared and transfered in an inert atmosphere (in an Ar filled glovebox) following the procedure described in refs. 20,37. For transport measurements, selected TaS 2 flakes were encapsulated between two 2-5layer thick hBN crystals (cf. Fig. For the TEM samples a layer of PMMA was spun on top of a the graphene/TaS 2 /graphene stack to serve as support during the KOH etching of SiO 2 to release the sample from the substrate and transfer it onto SiN support grids. High-resolution STEM characterisation was carried out using a JEOL ARM300CF double aberration corrected microscope, operating at 80 kV accelerating voltage, with 67 pA beam current and a convergence semiangle of 32 mrad. Annular dark field (ADF) images were acquired at a collection angle range of 46-169 mrad. High-resolution STEM chemical characterisation was performed using an FEI Titan G2 ChemiSTEM operating at 80 kV, with a convergence semiangle of 21 mrad and fitted with a Gatan Imaging Filter (GIF) Quantum ER for electron-energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and a Super-X, 4 SDD detector with a total collection angle of 0.7 srad for energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS). EELS and EDXS was performed simultaneously with a GIF collection semiangle of 62 mrad, with high loss spectra obtained for an energy range of 110-622 eV (dispersion of 0.25 eV). All EEL spectra and spectrum images were processed using the open source python package HyperSpy (available via zenodo.org/record/3396791). Individual spectra shown in Fig. Transport measurements were done with lock-in technique in four-probe configuration, and the sheet resistances were calculated according to van der Pauw's theorem. were below 1 meV/Å. A 24 × 24 × 1 (12 × 12 × 1) Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid was selected for simple unit cells (2 × 2 × 1 supercells). To calculate the defect formation energies, chemical potentials of the elemental phases were calculated for body-centered cubic Ta (spacegroup Im 3m), rhombohedral S 18 (spacegroup R 3) and molecular O 2 . Our density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) calculations employed a 24 × 24 × 1 (12 × 12 × 1) k-point grid and a 12 × 12 × 1 (6 × 6 × 1) q-point grid for simple unit cells (the 2 × 2 × 1 supercell used for Ta 4 S 7 O). For an accurate description of TaSO, an increased cutoff energy of 65 Ha and a 36 × 36 × 1 k-point grid were used.