The discovery of intrinsic magnetism in atomically thin two-dimensional transition-metal trichalcogenides has attracted intense research interest due to the exotic properties of magnetism and potential applications in devices. Pressure has proven to be an effective tool to manipulate the crystal and electronic structures of the materials. Here, we report investigations on ferromagnetic van der Waals Cr2Si2Te6 via high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction, electrical resistance, Hall resistance, and magnetoresistance measurements. Under compression, Cr2Si2Te6 simultaneously undergoes a structural transition, emergence of superconductivity at 3 K, sign change of the magnetoresistance, and dramatic change of the Hall coefficient at ~8 GPa. The superconductivity persists up to the highest measured pressure of 47.1 GPa with a maximum Tc = 4.5 K at ~30 GPa. The discovery of superconductivity in the two-dimensional van der Waals ferromagnetic Cr-based Cr2Si2Te6 provides new perspectives to explore superconductivity and the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. Layered structural materials have been a fertile playground to investigate mechanisms of fundamental physics and explore potential applications Pressure is an ideal tool to tune crystal and electronic structures as well as magnetism without simultaneously introducing any disorders In the pursuit of SC in FM materials, Cr2Si2Te6 is an ideal member of the 2D vdW FM insulators In this work, Cr2Si2Te6 was investigated via in situ high-pressure synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) and electrical resistance in diamond anvil cells (DAC) with pressure up to 47.1 GPa. We found that a pressure-induced structure transition occurs at ~7 GPa, and SC appears concomitantly. The Pressure-induced structural transition. Cr2Si2Te6 has a 2D honeycomb layered structure, which is formed by edges sharing CrTe3 octahedra. Each Cr 3+ ion is octahedrally coordinated by six nearest neighbor Te atoms, as shown in Fig. From the XRD patterns under pressure in Figs. Pressure-induced insulator-metal transition and superconductivity. Figures The data in Fig. To determine the upper critical field Hc2, we present temperature dependence of the resistance at 19.5 GPa under different magnetic fields in Fig. An elaborate temperature-pressure phase diagram. We summarize the data extracted from the pressure dependent XRD and resistance in a temperature-pressure (T-P) phase diagram as presented in Fig. Pressure-induced sign change of magnetoresistance. Previous studies have reported that Cr2Si2Te6 exhibits a negative magnetoresistance (MR) at ambient pressure The results reveal a dramatic change of the MR below 9.1 GPa and a negative to positive sign change of the MR at the pressure where the structural transition happens. The MR in the high-pressure range is positive and stable (Fig. Pressure and field dependences of the Hall coefficient. Figure Cr2Si2Te6 and FePSe3 have the same honeycomb lattice formed by the edge sharing octahedral centered by 3d metal ions Cr 3+ or Fe 2+ , respectively. Cr2Si2Te6 is a FM insulator, where the electrical configuration of Cr 3+ ions is governed by the Hund's rule coupling In addition, the discovery of SC in the Cr-based honeycomb lattice Cr2Si2Te6 under pressure, together with the SC in CrAs under pressure Material synthesis and characterization. Bulk single crystals were grown by the flux method. The samples have been characterized previously. The single crystal XRD data at ambient pressure were taken at a single crystal x-ray diffractometer with the Cu Kα (λ = 0.1542 nm) radiation. The magnetization was measured by a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). High-pressure structural characterization. In situ high-pressure XRD patterns were collected at room temperature on the 4W2 beam line at Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The X-ray has the energy of 20 keV (λ=0.6199Å) and the diffraction patterns were recorded by using a PILATUS detector with exposure times of about 300 s. Powder samples were ground from single crystals at room temperature. A symmetric DAC with a pair of 400 μm diameter culet-sized diamond anvils was used for the in situ high pressure measurements. A steel gasket was pre-indented to 40 μm in thickness and the corresponding sample chamber with 150 μm in diameter was drilled by laser. A pre-compressed Cr2Si2Te6 pellet was loaded in the middle of the sample chamber. Silicone oil was used as the pressure transmitting medium and the pressure in the diamond anvil cell was determined by measuring the shift of the fluorescence wavelength of the ruby spheres that were placed inside the sample chamber. The data were initially processed by using the Fit2d software High-pressure transport measurements. In situ high-pressure electrical resistance measurements on Cr2Si2Te6 single crystals were carried out using a miniature DAC made from Be-Cu alloy and a PPMS. Diamond anvils with 400 μm culet were used, and the corresponding sample chamber with 150 μm in diameter were made in the insulating gasket. The gasket was achieved by a thin layered of cubic boron nitride and epoxy mixture. NaCl powders were employed as a pressure transmitting medium. Pressure was calibrated by using the ruby fluorescence shift at room temperature 