We explore QCD 4 quark matter, the μ-T (chemical potential-temperature) phase diagram, possible 't Hooft anomalies, and topological terms, via non-perturbative tools of cobordism theory and higher anomaly matching. We focus on quarks in 3-color and 3-flavor on bi-fundamentals of SU(3), then analyze the continuous and discrete global symmetries and pay careful attention to finite group sectors. We input constraints from T = CP or CT time-reversal symmetries, implementing QCD on unorientable spacetimes and distinct topology. Examined phases include the high T QGP (quarkgluon plasma/liquid), the low T ChSB (chiral symmetry breaking), 2SC (2-color superconductivity) and CFL (3-color-flavor locking superconductivity) at high density. We introduce a possibly useful but only approximate higher anomaly, involving discrete 0-form axial and 1-form mixed chiral-flavorlocked center symmetries, matched by the above four QCD phases. We also enlist as much as possible, but without identifying all of, 't Hooft anomalies and topological terms relevant to Symmetry Protected/Enriched Topological states (SPTs/SETs) of gauged SU(2) or SU(3) QCD d -like matter theories in general in any spacetime dimensions d = 2, 3, 4, 5 via cobordism. Z 3 ) . . . . . . . . . . Color-Flavor locking superconductivity SU(3) C+L+R × Z F 2,V as Spin × SU(3) . . . . . . . [SU(2c as Spin × Z 2 Spin(4) × U(1) × U(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 QCD Symmetries, Anomalies and Topological Terms With Time-Reversal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Z 3 ) and Z 3 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . as Pin + × Z 2 Spin( 1 Introduction and Summary 1.1 Physics in QCD quark matter We are made of atoms, which are made out of quarks, the particles 1 of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) vacuum, plus some electrons. The majority of our mass is from the mass of nuclei. While about the 2% of our mass is from Higgs condensate, the surprising significant 98% of our mass is from QCD chiral condensate. Meanwhile, we live in the chiral symmetry breaking (ChSB) phase of QCD vacuum. In order to investigate the nature of QCD matter and its vacuum structure, it is helpful to move out from this particular vacuum (ChSB) to other new foreign phases. In condensed matter language, we try to explore other unfamiliar foreign phases outside the familiar domestic phase, away from the ground state (i.e., vacuum) we live in, by tuning parameters in the QCD phase diagram (see recent selected reviews In this work, we will look at some simplified ideal toy models. One model is that quarks are nearly massless and on bi-fundamentals of SU Tr (F a ∧F a )) . (1.1) 1 In particle physics, quarks are elementary particles. In condensed matter viewpoint, it may be beneficial to alternatively view the quarks as quasiparticles, quasi-excitations out of certain vacuum. 2 We consider the smooth differentiable manifolds with a metric g as spacetime -if the fermions/spinor can live on them, we require Spin structure; if we require time-reversal T = CP , or CT or other reflection symmetries, we require Pin + , Pin - or other semi-direct ( ) product or twisted structures between the spacetime tangent bundle T M and the gauge bundle EG of the gauge group G. See more in the main text and see an overview of our setting in This path integral describes an SU(N c ) = SU(3 c ) gauge theory with 1-form gauge field a and 2-form field strength F a for the (exact) color N c = 3 with three colors in fundamental: red (r), green (g), and blue (b). It also describes the (approximate) N f = 3-flavor in fundamental for fermions ψ q , where we choose the lightest bare quarks in nature: the up quark (u), the down quark (d), and the strange quark (s). At the massless limit m q = 0, the topological θ-term can be absorbed by axial U(1) A rotations of quarks, and we may set θ = 0. The fermion ψ q are quarks that carry quantum number (denoted the quark quantum number q) of color (c), flavor (f ), the spacetime self-rotational spin (s), whose quark-pairing can also carry the spatial momentum k, angular momentum L, and parity quantum number P , etc. 3 See Table The standard lore from the pioneer studies of quark matter (I). Global Symmetries: For symmetries, we explore and exhaust both continuous and discrete global symmetries and pay special attention to finite group sectors. (II). Higher Symmetries: For gauge theories, there are extended operators of lines and surfaces, etc. They can also carry quantum numbers thus also charged under the higher generalized global symmetries There are also corresponding symmetry generators as charge operators. We also need to pay attention to higher symmetries. (III). Anomalies and Higher Anomalies: Given the global symmetry, there can be potential obstructions to couple the symmetry to background gauge field or to subsequently gauging the symmetry -the phenomena are known as the 't Hooft anomalies • Non-perturbative global anomalies, classified by finite groups such as Z N (or the so-called torsion classes). Some selective examples from QFT or gravity include: (1): An SU(2) anomaly of Witten in 4d or in 5d (2): A new SU(2) anomaly in 4d or in 5d (3): Non-perturbative bosonic anomalies from finite-group-symmetry bosonic systems (1.2) See Table in (IV). Symmetry Protected Topological states (SPTs)/ Symmetry Enriched Topologically ordered states By keeping in minds and utilizing the above modern concepts of quantum systems and QFTs beyond Ginzburg-Landau symmetry-breaking paradigm, here we revisit the standard lore of four QCD quark matter phases 1. QGP (quark-gluon plasma/liquid) at high T: For general N c and N f , we have the symmetry: where the [SU(N c ) V ] color is gauged as a gauge group. 5 The U(1) V /Z Nc,V is the vector symmetry associated to the baryon number B conservation. The SU(N f ) L and SU(N f ) R are the left/righthanded Weyl spinor SU(N f ) flavor symmetries under the projection of P L/R = 1∓γ 5 2 . 6 We will mainly focus on N c = N f = 3. For general N c and N f , we have the symmetry: where the [SU(N c ) V ] color is gauged. Due to the chiral condensate ψψ = 0 in this vacum, the SU(N f ) L and SU(N f ) R flavor symmetries of the left/right-handed Weyl spinor are broken down to the diagonal vector subgroup SU(N f ) V . We will mainly focus on N c = N f = 3. In ChSB, by the spontaneously symmetry breaking (SSB) from QGP, we gain 8 pseudo-Goldstone bosons (as mesons: π 0 , π ± , K 0 , K0 , η, K ± ), while there is one massive η meson. If the ChSB further forms the nucleon superfluid, the U(1) V is SSB, and we gain 1 more Goldstone boson. 4 It is worthwhile to emphasize the old literature may happen to pay less attention to the finite group and discrete sectors. However, the finite group and discrete sectors are important for topological terms and non-perturbative global anomalies later we compute from the cobordism group. Thus, we aim to be as precise as possible writing down the global symmetries, see also where the [SU(2 c ) V ] color is gauged thus there is an SU(2) gauge theory. The 2SC pairing is shown in Table The SU(3) C+L+R means that the SU(3 c ) are locked and rotated in the opposite manner as the diagonal of SU(3 although there is a part of the global symmetry containing the electromagnetic [U(1)] Q which is gauged not global. In general, if the G sym group is broken, we denote it as ̈G sym . By including time reversal symmetries into the QCD system, we can choose any suitable outer automorphism of the color gauge or flavor global symmetry group as a Z 2 -time reversal symmetry, which is a Z 2 -reflection symmetry by putting the Euclidean QCD 4 path integral on an unorientable spacetime. In fact, several recent works have attempted to study QCD matter phases based on the languages of higher symmetries and anomalies above. We should quickly overview some of these pioneer works: (1). Whether the color superconductivity can be topological in some way was questioned in Ref. Ref. (2). Ref. The semi-direct product is more general, which also includes the direct product case of ×Z CT 4 as the CT symmetry. fermionic liquids in condensed matter, and constraints on 3+1D ultraviolet-infrared (UV-IR) duality. See Ref. (3). Ref. (4). Ref. In fact, there are still possibilities that symmetric gapped TQFTs can be constructed for some of these anomalies, for example, based on the symmetry extension method (5). Quark-hadron continuity outside the Ginzburg-Landau paradigm: Quark-hadron continuity In the remained of this article, we like to point out a higher anomaly involving discrete 0-form axial chiral and 1-form mixed chiral-flavor-locked center symmetries that can be matched by the above four QCD phases. Then we will give a quick mathematical introduction of tools we used in Sec. 1.3. After then, we will list down various data and tables computed from cobordism theory, with a view toward the applications of QCD matter phases, to be studied in the future In this section, we point out a higher 't Hooft anomaly involving discrete 0-form axial and 1-form mixed chiral-flavor-locked center symmetries can be matched by the above four QCD phases. Our approach is related but still somehow different from Ref. For simplicity, we will set we just need to replace the N below to their greatest common divisor gcd(N c , N f ) and make some moderate but a straightforward generalization. First, under some assumptions that we will comment later, we hope to point out that there is an approximate 1-form electric-magnetic (e-m) global symmetry Z N cf , where [SU(N c ) V ] is gauged, we still are left with part of the projective special unitary symmetry = PSU(N f ) V from the flavor symmetry. We can regarded it as a 1-form magnetic symmetry that can be coupled to the flavor symmetry background probed fields This idea is implemented already in (•3) Now we combine the above two 1-form e and m symmetries into a diagonal 1-form symmetry, and name it as 1-form electric-magnetic (e-m) global symmetry Z N cf , where the a c is. The (W c W f ) have ends that can be opened by having bi-fundamental quark and antiquark at each of two ends. Let us call the 2-dimensional surface operator that is the 1-form Z N cf , Here we write down the electric and magnetic 2-surface operators based on the conventions and notations in when the 2d U surface and the 1d combined W c W f line have a nontrivial linking number in a 4d spacetime. shows W c is charged under 1-form Z N cf , shows W f is charged under 1-form Z N cf , cf . We find that there is an anomaly captured by the Z 2N f ,A axial (chiral) symmetry transformation, such that the partition function Z gains a fractionalized term cf ∧ B (2) cf ) . (1.12) The fractionalized term exp cf ) is not a 4d SPTs but a fractionalized 4d SPTs, not a counter term, thus cannot be absorbed into 4d, and should be regarded as a 5d higher-SPTs/higher-iTQFT -which in fact is an indicator of the 4d higher 't Hooft anomaly of the QCD 4 . The caveat however is that this 4d higher 't Hooft anomaly of the QCD 4 is only approximate. The subtlety is that it is only a precise anomaly if we also "gauge" the ] gauge theory. The disadvantages of our approximate anomaly (1.12) are that the flavor Wilson lines are only probed but not dynamical objects, so we do not really have the 1-form symmetry unless we at least weakly gauge the flavor symmetry. In comparison, other approaches in Ref. and its dimensional reduction in 3d where B c and B f are color/flavor background fields respectively. Ref. In Figure which in Fig. N cf ), N cf indicates it is truly a 1-form symmetry in (1.12), while the upper index (0) in Z (0) N c-shift indicates it is dimensionally reduced from 1-form symmetry Z N c-shift , Let us indicate how the higher 't Hooft anomalies in (1.12) and in (1.14) can be matched by breaking some of the global symmetries in the triple data (Z 2N f ,A ; Z (1) N c-shift ). Our notations are that if the G sym is broken, we denote it as ̈G sym , if the G sym is preserved, we would either indicate G sym remained, or simply omit the symbol as we did in the Fig. 1. QGP (quark-gluon plasma/liquid) at high T: N cf ) shown in Fig. ) shown in Fig. The four phases can also be matched and cancelled by the anomaly (1.14), Z f ) introduced in Ref. N cf ) to label the discrete 0-form axial symmetry Z 2N f ,A , a dimensionally reduced color-shift Z N c-shift symmetry introduced in Ref. N cf that we introduce. N cf ) shown in Fig. (1.19) 4. CFL (3-color-flavor locking superconductivity) at low T and at high density and high μ: ) shown in Fig. (1.20) What we have shown above is that higher 't Hooft anomalies in (1.12) and in (1.14) can indeed be matched by four phases via breaking some of the global symmetries. We thus can constrain other possible QCD phases via the proposed approximate anomaly (1.12), based on higher 't Hooft anomaly matching and cancellation. In this article, we use spectral sequences (Adams spectral sequence, Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence, and Serre spectral sequence) to compute several cobordism groups which appear in QCD matter phases (QGP, ChSB, 2SC and CFL in Sec. 1.1). See We aim to compute the cobordism group Ω G d for d ≤ 5 where G is the gauge group of QCD matter phases (QGP, ChSB, 2SC and CFL). By the generalized Pontryagin-Thom isomorphism, which identifies the cobordism group Ω G d with the homotopy group of the Madsen-Tillmann spectrum M T G. We have the Adams spectral sequence Here A p is the mod p Steenrod algebra, Y is any spectrum. For any finitely generated abelian group G, G ∧ p = lim n→∞ G/p n G is the p-completion of G. In particular, A 2 is generated by Steenrod squares Sq i . In our cases, the cobordism groups only have 2-torsion and 3-torsion. We will use Adams spectral sequence to compute the 2-torsion part of the cobordism groups (we consider Y = M T G in Adams spectral sequence, and we focus on p = 2). We will use Serre spectral sequence and Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence to compute the 3-torsion part of the cobordism groups. In our cases, in order to compute the 3-torsion part of the cobordism groups, we need only to compute the cobordism group Ω SO d (BG ) for some group G . We have the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence H p (BG , Ω SO q ) ⇒ Ω SO p+q (BG ). (1.23) Since we need to know the integral homology groups H p (BG , Z). In order to obtain this data, we compute the integral cohomology groups H p (BG , Z) using Serre spectral sequence (we find a fibration of which BG is the total space). For example, if M T G = M Spin ∧ X where X is any spectrum, by Corollary 5.1.2 of for t -s < 8. Here A 2 (1) is the subalgebra of A 2 generated by Sq 1 and Sq 2 . So for the dimension d = t -s < 8, we have (1.26) The H * (X, Z 2 ) is an A 2 (1)-module whose internal degree t is given by the * . Our computation of E 2 pages of A 2 (1)-modules is based on Lemma 11 of Before we consider the cobordism theory and co/bordism group of the following four QCD matter phases, we need to convert our notations to involve both the internal symmetry and the spacetime symmetry. Here are the results of conversions for the high T QGP (quark-gluon plasma/liquid), the low T ChSB (chiral symmetry breaking), 2SC (2-color superconductivity) and CFL (3-color-flavor locking superconductivity) at high density. QGP: Here U(1) where L/R for P L/R = 1±γ 5 2 ChSB: (2.3) CFL: (2.4) For ChSB with a global symmetry: We have a fibration (2.5) Hence we have the Serre spectral sequence, see Figure We have and The arrow from (0,4) to (5,0) is a nontrivial differential by comparison with the Serre spectral sequence of the fibration BSU(3) → BPSU(3) → B 2 Z 3 . There is no differential from (0,2) to (3,0) since the 3d Z 3 survives the spectral sequence in Figure There is another approach: we have a fibration (2.9) Hence we have the Serre spectral sequence, see Figure We have (2.12) In Figure Here ? is an undetermined 3-torsion group. By the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence, we have )). (2.15) See Figure For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) We have where c i is the Chern class of the SU(3) bundle. By Thom isomorphism, where c 1 is the Chern class of the U(1) bundle and U is the Thom class. The A 2 (1)-module structure of H * +2 (M U(1), Z 2 ) ⊗ H * (BSU(3), Z 2 ) below degree 6 and the E 2 page are shown in Figure So there is no 2-torsion in Ω Combine the 2-torsion and 3-torsion results, we have Bordism group Table For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) We have where c i is the Chern class of the SU(3) bundle. The A 2 (1)-module structure of H * (BSU(3), Z 2 ) below degree 6 and the E 2 page are shown in Figure Table We have M T (Spin For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) By Thom isomorphism, we have where w i is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the SO(4) bundle and U is the Thom class. We also have where c 1 is the first Chern class of the U(1) bundle. , Z 2 ) below degree 5 and the E 2 page are shown in Figure Bordism group ), e i = e i (SO(4)). η is the mod 2 index of 1d Dirac operator, Arf is the Arf invariant. The ? is an undetermined cobordism invariant which also appears in For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence We have where c i is the Chern class of the SU(3) bundle. By Thom isomorphism, where c 1 is the Chern class of the U(1) bundle and U is the Thom class. , Z 2 ) below degree 6 and the E 2 page are shown in Figure , Z 2 ) below degree 6. . So there is no 2-torsion in Ω We have a fibration (2.27) Hence we have the Serre spectral sequence, see Figure ), Z). (2.28) We have and By Künneth formula, Compared with the 2-torsion result, we find that the differential from (0,2) to (3,0) kills one Z since the 2d cobordism group contains only one Z, and the differential from (0,4) to So and Here ? is an undetermined 3-torsion group. By the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence, we have )). Table Now we consider putting the QCD matters on the smooth differentiable and unorientable spacetime manifolds -if the fermions/spinor can live on them, we require Spin structure; if we require time-reversal T = CP , or CT or other reflection symmetries, we require Pin + , Pin -or other semi-direct ( ) product or twisted structures between the spacetime tangent bundle T M and the gauge bundle E G of the gauge group G. See more in the main text and see an overview of our setting in Here we will only focus on two cases: The direct product ×Z T 4 which implies the Pin + structure, where We may also denote such a Z T 4 := Z T F 4 to indicates it includes Z F 2 as a normal subgroup. The direct product ×Z T 2 × Z F 2 which implies the Pin -structure. For other possible time-reversal symmetries, we leave them in a future work Z 3 ) and We have For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) We have where c i is the Chern class of the SU(3) bundle. By Thom isomorphism, where c 1 is the Chern class of the U(1) bundle and U is the Thom class. Also by Thom isomorphism, where w 1 is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the O(1) bundle and V is the Thom class. The A 2 (1)-module structure of H * +2 (M U(1), Z 2 ) ⊗ H * +1 (M O(1), Z 2 ) ⊗ H * (BSU(3), Z 2 ) below degree 6 and the E 2 page are shown in Figure By Künneth formula, For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) 3.3 2-Color Superconductivity: We have M T (Pin We have the constraint w 2 = w 2 where w i is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the tangent bundle, w i is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the SO(4) bundle. For t -s < 8, since there is no odd torsion, we have the Adams spectral sequence Ext s,t A 2 (1) By Thom isomorphism, we have where w i is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the SO(4) bundle and U is the Thom class. Also by Thom isomorphism, we have where w 1 is the Stiefel-Whitney class of the O(1) bundle V 1 , and V is the Thom class of -V 1 . We also have where c 1 is the first Chern class of the U(1) bundle. C+L+R × Z T F In fact, since the strong forces are much dominant than the electromagnetism, we will focus on the [SU(3c)] gauge sectors from the strong forces first, and treat the gauge sectors of electromagnetism U(1)EM separately later. The illustration and TQFT calculations of such linking number, link invariants and link configurations in the spacetime picture, e.g. # (Σ 2 ,γ 1 ) = 1 on a 4-sphere S 4 , can be found in Weakly gauge the flavor symmetry is thus related to a certain twisted flavor boundary condition studied in, for examples, Ref. as Pin + × SU