Traditional metallic alloys are mixtures of elements where the atoms of minority species tend to distribute randomly if they are below their solubility limit, or lead to the formation of secondary phases if they are above it. Recently, the concept of medium/high entropy alloys (MEA/HEA) has expanded this view, as these materials are single-phase solid solutions of generally equiatomic mixtures of metallic elements that have been shown to display enhanced mechanical properties. However, the question has remained as to how random these solid solutions actually are, with the influence of chemical short-range order (SRO) suggested in computational simulations but not seen experimentally. Here we report the first direct observation of SRO in the CrCoNi MEA using high resolution and energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy. Increasing amounts of SRO give rise to both higher stacking fault energy and hardness. These discoveries suggest that the degree of chemical ordering at the nanometer scale can be tailored through thermomechanical processing, providing a new avenue for tuning the mechanical properties of MEA/HEAs. The attractive concept of using multiple principal elements in a single alloy system has received a tremendous amount of interest over the past decade Extensive studies have been documented on the deformation mechanisms in these alloys. Otto et al. Interestingly, computational work has suggested that the CrCoNi-based fcc single-phase alloys should have near-zero stacking fault energies (SFE, SF) The work highlights the potentially strong impact of chemical short-range order (SRO, defined as the deviation in the number of different chemical bond types from those corresponding to a random solid solution) on the mechanical properties of the MEA/HEAs. Later, Li et al. To investigate the presence of chemical SRO, equiatomic CrCoNi alloy samples were arcmelted and homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h. The alloy was then subjected to different thermal treatments: (1) water-quenched to room temperature (RT), or (2) aged at 1000 C for 120 h followed by furnace cooling to RT. All the alloys were confirmed to be a single-phase fcc structure via X-ray diffraction and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis. The microstructure and the degree of SRO were then characterized with a variety of Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) imaging techniques. Diffraction contrast from SRO is inherently faint as compared to the long-range fcc lattice diffraction signal since it arises from the relatively minor differences in atomic scattering factors between the constituent elements. As a result, measurement of the relatively faint SRO diffraction signal has proven to be challenging. In order to enhance the signalto-noise ratio of the diffraction contrast from SRO, we minimized the background noise from inelastic scattering by using a Zeiss LIBRA 200MC microscope, equipped with an in-column Ω energy filter and a 16-bit dynamic range camera. Energy-filtered diffraction patterns and darkfield (DF) images for the two heat treatment conditions are shown in Fig. The diffuse scattering in the diffraction patterns and associated contrast in the dark-field images could arise from a combination of effects, including static and thermal displacement scattering and chemical SRO High-resolution TEM imaging (HRTEM) has been used to distinguish the difference between thermal-and static-displacement induced diffuse scattering in previous studies The combined evidence from diffraction contrast and HRTEM imaging is that the hightemperature aging leads to the formation of appreciable SRO in fcc CrCoNi MEAs. The size and shape of the SRO-enhanced domains can thus be evaluated through energy-filtered DF imaging. For example, Figures It is also possible to characterize the size distribution of the domains by assuming a shape (in this case we assume a spherical shape for simplicity) and applying a Gaussian template fitting algorithm It is known that the formation of SRO has a significant impact on dislocation plasticity, where an increasing degree of SRO tends to increase the planarity of dislocation slip The exceptional strength, ductility and toughness of CrCoNi MEA can be directly correlated with the SFE of the material In order to quantify the impact of SRO on the MEA's mechanical properties, both nanoindentation tests and bulk tensile tests of the same alloys were performed. The measured nanoindentation hardness is 4.07 ± 0.23 GPa for the water-quenched sample and 4.37 ± 0.58 GPa for the 1000 C aged sample. The results show that the MEA is heat treatable, similar to the bake hardened steels or some aluminum alloys. SRO also significantly affects the onset of plasticity which is manifested by the "pop-in" event In addition to the effect of SRO on plastic behavior, it also, in theory, should affect elastic properties as the local bonding environments are significantly altered from the perfect random solid solution. A simple rule-of-mixtures would predict a Young's modulus of ~229 GPa for equiatomic CrCoNi As an emerging class of structural materials, MEA/HEAs possess a desirable combination of mechanical properties for structural applications Due to its impact on the mechanical properties, the degree of SRO is a critical feature that should be considered in the materials design phase. Directly tailoring the SRO microstructure on an atomic level therefore provides another dimension for controlling the structure-property relationship of advanced materials. Materials and sample preparation. The raw ingot of the equiatomic CrCoNi MEA was argon arc double melted and then cut into smaller samples. The samples were then divided into two groups and underwent different thermal treatments, (1) homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h then water quenched to RT (uniform texture, grain size ~800 μm as determined by EBSD), or (2) homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h then aged at 1000 C for 120 h followed by furnace cooling (uniform texture, ~1000 μm as determined by EBSD). Samples for dislocation analysis were further deformed by conducting bulk compression tests on an MTS Criterion (Model 43) system to introduce dislocation plasticity. The final strain was 6% with a strain rate of 1 × 10 -3 . The samples were then sliced and thinned by mechanical polishing. Electron-transparent samples for TEM observation were prepared with a Fischione twin-jet Electropolisher using a solution of 70% methanol, 20% glycerol and 10% perchloric acid at -20 C. The samples for nanoindentation tests were prepared by mono-side electrochemical polishing with aforementioned solution and parameters. Energy-filtered dark-field TEM imaging and SRO domain recognition. TEM samples of different heat treatments were used for observation. A Zeiss LIBRA 200MC microscope, equipped with an in-column Ω energy filter, was used to take both diffraction patterns and dark-field images. It is necessary to consider the impact on the resolution from the objective aperture, which could be estimated by the Airy disk radius using the following equation where G2D is the normalized 2-D Gaussian template,  is the varying standard deviation of the differently sized kernels, and x and y are the 2D coordinates from the kernel origin. 4. The domain signals in the DF image were identified by a 2-D Gaussian Hough transform. For each kernel in the list, a 2-D convolution between the DF image and the kernel would be performed using: where x is the DF image, h is the kernel and y is the result of the convolution. 5. After each convolution, pixels of the convolution result are compared to a data storing array; if the current pixel has a higher signal, the corresponding value would be updated in the data storing array. Another similarly sized array was used to store the associated kernel size of the highest signal. 6. After the iterations, the pixel values were first filtered by the domain diameter range and the peak signal cutoff. Then the local peaks in the result array were identified if a pixel has higher value than all of its eight neighbor pixels. 7. The identified peaks were ordered and checked in a "brightest to dimmest" manner according to their pixel value. If dimmer peaks appear in the radius of a brighter peak, they would be deleted. This process is to eliminate overlapping entities. 8. The remaining peaks were treated as identified domains. 9. The diameter cutoff below 0.7 nm is set manually as this is already the size of the 1st nearestneighbor shell of atoms in the MEA lattice, we do not regard anything below this value as SRO domain. A manual sampling was carried out to estimate the domain sizes and gain a reference for the optimization of parameters. Two critical parameters that would impact the identification are the minimal signal cutoff and the domain diameter range. The optimization process was conducted according to the best fitting results. In the case of a high signal cutoff or a narrow diameter range, the algorithm will miss some of the major contrast, whereas, in the case of a low signal cutoff or a wide diameter range, the algorithm will pick up lots of small intensity fluctuations that are from camera noise. It is worth mentioning the limitations to the domain recognition algorithm. Specifically, the assumption that the domains are spherical is for simplification, but the shapes of the domains vary. Parallel attempts of using a threshold segmentation algorithm involved much more subjectivity and yielded unreasonable results. However, the purpose of the analysis is to provide an estimated size distribution of the SRO domains, for which the current analysis is sufficient until large scale atomic imaging studies could provide similar statistics. The XRD experiments was performed ex situ with a PANalytical XPert diffractometer on water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. The scan range (2θ) was set to 42 -54 ͦ to include the (111) and the (200) peaks. The angle resolution was set to 0.005 ͦ with a 0.8s integration time to ensure an accurate measurement of the lattice constants. HRSTEM imaging of water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples were conducted on the doublecorrected TEAM I microscope (operated at 300 kV) at the National Center for Electron Microscopy (NCEM), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Drift correction was conducted with the methods developed by Ophus et al. FRWRtools plugin for Gatan Digital Micrograph software were used for the following GPA analysis. Averaged fast-fourier transforms were used as strain templates. The real-space resolution was set to 1.5 nm to achieve a relatively accurate measurement in reciprocal space. Quantitative energy dispersive X-ray mapping (EDS) was conducted on both the water-quenched samples and aged samples using the TitanX microscope with a quad EDS detector. No chemical segregation was observed; results are summarized in Supplementary Fig. Previous theoretical studies Dislocation analysis. TEM dislocation analysis was conducted on both the aged and waterquenched samples after 6% compressive deformation. TEM observations were conducted on the Zeiss LIBRA 200MC (operating at 200 kV) at NCEM. Low angle annular dark-field DC-STEM images where G is the shear modulus of CrCoNi MEA (determined by the ultrasonic pulse-echo measurement), b p is the magnitude of the Burgers vector of partial dislocations (~0.146 nm), d is the measured separation of partial dislocations, ν is the Poisson's ratio (determined by the ultrasonic pulse-echo measurement), and β is the angle between the perfect dislocation Burgers Due to the limited amount of material, the dimension of the gauge section of both water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples was set to 5.1 mm × 0.8 mm × 1.6 mm. Specially designed sample grippers were utilized to conduct the tensile test. Sample surfaces were mechanically polished and sparkle-sprayed prior to the tests. The strain was extracted from the DIC Von-Mises strain data using 'virtual extensometers' mode and averaged 3 virtual extensometers along the gage length. Ultrasonic pulse-echo measurement. An Olympus 38DL Plus thickness gauge with a Model 5072PR pulser/receiver module was used to measure the speed of the shear velocity and the longitudinal velocity. The Poisson's ratio, Young's modulus and the shear modulus were calculated with the following equations, where ν is the Poisson's ratio, V T is the shear velocity, V L is the longitudinal velocity, E is the Young's modulus, G is the shear modulus and ρ is the density of the materials, which is estimated with the following equation, where m aAvg is the averaged atomic mass of Cr, Co and Ni, V cell is the volume of a fcc unit cell calculated with the lattice constants derived from the XRD results. Nonproportional number of local atomic pairs. To quantify the atom distribution at the alternating sites along <110> directions, we defined the nonproportional number of local atomic pairs around an atomic species for the 4 th nearest-neighbor shell as detailed in a previous study where N ij Diffuse anti-phase boundary energy. The diffuse anti-phase boundary energy as the function of dislocation slip events was calculated via density functional theory using an "aged" atomic model reported in a previous literature 