The magnetic configurations of cylindrical Co-rich CoNi nanowires have been quantitatively analyzed at the nanoscale by electron holography and correlated to local structural and chemical properties. The nanowires display grains of both face-centered cubic (fcc) and hexagonal close packed (hcp) crystal structures, with grain boundaries parallel to the nanowire axis direction. Electron holography evidences the existence of a complex exotic magnetic configuration characterized by two distinctly different types of magnetic configurations within a single nanowire: an array of periodical vortices separating small transverse domains in hcp rich regions with perpendicular easy axis orientation, and a mostly axial configuration parallel to the nanowire axis in regions with fcc grains. These vastly different domains are found to be caused by local variations in the chemical composition modifying the crystalline orientation and/or structure, which give rise to change in magnetic anisotropies. Micromagnetic simulations, including the structural properties that have been experimentally determined, allows for a deeper understanding of the complex magnetic states observed by electron holography. One-dimensional magnetic nanostructures have for the past two decades been of increased interest for the development of future spintronic devices The magnetic configurations in various Co-based cylindrical nanowires have previously been studied in several publications, However, previous publications have shown a coexistence of fcc and hcp crystal phases in single CoNi alloy NWs, Only statistical overviews of the structural and chemical information have been reported, as the crystal phase and composition in NWs are often determined by techniques like x-ray diffraction (XRD) and energy dispersive x-ray microanalysis (EDX) on assemblies or arrays of NWs. For the sake of consistency, all the results presented in this work are taken from the same area of a single nanowire, representative for the whole sample. Similar results were obtained from other NWs of the same batch. The length of the enclosed area is 1.7 μm. EH analysis was carried out in this area and is shown in Figure Moving on, region C2 in Figure By overlapping the magnetic phase shift image onto the same region of the crystal phase map extracted from ASTAR (Figure The chain of vortex states is located in the large grain of mainly hcp phase (C2), and the curling state seems to be located in regions with a coexistence of fcc and hcp phase grain (C1 and C4). Spectrum imaging and ASTAR experiments indicate that the magnetic transition region C3 is located almost along the hcp/fcc grain boundary, where both the structure and the composition is likely to change. The drastic changes in magnetic configuration appear to be caused by local changes in crystal structure induced by inhomogeneous composition of the NW. Even for small-to-moderate changes in composition (Detected Ni content of 8-25%, excluding edge measurements), results in a change in the crystal structure, and from this, a drastic difference in the local magnetic configuration. Quantitative and local studies of the magnetic, structural and chemical changes have been performed on cylindrical textured Co-rich CoNi nanowires. A complex and inhomogeneous magnetic configuration has been revealed, consisting of a periodical configuration of exotic antiparallel transverse domain-like regions separated by transversvortex states of alternating chirality and/or polarity at the hcp rich region. In turn, in the more fcc rich regions, mostly axial domains are observed. A transition between these two regions has also been identified. The experimental results have been compared to micromagnetic simulations, revealing that the vortex chain is formed inside hcp phase of the Co-rich CoNi alloy. Correlated local changes in composition and crystal structure have been highlighted as the origin of the different magnetic configurations: the vortex chain is a result of the hcp phase whose magnetic easy axis (c-axis) is oriented 78 relative to the NW axis (x-axis), and counterbalances the shape anisotropy. A curling state with a magnetic induction component oriented along the NW axis is appearing in regions with fcc phase grains where the easy axis and shape anisotropy act in the same way. A transition region between these two configurations is observed at the fcc/hcp grain boundary running almost parallel to the NW axis. This study demonstrates the strong correlations between crystal structure and composition, and consequently on the magnetic configurations in CoNi NWs. The effect of local crystalline changes due to a slight variation of composition is found to drastically change the magnetic configuration in the NW, and can therefore not be neglected when attempting to explain and analyze the magnetic structure. A correlative microscopy investigation has been a great advantage in this work, as it offers magnetic, structural and spectroscopic analysis of the exact same area, since the same sample can be inspected by the different microscopic techniques. Cylindrical CoNi nanowires were prepared by electrodeposition into self-assembles pores of anodic aluminum oxide templates. For a detailed description of the synthesis, see supplementary information S1. The NWs were drop casted onto a TEM carbon grid for the EH, STEM-EELS and ASTAR measurements. Studies of the magnetic configuration of the CoNi NWs were performed by EH using a Hitachi HF-3300 (I2TEM-Toulouse) transmission electron microscope operated at 300kV. This microscope is equipped with a cold field emission gun, a spherical aberration corrector, and a double biprism setup, which makes it a dedicated microscope for interferometry experiments. The experiments were carried out in the normal stage of the I2TEM, at remanence state (with objective lens switched off), after an application of 1.8 T perpendicular to the sample, by switching the objective lens on and off again. The holograms were acquired by the use of a software for fringe position correction developed by C. Gatel, Studies of the structural configuration of the NWs were performed on a Philips CM20-FEG TEM at 200kV using the NanoMEGAS ASTAR system, a TEM based automatic crystal orientation and phase mapping technique. Studies of the compositional distribution of the NWs were performed using STEM-EELS at a JEOL ARM200F TEM operated at 200kV. This microscope is probe-corrected and equipped with a cold FEG. The data was acquired using GIF Quantum ER imaging filter and an energy resolution of 0.33 eV (measured at the FWHM of the zero loss peak) in dual EELS mode, acquiring low loss and high loss spectra at the same time. For the data treatment we used MLLS fitting algorithm in Gatan Microscopy Suite ® 's Element Quantification tool in order to analyze the signal from the overlapping Co and Ni edges. See supplementary information S4 for a description of the MLLS fitting procedure. Micromagnetic simulations were performed using OOMMF 