Two-dimensional materials such as transitional metal dichalcogenides exhibit unique optical and electrical properties. Here we report on the varying optical properties of CVD grown MoS2 monolayer flakes with different shapes. In particular, it is observed that the perimeter and the central region of the flakes have non-uniform photoluminescence (PL) energy and intensity. We quantified these effects systematically and propose that thermally induced strain during growth is the origin. The strain relaxation after transfer of the MoS2 flakes supports this explanation. Detailed investigations of the spatial distribution of the PL energy reveal that depending on the shape of the MoS2 flakes, the width of the strain field is different. Thus, our results help to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the differences in PL and Raman signals between the perimeter region and the center region of monolayer MoS2 and suggest that the induced strain plays an important role in the growth of monolayer materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, including graphene, black phosphorene (BP) and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), have attracted intense attention due to their promising properties The edges of 2D materials are one of their most interesting aspects as they influence the physical properties, including bandgap, superconductivity, mobility, and magnetism In this paper, we report spatially resolved PL and Raman studies on CVD grown MoS2 flakes with various shapes. The PL signal (peak position and intensity) and the E 1 2g Raman mode at the perimeter are strongly increased in comparison to the center of the flakes, while the FWHM of the A exciton and the position of the A1g Raman mode are uniform over the whole flake. Significantly, the width of the region with increased PL varies between flakes with different edges. Comparisons of as-grown and transferred MoS2 monolayers reveal that non-uniform tensile strain is induced during growth giving rise to the PL and Raman non-uniformities. Our results help to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms contributing to the differences in PL and Raman signals between the perimeter region and the center region of monolayer MoS2, and effects of the induced strain during CVD growth of TMDs. The MoS2 flakes were synthesized on 290 nm SiO2/Si in a two-zone CVD furnace using a microcavity reactor as Mo precursor supply. The growth temperature is 750°C with a pressure of 0.9 mbar, as described in detail in Ref The morphologies and microstructures of the MoS2 flakes were characterized by using scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL JSM-6700F) at 10 keV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Anasys NanoIR2s) studies were taken in air at ambient condition with tapping mode. Raman and PL spectra were collected using a Witec alpha 300R with a 532 nm excitation laser with a 100 x objective lens (NA=0.95) was at room temperature. The laser power was set at 200 μW for PL measurement in order to avoid laser heating and any other damages produced by the laser. For Raman measurements, a spectral grating with 1800 lines/mm was used whereas for PL the spectral grating was 600 lines/mm. Maps were generated by taking approx. 7 spectra/μm in both x and y directions. The MoS2 flakes studied in this paper were grown on 290 nm SiO2/Si substrates with a micro-cavity CVD set-up previously described (also see the experimental section) The identical color contrast manifests uniform thickness of the as-grown MoS2 structure. The thickness of the MoS2 flake was further confirmed by the height profile in the inset of Fig. For intrinsic monolayer MoS2, two pronounced PL peaks at approximately 1.85 eV (A) and 2.05 eV (B) can be observed. The A peak arises from the neutral exciton emission of the direct transition at the K-point, and the B peak is due to the exciton emission from a second direct transition between the conduction band and a lower-lying valence band The map of the peak position of the A exciton in Fig. However, as shown in Fig. where t is the sample temperature in °C. Compared to MoS2, amorphous SiO2 has very low thermal expansion coefficient of ~0.56 ×10-7 /°C 2 , which is too low to affect the calculation result. Thus, by ignoring the value of SiO2, the tensile strain in monolayer MoS2 then amounts to: On the basis of the growth mechanisms of 2D materials, the growth of MoS2 will begin from the nucleation center to the perimeter To further confirm the thermally-induced strain of the MoS2 monolayers, we transferred one of the samples onto another SiO2/Si substrate with a polymer supported wet transfer as described in the experimental section. During this process, the strain of the MoS2 monolayer can be released. This supports our observation that the non-uniform PL is originally from the substrateinduce strain during the growth. Various shapes of 2D MoS2 flakes are formed during CVD growth. Fig. and Fig. It is known that armchair edges have alternating S and Mo atoms, while zigzag edges are terminated by S or Mo only. Van der Zande et al. suggested that from the optical images of MoS2, the sharper, straighter edges are Mo-zigzag terminated Thus, the different widths of the perimeter region with shifted PL were observed within the two groups. In other words, the changes in PL at the perimeter of the flakes could not arise from the edge state or defects alone, the thermal expansion coefficient mismatch of the substrate and the induced strain in the center of the flake alongside different strain relaxation rates of each edge type makes the most significant contribution to the observed PL maps In this report, MoS2 monolayer flakes with various shapes grown by CVD were characterized by PL and Raman maps to study the structural heterogeneity and strain effects. The PL signal peak position, intensity, and the E 1 2g Raman mode position show significant differences at the edges and in the interior of monolayer while the FWHM of the A exciton and the A1g Raman mode are uniform. This indicates an intrinsic tensile strain in MoS2 which likely is induced during the fast cooling process after growth. For different edge types (straight or smooth edge), different widths of the perimeter region have been observed. This difference may be due to various strain relaxation rates in MoS2 along the growth direction. Our results suggest that thermally induced non-uniform tensile strain plays a significant role in CVD growth of MoS2 monolayers, and also helps to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms responsible for differences between the perimeter and center of PL and Raman in monolayer MoS2.