High magnetic field transport measurements and ab initio calculations on the layered superconductor TaSe 3 have provided compelling evidences for the existence of a three-dimensional strong topological insulator state. Longitudinal magnetotransport measurements up to ~ 33 T unveiled striking Shubnikov-de Hass oscillations with two fundamental frequencies at 100 T and 175 T corresponding to a nontrivial electron Fermi pocket at the B point and a nontrivial hole Fermi pocket at the Γ point respectively in the Brillouin zone. However, calculations revealed one more electron pocket at the B point, which was not detected by the magnetotransport measurements, presumably due to the limited carrier momentum relaxation time. Angle dependent quantum oscillations by rotating the sample with respect to the magnetic field revealed clear changes in the two fundamental frequencies, indicating anisotropic electronic Fermi pockets. The ab initio calculations gave the topological Z 2 invariants of (1; 100) and revealed a single Dirac cone on the (1 0 -1) surface at the point with helical spin texture at a constant-energy contour, suggesting a strong topological insulator state. The results demonstrate TaSe 3 an excellent platform to study the interplay between topological phase and superconductivity and a promising system for the exploration of topological superconductivity. A distinct feature of Majorana Fermion, which could be realized in solids as quasiparticle, is that it is its own antiparticle and the bound state obeys non-Abelian statistics, thus making it potential for the use in low decoherence topological quantum computation The layered transition-metal trichalcogenides TrX 3 (Tr = Nb, Ta; X = S, Se), with the schematic crystal structure of the representative TaSe 3 shown in Fig. implying that this material has potential use as an interconnector in electronic devices. Besides, it was found that quasi-1D nanowires of TaSe 3 had lower levels of normalized noise spectral density The result is nicely consistent with the results of a very recent theoretical work The TaSe 3 crystals were grown by using the self-flux method. Starting materials of Ta powder (99.9%, Aladdin) and Se (99.999%, Aladdin) granules were mixed in a molar ratio of 1 : 6 and placed into an alumina crucible. The assembly was heated in a furnace up to 750 o C within 9 hrs, kept at the temperature for 20 hrs, and then slowly cooled down to 450 o C at a temperature decreasing rate of 1.5 o C/h. The excess Se was removed at this temperature by quickly placing the assembly into a high-speed centrifuge. Then, the quartz tube was cooled to room temperature in air. The shining quasi 1D crystals with a typical dimension of 2.4 × 0.1 × 0.06 mm 3 were obtained. The typical picture of a crystal is presented in the inset of Fig. First-principles methods based on the density functional theory (DFT) encoded in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) sampling was done with a Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh of size 6 × 15 × 5, and the total energy difference criterion was defined as 10 -8 eV for self-consistent convergence. The modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) The maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) The Wannier Tools package The scattering lifetime τ Q = 2.28 × 10 -13 and 1.07× 10 -13 s, respectively. Furthermore, the quantum mobility μ Q ~ 1.2× 10 3 and 456.6 cm 2 VS -1 could also be obtained from . The results are summarized in Table To achieve in-depth insights into the SdH oscillations, the Landau level (LL) index fan diagram is constructed, aiming to examine the Berry phase of TaSe 3 accumulated along the cyclotron orbit. This is due to that the nontrivial Berry phase is generally considered to be a key evidence for Dirac fermions, which are caused by the pseudo-spin rotation under a magnetic field is the Onsager phase factor and δ represents the FS dimension-dependent correction to the phase shift, which is 0 for 2D system and ± 1/8 for 3D system in presence of nontrivial Berry phase However, it should be very cautious to examine the possible CDW order in TaSe 3 . It is known that CDW order appears in its analogues such as TaS 3 One claimed that the phonon dispersion shows imaginary frequencies In summary, by performing high magnetic field magnetotransport measurements and ab initio calculations on the layered superconductor TaSe 3 , we have observed topologically nontrivial electronic bands stemming from the three-dimensional strong topological insulator state. We also have unveiled spin-momentum locking surface states. The results demonstrate the intrinsic superconductor TaSe 3 as an ideal platform for the study of the interplay between topological phase and superconductivity. However, to realize Majorana Fermion, the surface states, which strongly depends on the position of chemical potential, should be well separated from the bulk states. If the chemical potential lies ~ 40 meV below the E F , as is shown in Fig. The authors acknowledge the support by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai 