Resistance drift in phase change materials is characterized in amorphous phase change memory line-cells from 300 K to 125 K range and is observed to follow the previously reported power-law behavior with drift coefficients in the 0.07 to 0.11 range in dark. While these drift coefficients measured in dark are similar to commonly observed drift coefficients (~0.1) at and above room temperature, measurements under light show a significantly lower drift coefficient (0.05 under illumination versus 0.09 in dark at 150K). Periodic on/off switching of light shows sudden decrease/increase of resistance, attributed to photo-excited carriers, followed by a very slow response (~30 minutes at 150 K) attributed to contribution of charge traps. Continuation of the resistance drift at low temperatures and the observed photo-response suggest that resistance drift in amorphous phase change materials is predominantly an electronic process. Phase change memory (PCM) has entered the main-stream non-volatile memory market due to its high-speed, endurance, and cost-effective scalability Most reports in literature on resistance drift in PCM cells are on characterization studies at room temperature and above, where multiple processes may be occurring simultaneously. In this work, resistance drift in amorphous GST line cells is monitored in 300 K to 125 K temperature (T) range and the effect of light on the cell resistances is investigated. The line-cells used in this work were fabricated using 90 nm technology with 250 nm thick bottom metal (Tungsten with Ti/TiN liner) contacts on 700 nm thermally grown SiO2. GST was deposited using sputtering, patterned using optical lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE) and capped with 10 nm plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) Si3N4 to prevent evaporation of Te during experiments (FIG. The line-cells used in the experiment were annealed to 675 2 K for 20 minutes under high vacuum to ensure that they were all in crystalline (HCP) phase prior to application of electrical pulses. A 500 ns pulse with 30 ns rise and fall times was used to amorphize each line-cell (FIG. where R and R0 are resistances at time t and t0 respectively and γ is the drift coefficient. The drift coefficients can be extracted from the slope of the bi-logarithmic resistance (R) versus time (t) plots (FIG. During the LED on versus off experiments, two effects of light were observed: (i) electrical conductivity is higher under light, which is expected as amorphous GST (a-GST) is a semiconductor, (ii) line-cells amorphized and monitored under light showed significantly smaller drift than cells amorphized and monitored under dark (FIG. In a second set of experiments, the LED was periodically switched on and off, soon after amorphization (FIG. In summary, amorphized GST line cells display resistance drift in T = 300 K to 125 K, the full range of temperatures used in these experiments. Photo-excitation gives rise to a clearly observable change in resistance and lower drift coefficients, suggesting that photo-excited carriers have a significant contribution to conductance at low temperatures. Experiments with periodic exposure to light show a fast and a slow response. The time-scale of the slow response (~10 minutes at 150 K) suggest that very slow trap-to-trap charge exchanges have a significant impact on electrical conductivity and resistance can be stabilized under-light within each cycle. These results suggest that resistance drift in amorphous GST is predominantly an electronic process. 