Accurate determination of three types of losses (dielectric, elastic and piezoelectric) in piezoelectric materials is critical, since they are closely related to the performance of highpower piezoelectric devices. The Standard kk 33 mode has a number of serious deficits that hinder researchers from determining accurate physical parameters and losses. In order to overcome such deficits, "partial electrode" has been devised and proposed. This study provides analytical derivation process and proposes parameter determination method by utilizing analytical solutions. Compared to finite element analysis, analytical solutions show 0.1 % difference in resonance frequencies and 2 % difference in mechanical quality factors, proving themselves as valid modeling. The analytical solutions are fitted to experimental data to determine physical parameters and losses. The kk 33 (electromechanical coupling factor) values were calculated with determined values from curve fitting in two different ways and show good agreement to each other. For the past decades, piezoelectric materials have been proven to be better than electromagnetic (EM) counterparts when being utilized as ultrasonic motors, sonar transducer devices and electrical transformers, since they have higher energy densities in smaller volumes and generates no electromagnetic noise. Accurate loss determination of piezoelectric material is crucial for the following two reasons: First, the bottleneck of high-power piezoelectric devices has been identified as heat generation, which severely degrades their performances Each dielectric, elastic, and piezoelectric loss is further classified into "intensive" and "extensive" subsets according to the constraint conditions of the vibration modes: intensive parameters, such as stress (XX) and electric field (EE), are the ones that rely upon the amount of matter or total volume of the system, whereas extensive parameters, such as strain (xx) and dielectric displacement (DD), are the ones that depend on the volume of given system. Followed by the statement of intensive and extensive parameters, the following equations are the definitions of intensive and extensive losses The losses can be represented as tangent angle supposing that the loss values are not large and handled primarily as viscous friction from the viewpoint of mathematical simplicity. The first three equations explain intensive losses, which are primed; εε XX , ss EE and dd are relative permittivity under constant XX, elastic compliance under constant EE and piezoelectric constant, respectively. Primed losses are defined as losses under constant intensive parameters. The latter three equations explain extensive losses, which are non-primed; κκ xx , cc DD and h are inverse permittivity under constant xx , elastic stiffness under constant DD and inverse piezoelectric constant, respectively. Therefore, the non-primed losses are defined as losses under constant extensive parameters. Up to date, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (IEEE) have proposed a standard method for parameter determination with different vibration modes However, there exist significant divergence with the experimental data (e.g. QQ AA < QQ BB in PZT In order to resolve such issues, partial electrode (PE) configuration method was introduced to realize the mechanical excitation measurement, in contrast to the "Standard" specimen with pure electrical excitation. PE configuration sample has two main parts: center part, which is electrically excited and behaves as a mechanical "actuator", and side part, which is pure mechanical load excited by the center part and can be modified with electrical constraints. In our previous paper In this paper, we provide detailed derivation process for analytical solutions for kk 33 mode PE configuration for providing the determination process of the intensive and extensive piezoelectric parameters and corresponding losses. The derived admittance equations are validated by the comparison with finite element analysis (FEA) and experimental admittance curves. In order to solve analytical solutions and generate admittance curves for kk 33 mode PE configuration, Wolfram Mathematica (version 11.1, Wolfram Research, Champaign, IL) was utilized. The FEA software package (ATILA++ distributed by Micromechatronics, Inc., State College, PA) was used to validate admittance curves from analytical solutions, which can integrate all kinds of losses, including piezoelectric loss, in the simulation. The comparison was done between admittance curves from ATILA FEA and analytical solutions with the exactly same input parameters. Also, all samples, PE OC, PE SC and PE SE, were prepared and measured with Precision Impedance Analyzer (4294A, Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA) with constant peak voltage of 0.1 mV to avoid possible peak distortion Consider the following geometry for PE configuration, as shown in Figure For convenience, we separated constitutive equations for electrically excited center part and side load part. In above equations, the subscripts "cc" and "ss" denotes center part and side part, respectively. Note that these equations are written with respect to the effective coordinate shown in Figure For the center part, by using constitutive equations and harmonic vibration equations, it is obtained: This expression is the same as "wave differential equation" that can be found elsewhere. The velocity of the wave for the above equation is define as: where vv 11 EE is sound velocity related to compliance ss 11 EE . The general solution of the Eq. ( for uu(xx) would be in terms of sine and cosine function, which is of the form: Since the displace function is asymmetric, but 0 at the center (center of gravity), cosine term should vanish. Therefore, for center part, we have the following equation of displacement: Where AA cc is constant. The wave equation for the side part should be considered separately. Due to different electrical boundary conditions, OC and SC, and SE should be separately considered. For the side part of OC and SC, we have DDconstant conditions. In the similar manner, it is obtained: The solution to the above wave equation is given by: where vv 33 DD is sound velocity related to compliance ss 33 DD , and AA ss and BB ss are constants. The side part does not have center of gravity, so it does not vanish at xx = 0. For SE configuration, EEconstant condition should be considered. In similar manner, it is obtained: For kk 33 PE OC and SC, DD -constant condition should be considered. For OC, assuming voltage applied to the center part is small, it can be assumed that DD 1ss is zero. For SC, the expression for DD 1ss should be derived according to the voltage constraint. Because of the short circuit condition, the potential difference between xx = aall 2 ⁄ and xx = ll 2 ⁄ should be zero even though the electric field distributes in between: By using constitutive equations and Eq. ( With Eq. ( For simplicity, let us express DD 1ss with the following equation: Where, xx 1ss,aaaaaa is average value of strain xx 1ss over the range of xx = aall 2 ⁄ and xx = ll 2 ⁄ . For kk 33 SE, EEconstant condition should be considered. Furthermore, due to charge neutralization originated from surface free charges that compensate surface bound charges, EE 1ss should be zero. The mechanical boundary conditions are universal for all the PE configurations. First, the displacement should be continuous at xx = aall 2 ⁄ . By Equating Eq. ( For SE, the equation can simply be obtained by equating Eq. ( Second, the stress should be continuous at xx = aall 2 ⁄ . The stress of the center part at xx = aall 2 ⁄ for all PE configurations is obtained by using Eq. ( The stress of the side part of kk 33 PE OC, SC and SE can be similarly derived by utilizing mechanical wave equations. For kk 33 OC, since DD 1ss = 0 was assumed, we obtain: Then stress continuation condition should be achieved by equating Eq. (26) to Eq. ( Third, the stress should be zero at each edge of the bar, which is located at xx = ll 2 ⁄ . The equations can simply be expressed by using Eq. ( For PE, since we measure the current (admittance) through the center electrode, we have: Then using constitutive equations, it is obtained: The expression for admittance is simply given by: Finally, the expression for the admittance for all the configuration is given by: For the final admittance equations, it is noteworthy to see the superscript star (*) on the physical parameters, meaning the parameters are complex, including real and imaginary (loss) parts. These parameters can be written as: In Eq. ( tan φφ 33 can rather be directly determined from thickness mode (kk tt ) specimen. So far, analytical solutions for kk 33 PE are derived. One of validation methods for analytical solutions is to take limit of the admittance functions. If we take the center portion "a" as 100 % (aa → 1) for all the admittance equations, meaning the center part takes up the entire PE geometry, we obtain: As a result of aa → 1, all the equations beautifully converge to that of Standard kk 31 mode It is obvious from the fact that the center part is kk 31 mode for all the PE geometry. Next, when "a" goes to zero (aa → 0), antiresonance frequency (ff BB ) of PE OC should approach to that of standard specimen, while resonance frequency (ff AA ) of PE SC should approach to that of standard sample, since PE OC corresponds to antiresonance behavior and PE SC corresponds to resonance behavior for kk 33 mode. Figure The mathematical limit partially validates analytical solutions; they should be compared to both finite element analysis (FEA) for definite evaluation. Figure For FEA simulation, the parameters of PZT 5A, which are already built in the software, were utilized. The physical parameters and losses of PZT 5A are listed in Table For the calculation, the piezoelectric loss was set to be 1.6 %, about the average of the sum of dielectric and elastic loss. The discrepancies between admittance curves from analytical solution and ATILA FEA is mainly due to two reasons: (1) 3D analysis in ATILA, whereas 1D analysis in the analytical solutions. Due to 3D consideration of FEA, the peak heights of admittance curves from FEA are smaller than those of admittance curves from analytical solutions. (2) FEA's consideration of higher harmonic generation, while analytical solution only considers fundamental resonance. Due to this difference, the base lines far from resonance and antiresonance frequencies of admittance curves deviate. Despite these discrepancies, only about 0.1 % deviation occurs in ff AA and ff BB , and about 2 % deviation occurs in QQ AA and QQ BB . These values are especially important, since they are directly related to physical parameters and loss determination. After analytical solutions were validated with the aid of FEA, they were fitted to experimental data. Since the center part is kk 31 mode, the related physical parameters were measured with standard kk 31 sample. Determined parameters of kk 31 mode are listed in Table For curve fitting, in order to simplify and minimize the fitting parameters, the following method was utilized: first, ρρ was determined by measuring the mass of each sample. Also, "aa", the center portion, was measured with the help of optical microscope. Although we designed aa as The imaginary part of electromechanical coupling factor (tan χχ 33 ) are defined as "coupling loss", which is given by: The determined values of physical parameters and losses from curve fitting are shown in Table In summary, the "Partial Electrode" configuration for kk 33 mode was introduced in order to resolve issues in the IEEE Standard kk 33 mode specimen, which can determine experimentally both "intrinsic" and "extrinsic" physical parameters in piezo-ceramics. The analytical solutions for kk 33 PE have been derived, with the aid of piezoelectric constitutive equations and electrical/mechanical boundary conditions. The derived admittance curves from analytical solutions well match with those simulated from ATILA FEA, in terms of resonance frequencies and mechanical quality factors. After analytical solutions are validated through the comparison, they were fitted to real experimental data to determine physical parameters of kk 33 mode. The fitting method was confirmed by comparing kk 33 values determined from two different equations. The fitting method to determine physical parameters and losses with analytical solutions will provide more accurate parameter determination compared to the method using the IEEE standard kk 33 specimen by providing much larger capacitance with less fringing electric field effect, free of specimen setup issue, and direct determination of intensive elastic compliance and losses. 