We report the observation of anomalous peak structures induced by hybridized magnon-phonon excitation (magnon polarons) in the magnetic field dependence of the spin Peltier effect (SPE) in a Lu2Bi1Fe4Ga1O12 (BiGa:LuIG) with Pt contact. The SPE peaks coincide with magnetic fields tuned to the threshold of magnon-polaron formation, consistent with the previous observation in the spin Seebeck effect. The enhancement of SPE is attributed to the lifetime increase in spin current caused by magnon-phonon hybridization in BiGa:LuIG. Magnetoelastic coupling (MEC), the interaction between spin waves (magnons) and lattice waves (phonons), was first investigated more than half a century ago Magnon polarons can convey spin information with velocities close to those of phonons, much faster than the magnon velocities in the dipolar magnon regime The spin Seebeck effect (SSE) In this study, we explore the magnon-polaron features in the spin Peltier effect (SPE), the reciprocal effect of the SSE, referring to the heat-current generation as a result of a spin current Figure where θ SHE is the spin Hall angle of PM. By the interfacial spin-exchange coupling, μ s causes a nonequilibrium magnon creation or annihilation scattering; when μ s is parallel (antiparallel) to the equilibrium magnetization (M) in FI, the number of magnons in FI is increased (decreased). This process accompanies a heat flow J q between the PM/FI and thereby modulates the system temperature. The SPE-induced temperature modulation ∆T SPE satisfies the following relation We prepared a Pt(5 nm)-strip/BiGa:LuIG(3 μm) bilayer film, where the numbers in parentheses represent the thickness. The single-crystalline BiGa:LuIG (100) film was grown by liquid phase epitaxy on Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 (GGG) (100) substrate (a 2 × 1 × 0.5 mm 3 rectangular shape). Before the Pt deposition, the BiGa:LuIG/GGG was cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic bath and then cleaned with so-called Piranha etch solution (a mixture of H 2 SO 4 and H 2 O 2 at a ratio of 1:1) to remove organic matter attached to the BiGa:LuIG surface To measure the SPE-induced temperature modulation, we follow the experimental method shown in Ref. We first checked the appearance of the conventional SPE signals in the present Pt/BiGa:LuIG sample at the temperature of T = 300 K and a low-H range, |μ 0 H| < 10 mT. Figure We then applied a relatively high magnetic field to the sample, |μ 0 H| < 0.8 and measured the H dependence of ∆V TC with the intervals of 10 mT. Figure Importantly, the peak appears for the field H TA at which the magnon dispersion curve of BiGa:LuIG touches the TA-phonon dispersion curve, as with the magnonpolaron anomaly observed in the SSE measurement where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, the Dirac constant, S the spin of Fe 3+ (S = 5/2), a (J ad ) the nearestneighbor distance (inter-sublattice exchange constant) between Fe a-and d-sites, and A, B, and C the constants determined by the occupation ratio of Fe 3+ in the octahedral and tetrahedral sites of BiGa:LuIG We carried out systematic T dependence measurements. Figure T is decreased from 325 K, the SPE-induced ∆T takes a broad maximum around 250 K and it monotonically decreases by further decreasing T . The T dependence is qualitatively consistent with the previous results on the SSE in Pt/YIG films We found the magnon-polaron peak structure appears also when the magnon branch tangentially touches the LA-phonon dispersion. Figure The appearance of the peaks in the SPE can be understood in terms of the enhanced lifetime of spin current by the magnon-phonon hybridization in a similar way as the SSE To summarize, we observed anomalous peaks in Hdependent SPE signals in a Pt/BiGa:LuIG system. The anomalies appear at the onset H values for hybridized magnon-phonon excitations (magnon-polaron formation), at which the magnon and phonon branches in BiGa:LuIG touch with each other. The observed peaks can be interpreted as the enhanced spin current caused by its lifetime increase due to the hybridization between magnons and long-lived phonons in BiGa:LuIG, which leads to the increased heat-current generation in the SPE. Future works should address the experimental validity of the Onsager reciprocity 