Twinkling Artifact is a valuable tool in detecting dense objects such as kidney stones, calculi etc., especially when there is no acoustic shadowing and presence of hyperechogenic tissues obstructs visualization. This phenomenon is not completely understood. Different scientific groups have contradictory findings concerning its properties: some of them observed a decrease in Twinkling intensity at elevated pulse repetition frequencies (PRF), while others found Twinkling to be independent from PRF, etc. In this paper we hypothesize that this kind of contradictions can be partially resolved on an assumption that there are two types of Twinkling. The 1 st type presumably is produced by randomphased reflections from microcavitation and can be registered even at PRF high enough to suppress blood flow. The 2 nd is originated from elastic vibrations as the object under investigation swings like a pendulum in the field of ultrasound. These vibrations can be associated with an external source such as a muscles contraction, etc. or the acoustic radiation force from signals emitted by the transducer. The 2 nd type of Twinkling disappears at high PRF and can be regularly observed in silicone and polyurethane phantoms where the occurrence of cavitation microbubbles is highly unlikely. Nowadays sensitivity of ultrasound imaging for kidney stones and soft tissue calculi detection is often considered insufficient, which is unfortunate since ultrasound is a method of choice in diagnostics of children, adolescents and pregnant population. In a recent study Twinkling Artifact (Figure Characterization of Twinkling Artifact with various machine settings has been thoroughly investigated by different authors. As shown in Table The researchers can be divided in two major groups based on their observation results regarding the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). Some of the researchers Not many studies measured dependence of Twinkling on a wall filter threshold. However, it is a known fact, that this threshold increases with PRF, for this reason we report four papers describing the decline of Twinkling intensity with increase of the wall filtering threshold, the same number of papers found that this threshold had no effect on Twinkling Artifact whatsoever and one study even indicated the rise of intensity with the filtering threshold. These contradictions made us suppose that there is not just one but, indeed, two types of Twinkling, and the researchers in the field of Twinkling Artifact were unknowingly investigating two different phenomena. These phenomena are easy to confuse as they have a matching appearance on the screen in CFI mode: apparently, stationary objects colored as there is a blood flowing through them (see Figure The aim of this study is to test the hypothesis about two types of Twinkling. If two types indeed exist than it might be possible to recognize and differentiate them on the basis of observations with a standard scanner. For deeper understanding, a research machine will be used in our study with the ability to thoroughly observe and analyze raw radio-frequency signals. MAIN HYPOTHESES OF TWINKLING For Twinkling to occur there has to be not an initial phase fluctuation, but a frequency shift. The way the phase jitter can result in a frequency shift is unclear. It is also unclear how the slight variations in the path can amplify the shift. Apart from the acoustic radiation force induced by ultrasound machine, object's motion can be caused by internal sources such as heartbeat, breathing, etc., as well as external ones like a vehicle passing nearby, people walking down the hall, etc. One team The most recent hypothesis Polyanskiy and Sapozhnikov in 2018 conducted a numerical simulation to test the 'microbubble hypotheses'. Results of their simulation show that the cavitation of gas bubbles is indeed capable of producing the Twinkling Artifact. Representation of Twinkling is reported to be machine dependent. That is why in this study we used two standard ultrasound medical diagnostic scanners with a variety of transducers. The first is Sonoace 8000 EX Prime (Medison, Seoul, Korea) with linear probe L5-9EC (Medison, Seoul, Korea), convex probe C3-7ED (Medison, Seoul, Korea) and sector probe P2-5AC (Medison, Seoul, Korea). The second is Sonomed-500 (Spectromed, Moscow, Russia) scanner with linear probe 7,5L37 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania), convex probe 3,5C60 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania), sector probe 3,5P14 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania) and endocavitary probe 6,5CV13 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania). We repeated experiments using both ultrasonic machines, observed images in CFI, power Doppler and spectral Doppler modes and compared findings. In this study, we also analyzed the raw data obtained from the receive path of the research ultrasound scanner Sonomed-500. This machine has an openarchitecture which allows the raw data capture from Doppler and B-mode paths for a non-real time processing on a PC and executing third-party program modules to perform real-time experiments on the machine itself. Doppler data went through some preliminary processing stages in the machine including the bandpass filtering and Hilbert transform for creating an analytic signal. The above processing steps were the only "black boxes" in the experiments. We used several commercially available ultrasound phantoms: in Gammex 1430 LE Mini-Doppler Flow System (Sun Nuclear Corporation, Middleton, Wisconsin, USA) we could observe conventional Doppler images of a blood mimicking fluid flow as well as mild Twinkling on nylon strings; in ATS 539 (CIRS, Norfolk, Virginia, USA) Twinkling appeared on grayscale targets; in elastography breast phantom by Blue Phantom Twinkling was registered on imitations of breast microcalcifications. In most of the experiments, a clamp held the probe to minimize the effect of random vibrations. We also investigated Twinkling Artifact with a custom-designed and 3Dprinted ultrasound phantom, which is a container with external dimensions of 162x94x82 mm printed with styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) (Bestfilament, Moscow, Russia) and having special holdings for targets allowing their placement at predetermined positions. Depending on the experimental requirements, the container was filled with degassed water, ethanol, silicone, or agar-based tissue-mimicking material with the organic sound reflecting content. We degreased all parts with ethanol before pouring water or adding liquid agar. Afterward, we processed them with a hygroscopic surfactant to reduce the residual pocket of gas in the parts' crevices and place a fibrous sound-absorbing material 10 mm thick at the bottom of the phantom to avoid reflections. We attached the reflecting objects to the custom-built suspensions fixing them in particular positions inside the phantom body. In the early phase of our research, we conducted experiments on a vast number of different materials, but afterward we decided to focus on some minimal set of specimens with known physical properties. The density of the basic material had to be close to that of the bladder stones and calcifications, which is approximately 2.4 g/cm 3 . We used solid aluminum cylinders with diameter 1.75 mm and length between 8-20 mm ( ρ 2.7  g/cm 3 ). Microcalcification was imitated by microcrystals of CaSO 4 (ρ 2.4  g/cm 3 ) about 0.1 mm in size, chemically grown in agar jelly. Some cylinders were scratched with sandpaper to investigate the dependence of Twinkling Artifact and signal characteristics from surface smoothness. We studied the dependence of Twinkling Artifact on material's density using same-sized cylinders made of iron (ρ 7.8  g/cm 3 ), high-impact polystyrene (HIPS) (Bestfilament, Moscow, Russia) (ρ 1.06  g/cm 3 ), wet wood (ρ 0.8  g/cm 3 ). Apart from the phantoms, Twinkling was studied in three adult volunteers (a local institutional review board approved the experimental protocol; all the human subjects gave their informed consent for the study): -Volunteer 1 in the neck area contains 3-mm calculus occurred in the place where hematoma had been previously diagnosed; -Volunteer 2 has a 15-mm stone located in the right kidney producing acoustic shadowing clearly visible in B-mode and creating pronounced Twinkling Artifact; -Volunteer 3 has the gallbladder stones producing shadowing and almost no Twinkling. In the process of CFI frame acquisition multiple pulses are being send to each point of the region of interest (ROI). The number K of pulses ranges between 8-32 depending on the frame rate needed. Each received pulse represents the state of the system in the current moment of time. In fact, a series of K images is being constructed; these images reflect the changing state of the ROI. For that, a sequence of K ultrasonic pulses with frequency 0 ω and interval . Each element of the ensemble is a complex value, which can be described in accordance with a traditional Doppler signal model: where k P describes the influence of the scanning impulse envelope at the moment k t , i.e., for a single reflector initially positioned at the center of the The scanning impulse can be assumed having Gaussian shape with the duration of several oscillation periods at frequency 0 ω ; 0 φ is the initial phase of the ensemble. where k C is the amplitude of vibration-related signals leading to the appearance of the 2 nd type of Twinkling, its power is 0-10 dB greater than that of the soft tissue signals. Stones can move along with tissues resulting in the Doppler shift B ω ; the acoustic radiation force can trigger their oscillations as well. We con- sider these oscillations as an important cause of Twinkling Artifact. They are the reason for an additional phase shift φ k to occur. This phase change can be estimated via this equation: where R ≪ The ultrasound machine Sonomed-500 has advanced research capabilities allowing to obtain the raw radio signals from its receive path for further investigations. For processing of these signals, we prepared program modules, including conventional CFI signal processing algorithms. There is a broad range of references for such processing methods, e.g., We wrote all our program modules in C++ and can either upload them to the machine to analyze data in real time or use them for detailed analysis on a personal computer. eliminating signals from slow-moving reflectors (wall filter, clutter filter). We tested several different variants of this procedure: bandpass filtering; polynomial regression of different orders; principal component analysis; Karhunen-Loève decomposition; empirical mode decomposition In our experiments we filtered Doppler sequences and found the polynomial regression of 2 nd and 3 rd orders to be the most suitable for the task; smoothing and signal accumulation for noise reduction. Recursive low-pass filters were implemented in two spatial directions along with the frame averaging; phase analysis of signals within a Doppler sequence (this information is used in CFI); -Doppler signals intensity analysis (this mode is known as power Doppler). We tested the algorithms under the following conditions: -observation of the liquid flowing along the Doppler phantom's tube; flow velocity was being changed between 0-174 cm/sec. The probe was held in the clamp; the same observation, but the probe was held in hand. Wall filter efficiency was evaluated; observation of targets, in which Twinkling Artifact appears in standard ultrasound machines. The machine parameters were adjusted for the most evident artifact appearance. Experiment I: visual representation of Twinkling Artifact. With two standard medical ultrasound machines in all available Doppler modes, which were CFI, power and spectral Doppler, we investigated the presence of Twinkling in each target in the phantoms at our disposal and the dependence of Twinkling on machine settings: PRF, wall filter type, color write priority, Doppler power, carrier frequency, grayscale gain and focal position to reproduce the findings of other researchers given previously in the 'Dependence on machine parameters' section. The main question of this experiment was: "Can two types of twinkling be reliably differentiated through the observation of their appearance on a screen of a standard scanner?" Experiment II: looking for the 1 st and 2 nd type of Twinkling signals predicted by mathematical model (2). Now, after we can reliably detect and differentiate 1 st and 2 nd type of Twinkling by their appearance on the screen, we want to look deeper and study the nature of the artifact by looking at raw signals themselves. The model (2) predicted that the signal diagram of the 1 st type of Twinkling would be chaotic and the diagram of the 2 nd type on a complex plane would look linearthese are the peculiarities we are looking for in this experiment. Experiment III: quantitative differentiation of 1 st and 2 nd type of Twinkling signals. Differentiating signals based on the visual observation of their diagrams is a tedious process. We introduced a mathematical rule to speed up the process of differentiation: according to the model (2), the 2 nd type of Twinkling has a signal of which real and imaginary parts change either in phase or with a 180 degree delay, therefore a rule based on correlation between them can be used for recognizing these signals: if the correlation is close to one then the 2 nd type of Twinkling is considered to be detected, else if the correlation is low enough then it is the 1 st type, otherwise there could be a mixed type; the correlation is given by:     In this experiment we calculate distributions of correlation for signals with known types to assess the reliability of the introduced rule and construct maps of correlation for phantoms and in vivo data to recognize the presence and type of Twinkling in the volunteers. Twinkling was observed on different objects: on kidney stones submerged in water, agar gel and ethanol, on rusty metal, wooden rods, polystyrene pin targets, on grayscale targets in commercially available phantoms. We tried using different ultrasound probes and machine settings like did the authors of the papers described in section 'Dependence on machine parameters'. We found that Twinkling strongly depends on a tissue-mimicking material or a phantom filler (see Figure The kidney stone of Volunteer 1 exhibited the broadband spectrum (Figure In this experiment, through observation of pictures obtained with standard ultrasound machines in common Doppler modes we identified two types of characteristic behavior of Twinkling Artifact: it is PRF-indifferent and has the broadband spectrum or appears only at low PRF and has the narrowband spec-trum. In our further discussion, we will refer to it as the 1 st and 2 nd type of Twinkling, respectively. In this experiment the theoretical signals are compared to the empirical ones. The theoretical signals derive from the mathematical model ( chaotic signals are those whose amplitude changes from pulse to pulse without an observable pattern; the most known physical source of these is cavitation producing broadband noise-like reflections given in Figure signals from oscillating targets, an example of which according to the mathematical model is given in Figure A typical signal corresponding to the 1 st type of Twinkling is presented in Figure and Figure Given the distinct appearance of the diagrams of signals, relating to both types of Twinkling, a correlation-based criterion can be introduced and used for their differentiation from each other. Figure As it is evident from Figure Figures 5-7 contain the maps of power and correlation superimposed on grayscale frames with the following color palettes: green to yellow is for the absolute value of correlation between real and imaginary parts of signals; brown to purple represents the power of the Doppler signal. We picked the mentioned colors in order to avoid confusion with the traditional CFI. The first set contains data from the neck area of Volunteer 1 with a couple of wide vessels and calculus without a strong acoustic shadow in the B-mode image (Figure 