This paper proposes four fundamental requirements for establishing PDEs (partial differential equations) modeling irreversible processes. We show that the PDEs derived via the CDF (conservation-dissipation formalism) meet all the requirements. In doing so, we find useful constraints on the freedoms of CDF and point out that a shortcoming of the formalism can be remedied with the help of the Maxwell iteration. It is proved that the iteration preserves the gradient structure and strong dissipativeness of the CDF-based PDEs. A refined formulation of the second law of thermodynamics is given to characterize the strong dissipativeness, while the gradient structure corresponds to nonlinear Onsager relations. Further advantages and limitations of CDF will also be presented. As a branch of macroscopic physics, thermodynamics is a theory studying relationships among various apparently unrelated variables or parameters (extensive and intensive) characterizing a thermodynamic system To see what the expected PDEs look like, we follow de Groot and Mazur for electrically neutral fluids without external forces. Here ρ is the fluid density, v is the velocity, P is the pressure tensor, E = e + |v| 2 /2 with e the specific internal energy, and q represents the heat flux. Thus, in 3D we have 5 evolution PDEs for 17 unknowns ρ, v, e, P and q (when P is not symmetric). They are not closed. Notice that only first-order time and spatial partial derivatives appear in With fluid flows in mind, we may consider a general physical process and assume that its conservation laws are (1.2) Here u = u(t, x) ∈ R n represents conserved variables like u = (ρ, ρv, ρE) in (1.1), x = (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ), and f j is the corresponding flux along the x j -direction. If each f j is given in terms of the conserved variables, the system (1.2) becomes closed. In this case, the system is considered to be in local equilibrium and u is also referred to as equilibrium variables. However, very often and as in (1.1) f j depends on some extra variables in addition to the conserved ones. The extra variables characterize non-equilibrium features of the system under consideration and are called non-equilibrium or dissipative variables. Choosing suitable non-equilibrium variables and determining their evolution equations are the fundamental task of irreversible thermodynamics. There have been no well-accepted rules for choosing the non-equilibrium variables and determining the evolution equations. So far irreversible thermodynamics has had a number of different theories, such as CIT (Classical Irreversible Thermodynamics, No matter how the PDEs are derived, they should meet certain fundamental physical requirements. In this paper, I will propose four such requirements. They are the observability of physical phenomena, time-irreversibility, long-time tendency to equilibrium, and compatibility with possibly existing classical theories. The fundamentality of these requirements will be expounded in the next section. I will show that the PDEs constructed via our CDF Based on the first and second laws of thermodynamics, CDF is a learning based method for choosing the non-equilibrium variables and deriving the corresponding evolution equations It is proved that the derived second-order PDEs preserve the gradient structure and strong dissipativeness of the first-order ones. Furthermore, a refined formulation of the second law of thermodynamics is given to characterize the strong dissipativeness. On the other hand, the gradient structure The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the four requirements. CDF is reviewed in Section 3 and illustrated with examples in Section 4. Section 5 is devoted to the long-time tendency and compatibility analysis. Further comments are given in Section 6. The final section summarizes the main conclusions of this paper. In this section, I propose four requirements in closing a given system of conservation laws (1.2). They are the observability of physical phenomena, time-irreversibility, long-time tendency to equilibrium, and compatibility with possibly existing well-validated theories. The fundamentality of these requirements can be expounded as follows. The first two of these requirements are quite natural because only observable and irreversible phenomena are of our interest in non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Observable phenomena are insensitive to small changes of experimental conditions. The physically correct mathematical description should produce results which are robust against any disturbance of initial or boundary data. Mathematically, the robustness usually corresponds to stability of PDEs with respect to initial or boundary data. For first-order evolution PDEs, hyperbolicity is believed to be necessary for the stability To reflect the time-irreversibility, the expected evolution PDEs should not be timeinvariant. This is quite different from the Hamilton's equations in classical mechanics. Actually, irreversible terms have been inherently incorporated into non-equilibrium thermodynamics The third one just aims at matching the empirical hypothesis of classical thermodynamics The last one is Bohr's Correspondence Principle. It seems indispensable for any generalization of a classical theory to be reasonable. We do not live at Newton's era. For many problems, there are already well-validated and well-accepted theories. New theories are wanted because more details are needed to be understood and more refined experiments are available. The compatibility means that the new theories should be compatible with the well-validated and classical ones. By the way, this requirement is also a part of Hilbert's sixth problem ("The investigations on the foundations of geometry suggest the problem: To treat in the same manner, by means of axioms, those physical sciences in which mathematics plays an important part; ... Further, the mathematician has the duty to test exactly in each instance whether the new axioms are compatible with the previous ones. ..."). Here we review the conservation-dissipation formalism (CDF) developed in With the above simple idea in mind, we choose a dissipative variable v ∈ R r so that the flux f j in (1.2) can be expressed as f j = f j (u, v) and seek evolution equations of the form This is our constitutive equation to be determined, where g j (u, v) is the corresponding flux and q = q(u, v) is the nonzero source, vanishing at equilibrium. Together with the conservation laws (1.2), the evolution of a non-equilibrium state is then governed by a system of first-order PDEs in the compact form where Note that not every thermodynamic variable can evolve in such a balance form, while many classical systems allow such a set of state variables (ii). There is a positive definite matrix M = M(U), called dissipation matrix, such that the non-zero source can be written as Here the subscript stands for the corresponding partial derivative, for instance ∂U 2 , and η v (U) should be understood as a column vector. Note that the dissipation matrix is not assumed to be symmetric and its positive definiteness means that of the symmetric part M +M T . This principle is a strengthened version of the structural stability conditions proposed in Balance laws (3.2) together with the conservation-dissipation principle will be referred to as conservation-dissipation formalism (CDF). This formalism has two freedoms: the entropy function η = η(U) and the dissipation matrix M = M(U). They are both functions of the state variable U. The former is strictly concave and the latter is positive definite. Except these, no further restriction is imposed on η = η(U) or M = M(U). Specific expressions of η(U) and M(U) should be problem-dependent. Here are some simple comments on the conservation-dissipation principle. Condition (i) is the well-known entropy condition for hyperbolic conservation laws This imposes a restriction on the flux g j (u, v). Moreover, we use equations (3.2) and (3.3) to compute the rate of change of entropy: with the entropy production σ = η v • M(U)η v ≥ 0. Here Condition (ii) has been used. Thus, the second law of thermodynamic and thereby the time-irreversibility are respected automatically by the CDF-based system (3.2). Condition (ii) is a nonlinearization of the celebrated Onsager reciprocal relation for scalar processes . Therefore, the balance laws possess the gradient structure This form relates the change of entropy η U (U) directly to the various irreversible processes that occur in a system Remark that the dissipation matrix may depend on the non-equilibrium variables as well as the conserved ones, while the usual Onsager relation only allows the dependence on the conserved variables. It was shown in We conclude this section with the entropy-production inequality proposed in In this section, we illustrate with examples how CDF guides us to choose the dissipative variable v and to determine the corresponding fluxes g j (u, v). The interested reader is referred to (4A). The first example is about fluid flows through porous media. The process obeys the conservation law of mass: This equation is not closed since the fluid velocity v is unknown. Our task is to close this equation. To this end, we introduce a non-equilibrium state variable w with the size of the fluid velocity v, but not necessarily the unknown velocity. Thus, the system is characterized with the state variable (ρ, ρw). This choice of the state variable, instead of (ρ, w), is inspired by the classical calculations Then we specify a strictly concave function η = η(ρ, ρw) as an entropy density in the CDF. In order to compare with the classical calculations In what follows, we will use s instead of η. As in Then we use the conservation law (4.1) and the generalized Gibbs relation to compute the rate of change of entropy: Here J = -πv and σ = s w • Dwv • ∇π is the entropy production. With this expression of the entropy production, our CDF suggests to choose v = -s w (ν, w) and where M = M(ρ, ρw) is a positive definite matrix. Note that this equation is not Galilean invariant due to the dissipation proportional to the velocity field v. Equations (4.1) and (4.2) together form a system of first-order PDEs in the form (3.2) with where I is the 3×3 identity matrix. From the above procedure, we see that the non-equilibrium variable w is conjugated to the fluid velocity v with respect to the pre-specified entropy. Thanks to the strict concavity of s = s(ν, w), the non-equilibrium variable w can be globally expressed in terms of ρ and v At this point, let us mention that the use of such conjugate variables are traditional in thermodynamics For the freedoms, a simple choice is Here s 0 (ν) is the equilibrium entropy, α is a positive constant with unit kg/K, λ is a positive constant with unit m 3 /kg, and ε is a positive constant related to the relaxation time. With this choice, we have v = w/α and equation (4.2) reduces to the classical momentum equation with damping: Thus, equation (4.2) can be regarded as a nonlinear generalization of the momentum equation. (4B). Next example is from For convenience, we exempt the thermodynamic pressure π from the stress P. Namely, set τ = P -πI which accounts for possible dissipative effects such as viscosity. Moreover, we have the generalized Gibbs relation Here the superscript T denotes the transpose and the colon : stands for the double contraction of two second-order tensors: Then we use the conservation laws in (1.1) and the generalized Gibbs relation to compute the rate of change of entropy: The details can be found in is the entropy production. Having this expression of the entropy production, we refer to CDF and choose q = s w , τ = θs C , and with M = M(ρ, e, w, C) positive definite. Consequently, the final closed system of governing equations consists of the constitutive equations (4.5) and the conservation laws in (1.1). Up to now, we have not assumed the symmetry of the stress tensor. When it is symmetric, we will take the non-equilibrium tensor C to be symmetric. In this case, the previous calculations are still valid but lead to instead of equation (4.5). Further discussions about the fluid system obtained thus can be found in In this section, we show that the CDF-based balance laws (3.2) meet the long-time tendency and compatibility requirements, while the hyperbolicity and time-irreversibility have been shown in Section 3. To begin with, we introduce a positive parameter ε in the right-hand side of (3.2): Notice that the first n components of Q(U) vanish. This parameter can be regarded as a relaxation time. A small ε means that the dissipative variables v evolve much faster than the conserved ones u. Namely, the time scale for v to reach stationary is much smaller than that for u. With the concept of relaxation time, a long-time can be simply defined as a time that is much longer than the relaxation time ε. Thus, the long-time tendency is equivalent to the zero relaxation-time limit where ε tends to zero. (5A). For small ε, the following result was established in in a certain Sobolev space. Here u 0 = u 0 (x, t) and v 0 = c 0 (x, t) solve the so-called equilibrium system The expansion shows that, in the long time or when ε is small, the CDF-based PDEs (3.2) can be well replaced with the equilibrium system. Namely, the equilibrium system approximately describes the thermodynamic system under consideration. For one-component fluid flows where the CDF-based balance laws are equations (1.1) together with (4.5), the equilibrium system is just the classical compressible Euler equations These algebraic equations are globally uniquely solvable thanks to the strict concavity of the generalized specific entropy s = s(ν, e, w, C) in (4.3). For v = 0, we arrive at the equilibrium states characterized with the specific entropy s = s(ν, e, w(ν, e), C(ν, e)). (5. 3) The concavity of this entropy function will be shown in Theorem 5.1 below. This verifies the long-time tendency to equilibrium. Remark that the equation of state (5.2) or the equilibrium entropy (5.3) place a constraint on the undetermined entropy function s = s(ν, e, w, C). (5B). To show the compatibility, we introduce the following transformation (5.4) Thanks to the strict concavity of η(U), the algebraic equation z = η v (u, v) can be globally and uniquely solved to obtain v = v(u, z). Namely, the transformation is globally invertible. Under this transformation, the system (5.1) for smooth solutions can be rewritten as and I k the unit matrix of order k. For the CDF-based fluid model (4.1) and (4.2), this transformed system is Transformation (5.4) preserves the original conservation laws in (5.1): Here and below, the simplified notation f j (u, z) has been used to replace f j (u, v(u, z)). The z-equation in (5.5) can be rewritten as This indicates that z = O(ε). Iterating the last equation yields where M (u) = M(u, v(u, 0)) giving the meaning of the bar. Moreover, f j (u, z) in (5.6) can be expanded into Substituting the two truncations above into (5.6), we arrive at the following secondorder PDEs This procedure in deriving (5.7) from (5.5) is called Maxwell iteration For the CDF-based heat conduction model above, the corresponding second-order system (5.7) reads as where w = w(ν) is obtained by solving s w (ν, w) = 0. Recall that π = s ν (ν, w). This is the classical porous medium equation provided that the dissipation matrix and entropy are taken as, for example, with m a real number and h(w) strictly concave. Remark 5.1. From such choices of M(ρ, ρw) and η(ρ, ρw) = ρs(1/ρ, w), we see that the compatibility and long-time tendency analysis provide significant constraints on the freedoms of CDF: the strict concave entropy function and positive-definite dissipation matrix. A similar analysis for the CDF-based one-component fluid system (1.1) and (4.5) (or (4.6)) can also be done but is a bit tedious. h ≡ (u ε h , z ε h ) and u ε p the solutions to systems (5.5) and (5.7), respectively. It was proved in holds in a certain Sobolev space. This result indicates that the second-order PDEs (5.7) is a good approximation to the CDF-based first-order system (5.1) when the dissipative variables evolve much faster than the conserved ones. Consequently, the Maxwell iteration makes up for the shortcoming of CDF that only first-order PDEs can be obtained. (5C). The CDF-based second-order PDEs (5.7) possess the following important structural properties. Theorem 5.1. ( (5.10) Proof. First of all, the symmetric positive-definite matrix is a symmetrizer in the sense of Friedrichs it is direct to verify that the symmetrizer is a block-diagonal matrix with the above partition. Notice that η(W ) = η(u, z). We compute at equilibrium where q = η v (U) = 0. This indicates the negative-definitenss of ηuu (u, 0) and thereby the strict concavity of η(u, 0). In addition, since A 0 (W ) is block-diagonal and A 0 (W )D U W F j (U(W )) W is symmetric, it follows immediately from the expression of D U W F j (U(W )) that ηuu (u, 0)f ju (u, 0) is symmetric and Moreover, a direct calculation shows that ηzz (u, 0) = η -1 vv (U)| z=0 = ηvv (u) -1 . This together with (5.11) leads to the following relation The theorem follows from this relation. Theorem 5.1 exposes the gradient structure Namely, the (3n) × (3n)-matrix is symmetric. Such a matrix corresponds to a nonlinear reciprocal relation between the thermodynamic flux and (entropic) force ((η u (u)) x 1 , (η u (u)) x 2 , (η u (u)) x 3 ) for vectorial or tensorial irreversible processes with δ 1 (u) the largest eigenvalue of the symmetric positive-definite matrix M (u). On the other hand, there exists δ 2 (u) > 0 such that Hence the proof is complete by taking c 0 (u) = δ 1 (u)/δ 2 (u). It is worthwhile to comment that Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 correspond to the conservationdissipation principle and the entropy-production inequality This section contains some further comments on CDF, including its limitations. First of all, CDF assumes that certain conservation laws are given a priori. This particularly means that CDF accommodates other possibly existing conservation laws rather than only that of energy. Notice that conservation laws usually root in first principles and therefore should be respected fully. Numerical methods respecting conservation laws have been developed in CDF-based PDEs have the conservative form in (3.2), which allows a convenient definition of weak solutions. Let F j = F j (U)(j = 1, 2, 3) and Q = Q(U) be continuous with respect to U. A vector-valued locally bounded function U = U(x, t) is called a weak solution to balance laws (3.2) if the following equality holds for any smooth function φ = φ(x, t) with compact support When nonconservative terms exist, the above conclusion does not hold in general. To see this, we consider the GENERIC-based compressible model for complex fluids proposed in Here the first two equations are the standard conservation laws (of mass and momentum) and the third one is a constitutive equation for the configuration tensor c. In (6.1), BISQ model in geophysics. It was shown in This section collects the main conclusions of this paper. I propose four fundamental requirements for establishing evolution PDEs modeling irreversible processes. These requirements are the observability of irreversible processes, irreversibility, long-time tendency to equilibrium, and compatibility with the possibly existing well-validated theories. I show that the CDF-based PDEs meet all the four requirements. In showing the compatibility, the Maxwell iteration is applied to the CDF-based firstorder PDEs and, consequently, second-order PDEs are derived systematically. The analysis not only reveals significant constraints on the freedom of CDF, it also remedies the shortcoming of CDF that only first-order PDEs can be derived. It is proved that the derived second-order PDEs preserve the gradient structure and strong dissipativeness of the first-order ones. The strong dissipativeness is characterized with a refined formulation of the second law of thermodynamics, which is the entropy-production inequality (3.5) and Theorem 5.2 for the first-order and second-order PDEs, respectively. The inequality follows from the conservation-dissipation principle-the basis of CDF. On the other hand, the gradient structure corresponds to nonlinear Onsager reciprocal relations for scalar processes (described with the first-order PDEs) and for vectorial or tensorial processes (described with the second-order PDEs).