MgFe)O is a solid solution with ferrous iron undergoing the high to low spin state (HS-LS) crossover under high pressure. The exact state of the material in the region of the crossover is still a mystery, as domains with different spin states may coexist over a wide pressure range without changing the crystal structure neither from the symmetry nor from the atomic positions point of view. At the conditions of the crossover, (MgFe)O is a special type of microscopic disorder system. We explore the influences of (a) stress-strain relations in a diamond anvil cell, (b) time relaxation processes, and (c) the crossover itself on the characteristic features of a single crystal (111)hkl Bragg spot before, during and after the transformation. Using high resolution X-ray diffraction as a novel method for studies of unconventional processes at the conditions of suppressed diffusion, we detect and discuss subtle changes of the (111)hkl Bragg spot projections which we measure and analyze as a function of pressure. We report changes of the spot shape which can be correlated with the HS-LS relative abundance. In addition, we report the formation of structural defects as an intrinsic material response. These static defects are accumulated during transformation of the material from HS to LS. The solid state solution MgO-FeO (or (Mg,Fe)O) would seem trivial if not playing role for the lower mantle of the Earth (and probably super-Earths) and exhibit a complex and at the same time fascinating behavior. The spin state crossover of ferrous iron can indeed play an important role in natural processes of planetary scale. On the one hand the crossover affects elastic properties of the materials. On the other hand, it may be involved in various diverse processes featuring multiple phases, e.g. involving iron partitioning in major constituents of geophysically and geochemically important mineral assemblages (Earth's lower mantle, ultralow velocity zones, terrestrial and extraterrestrial planets, and etc.) At the same time we should not forget that (MgFe)O is an oxide system with strong correlation between lattice and spins. We would like to follow the original publication of E. Dagotto The spin state crossover in (MgFe)O is complex thermodynamic quantum phenomenon Review of the literature reflects the significant progress unraveling different important aspects of this phenomenon After a careful consideration it becomes clear that the origins behind the changes of the bulk are hidden on atomic level as we attempt to demonstrate below. Within the pressure range of the spin state crossover, (MgFe)O can be introduced as a 'frustrated system'. While the total abundance of HS and LS domains is dictated by thermodynamic pressure and temperature conditions, the exact distribution of HS-LS domains should be free to change for a given thermodynamic point. With or without a small temperature perturbation, the system may switch a specific Fe LS 2+ to Fe HS 2+ , individually. The restraint on the spin state abundance balance would require another Fe HS to switch into Fe LS 2+ , promoting 'breathing' of a system. The presence of competing, but spatially heterogeneous dominant states could be described within the term of Griffiths phases, so common for other transition elements oxides (e.g. It is well documented that in addition to pressure, the system is very sensitive to the temperature. Temperature increase expands the pressure region of HS and LS coexistence even small temperature fluctuations introduce an additional complication to the picture. The description of (MgFe)O spin state crossover as a frustrated system can be reconceived into a picture of the system disorder. At the moment, we do not have any information about the equilibrium shapes, sizes and the distribution of HS and LS domains. They may be small, down to nanoscale size. They could be still large enough (i.e. 10-100 of nm) that they would not create a significant detectable contribution to the conventional high pressure powder surrounded by six Fe HS 2+ ), which in turn lead to a complex strain field in the bulk of the material. As to an additional complication, we refer to publications exploring intrinsic variation of iron concentration inside the (MgFe)O X-ray diffraction is the natural methodological choice for investigations of material strain and related effects, caused, for example, by subtle processes such as the spin state crossover. Considering different contributions to the diffraction signal and harsh experimental environment in high pressure diamond anvil cell (DAC) experiments, the sought information can only be provided from a single crystal of exceptional quality which should remain preserved during the compression. In comparison with powder material, single crystal diffraction signal of (Mg,Fe)O should be free from additional undesirable micro strains unavoidably appearing in compressed powders (grain boundaries, grain-grain contacts, higher concentration of dislocations, etc.). Importantly, for any existing diffraction condition, single crystals provide the highest signal-to-noise ratio if we consider the same sample scattering volume. In this paper we investigate effect of high pressure on (Mg,Fe)O single crystal (111)hkl Bragg reflection by means of synchrotron based X-ray diffraction. We use the advantage of high resolution (controlled in our case by a combination of a long sample to detector distance (SDD) and a choice of X-ray energy) to monitor the effects of compression on sample diffraction signal. We analyze the signal collected before, during, and after spin state crossover. We pay special attention to a characterization of disordered state (spin state crossover) and, the material's response originating from the effects on the nano-scale. Our study could also be considered important for other methodological reasons, particularly for developments in the field of dynamic compression experiments using diamond anvil cells. The findings presented below may provide references for analysis and comparison of the effects of the stresses and strains (and additional factors like relaxation processes) in relatively slow static and dynamic DACs experiments (membrane and piezo-driven mechanics). (MgFe)O single crystals were synthesized at Bayerisches Geoinstitut, Bayreuth University. We used a crystal from the batch already reported before The small crystal (10 x 15 x 5 μm 3 ) was preselected at the P02.2 extreme conditions beamline Petra-III, DESY using the energy of 42.7keV. Sample was loaded into a symmetric diamond anvil cell (DAC) with opening of 70 o equipped with Boehler-Almax diamonds. We used Re as gasket material, Ne as pressure medium; small sphere of ruby (pressure marker) and tiny piece of tungsten were placed inside the sample chamber. Tungsten was used for the sample alignment to the X-ray beam and for the centering of the DAC to the goniometer rotation axis (strong X-ray absorber). The diamond anvil cell (X ray aperture ±32 o ) was manually pre-oriented in such a way that (MgFe)O (111)hkl was located in the horizontal plane. X-ray diffraction data at high resolution were collected at the P10 Coherence Applications Beamline, Petra-III, DESY (Fig. The choice of the Bragg reflection comes from following consideration: the (111)hkl is the plane with the densest packing, and we could expect the strongest manifestation of the crossover; at the same time this reflection is accessible through the aperture of DAC for the given, rather low, energy of 15 keV. We have recorded the pressure dependence of the Bragg spot by scanning the φ axis (Fig. The Fig. We suggest that some of the new features could be attributed to the high pressure environment surrounding the sample. Indeed, the phase of the partially coherent X-ray beam can modified during the traversing through the sample environment. The properties of X-ray beam can be modified prior to the diffraction of the beam by (MgFe)O, during and/or after. The important fact is that certain features related to the X-ray beam path on the incident and the scattered intervals can manifest to the final Bragg spot in terms of fringes of weak intensity. For example, we can introduce strong contrast between different materials, shape of the sample, grain boundaries of material with strong scattering power and etc. Since the fringes signal is weak, they do not interfere with our analysis of the Bragg spot which we perform within the framework of conventional diffraction. In the case of the current study, we see a nice correspondence of the Ne grain boundaries (visible light) with additional lines appearing on the Bragg spot (Fig. Before we present the results, we would like to have a brief introduction of the methodology of the data collection. By scanning the Bragg spot by means of the 2D detector and the φ motorized rotation stage (see also Fig. Data on d-spacing and width of the peak in the detector plane perpendicular to the diffraction cone (along 2θ), represents data on the current average stress conditions and strain. Data on the χ angle should produce information on the mosaicity of the crystal, if it would be evolving under pressure, but it should not be considered limited to it. The size of the particular Bragg spot in the reciprocal and the direct space is affected by many parameters, including the instrument. In our case it is a natural choice to use the width of the Bragg spot in units of χ and φ angle rotation to detect a trend of Bragg spot broadening due to an additional scattering which could be attributed to the presence of spin state disorder in the material caused by the crossover. As would be clear from the results, a single d-spacing or 2θ projection is not fully suitable for this purpose. We collected X-ray diffraction data at several pressure points, covering the pressure region before, during and after the spin state crossover. The resulting pressure-volume (P-V) relation is plotted at Fig. In the insert of Fig. Going back to Fig. In Fig. Having confirmed the region of the spin state crossover, we present the data describing (MgFe)O (111)hkl Bragg peak shape using three cross-sections, namely, using profiles collected in 2θ, χ projections and a profile collected during φ rotation as was introduced previously. Before we continue our analysis, for a complete description of the data shown in Fig. The reason for emphasizing this specific point comes from its vicinity to HS-LS crossover onset In Fig. Observations made for our particular sample may be applicable for any other sample compressed using diamond anvil cells. Considering the width of the measured profiles in d-spacing units (Fig. Our observations indicate that ambient temperature dynamic compression experiments, which become more and more popular (i.e. Ref. If we consider the projection along χ direction, the broadening of the Bragg peak (Fig. It is inherently difficult to present and describe evolution of the 3D Bragg peak as a function of pressure, especially in the situation when the Bragg peak shows additional interference effects (Fig. In the Fig. We analyze different projections and their widths in the following section, where we compare all our observations and discuss effects potentially responsible for the observed broadening of a Bragg spot. But, before doing that, we would like to provide additional practical information and we present data in Appendix C illustrating stability of the signal during the data collection. As can be seen from the figures shown in Appendix C, our signal is only weakly dependent on the top-up mode on the synchrotron. We investigated temporal stability of the Bragg spot central slice. We note, that the integral intensity of a Bragg spot is constant as well as the corresponding pattern recorded by the detector. The width of the Bragg spot does not change over the time of 80 seconds of data collection. This test indicates that the timescales of stress-strain relaxation effects described above are significantly longer than the 80 seconds of the test conducted. Analysis of unit cell volume of (Mg,Fe)O as function of pressure (Fig. While effects of spin state crossover on FM1/3 d-space (2θ projection) could be potentially influenced by the effects of 'stress-strain' relaxation described above, variation of FW1/3 χ (χ projection) and FW15% φ (φ projection) as a function of pressure indicate an obvious response to the crossover. The spin state crossover started at 51 GPa. Our observations are supported by the increase of FW1/3χ , especially pronounced after 9 hours relaxation at 51 GPa, and significant increase of FW15% φ at the same pressure. At pressure of 72GPa, at the end of the spin state crossover stability field, the value of FW1/3χ decreased to the values preceding the crossover. Please also note that the values of FW15%φ saturate at pressure which should correspond to the middle of the spin crossover region. The observed behavior of FW1/3χ can be attributed to additional scattering arising from the appearance of the disorder and competition of HS/LS states. The observation that the maximum of FW1/3χ corresponds to the middle of the crossover stability field supports our argument. This pressure region corresponds to the case of 1:1 abundance of HS and LS domains. If the changes of FW1/3χ would be related with any enhancement of mosaicity in χ direction, the FW1/3χ value would not decrease at higher pressures and exhibit the behavior close to that observed for FW15% φ. In turn, the changes of FW15% φ could be attributed to the defect-structure modification of the material. Within the restriction of fixed sample composition, we may consider formation of stacking faults and/or increased mosaicity of the sample in a specific direction. The scattering geometry (Fig. and the data shown in Fig. First of all, to our knowledge it is the first observation of correlation between microstructure changes in the material and the spin state crossover observed at high pressures on a single crystal. Considering different type of defects, we can exclude formation of uniformly distributed vacancies, in the latter case we would not see specific directional behaviorthe broadening of the Bragg peak would appear in all directions, and mostly at the baseline of the Bragg peak. It should also be weak Taking other effects into account, the formation of stacking faults is one of the most probable explanations for the observed behavior. Stacking faults are considered to be manifestation of one dimensional disorder. (MgFe)O is material with fcc lattice, and thus, may have stacking faults of deformation or twin type Another explanation for the observed effect would be a formation of sub-grain boundaries leading to a minor rotation of (111)hkl planes along the φ axis (see scattering diagrams featured at Fig. Formation of the stacking faults as planar defects could be correlated with information on the slip planes typical for cubic systems. The main slip systems for our material are {110}(1 10), {100}(011), and {111}(1 10). Although, the slip systems of {100}(011) and {111}(1 10) were shown to be less probable than {110}(1 10), as follows from a study employing strongly non hydrostatic conditions In order to avoid any confusion, we would like to clarify, that the observed broadening attributed to stacking faults would be observed differently for powder and single crystalline material. In powders, the response is averaged over an ensemble of many grains and numerous orientations, while in a case of a single crystal the effect should be directional. Due to the specific limitations of our experiment we could access only one Bragg peak and could not retrieve additional information. Finally, one should not consider the picture of defects, or stacking faults formation as the only mechanism accommodating the contact strains of HS-LS during the crossover. Still, to our knowledge this is the first experimental observation of such process. We can mention other examples related to the HS-LS contact stain accommodation which have not yet been given attention from the high pressure community. They include HS-LS boundary modification of Fe 2+ local crystal structure changing local crystal field configuration, and thus, electron distribution across different d-electron orbitals. Such effects are very difficult to resolve experimentally in conventional high pressure X-ray diffraction and also present a certain challenge to theoretical studies. All in all, at this point we can conclude that data collected in the χ projection of (111)hkl Bragg peak demonstrates additional finite scattering correlated with the disorder caused by presence of HS and LS. We also report formation of static structural defects which accumulate as material is transformed domain by domain from HS to LS. We consider that the discussion would not be complete if we do not address temporal evolution of our signal for the individual slices of the Bragg peak. In the Introduction we mentioned the consideration, that in a situation of spin state crossover and strongly suppressed kinetics, the system may still `breath` by switching HS to LSthe process of small to little energy fluctuation (e.g. temperature). This process could be potentially investigated if we inspect and compare evolution of diffraction spot speckles collected before, during and after the spin state crossover as a function of time. Data presented in Appendix C allows us to conclude that within 80 seconds of data collection with a frame exposure time of 0.05 second, we do not resolve any additional features which could be attributed to the HS LS domain fluctuations. If we will slice the Bragg spot at the center and cross correlate variations of different regions of interest with finite intensity, then all the anomalies detected in the temporally resolved signal will be unambiguously attributed to the fluctuations related to t.he operation of the synchrotron source. This observations indicates that the process of domain 'breathing' is either much faster than the exposure of the frames, and here we limited by the photon flux, or, which is equally probable, the process is much slower and could be resolved in future studies. By using (MgFe)O as an example of a material with strongly correlated properties and with the distinct, relatively broad spin state crossover of ferrous iron we characterize the latter phenomenon employing high resolution X-ray diffraction under high pressure conditions. We select the composition with moderate iron content xFe=0.19 Bragg spot as we approach and pass through the pressure range of coexisting HS/LS states. We find and describe the effects of stress-strain relaxation as well as subtle changes of Bragg spot shape and size, some of those we attribute to the formation of static microstructure defects accumulating during the spin state crossover in a single crystal material. We suggest that the formation of microstructural defects is one of intrinsic processes of contact strain relaxation upon transformation of HS domains to LS. Finally, even for a composition of xFe=0.19(1), we detect an evidence which we describe as the additional contribution to the diffraction signal caused by the presence of disorder in form of HS-LS domains. Indeed, this contribution, manifested through an additional Bragg peak broadening reaches maximum at pressures corresponding to the middle of the crossover, and thus, it corresponds to the equal abundance of the HS and LS. GPa. This point was measured twice with 9 hours between the measurements. After hours of relaxation, the width of the peak in 2θ has become narrower. Our observation indicates a complex stress-strain relaxation process. The 2θ position of the peak did not changed significantly while the corresponding projection on χ increased after relaxation period. (Right) The projection of integrated Bragg peak on χ. The width of the peak in χ projection has increased upon entering the stability region of the spin state crossover, but then it decreases as we compress further and complete the transition at 72GPa. In addition, we would like to mention importance of the synchrotron source stability on the measurements. This is indicated in the Fig. 