Magnetic particle imaging (MPI) is a non-invasive, non-ionizing imaging technique for the visualization and quantification of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). The technique is especially suitable for cell imaging as it offers zero background contribution from the surrounding tissue, high sensitivity, and good spatial and temporal resolutions. Previous studies have demonstrated that the dynamic magnetic behaviour of MNPs changes during cellular binding and internalization. In this study, we demonstrate how this information is encoded in the MPI imaging signal. Through MPI imaging we are able to discriminate between free and cell-bound MNPs in reconstructed images. This technique was used to image and quantify the changes that occur in-vitro when free MNPs come into contact with cells and undergo cellularuptake over time. The quantitative MPI results were verified by a phenanthroline assay. The results showed a mean relative difference of 23.8% for the quantification of cell-bound MNPs. The insights gained from such observations provide a new window into fundamental biological processes and associated pathological changes occurring at a cellular level. This technique could therefore offer new opportunities for the early diagnosis of inflammatory diseases. Magnetic particle imaging (MPI) is a non-invasive technique capable of determining the spatial distribution of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) both in-vivo and in-vitro The magnetic response generated by MNPs is severely influenced by their local environment. In this respect, the changing magnetic properties of MNPs induced by their interaction with cells are a relevant factor for MPI. Previous studies using magnetic particle spectroscopy (MPS), have described and quantified the changes that occur in the dynamic magnetization of certain MNP systems upon interaction with living cells The aim of this work was to test the potential of imaging the internalization of MNPs into living cells with MPI. It was hypothesized, that based on different magnetic signals, the particle distributions of free vs cell-bound MNPs can be separated using MPI image reconstruction. Furthermore, due to the high temporal resolution of MPI, the processes involved in the cellular uptake of MNPs were imaged and quantified. All MPI measurements were performed on a commercial, preclinical MPI scanner (Bruker MPI 25/50 FF) based on the field-free point (FFP) approach. The FFP is generated by a static magnetic gradient field with gradient strengths 0.6/0.6/1.2 T/m (x/y/zdirection). By superimposing oscillating magnetic drive fields with field amplitudes of 12/12/12 mT and frequencies 24.5/26.0/25.3 kHz the FFP is moved on a Lissajous trajectory through the field of view (FOV) of size 40/40/20 mm. Based on these magnetic field settings and the nonlinear dynamic magnetic properties of MNPs, higher harmonics of the excitation frequencies are generated and measured by a gradiometric receive coil The SF (S) contains information on how the environmental conditions and spatial position affect the measured MPI signal u. The SFs used in this study were acquired experimentally by measuring small reference samples of MNPs with fixed environmental conditions at multiple positions all over the scanner's FOV. For this approach to be accurate, it is necessary that all environmental conditions influencing the MPI signal during a measurement are the same as the conditions during the SF acquisition. If the environmental conditions of the MNPs change, it must be considered in the image reconstruction process. This can be achieved by acquiring multiple SFs (S 1 and S 2 ) of MNPs at different environmental conditions. Thus, a combined SF can be used to reconstruct multiple particle distributions (c 1 and c 2 ) of MNPs at given environmental conditions by adapting the least squares problem: Assuming that changes in the dynamic magnetization induced by interactions of cells and MNPs can be described with a simple two-state system, two SFs were acquired under same field settings with a fluid (8 μL Synomag, iron oxide MNP, product nr. 103-02-301, LOT: 05218103-03 iron concentration c(Fe)=2.75 mg/ml, micromod Nanopartikeltechnologie GmbH Rostock) diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)) and cell sample (2 ⋅ 10 6 THP-1 cells incubated with Synomag), respectively. This enables the reconstruction of two particle distributions representing the free and cell-bound MNP distributions. The choice of reconstruction parameters heavily influences the quantitative and qualitative MPI images. Therefore, we varied the reconstruction parameters over a certain range, taking a priori knowledge of the particle distributions into account to determine an optimal parameter set. A detailed description of this procedure, and a list of all measurement and reconstruction parameters used in this study can be found in the supplement. THP-1 cells (human acute monocytic leukemia cell line) obtained from the ATCC (Wesel, Germany) were cultured in suspension in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with a 5% CO2 concentration in RPMI medium 1640 (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Culture medium was supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen), and 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen). Exact cell numbers were determined with a hemocytometer. The cell sample for system function acquisition was prepared as follows: 2•10 6 THP-1 cells suspended in 2 mL of RPMI containing 1% FCS were treated for 3 hours with 0.5 mM Synomag. After incubation cells were centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g and pellets were washed three times with 1 mL PBS to remove all unbound MNPs. After washing, resuspended cells were filled into a cubic 2 mm3 container (Bruker Biospin, Germany). Centrifugation for 3 min at 200 g led to the sedimentation of the cells in the lower chamber of the container. After SF acquisition the iron content of the pellet was quantified using the 1,10-phenanthroline-based iron assay as previously described For the colorimetric quantification of Synomag uptake similar conditions as for the quantification with MPI were used. As described in the experimental setup: The indicated numbers of THP-1 cells were suspended in 100 μL PBS, and added in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube to 40 μL of Synomag diluted in PBS with an iron concentration of 2.75 mg/mL. After incubation cells were centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g. Supernatants were collected and evaporated to dryness using a Speedvac (Savant Instruments, NY, USA). Pellets were washed twice with 1 mL PBS and centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g. Iron content in the sediment of the supernatants and of the pellets was quantified using the 1,10-phenanthroline-based iron assay. The quantified iron amounts of free and cell-bound MNPs were extracted from the reconstructions and are displayed over time in Figure The relative deviation of the total iron amount (Δm Fe ) is displayed over time in Figure The central finding of this study is, that the distribution of free and cell-bound Synomag can be separated by our extended MPI image reconstruction based on different magnetic signals. This was achieved by incorporating the different magnetic signals generated by Synomag diluted in water and after cellular internalization into the MPI image reconstruction. This allowed for both the visualization and quantification of the cellular uptake of Synomag by THP-1 cells with a high temporal resolution of 2.15 s. A decrease in the amount of reconstructed free MNPs and an increase in the amount of cell-bound MNPs over time supports the assumption that MNPs were accumulating in the cells. A similar pattern was observed when MPI results were qualitative compared with the results acquired with the reference experiment (phenanthroline-based iron assay). Both show a consistent decrease of free and increase of cell-bound MNPs until saturation is reached after about 10-15 minutes. This rapid cellular uptake of electrostatically stabilized MNPs is in accordance with previous studies using different particle systems The deviation of the total iron amount determined by MPI increased over time and correlated with the number of injected cells. These deviations can only partly be attributed to technical issues, such as heating of hardware components and thermal drifts of the background signal, which caused small deviations below 5% in the control experiment (as determined from injection of PBS without cells). The impact of thermal drifts could be minimized by an advanced background signal removal technique We assume the main reason for the deviation was caused by MNPs whose magnetic properties deviate from the states "free MNP" and "cell-bound MNPs", which we used in this proof-of-principle study. The detection of signals generated by additional states leads to quantification errors and also explains the imaging artifacts occurring at the edges of the FOV after 10 minutes in some of the reconstructed images A different approach to include multiple states in the MPI image reconstruction would be to take the reconstructed signals gained from a two-state system as presented here. The respective MPI signals could then be correlated with a priori knowledge of the measured sample to generate a calibration curve of the cellular uptake process. A similar approach was presented for viscosity quantification using multi-contrast MPI It was shown, that MPI can not only be used to image and quantify the spatial distribution of MNPs, but also to extract functional information about the environmental conditions such as the binding state based on the simple assumption of a two-state model. Overall imaging the cellular uptake process was possible for cell numbers down to 2.5•10 5 with a temporal resolution of 2.15 s. This technique can be adapted for other cell types and MNP systems. This would permit for nanoscale imaging of MNP cellular internalization without damaging or destroying the cells. Further improvements can be achieved by adapting the reconstruction process and by extending the two-state model as discussed above. This study demonstrates the potential of MPI to separate the signals of free and cell-bound MNPs, within a mixed sample. This technique can be used to image and quantify the uptake of MNPs into cells starting directly from initial MNP-cell contact thereby providing information about the dynamics of cellular uptake. It is assumed that the uptake dynamics of MNPs in vivo correlates with pathological changes of diseased tissue, in particular with the permeability of the vasculature and the infiltration of immune cells. Therefore, further development of this technique is anticipated to result in highly interesting opportunities for future diagnostic applications.