Along a single strand of micro-capillary optical waveguide, we achieved an efficient transfer of the light momentum onto the liquid contained there within, successfully atomizing it into nanoscale droplets. A hollow optical fiber (HOF), with a ring core and central air hole, was used to optically drive jetting of non-conducting transparent liquid of sub-pico liter volume, out of a surface-treated facet orifice, producing droplets ranging from nano to micrometer scale. These droplets were carried over the propagating light field forming a spherical cone, which were then deposited on a silica substrate in a Gaussian spatial distribution. The deposited patterns and sizes of individual droplets were characterized as a function of the laser power, irradiation time, and distance between the HOF and a substrate. This HOF based laser driven atomization technique obviates imperative electrode or aerial pressure requirements in prior methods, opening a new pathway to drastically scale down the form-factor of liquid jetting devices, and has a high potential to in-situ atomization and delivery of bio-medical nonconducting liquids in a microscopic environment, which was not possible in prior arts. Conventional microscopic jetting technology systematically generates liquid droplets or particles of micrometer size to propel them on various substrates and is being further developed for various emerging printing applications In this paper, we present an all-laser-driven liquid jetting technology that can eject "nonconducting" liquids (including hydrophobic and lipophilic) droplets through a single strand of hollow optical fiber (HOF) without external electric field or gas flow, for the first time to the best knowledge of the authors. This technique uses only irradiation of a continuous wave (CW) mid-infrared (IR) laser with a moderate power through a HOF filled with the liquid of interest to generate atomized liquid droplets then carry them over the light field propagating toward a solid substrate. Inherent flexibility of optical fiber provides versatile and accurate deployment of the proposed system, which enables in-situ jetting of sub-pico liter volume liquid in a microscopic environment, which was not possible in prior arts. The schematic diagram of the proposed method is summarized in Fig. The HOF was designed to guide the laser at the wavelength of 980nm in the ring core, which has the refractive index of ncore=1.457. HOF had the central air hole diameter of 3.1μm, surrounded by the ring core with the thickness of 2.6μm and cladding diameter of 125μm, which ensures adiabatic mode transformation between conventional single mode fibers (SMFs) as in other fiber optics applications In order to facilitate this light assisted momentum transfer, the liquid should have a high optical transparency and high dielectric constant at the laser wavelength. Firstly, we used glycerol as a non-conducting liquid, for its low absorption at the laser wavelength λ=980 nm In this experiment, we found that successful jetting of glycerol from HOF required additional preparation such that the end facet of the HOF and its inside surface should be covered with a rough surface layer. It is well-known that the solid-liquid interaction at their interface can be significantly affected by introducing additional rough nano-scale layer . Here n is the refractive index of the medium light is propagating, ncore and nclad are the refractive indices of the core and cladding of the optical fiber, respectively. The light propagates within this spherical cone with the maximum angle of θ, and the laser beam diameter increases linearly with the axial distance, which explains the linear behavior in Fig. As is well known, the radiant exposure of the laser, where e E is irradiance, the flux of radiant energy per unit area, and T is the irradiation time, linearly increases with the irradiation time for CW laser We also observed that this jetting process requires a certain level of laser power. Note that the glycerol itself has a very little absorption We now focus on individual droplet size within the Gaussian-like distributed area. To measure the size of each individual droplet, we mixed gold nanoparticles in glycerol to make a colloidal suspension. Here, the gold nanoparticles we used are gold nanorods (GNRs) and it was prepared by previous methods In summary, we experimentally demonstrated laser-driven jetting of non-conducting transparent liquid (glycerol and olive oil) out of surface-treated hollow optical fiber (HOF), producing liquid droplets ranging from 76nm to 11μm. These droplets were carried by the propagating light field forming a spherical cone, which were then deposited on a silica substrate in a Gaussian distribution. We found that successful jetting required additional preparation such that the end facet of the HOF and its inside surface should be covered with a rough surface layer, which was achieved by depositing nano-diamond on the surfaces. The liquid volume used for the laser-driven jetting was in the range of ~2.6 pico-liter, which was fed to HOF by the capillary force. The deposited area diameter has shown a linear dependence on the process parameters such as the laser irradiation time and the vertical distance between HOF and the substrate. The droplet deposited area diameter was flexibly controlled with minimum droplet distribution of 15μm, which makes this unique all-optical fiber-based jetting technology versatile and flexible. Moreover, this system can precisely generate the femto-scale atomized liquid droplets. This technique can obviate imperative requirement of electrodes as in prior electric hydrodynamic printing and can be readily implemented in-situ microscopic environment.