Galbrun's equation, which is a second order partial differential equation describing the evolution of a so-called Lagrangian displacement vector field, can be used to study acoustics in background flows as well as perturbations of astrophysical flows. Our starting point for deriving Galbrun's equation is linearized Euler's equations, which is a first order system of partial differential equations that describe the evolution of the so-called Eulerian flow perturbations. Given a solution to linearized Euler's equations, we introduce the Lagrangian displacement as the solution to a linear first order partial differential equation, driven by the Eulerian perturbation of the fluid velocity. Our Lagrangian displacement solves Galbrun's equation, provided it is regular enough and that the so-called "no resonance" assumption holds. In the case that the background flow is steady and tangential to the domain boundary, we prove existence, uniqueness, and continuous dependence on data of solutions to an initial-boundary value problem for linearized Euler's equations. For such background flows, we demonstrate that the Lagrangian displacement is well-defined, that the initial datum of the Lagrangian displacement can be chosen in order to fulfill the "no resonance" assumption, and derive a classical energy estimate for (sufficiently regular solutions to) Galbrun's equation. Due to the presence of zeroth order terms of indefinite signs in the equations, the energy estimate allows solutions that grow exponentially with time. The linearized Euler's equations constitute a standard model for propagation of sound in a background flow. What appears to be less known is that the linearized Euler's equations can be reduced to a vector "wave" equation in the Lagrangian displacement, that is, the displacement of individual fluid particles. (The precise definition of the Lagrangian displacement will be given later.) The resulting equation is often referred to as Galbrun's equation in the literature, in honor of Henri Galbrun who first derived the equation in 1931 The linearized Euler's equations are derived from Euler's equations by using an Eulerian linearization ansatz where the vector field w denotes the Lagrangian displacement; u 0 , p 0 , ρ 0 , and c 0 the fluid velocity, pressure, density, and speed of sound fields of the background flow, respectively; φ 0 the volume force density acting on the background fluid; δφ a volume force density; and D 0 = ∂ t + u 0 • ∇ the material derivative with respect to u 0 . Apart from reducing the number of unknowns and equations to be solved, it is pointed out in the literature that Galbrun's equation allows natural handling of boundary conditions, since the primary unknown is the Lagrangian displacement Naive finite element discretizations of the time harmonic counterpart of Galbrun's equation In a sequence of papers that consider increasingly complicated background flows, a regularized formulation of Galbrun's equation has been proposed to resolve the numerical issues for subsonic background flows where D0 = iω + u 0 • ∇, w(x, t) = ŵ(x) exp iωt, and δφ(x, t) = δ φ(x) exp iωt. The regularized formulation of equation ( which is obtained by applying the curl operator to the time harmonic Galbrun's equation where δ L p(x, t) = δ L p(x) exp iωt denotes the Lagrangian pressure perturbation (a precise definition of Lagrangian perturbations are given in the next section). To the best of our knowledge, wellposedness of formulation (4) has not been established. The case of general time dependence appears to have received less attention in the literature than its harmonic counterpart. For homogeneous background flows, a regularized formulation, analogous to that used in the time-harmonic case, is known to be well-posed in two spatial dimensions In this section, we derive Galbrun's equation from Euler's equations via the linearized Euler's equations. We consider an inviscid fluid that either undergoes homentropic flow (the entropy is constant in time and space) or is elastic (the equation of state is independent of the entropy). The time evolution of the flow is assumed to be governed by Euler's equations ρDu + ∇p = ρφ, (5a) where u, p, ρ, and φ denote the fluid velocity, pressure, density, and volume force density fields, respectively, and D = ∂ t + u • ∇ the material derivative. Equations (5a) and (5b) express conservation of momentum and mass, respectively, while relation (5c) is called the (homentropic) equation of state, which upon differentiation gives the speed of sound c = Σ (ρ). With the intention to study the evolution of small perturbations of the flow, we introduce the linearization ansatz φ(x, t) = φ 0 (x, t) + δφ(x, t), where φ(x, t) denotes a generic flow field, φ 0 (x, t) is given, and δφ(x, t) denotes the so-called Eulerian perturbation. As before, the given fields u 0 , p 0 , ρ 0 , and φ 0 are termed the background flow, and we require that they themselves satisfy Euler's equations, that is, Substituting the linearization ansatz (6) into Euler's equations which describe the evolution of Eulerian perturbations. Informally, the Lagrangian displacement w is the displacement of individual fluid particles, as illustrated in Figure We will, however, derive Galbrun's equation directly from linearized Euler's equations where L u0 w = (u 0 • ∇)w -(w • ∇)u 0 denotes the Lie derivative of w along u 0 . As will be discussed in the sequel, suitable initial and boundary conditions need to be supplied to equation which we now demonstrate. By product rule (95), we obtain from definition Applying the divergence to relation The last term in expression We will now use identity where we in the last step have used mass conservation (7b). Thus, by identity ( Remark. Note that since δρ + ∇ • (ρ 0 w) = δρ + (w • ∇)ρ 0 + ρ 0 ∇ • w and by definition (9), we obtain from expression (15) that which is the Lagrangian linearization of (5b). (Compare with equation (58) in Gabard and eliminating δu, δρ, and δp from equation (8a), using relations (8c), Formulation (18) of Galbrun's equation has a different form compared to the standard formulation naturally obtained via Lagrangian linearization (1), Nevertheless, a lengthy direct calculation yields that formulations Before continuing the investigations into the well-posedness of Galbrun's equation, we briefly recall an abstract framework for time dependent Friedrichs' systems that will be extensively used to assess well-posedness of various initial-boundary value problems that are closely related to Galbrun's equation. The time dependent framework that we rely on was recently presented by Burazin and Erceg We use the notation from the article by Ern et al. By W 0 , we denote the completion of D in the inner product (•, As detailed by Antonić and Burazin Let V and Ṽ be subspaces of W that satisfy the conditions where , and D( Ṽ ) 0 denotes the annihilator of D( Ṽ ). The abstract Cauchy problem related to the operator T is given by where ξ : [0, τ ) → L for some τ ∈ (0, ∞), f : (0, τ ) → L and ξ I ∈ L. We define λ 0 by where the last inequality follows from assumption (T2). Then, the operator where λ 0 is given by expression Finally, we note that formula which shows that the solution depends continuously on data. Analogously, (•, •) ∂Ω denotes the standard L 2 (∂Ω) k inner product, that is, Let A, B be normed spaces with norms In this section, we present a scheme to generate solutions to Galbrun's equation ( • existence of solutions to linearized Euler's equations ( • existence of solutions to equation • conditions that guarantee fulfillment of the "no resonance" assumption. If we introduce the quantity the "no resonance" assumption takes the form Anticipating that the initial value problem (or depending on the situation, the initial-boundary value problem) that corresponds to the equation to the left of the implication ( Assume that Ω ⊂ R d is open, bounded, connected, and lies locally on one side of its Lipschitz boundary ∂Ω. By n we denote the outward unit normal field on ∂Ω. We partition the boundary into three disjoint parts depending on the sign of n • u 0 Unless otherwise stated, we assume that the background flow is steady and that the background flow quantities are Lipschitz continuous in Ω. Thus the background flow quantities are bounded in Ω and have bounded first order spatial derivatives almost everywhere in Ω. Moreover, we assume that the density and the speed of sound are bounded away from zero, that is, The initial-boundary value problem related to the "no resonance" assumption reads in Ω for all t ∈ (0, τ ), (30a) where 0 < τ < ∞. Theorem 2. Assume that the background flow is steady. If h I ∈ L 2 (Ω) and h -= 0, then the initial-boundary value problem (30) is well-posed. Proof. With notation as in Section 3, we let L = L 2 ρ0 (Ω) with inner product (•, •) L = (ρ 0 •, •). By assumption, 0 < inf Ω ρ 0 ≤ supΩ ρ 0 < ∞, which implies that L is topologically equivalent to L 2 (Ω). Therefore, in this case, we let C ∞ 0 (Ω) serve as the dense set D ⊂ L described in Section 3. In equation (30a), we find T = u 0 • ∇. By mass conservation (7b) it holds that ∇ • (ρ 0 u 0 ) = 0, which implies that the formal adjoint of T in L is T = -u 0 • ∇ = -T . Thus, T and T satisfy conditions (T1) and (T2), and definition (21) yields λ 0 = 0, since T + T ≡ 0. Due to the assumption that dist(Γ -, Γ + ) > 0, there is a continuous trace operator γ : Remark. Note that a similar estimate to estimate Integrating inequality In either case, Theorem 2 or estimate (32) show that if h I = h -= 0, then the "no resonance" assumption Equation (33) requires that the initial datum w I of the Lagrangian displacement satisfies ∇•(ρ 0 w I ) = -δρ I in Ω, which can be achieved by defining w I = ρ -1 0 ∇v I , where v I ∈ H 1 0 (Ω) is the solution to -∆v I = δρ I in Ω. Thus, using w| t=0 = w I as the initial condition for the Lagrangian displacement, we obtain that h| t=0 = 0. For the case when the background flow is everywhere tangential to ∂Ω-∂Ω = Γ 0 and Γ -= Γ + = ∅-no boundary condition is needed, and the "no resonance" assumption holds if and only if h| t=0 = 0, which can be achieved by adjusting the initial datum of w as demonstrated above. We note that, in this particular case, the "no resonance" assumption imposes no restriction on the initial datum δρ I ∈ L 2 (Ω) of δρ. However, when the background flow is not everywhere tangential to ∂Ω, imposing homogeneous data for h at the boundary part Γ - appears unfortunately to be difficult. Indeed, we would like to impose Contrary to condition (33) that directly translates into a condition on the initial datum of w, it is not possible to convert expression (34) into a condition on the boundary datum of w on Γ -. In this section we prove well-posedness of an initial-boundary value problem for linearized Euler's equations for steady background flows on a bounded domain by employing the framework for abstract Friedrichs' systems that was briefly recalled in Section 3. Following Kreiss and Lorenz Then the linearized Euler's equations ( Similarly as in Section 4.1, we assume that Ω ⊂ R d is open, bounded, connected, and lies locally on one side of its boundary ∂Ω, that the background flow is steady and that the background flow quantities are Lipschitz continuous in Ω, and that the density and the speed of sound are bounded away from zero To form an initial-boundary value problem, we supply to equation (36) the initial and boundary conditions (δu, δρ) = (δu I , δρ I ) in Ω at t = 0, (37) where In principle, nonzero boundary data can also be handled in problem (40). Formally, a problem in ξ with nonzero boundary datum g transforms to a problem in (ξg) with zero boundary datum by the splitting ξ = (ξg) + g, where g is a kind of extension of g to Ω × (0, τ ) that satisfies √ 1 + Y 2 e T g = g on ∂Ω. With notation as in Section 3, we let Let T be defined as in relation (39) and let ρ 0 T = -A + B T . Then conditions (T1) and (T2) in Section 3 are satisfied; that is, T is the formal adjoint of T in L, and T + T = ρ -1 0 (B + B T ) is a bounded operator on L. We define the graph space which is a Hilbert space in the graph norm where the time scale τ 0 > 0 has been included to make the terms dimensionally consistent. Remark. Unless ξ is regular enough, the individual terms in the last two norms might not be well-defined-analogously as the ∂ 1 u 1 term of ∇ • u = ∂ 1 u 1 + ∂ 2 u 2 + ∂ 3 u 3 might not be well-defined for u ∈ H div (Ω). Moreover, since we have assumed that 0 < inf Ω ρ 0 ≤ supΩ ρ 0 < ∞, and since B is a bounded operator on L 2 (Ω) d+1 , • W in expression (41) is equivalent to the "standard" The boundary operator D : W → W is given by and we note that for φ, ψ ∈ C 1 ( Ω) d+1 , it has the representation where since n • u 0 = 0 on ∂Ω. We will now proceed to define a trace operator for functions in W that provides a sound mathematical treatment of boundary condition (40c). Our approach is based on the work of Rauch For ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ω) d+1 , we define a linear operation γ e ξ = e T ξ| ∂Ω . Observe that e T = b T A(n), where A(n) is defined by expression (44) and b is a Lipschitz continuous vector field on ∂Ω (b = (Y n, -1)/(ρ 0 c 0 √ 1 + Y 2 )). For any v ∈ H 1/2 (∂Ω), we obtain by integration-by-parts formula (43) that where γ * 0 : H 1/2 (∂Ω) d+1 → H 1 (Ω) d+1 denotes a (bounded linear) right inverse of the standard trace operator γ 0 : H 1 (Ω) d+1 → H 1/2 (∂Ω) d+1 , and where we have used that vb ∈ H 1/2 (∂Ω) d+1 since b is Lipschitz continuous. From relation (45) we obtain the estimate from which it follows that γ e ξ H -1/2 (∂Ω) ξ W . Since C 1 ( Ω) d+1 is dense in W [29][Proposition 1], the operator γ e extends uniquely to a bounded linear operator W → H -1/2 (∂Ω), which we still denote by γ e . We say that ξ ∈ W satisfies boundary condition (40c) if and only if γ e ξ = 0 and define V = ker γ e ⊂ W . To analyze initial-boundary value problem (40), we also need to consider functions that satisfy the adjoint boundary condition 1 + Y 2 ẽT ξ = 0 on ∂Ω for all t ∈ (0, τ ), )), we may proceed analogously as in the case of e to define the trace operator γ ẽ : W → H -1/2 (∂Ω) and the subspace Ṽ = ker γ ẽ. The following lemma expresses the fundamental geometric relation between boundary conditions (40c) and (47). Proof. From definition (44) it follows that On the one hand, if ξ ∈ N (x), then 0 = 1 + Y (x) 2 e(x) which implies that n(x) • ξ1 = -Y (x) ξ2 . It follows from expression (51) that ξ T A(n(x))ξ = ξ T A(n(x)) ξ = 0 for any pair ξ ∈ N (x) and ξ ∈ Ñ (x). Thus, Ñ (x) ⊂ (A(n(x))N (x)) ⊥ and N (x) ⊂ (A(n(x)) Ñ (x)) ⊥ . We now proceed to demonstrate the reverse inclusions. To that end, let us first assume that ξ ∈ R d+1 is such that ξT A(n(x))ξ = 0 for any ξ ∈ N (x). Using that n(x) • ξ 1 = Y (x)ξ 2 in expression (51), we find that from which it follows that ẽ(x) T ξ = 0, that is, ξ ∈ Ñ (x). We have thus demonstrated that (A(n(x))N (x)) ⊥ ⊂ Ñ (x) and note that the missing inclusion (A(n(x)) Ñ (x)) ⊥ ⊂ N (x) can be demonstrated analogously. Finally, definition (44) implies that ker A(n(x)) = {ξ ∈ R d+1 | n(x)•ξ 1 = 0 and ξ 2 = 0}, and thus inclusion (50) holds. Remark. Note the symmetry in the relationship between N (x) and Ñ (x). The following theorem, which is due to Rauch Theorem 3. If the boundary is a characteristic surface of constant multiplicity, that is, the dimension of kerA(n) does not vary along the boundary, then Remark. Note that for A(n) defined in expression (44), dim kerA(n) = d -1, which implies that Theorem 3 is indeed applicable. Moreover, note that functions in C 1 ( Ω) d+1 ∩ V satisfy boundary condition (40c) pointwise, while functions in C 1 ( Ω) d+1 ∩ Ṽ satisfy adjoint boundary condition (47) pointwise. Using Theorem 3, we now demonstrate that boundary operator ( where we in the last step have employed boundary condition (40c). Recalling that Y ≥ 0 on ∂Ω, we conclude by density that Dξ, ξ W ≥ 0 for all ξ ∈ V. (V1a) Analogously, for ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ω) d+1 ∩ Ṽ , integration-by-parts formula (43) with φ = ψ = ξ yields where we in the last step have employed the adjoint boundary condition (47). Recalling that Y ≥ 0 on ∂Ω, we conclude by density that Conditions (V1a) and (V1b) together form condition (V1) in Section 3. The following theorem establishes that the spaces V and Ṽ are "orthogonal" with respect to boundary operator (42). Proof. By Theorem 3 and its symmetric analogue, it is sufficient to establish the claim for ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ω) d+1 ∩ V and ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ωd+1 ) ∩ Ṽ . Therefore, for ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ω) d+1 ∩ V and ξ ∈ C 1 ( Ωd+1 ) ∩ Ṽ , integration-by-parts formula (43) with φ = ξ and ψ = ξ yields where we in the last step employed Lemma 1. an immediate consequence is the following property. Theorem 5. Assume that ξ ∈ W . If D ξ, ξ W = 0 for all ξ ∈ Ṽ , then ξ ∈ V . Recall from Section 3 the definition of annihilator Exploiting, once more, the symmetry in the relations of Lemma 1, we conclude by Theorem 4 and the analogue of Theorem 5 that Conditions (V2a) and (V2b) combine to condition (V2) in Section 3. We have thus demonstrated that conditions (T1), (T2), (V1), and (V2) are satisfied. Thus, Theorem 1 yields the following well-posedness result. Here, we make the same assumptions on the domain Ω and on the background flow as in the previous section; in particular, we restrict the attention to the case n • u 0 = 0 on ∂Ω. Employing the abstract framework for Friedrichs' systems, briefly recalled in Section 3, we demonstrate that if we supply an initial condition, the Lagrangian displacement is unambiguously defined by equation where 0 < τ < ∞. Analogously to the previous section, let In equation (57a) we find the operator T = u 0 • ∇ -∇u 0 and note its formal adjoint in L, T = -u 0 • ∇ -(∇u 0 ) T . Then conditions (T1) and (T2) in Section 3 are satisfied. In this case the graph space is W = {ξ ∈ L | (u 0 • ∇)ξ ∈ L}. Since n • u 0 = 0 on ∂Ω, no boundary condition is needed and we define , we obtain that the boundary operator D ≡ 0. Thus conditions (V1) and (V2) in Section 3 are satisfied. From Theorem 6, we obtain that f := δu ∈ C([0, τ ]; L) ⊂ L 1 ((0, τ ); L). Therefore, Theorem 1 yields the following well-posedness result regarding initial value problem (57). Theorem 7. Assume that n • u 0 = 0 on the boundary. For any initial datum w I ∈ L, the Lagrangian displacement, defined as the solution to initial value problem (57), is well-defined in the sense of Theorem 1. Recall from Section 4.1 that, since the background flow is assumed to be everywhere tangential to the boundary, we may always choose the initial datum w I in inital condition (57b) so that the "no resonance" assumption is satisfied. Remark. Note that for background flows that cross the domain boundary, we need to supply both an initial condition and a boundary condition on Γ -in order for the Lagrangian displacement to be well-defined by equation In this section, we derive an a priori energy estimate for Galbrun's equation which is formed by appending equation where Our first result towards an energy estimate for Galbrun's equation is to show that relation (59) also holds for Galbrun's equation. However, in that case the "no resonance" assumption holds and δρ = c 0 ρ -1 0 δρ = -c 0 ρ -1 0 ∇ • (ρ 0 w) (recall relation Proof. We start by writing Galbrun's equation Multiplying equation (61a) with δu T from the left and integrating over Ω, we obtain (δu, ρ 0 δφ) = (δu, ρ 0 D 0 δu) + (δu, ∇(ρ 0 c 0 δρ)) + (δu, ρ 0 (δu • ∇)u 0 ) -(δu, c 0 ∇ρ 0 δρ), where we have rewritten the last term using that ∇p 0 = c 2 0 ∇ρ 0 , which follows from the equation of state (7c). Applying integration-by-parts formula (98) to the first term in equation (62), we find that (δu, Integration by parts of the second term of equation ( From identity which substituted into expression (64) gives where we have employed integration-by-parts formula (98) to arrive at the final expression. Substituting expressions (63) and (66) into expression (62), we find that Multiplying equation (61b) by ρ 0 w T from the left and integrating over Ω, we obtain that Integration-by-parts formula (98) applied to the first term in equation ( where the factor τ -2 0 has been introduced to match the dimensions of expressions ( We will once more restrict our attention to the case where the background flow is everywhere tangential to ∂Ω, that is, the case when the "no resonance" assumption can be enforced by adjusting the initial datum of the Lagrangian displacement. To derive an energy estimate for Galbrun's equation where, as in Section 4.2, Y : ∂Ω → [0, ∞) is a Lipschitz continuous (dimensionless) admittance function with the additional requirement that Y ≥ a > 0, and 0 < τ < ∞. We assume that 0 < ρ 0 := inf sup sup Theorem 8. Assume that w is a sufficiently regular solution to initial boundary value problem (70) for sufficiently regular data and a sufficiently regular background flow that is everywhere tangential to the boundary. For any finite time τ > 0, there exists C, ν > 0 that are independent of w such that for any 0 Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 2, we introduce δu and δρ by expressions (61b) and (61c). Moreover, we introduce the corresponding expressions at time t = 0 Then estimate (75) takes the form For convenience and consistent with definition (60), we introduce ξ = (δu, δρ, τ -1 0 w) and ξ I = (δu I , δρ I , τ -1 0 w I ). By the bounds (73) and (74), we obtain from relation (59) that 1 2 where • 2 ρ0 = (ρ 0 •, •). We now derive an estimate for the boundary term in expression (78). Observe that by expressions (61b) and (61c), boundary condition (70c) can be reexpressed in δu and δρ, Recalling that n • u 0 = 0 on ∂Ω, we obtain by boundary condition (79) and definition (60) that where we in the last step have used that Y ≥ a > 0 on ∂Ω. Combining estimates (78), and (80), we obtain where we in the last step have used the bounds (71) and (72). Multiplying estimate (81) by the integrating factor exp(-νt), integrating over the time interval (0, t) ⊂ [0, τ ], and using that ξ(0) = ξ I , we obtain Note that the bounds (71) imply that ρ 0 • ≤ • ρ0(t) ≤ ρ 0 • for all t ∈ [0, τ ]. Thus, using exp(ν(ts)) ≤ exp(νt), we end up with estimate (75) with C = ρ 0 /ρ 0 . The abstract definition (10) of the Lagrangian displacement calls for adequate initial and boundary data. In the special case when the background flow is everywhere tangential to the boundary, no boundary datum is needed, and the initial datum can be determined so that the "no resonance" assumption is satisfied. However, when the background flow passes through the boundary of the domain, we do not know whether a boundary datum that guarantees fulfillment of the "no resonance" assumption can be provided for the Lagrangian displacement. We note that fulfillment of the "no resonance" assumption in any case requires that the initial data of δρ and w satisfy condition (33); that is, the "no resonance" assumption imposes a restriction on the initial datum of the Lagrangian displacement. However, at least when the flow is everywhere tangential to the boundary, the "no resonance" assumption imposes no restriction on δu and δρ, that is, it does not restrict the physical behavior of the system. The role of the "no resonance" assumption has a striking resemblance in electrodynamics. In vacuum, Maxwell's equations are given by where E and B denotes the electric and magnetic fields, J and χ the current and charge densities, μ 0 the vacuum permeability, and 0 the vacuum permittivity where we in expression (84b) have used that ∂ t χ+∇•J = 0, which expresses conservation of electric charge. Thus, if the initial data for E and B satisfy divergence conditions (83c) and (83d), then divergence conditions (83c) and (83d) hold for all subsequent times. Analogously for Galbrun's equation, relation It would be tempting to define the Lagrangian displacement by both relations ( We have presented a mildly well-posed initial-boundary value problem for linearized Euler's equations (40) in the special case that the background flow is everywhere tangential to the boundary. Given a solution to that initial-boundary value problem, we may define the Lagrangian displacement by Although we have not performed any numerical experiments, the ideas behind our analysis could be transformed into a numerical scheme for solving Galbrun's equation. The resulting scheme would not be computationally attractive since the linearized Euler's equations need to be solved for the Eulerian perturbations before the Lagrangian displacement can be determined from definition ∇ • E = χ,(83d)