Based on the in-detail tracking of the movements of atoms in a large number of molecular dynamics simulation boxes, we find that the diffusion of H and He atoms in single-crystal W is composed of non-Markovian jumps. The waiting time distribution of the triggering of jumps is not the usually recognized exponential distribution, but a temperature-dependent power-law distribution. The power-law distribution of the waiting time may lead to clear ergodicity-breaking diffusion, a phenomenon that has formerly been reported to only occur in complex systems such as living biological cells or soft matter. The present finding provides an insightful new view for the analysis and simulation of the puzzling H/He behaviors in W that are observed in experiments. Our findings will inspire reconsiderations on how to bridge the multiscale theoretical predictions with experimental observations, not only for H/He in W but also for H/He in other materials. The diffusion of H and He atoms in solids is a fundamental process closely related to phenomena observed in many scientific and technology fields. The diffusion of H/He atoms in metals cannot be directly experimentally observed on the atomistic level. The commonly supposed atomistic picture for the diffusion of H/He atoms in materials is as follows: H/He atoms move following the Markovian chain of jumps between energetically stable or metastable states, and the waiting time of the triggering of jumps follows the exponential distribution φ(t) = exp (-t τ ⁄ ), where the average jumping time τ can be deduced through harmonic transition state theory (HTST) We report here a novel picture via massive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations for H/He atoms diffusing in tungsten, in which the diffusion of H/He atoms comprises non-Markovian jumps with the waiting time of the triggering of jumps following a temperature-dependent power-law distribution, and the diffusion may exhibit nonergodic features at low temperatures. Here, the diffusion of H/He in W is chosen for the focus of our investigation because W is the most promising plasma-facing material in nuclear fusion reactors However, contradictions exist even in the very fundamental experimental and theoretical results for H and He diffusion in W. For example, the usually accepted experimental activation energy of H diffusion in W is 0.39 eV Our MD simulation study on the diffusion process of H/He in W was conducted using our GPU-based molecular dynamics package, which can efficiently simulate the evolution of many simulation boxes in parallel In addition to recording the atomic displacements to be used for calculating the diffusion coefficients of H/He atoms, we also explored the waiting times of the triggering of jumps of H/He atoms. To identify the jump events more accurately, replicas of the simulation boxes were generated and were quenched to zero temperature by the steepest-descent algorithm. A jump event is counted if a tetrahedron site that the H/He atom is in changes, and the waiting time is defined by the time difference between two successive jump events. Figure However, we can also see that the paths of the H/He atoms moving through the barrier may not be the adiabatic path that is suggested by HTST and can be obtained by static mechanics (SM) using certain algorithms, for example, the nudged-elastic-band (NEB ) method shown in Figure The fast ballistic-like jumps look similar to the Levy flight Because of the ballistic characteristic, the RCD here appears to be atomic-massdependent. In Figure The interaction from the host atoms can also induce an effect on the other end of the scale, that is, the H/He atoms can be confined in a tetrahedron site for a long time depending on the temperature. Especially for H in W, the representative trajectories, which were selected for the visual inspection in Figure These peaks arise most likely from the ballistic-like jumps of the H/He atoms discussed above. Circumstantial evidence can be found in Figure If the fast ballistic-like jumps are the only sources for the diffusion of the H/He atoms, the diffusion would be normal only if the diffusion is measured on a timescale longer than the characteristic time of the truncated ballistic-like movements. However, the existence of the slow jumps may lead to different results. In the region of tw > 0.1 ps, the WTDs do not exponentially decrease but fit well to the power-law distribution: , which has a longer tail than the exponential distribution. The α value is temperaturedependent. The smaller the α value, the longer the tail. For both H and He atoms in W, the α value increases with the temperature. Theoretically Figure and the time-averaged MSD of single trajectories δ (∆; t ) defined as: where ∆ is the lag time and t is the evolution time of the simulation boxes. If r (t) and δ (∆; t ) (for t ≫ t and ∆= t) are equivalent, the diffusion would be ergodic. Instead, the difference of δ (∆; t ) between different trajectories is an indicator of nonergodic diffusion We then investigate MSDs for the H atoms in W. The situation is very different. A strong temperature dependence of trajectory-to-trajectory scatter is observed for δ (∆; t ) . The temperature is lower, and the trajectory-to-trajectory scatter of δ (∆; t ) is more pronounced, corresponding to the decreasing α value of the WTDs with decreasing temperature. For T ≥ 1000 K, δ (∆; t ) tends to converge to r (t) (also see Figure In theory, subdiffusion induced by ergodicity-breaking is indicated by the ensemble-averaged MSD having the form r (t) ~K t with α < 1 In the case of H in W of T ≥ 600 K, the r (t) and 〈δ (∆; t ) 〉 agree well with each other and a good linear relationship is observed for both r (t) vs. The good linear relationship of 〈δ (∆; t ) 〉 vs. ∆ (a property that may mislead one to normal diffusion), even in the case of ergodicity-breaking, is compatible with the inference of the continuous time random walk model Anomalous diffusion is a phenomenon observed in various fields, as reviewed by Barkai et al. One of the issues is the formation of H isotope blisters experimentally observed in the plasma-facing W in nuclear fusion reactors The finding of the novel diffusion feature of the H/He atoms may have more significant impacts on methodological aspects. Because the timescale of dynamic processes that MD simulations are able to handle is usually less than a nanosecond, multiscale studies are indispensable. Among them, the kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) and rate theory (RT)-based methods are two of the most applied approaches connecting what is extracted from MD simulations with the long-term consequences of the diffusion of impurities or defects in materials The KMC method is an event-driven method, based on the random walk model with the basic assumption that the jump events are Markovian. The correlated ballisticlike jumps appearing in the diffusion process of the H/He atoms clearly conflict with the basic assumption. The rate parameters adopted in the KMC are commonly constructed from ab initio or classical SM calculations in the framework of HTST The correlated ballistic-like jumps (referring to Figure Instead of event-driving in KMC, the evolution of systems in the RT-based methods is governed by master equations. Bedeaux et al. provided a mathematical analysis on the condition that should be satisfied if the solutions of the master equations are equivalent to solving the random walk problems The focus of the present paper is for the diffusion of H/He in W. A comprehensive description of the evolution of H/He atoms in W needs also knowledge of other rate processes, for example the dissociation of H/He atoms from vacancies or clusters. The WTDs of these rate processes are also commonly assumed to be the exponential distribution. The findings of the present paper may inspire revisiting the WTDs of these rate processes. Moreover, the findings may also motivate similar investigations for H/He in other materials in which the long-term H/He behavior has important impacts on their macroscopic properties. Figure Amano, J. & Seidman, D. N. Diffusivity of 3He atoms in perfect tungsten crystals. J. Appl.