We show that two phenomena of superfluidity, superfluidity of weakly interacting bosons and superconductivity of the BCS model, are unified using the collective mode arising from the Berry connection for many-body wave functions. The superfluidity is attributed to the presence of this mode, which is stabilized by the interaction between particles that causes fluctuations of the number of particles participating in it. It is suggested that the existence of this collective mode and its stabilization is more fundamental to the occurrence of superconductivity than the electron-pair formation. Properties of superfluid are well described by a macroscopic wave function Thus, the origin of it is very important for the theory of superfluid. There are two major theories for the definition of Ψ s . One of them attributes it to the mean value of the boson particle field operator ψ In order that this mean value can be nonzero, it has to be calculated by a particle number mixed pure state since ψ changes the number of particles by one. It has to be a pure state to explain the observed interference effect attributed to Ψ s . However, such a state is not realizable if the particle number refers to the total number according to the superselection rule where N 0 is the condensate number (the number of particles in the condensate state) and η 0 is the condensate state single-particle wave function that appears in the natural orbital basis {η i } expression for the one-particle reduced density matrix ψ † (r, t) ψ(r ′ , t) where i = 0 state is the condensation state for the Bose-Einstein condensation In the present work, we put forward a new approach to define Ψ s . It uses the Berry connection for many-body wave function which can be defined for both bosonic and fermionic systems. In this way, Ψ s 's in the above two superfluidity phenomena can be obtained from a single principle. It is also noteworthy that this approach is formulated using fixed total particle number states, thus, is free from artifacts that may arise in the particle number non-fixed formalism. Especially, such a formalism will be useful for the accurate calculations for the properties of nano-sized superconductor systems, including qubits The key ingredient for the particle-number fixed formalism is the number changing operator used in the circuit quantization approach for superconducting qubits where I c is a parameter and φ is an operator that corresponds to the scalar φ satisfying the Josephson relation Here, V (t) is the voltage across the junction at time t; thus, relations in Eqs. ( In this approach φ is a conjugate variable of the Cooper pair number density Npair , satisfying the commutation relation Then, e ±i φ are the number changing operators; i.e., if we denote |N pair as the eigenstate of Npair , it satisfies e ±i φ|N pair = |N pair ∓ 1 For the reformulation of superfluid phenomena presented in this work, we use the number changing operators similar to e ±i φ. Then, Ψ s in Eq. ( where the expectation value is evaluated using the particle number fixed state. Using the number changing operators defined from the Berry connection, we will provide a novel way of viewing superconductivity. It will provide the view that the existence of the collective mode from the Berry connection and its stabilization is more fundamental to the occurrence of superconductivity than the electron-pair formation. The organization of the present work is as follows: in Section 2, the Berry connection for many-body wave functions is defined for boson systems. In Section 3, the number changing operators are constructed from the Berry connection. In Section 4, the Bogoliubov transformations for the interacting boson system is reformulated using the number changing operators. In Section 5, the number changing operators for the BCS model are constructed. In Section 6 the BCS theory is reformulated using the number changing operators. In Section 7, the number changing operators obtained in Section 5 is identified as the one constructed from the Berry connection for many-body wave functions. In Section 8 the Josephson tunneling is reformulated using the number changing operators. In Section 9, Ψ s for the BCS model is provided using the number changing operators. In Section 10, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations are reformulated using the number changing operators. Lastly, in Section 11, we conclude the present work with some remarks concerning the foundation of superconductivity. Let us consider the wave function of a system with spinless N b bosons, where r j denotes the coordinate of the jth particle. We define a Berry connection associated with this wave function where |C Φ (r, t)| is the normalization constant given by Using |n Φ , the Berry connection for many-body wave functions is defined as Here, r is regarded as the parameter We only consider the case where the origin of A MB Φ is not the ordinary magnetic field one; thus, we have Then, it can be written in the pure gauge form, where φ is a function which may be multi-valued. The kinetic energy part of the Hamiltonian is given by where m is the particle mass and ∇ j is the gradient operator with respect to the jth electron coordinate r j . Using Φ and A MB Φ , we can construct a currentless wave function Φ 0 for the current operator associated with K 0 Reversely, Φ(r using the currentless wave function Φ 0 . Let us obtain the conjugate momentum of φ given in Eqs. For this purpose, we use the time-dependent variational principle using the following Lagrangian where ρ b is the number density of the bosons. From the above Lagrangian, the conjugate momentum of φ is obtained as thus, φ and ρ b are canonical conjugate variables. If we follow the canonical quantization condition [p φ (r, t), φ(r ′ , t)] = -ihδ(rr ′ ), where pφ and φ are operators corresponding to p φ and φ respectively, we have where ρb is the operator corresponding to ρ b . Strictly speaking, φ is not a hermitian operator; however, it is known that when it is used as sin φ or cos φ, the problem is avoided, practically We construct the following boson field operators from φ and ρb , Using Eq. ( Now, we construct the number changing operators for particles participating in the collective mode described by φ. For that purpose, we first define the following creation and annihilation operators, where V is the volume of the system. Using Eq. ( Then, the number operator for the particle participating in the collective mode described by φ is given by We define eigenstates of Nφ , Through the creation and annihilation operators B † and B, the phase operator Θ that is conjugate to the number operator Nφ can be defined, The following relation is obtained from Eqs. ( Then, e ±i Θ are the number changing operators that satisfy With the number changing operators, the definition corresponding to Eq. ( where ψ † b (r)e i Θ and e -i Θ ψb (r ′ ) conserve the particle number. Then, we can define for the macroscopic wave function corresponding to Ψ s . The definition corresponding to Eq. ( Next, we define η 0 as We construct the basis {η i } where η 0 is given above, and η i , i = 0 are chosen to be orthogonal to η 0 . Then, ψb is given by ψb where b i is the boson annihilation operator for the state η i . A prerequisite to superfluidity for the boson system is the Bose-Einstein condensation. We identify η 0 as the condensation state. Then, we may employ the following approximations, Consequently, we have in accordance with Eq. (3). It is worth noting that the present formalism also has a connection to the quantization of liquid motion given by Landau where m and v are the mass and velocity operator, respectively. This relation can be obtained from Eq. ( As shown above, three different previous approaches for superfluidity can be unified by utilizing the Berry connection A MB Φ . The state with the wave function Φ in Eq. ( We consider an interaction between the particles and show that a lower energy state is obtained by taking into account fluctuations of the number of particles participating in the collective mode described by φ. For this purpose, we use the model considered by Bogoliubov where k is the wave vector, 2m is the single-particle energy for the particle with wave vector k, g > 0 is the coupling constant for the two-body interaction, and b k and b † k are boson annihilation and creation operators for the particle with wave vector k, respectively. Assuming that the contribution from the second term is much smaller than that from the first one, the zeroth order state is given as the state with the total occupation of k = 0 state. We take this state as the Bose-Einstein condensation state. Then, the number changing operator is given by In the interaction term, important terms are those with four k = 0 and two k = 0 terms; thus, we may approximate it as We can also use the following approximations, We also use the the following replacements where e -i Θ b 0 and b † 0 e i Θ are replaced by their average values As a consequence, the Hamiltonian becomes We further replace N 0 by using the total number operator and approximate N by N . Then, by keeping terms of order N 2 and N , we have Now we use the following particle number conserving version of Bogoliubov operators They satisfy the boson commutation relations; parameters v b k and u b k are given by where Then, the Hamiltonian is expressed as The ground state |Gnd b is defined by the condition The equation (53) indicates that the ground state is energetically lowered by the interaction that causes fluctuations of the number of particles participating in the condensate. This situation is similar to the one find in the antiferromagnetic ground state, where the semiclassical equation-of-motion method The ground state that satisfies Eq. ( where the condensate state is given by and |vac denotes the vacuum. The number of particles in the condensate fluctuates due to the number changing operator e 2i Θ in Eq. (55). The above ground state is actually equivalent to the one obtained by Leggett Now the excited state is given by with excitation energy E b k . The single-particle dispersion E b k satisfies the condition provided by Landau From the point of view of the present theory, the definition of Ψ s in Eq. (2) (which corresponds to Eq. (34) in the present theory) may be regarded that superfluidity is attributed to the stabilization of the collective mode. This stabilization requires the fluctuation of the number of particles participating in the collective mode. On the other hand, the definition in Eq. ( The present formalism combines the above two views; namely, the superfluidity requires both the existence of the condensate state with the collective mode, and the stabilization of the collective mode by the fluctuation of the number of particles participate in the collective mode. In this section, we obtain the number changing operators for superconductivity. First, we review the BCS theory where c † kσ and c kσ are annihilation and creation operators for electrons with wave vector k and spin σ, respectively, and ξ 0 (k) is the single-particle energy measured from the Fermi energy E F , H int is the interaction energy given by We assume the simplest form for V kl , V kl = -g < 0, where g is a constant. The superconducting state is given by the following state vector, This state exploits the attractive interaction between electron pairs (k ↑) and (-k ↓), and gives rise to the energy gap where u k and v k are parameters given by and E k is the Bogoliubov excitation energy For the BCS model, a relation similar to Eq. ( Now u k and v k depend on the coordinate and time. The phase factor e -iχ(r,t) is the phase of the order parameter. Then, the Lagrangian corresponding to Eq. ( where H BCS is now coordinate dependent and specified by the coarse-grained cell position r. The electron number density in the cell is given by Using the Lagrangian in Eq. ( for the canonical quantization condition, where ρe is the operator corresponding to ρ e . We construct the following boson field operators, ψ † e (r) = ( ρe (r)) Using the above boson field operators, we construct the number operators for electrons participating in the collective mode described by χ. First, we define boson creation operator Ĉ † χ and annihilation operator Ĉχ Through the creation and annihilation operators, the phase operator X that is conjugate to the number operator Nχ = Ĉ † χ Ĉχ is defined as (72) We define eigenstates of Nχ , Then, e ± i 2 X are number changing operators that satisfy in analogous to Eq. 6 The Pairing Interaction Using Number Changing Operators e ±i X Using e ±i X , the interaction part of the Hamiltonian can be written as which can be transformed to a mean-field version where with employing V kl < -g. We can use the following particle number conserving version of Bogoliubov operators to diagonalize the mean field Hamiltonian where the operator u k and v k are given in Eq. ( Reversely, we also have (79) In order that c kσ and c † kσ satisfy the fermion commutation relations, we require that γ k0 , γ † k0 , γ -k1 , and γ † -k1 commute with e ± i 2 X . Then, the Hamiltonian is cast in the following form The ground state for N electron system is the vacuum of γ k0 and γ k1 , given by where |Cnd(N ) is defined as the state vector for the condensate state given by analogously to Eq. (56). In the limit of ∆ BCS → 0, the ground state becomes the normal state given by const. 7 What Is |Cnd(N ) ? Let us identify |Cnd(N ) in Eq. ( where x = (r, s) (s is the spin coordinate) with regarding r as parameters; Ψ (r, t)| is the normalization constant given by Then, we obtain the Berry connection and introduce χ as in Eq. ( and express using the currentless wave function Ψ 0 as in Eq. ( where ρ e is the number density of the electrons. Consequently, we have the canonical quantization condition in Eq. ( Actually, we do not need the explicit form for |Cnd(N ) ; the knowledge of A MB Ψ is sufficient for the following calculations. Let us consider the observable effect of the number changing operators for the number of particles in the collective mode in this section. For this purpose we consider the Josephson tunneling We denote two superconductors in the Josephson junction as S L and S R . The zeroth order junction state is a product of an S L state given by and an S R state given by where parameters with subscripts L and S are those for electrons in S L and S R , respectively; and c kLσ and c † kLσ denote annihilation and creation operators for electrons in S L , respectively (d kRσ and d † kRσ denote annihilation and creation operators for electrons in S R , respectively). The number changing operators e -i χj , j = L, R are defined as follows: First, we construct the number operators for electrons participating in the collective mode described by χ in the two superconducting regions as Then, the phase operators χj that are conjugate to the number operators Nχj are defined through the relations The number changing operators are given by e ±i χj , which satisfy the relations Note that the phase factors e ±iχj are introduced to take into account the existence of the phase difference between |Cnd L (N L ) and |Cnd R (N R ) arising from Eq. ( where T kLkR is assumed to be real. It is rewritten using the Boboliubov operators defined analogously to Eq. ( by replacing the electron creation and annihilation operators; labels"L" and "R" refer to quantities for S L and S R , respectively. From the second order perturbation, the effective interaction Hamiltonian that will act on products state |Gnd L (N L ) |Gnd R (N R ) is calculated as It contains an electron transfer Hamiltonian with the number changing operators, where ∆ L and ∆ R are energy gaps in S L and S R , respectively. The above transfer Hamiltonian indicates that tunneling of the condensate occurs through the difference of the phase operators ( χL -χR ). It transfers two electrons, giving the interpretation that the tunneling current is due to the electron-pair flow; however, from the view point of the present theory, Josephson tunneling current should be considered as due to the collective mode ∇χ. In this respect, it is worth noting that a doubt has been raised in the attribution of the Josephson tunneling to the electron-pair flow In order to describe the supercurrent, spatial variation of χ needs to be included. We have obtained the result for two sites, S L and S R , in the previous section; we will extend it to the many-site case in this section. We express the ground state for the many-site case as where r denotes the centers of the coarse-grained cells. In the following, we treat r as a continuous variable using spatially varying parameters u k (r), v k (r), and e -i χ(r) . The requirement that the ground state in Eq. ( as in Eq. ( The electron field operators Ψσ (r) = k e ik•r / √ Vc kσ , σ =↑, ↓, are now modified to considering Eq. ( in analogous to Eq. (34). For inhomogeneous superconductors, a powerful formalism is the Bogoliubovde Gennes formalism The effective Hamiltonian of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism is now given by where and In the single-particle Hamiltonian H e , a potential U 0 (r) and the electromagnetic vector potential A em are included; q is the electron charge q = -e. The Bogoliubov operators γ nσ and γ † nσ are those conserves particle numbers like those in Eq. (78). They obey fermion commutation relations, and are chosen to satisfy Using Eq. ( By taking into account the relation in Eq. ( with e -i 1 2 χ(r) . Then, we obtain the following system of equations, where with In this system equations A eff appears instead of A em . The effective vector potential A eff is gauge invariant since the gauge degree of freedom in A em is compensated by that in ∇χ which arises from the wave function. Now Ψ s is given by This is essentially the one derived by Gor'kov We have obtained the macroscopic wave function for superconductivity in Eq. ( In the present theory, superconductivity requires χ in addition to the electron-pairs. In other words, the supercurrent generation requires an additional ingredient to the BCS theory in accordance with the warning by Bloch It is now widely believed that supercurrent generation is due to the electronpair flow due to the observation of the flux quantum h/2e and also due to the observation of the ac Josephson effect In the standard theory, the electron transfer Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where the gauge invariant vector potential A eff in Eq. ( This φ is obtained if we use the following electron transfer Hamiltonian, which yields φ in Eq. (124). Thus, the electron transfer Hamiltonian relevant for the ac Josephson effect is H e J , rather than H 2e J . Lastly, we would like to mention that the supercurrent is attributed to the collective motion of ∇χ, rather than electron-pair flow in the present formalism. This suggests that superconductivity will occur without pairing electrons if a nontrivial ∇χ exists and stabilized by some means.