Quantum dot sensitized solar cells are among the new generations of solar cells that have attracted much attention. Theoretical and simulation studies have predicted high efficiency for these cells so that in the future, these cells could be an excellent alternative to silicon solar cells. Other advantages of these cells are their ease of fabrication and cheaper manufacturing methods than existing cells. This paper's main idea is to simulate the effect of different quantum dots on the optical and electrical characteristics of these cells and, in particular, the efficiency. We then simulated the effect of simultaneous sensitizing by different quantum dots, and we observed that the cell's light absorption and the efficiency in simultaneous sensitizing, increased. Then we experimentally studied one of the cells that give the best simulation result (PbS/CdS co-sensitized). We deposited the quantum dots on transparent TiO 2 , and we obtained the light absorption, efficiency, and other characteristics of cells. Further, we investigated the effect of cobalt sulfide as the counter electrode in PbS/CdS, instead of platinum and gold, and we found that the efficiency has increased. can be transformed into other useful forms of energy, such as heat, electricity, and chemicals, to supply daily human energy. Reports have shown that using solar cells by 10% efficiency in just 0.1% of the earth's surface can provide current electricity demand Quantum dot solar cells are a bunch of solar cells based on nanomaterials, and quantum dots(QDs) and QDs can be used in a variety of solar cells to reduce costs and increase efficiency. The optical behavior of quantum dots is such that they emit visible light of varying wavelengths when exposed to ultraviolet light If the photon energy exceeds the threshold required for impact ionization, this extra energy will excite another electron and produce another exciton Quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) are a replacement of dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSCs) After the light is emitted into the photovoltaic cell, the quantum dots on the surface TiO 2 layer absorb light, which excites the quantum dots' electrons from the valance band to the conduction band. This process leaves a positive charge hole in the vacancy of the electron. The generated electron-hole pair (exciton) must be separated at the quantum dots' boundary with TiO 2 . The excited electron is transferred to the TiO 2 electrode and moved to the counter electrode through an external circuit. Also, through the electrolyte, which plays the role of oxidation /reduction (redox) pair, the electron transfers to the Ground state of the quantum dots and becomes oxidized. Then the intermediate undergoing the oxidation process goes through the diffusion process to the counter electrode and is then subjected to the reduction process again. Selecting the counter electrode is one of the key points in achieving high efficiency. Because the counter electrode plays the role of oxidation, it is necessary to choose the counter electrode from materials with low resistance and high work function. Mainly in quantum dot sensitized solar cells, the S 2-/S x 2-is redox pair, and the platinum, gold, and cobalt sulfide are used as the counter electrode. We used three of them in PbS/CdS co-sensitized solar cells, and we investigated their effect on the efficiency of this particular cell in the experimental section. In the simulation section of this paper, after investigation the effect of different quantum dots on the optical and electrical properties of sensitized solar cells with one or two types of QDs, we optimized the size of QDs for the cell with the highest predicted efficiency. As we describe in the Experimental section, we fabricated this solar cell in the laboratory and investigated the effect of different electrodes on its efficiency. If the wavelength of the incident light is less than or equal to the size of the structure, we will no longer be able to use the ray optics analysis methods for obtaining accurate solutions. Therefore, we will need a new optical approach to provide the correct and expected response. For optical simulation, we used the method Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) because this method can solve Maxwells equations directly in the time domain, thereby providing accurate broadband solutions to electromagnetic wave propagation and scattering problems As the name implies, the time-domain finite difference method is done in the time domain. So when a simulation is run, the Maxwell equations are, in fact, solved in the time domain to obtain E (t) and H (t). In FDTD Method we solve Maxwell's equations by dividing the electric and magnetic fields, which are initially continuous functions of time, and obtain the fields in time n∆t that we briefly represent with n using steptime equations (see Eqs (1) and (2) Where ε is the electrical permittivity, and μ is magnetic permeability. Using Eqs (1) and ( Eq.( To calculate it, we only need to know the electric field intensity and the imaginary part of the electrical permittivity of the material. The number of photons absorbed per unit volume per frequency can be calculated by dividing the absorption power in that frequency by the energy of each photon in the same frequency by Eq. ( If we assume each absorbed photon produces an electronhole pair, the rate of electron-hole production (G) can be obtained by integrating Eq. ( By solving the equations of drift and diffusion for carriers, given separately for electrons and holes by Eqs.( where q represents the electron's charge, μ n and μ n are the mobility of electrons and holes, n, and p are the densities of electrons and holes, respectively. E is the electric field, D n and D p are the diffusion coefficients of electrons and holes, respectively. Efficiency can then be calculated using Eq.( where P in is the power intensity of the incident light (100 mW/cm 2 ) and Fill Factor FF is defined by Eq. ( where P max is the maximum power of a photovoltaic cell, J SC is short circuit current density and V OC is open circuit voltage. With the goal of reducing production costs and increasing the efficiency of solar cells, research on solar cells is increasingly focused on new solar cell design concepts, including nanostructured solar cells. Solar cell simulation is necessary to predict the behavior of these devices. As the complexity of the design of photovoltaic cells increases, it becomes difficult to obtain analytical solutions to describe their performance. In a real cell, non-ideal processes such as surface and volume recombination of carriers reduce the efficiency of solar cells. A combination of optical and electrical simulations that considers these non-ideal processes is essential to simulate solar cells more accurately. The usual structure of these cells is FTO / TiO 2 / QDs / electrolyte / counter electrode as shown in the Fig. The active area of these cells includes TiO 2 and quantum dots. Quantum dots are the major absorbers of sunlight and excitons are produced after absorbing light using QDs. Photocurrent is formed by the transfer of electrons to the TiO 2 anode For quantum dot sensitized and dye-sensitized solar cells, the best TiO 2 layer thickness is 10 μm We performed the calculations to obtain the absorption spectrum of cells according to the described equations and the absorption spectrum of QDSSCs with different quantum dots in wavelengths between 300 nm and 110 nm are shown in Fig. As can be seen in the diagram of the current densityvoltage of these cells (see Fig. The cells characterization results are summarized in Table By using two types of QDs, the absorption and efficiency of the solar cell can be controlled by two substances. We performed the calculations to obtain the absorption spectrum of co-sensitized solar cells with different pairs of QDs, and the absorption spectrum of them in wavelengths between 300 nm and 110 nm are shown in Fig. In co-sensitized solar cells that one type of QDs is selected from the PbS and PbSe compounds to increase the rate of carrier production by extending the absorption range to the infrared region. The other type is selected from compounds by band-gap more than 1 eV to improve the V OC in addition to increasing the absorption at shorter wavelengths, which can achieve higher efficiency than sensitized solar cells with one type of quantum dot. Our simulation results show the highest efficiency for a sensitized cell using PbS and CdS. So we chose this cell for the experimental section. In the all simulations, quantum dots are considered dome-shaped Which randomly with different sizes are arranged on the TiO 2 . The refractive index for QDs can be calculated using Eq. ( where χ ef f (ω), is defined as χ ef f (ω) = χ (1) +χ (2) (ω) Ẽ+ χ (3) (ω) Ẽ2 . χ (1) , χ (2) and χ (3) are linear, second order, and third order susceptibilities, respectively. Ẽ is a linear x-polarized monochromatic electric field propagate along the z direction (see Eq. ( The relative refractive index change and absorption coefficient of medium can be calculated using Eqs. ( where μ is the vacuum permeability and R is the real part of permittivity. After that we simulated QDs of a certain size instead of different sizes that are randomly positioned on TiO 2 and optimized the size of QDs for PbS/CdS co-sensitized solar cell. Fig. FTO (Fluorine-Tin-Oxide (FTO) Coated Glass Plates; sheet resistance 8 Ω/ square) were used as substrates and pretreated by rinsing in an ultrasonic bath of detergent and acetone for 10 and 20 minutes in turn, then rinsing with a large amount of deionized water and ethanol, and at last dried with nitrogen gas. Transparent titanium dioxide (TiO2) paste was applied to substrates using the doctor-blade method. TiO 2 nanoparticles were in the anatase phase, with an average size of 20 -25nm. The nanoporous nature of the TiO 2 layer provides a high surface area, which can increase the QDs adsorption and then high photocurrent generation. After the application of transparent TiO 2 paste, the substrates were heated at 120 • C for 0.5 h. Reflector anatase TiO 2 paste after that was applied on the previous layer by the same method, and the deposited photoanodes were heated at 450 • C for 0.5 h. This material provides a high scattering layer as a reflector that increases light harvesting and photocurrent. For deposition of PbS and CdS quantum dots on TiO 2 electrode we used successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. The electrode first dipped in a 0.02 M Pb(NO 3 ) 2 aqueous solution for 30 s, rinsed with deionized water and then dipped in 0.02 M Na 2 S aqueous solution for another 30 s followed by rinsing which was termed as one SILAR cycle. The next step is the deposition of CdS quantum dots. Similarly, for the CdS nanoparticles layer, the electrode first dipped in a 0.2 M Cd(NO 3 ) 2 aqueous solution for 5 min, rinsed and then dipped in 0.2 M Na 2 S aqueous solution for another 5 min. The number of immersion cycles can control the size of quantum dots. The method is designed to increase the particle size of a monolayer during an immersion cycle. The optimal number of cycles can be obtained by repeating the experiment several times to maximize cell efficiency. In this study, layers with different cycles were used to sensitize the TiO 2 electrode once only with PbS quantum dots, once only with CdS quantum dots and then by combining two types, with PbS/CdS order as hybrid samples. Four sensitized electrode specimens were thus obtained for use in cell fabrication. In dye-sensitized solar cells, platinum is typically used as the counter electrode and iodide/triiodide as the oxidation/reduction pair, but unfortunately, the wellknown pair of I -/I - 3 is not compatible with low bandgap semiconductors and lead to rapid corrosion of these materials Polysulfide electrolyte were prepared by mixing suitable quantities of Na 2 S, S and KCl powders in 3:7 water/methanol solution. Then we put it on the magnetic stirrer for two hours to obtain a uniform solution. The color of the solution changes from yellow to orange after stirring. Different materials and different deposition methods were used to prepare the counter electrodes. For this purpose, the FTO is being washed in the same way as in the preparation of the substrates described above. The method for deposition of Pt and Au was physical vapor deposition (PVD) at the pressure of 10 -5 millibars, and the thickness of the deposited layer was of 100 nm. Another approach was to use CoS nanoparticles, which we applied to the pre-prepared FTOs using the SILAR method. The counter electrodes were prepared by first dipping a clean FTO in 0.5 M Co(CH 3 COO) 2 aqueous solution for 30 s, rinsed with deionized water, and then dipped in 0.5 M Na 2 S aqueous solution for another 30 s followed by rinsing. This constituted one cycle, and the process was repeated four times. The sensitized TiO 2 electrode was then combined with the counter electrode in the presence of polysulfide electrolyte to assemble a typical QDSSC. Photocurrentvoltage (I-V) characteristics of the QDSSCs were measured using a Keithley 2400 electrometer under illumination from xenon lamp at the intensity of mW/cm 2 The prepared TiO 2 layer electrodes were sensitized using PbS and CdS quantum dots during different cycles. We then integrated these electrodes with the Pt counter electrodes, and after injecting the electrolyte into them, we characterized the fabricated cells. Fig. Characteristics of these samples, such as efficiency, open-circuit voltage, and short circuit current density and filling factor, were also measured and calculated, as shown in Table As the number of SILAR cycles in PbS deposition changes, the color of the photoelectrodes changes from pale brown to black. According to the results in Table The results show that in photoanode sensitized with quantum dots by the SILAR method, as the number of solar cycles increases, the short-circuit current density, open-circuit voltage, and subsequently the cell efficiency increase until the optimized cycles, and then they decrease. When quantum dot deposition is performed with a low number of SILAR cycles, the quantum dots cover the TiO 2 layer partially, and an increase in the number of deposition cycles results in complete TiO 2 layer coverage. If sensitization is performed over an optimal number of cycles, this increase in the cycle reduces cell performance, which can be attributed to poor charge injection and appears to be due to reduction of the quantum effect of larger quantum dots, which reduces the repulsive force for charge injection (electrons and holes) Generally, the efficiency of QDSSCs is below 5%. But simulation and theory studies have shown that the efficiency of these cells can reach up to 44% Table where λ is the wavelength x-ray, β is FWHM and θ is a diffused Bragg's angle. Quantum dot sensitized solar cells with one type of material can achieve more than 12 % efficiency using CdSe. Due to its good band-gap for use in solar cells, it can absorb a wide range of the visible spectrum. Materials with low energy band-gap such as PbS and PbSe due to their low band-gap have high absorption in the visible and infrared spectrum of light, but cells made with these materials have a smaller V oc because of more recombination of carriers than other materials. Simultaneous sensitizing using two different materials, one with a large band-gap and the other with a small band-gap, can cause the solar cell to absorb more light in the visible, infrared, and ultraviolet spectrum. Although at co-sensitized solar cells, the V OC decreases, overall, the efficiency of this type of cell is higher than a sensitized cell with one type of quantum dot. The co-sensitized cell with the PbS and CdS quantum dots has a higher efficiency (Almost 15 %) than the other types of co-sensitized cells due to its J SC higher than 20 mA/cm 2 and V OC higher than 0.8 V . The experimental method of fabricating solar cells can greatly influence the characteristics of this cell by changing the number of SILAR cycles. The X-ray diffraction results show that by changing the concentration of precursors, the immersion time, and the number of cycles, the size of the quantum dots can be well controlled. A cathode made of CoS, which costs less than platinum and gold cathodes, can increase relative cell efficiency of PbS/CdS co-sensitized solar cell up to 80 %. Although the anode made with PbS and CdS quantum dots has high absorption, the efficiency of this cell is low, which can be a result of the strongly recombined carriers in this cell. sensitizers Fig. 11 Optical absorption curve of a QDSSC with PbS and CdS quantum dots made using SILAR method by optimized SILAR cycles.