We investigate superconducting quantum interference devices consisting of two highly transmissive Josephson junctions coupled by a superconducting loop, all defined in an epitaxial InAs/Al heterostructure. A novel device design allows for independent measurements of the Andreev bound state spectrum within the normal region of a junction and the resulting current-phase relation. We show that knowledge of the Andreev bound state spectrum alone is enough to derive the independently measured phase dependent supercurrent. On the other hand, the opposite relation does not generally hold true as details of the energy spectrum are averaged out in a critical current measurement. Finally, quantitative understanding of field dependent spectrum and supercurrent require taking into account the second junction in the loop and the kinetic inductance of the epitaxial Al film. Josephson junctions (JJs) in superconductor/semiconductor hybrids are objects of intense study. Electrostatic tuning of the critical current enables voltage controlled superconducting qubits On the other hand, ABS spectroscopy requires either weakly coupled tunneling probes or microwave spectroscopy techniques, both challenging to combine with standard transport measurements. As a result, direct visualization of ABSs could only be achieved for a limited selection of material systems, such as atomic break junctions In this Letter we demonstrate concomitant measurement of phase-dependent critical current and Andreev bound state spectrum in a highly transmissive InAs JJ embedded in a DC SQUID loop. Tunneling spectroscopy reveals ABSs with near unity transmission probability. A non-sinusoidal CPR is derived from the ABS spectrum, showing excellent agreement with the one extracted from the SQUID critical current. Both measurements are reconciled in a short junction model where multiple ABSs, with various transmission probabilities, contribute to the entire supercurrent flowing in the junction. This work highlights hybrid planar JJs as ideal test grounds for emerging paradigms in condensed matter physics, such as ABS manipulation in highly transmitting devices Planar JJs were defined in an InAs quantum well contacted by a thin epitaxial Al film grown in-situ where τ i is the transmission probability. The spectrum is periodic in φ and approaches zero energy for τ i → 1 and φ = π. Each populated ABSs carries a supercurrent Summing the current contribution of all ABSs results in the CPR of the junction, so that a junction with highly transmissive modes is characterized by a forward-skewed sine-like CPR. Phase tuning was achieved by embedding the junction of interest, referred to as JJ1, in a superconducting loop (also made of epitaxial Al on InAs) together with a second InAs/Al JJ, named JJ2. Dimensions were chosen so that the critical current of JJ2 (I C2 ) was much larger than that of JJ1 (I C1 ). A superconducting tunneling probe with tunable transmission was integrated laterally to JJ1, allowing spectroscopy. Figure The device, shown in Fig. If not explicitly stated, the device was operated with gate voltages V G1 = V G2 = 0. Additional gates, set to negative voltages, laterally confine electrons underneath the Al leads. For JJ2, this is achieved with gate G 3 while for JJ1 with two gates that also define a constriction in the 2DEG and are operated at the same gate voltage V QPC . This concept is presented in Fig. Figure The tunneling differential conductance dI 1 /dV 1 , measured in the same regime as in Fig. The derived DOS was then used to compute the field dependent supercurrent as the sum of the contributions of each occupied ABSs (E i < 0), as per Eq. 2. Here we used the approximation: that is, we substituted the summation with an integral of the phase derivative of the DOS times energy, which is readily computed on the data of Fig. missions τ 1 and τ 2 (see Eq. 2): Taking into account flux quantization, we substitute φ 2 = φ 1 -2πΦ, resulting in an equation of two unknowns, φ 1 and Φ, that is solved self-consistently to obtain Φ ext (φ 1 , Φ) and . Solutions are further constrained using physical arguments: for each value of Φ ext , the SQUID critical current is the maximum of I SQUID . Similarly, the situation with only circulating currents (equivalent to the case where tunneling spectroscopy is measured) is obtained for Fitting of our full model to the critical current of Fig. We now provide a quantitative understanding of the measured ABSs. Figure In conclusion, we measured highly transmissive planar JJs embedded in an InAs/Al hybrid heterostructure. Thanks to a novel device design, we related the junction ABS spectrum to its CPR, finding remarkable agreement. Supercurrent gave an average transmission τ 1 = 0.69, resulting in a forward-skewed CPR. On the other hand, tunneling spectroscopy provided a much richer description of the device, revealing sets of discrete ABSs populating the superconducting gap. We measured ABSs with almost unity transmission, well separated from other states and the continuum, and energy approaching zero for φ 1 = π. These levels are a promising starting point for engineering topological states either via phase biasing in multi-terminal geometries The kinetic inductance of the superconducting loop was estimated from the loop geometry and the normal state resistivity of the heterostructure stack as where l and w are the length and width of the superconducting stripe defining the SQUID loop and R is the normal state resistivity of the Al/InAs heterostructure. In the present case l/w = 48, while R was separately measured above the Al critical temperature in a Hall bar geometry where the top Al film was not removed, giving 6.4 Ω. In comparison, the geometric inductance of the loop was estimated in 4 pH only. In the Supplementary Information section, fitting of the data of Fig. Experimental identification of zero out-of-plane magnetic field Superconducting vector magnets are typically characterized by hysteresis and magnetic field offsets of the order of a few mT, much larger than the periodicity of the supercurrent modulation measured in this work (265 μT). As the fitting procedure presented in the main text crucially relies on the correct identification of the B ⊥ = 0 condition, particular care was taken to properly account for this experimental uncertainty. For this reason, while measuring the loop resistance dV 2 /I 2 , the AC current I 1 flowing through the high impedance tunneling probe was recorded via a low impedance IV converter. In The CPR of a JJ is known to be sine-like (with an eventual forward skewness) and have zero current for zero phase difference. In the measurement of Fig. S.1a the point identified as B ⊥ = 0 does not occur at a zero of the forward-skewed sinusoidal modulation of critical current. This anomalous flux offset, which should not be confused for a phase offset, is explained in our model as due to the large induced flux in the loop when I 0 ≈ I C2 . The sample presented in the Main Text has been further characterized in terms of tunneling spectroscopy as a function of an in-plane magnetic field B , applied per- Tunneling conductance as a function of in-plane magnetic field. Conductance dI1/dV1 of the tunneling probe measured as a function of an in-plane magnetic field oriented along the y direction as defined in Fig. Andreev bound states with transmission approaching unity have been consistently measured, in this work, over several devices. The use of a superconducting tunneling probe generally results in sharp spectroscopic data, however direct visualization of the spectrum requires numerical deconvolution 