The negative differential resistance (NDR) response of Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-point devices is shown to have a polarity dependence due to the effect of the metal/oxide Schottky barriers on the contact resistance. Three distinct responses are observed under opposite polarity testing: bipolar S-type NDR, bipolar snap-back NDR, and combined S-type and snap-back NDR, depending on the stoichiometry of the oxide film and device area. In-situ thermoreflectance imaging is used to show that these NDR responses are associated with strong current localisation, thereby justifying the use of a previously developed two-zone, core shell thermal model of the device. The observed polarity dependent NDR responses, and their dependence on stoichiometry and area are then explained by extending this model to include the effect of the polarity dependent contact resistance. This study provides an improved understanding of the NDR response of metal/oxide/metal structures and informs the engineering of devices for neuromorphic computing and non-volatile memory applications. Two terminal metal-oxide-metal (MOM) devices using transition metal oxides (TMOs) are of increasing interest for next generation non-volatile memory technology and brain-inspired computing In many cases the NDR response is only observed after an initial electroforming process which introduces a filamentary conduction path through the film Studies have also shown that several NDR modes including two basic types: continuous 'S-type' and discontinuous 'snap-back' NDR as well as more complex combinations can be observed in NbOx systems In an attempt to resolve this ensuing debate about the origin of the snap back response and also to explain a diverse range of NDR modes observed in metal-insulator-metal (MIM) devices, we recently developed a core-shell model of NDR and demonstrated its utility to predict novel functionality for emerging electronic and neuromorphic computing applications In the present work, we demonstrate that the interface resistance originated from the Schottky barriers at the metal/oxide interfaces can significantly influence the threshold switching properties of an electroformed MOM device and can result in distinct NDR modes depending on the operating bias polarity. The observed materials and device dependencies have been analysed by combining in-situ thermo-reflectance imaging and temperature dependent electrical testing. The results are explained by extending the core-shell model of NDR. Cross-point devices with a metal/oxide/metal structure as shown in Figure These were coated with sub-stoichiometric NbOx layers by reactive sputter deposition of an Nb target using an Ar/O ambient. For comparison, near-stoichiometric Nb2O5 film were also deposited by RF-sputtering of an Nb2O5 target (Ar ambient). Top electrodes were subsequently defined by a second lift-off process and comprised 5 nm Nb and 25 nm Pt (or 75 nm Au for the thermo-reflectance measurements). A final lithography step was then used to remove the NbOx film from the contact-pads of the bottom electrodes. Details of the deposition conditions and film thicknesses are given in Table-1 (supplementary information). The resulting cross-point structures had dimensions ranging from 2μm x 2μm to 20μm x 20μm. The NbOx stoichiometry was determined by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) of films deposited onto vitreous carbon and Si substrates and was found to be in the range from x=1.92±0.03 to x=2.6±0.05. (The relationship between stoichiometry and film resistivity is included in the Supplementary Information). Further analysis by grazing incident-angle X-ray diffraction (GIAXRD) showed that the as-deposited films were amorphous. Ex-situ electrical measurements were performed in air using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyser attached to a Signatone probe station (S-1160) and generally consisted of bidirectional quasi-static current sweeps. In-situ measurements performed during thermoreflectance imaging were performed with a Keithley 2410 parameter analyzer and included both DC and pulsed testing. In all cases the bias was applied through the top electrode while the bottom electrode was grounded. Thermal imaging of the devices was performed using the TMX T°Imager® system. The imaging setup uses a camera-based thermoreflectance method All devices with sub-stoichiometric NbOx films exhibited negative differential resistance (NDR) following a one-off electroforming step but the forming and NDR characteristics were found to depend on the measurement polarity, as illustrated in Figure Once electroformed, devices exhibited characteristics similar to those depicted in Figure In-situ thermo-reflectance imaging was performed on 10 μm NbO1.99 devices to better understand the current distribution during post-forming current sweeps. The results are summarised in Figure In contrast, under negative bias, the temperature distribution is near-uniform at currents below the threshold for snap-back and only becomes localised for currents near the threshold value (indicated by the point 'F' in Figure Experimentally, the current-voltage characteristics were analysed in terms of field-enhanced thermionic emission over a Schottky barrier, as described by where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ΦB0 is the zero bias potential barrier height at metal/oxide interface, α is the barrier lowering factor, A* is the Richardson constant and A is the device area. For both bias polarities the experimental data for a given electric field (V) exhibits a linear trend on a ln(I/T 2 ) vs 1000/T plot as shown in Figures The obtained values were found to decrease with increasing the applied bias, as expected from equation ( The resistance asymmetry is represented more clearly by plotting the ratio of currents measured under negative and positive bias as a function of absolute voltage, as shown for the Nb/NbO2.22/Pt device in Figure Effect of oxide stoichiometry and device scaling. The film stoichiometry and device area also have a direct impact on the resistance of the region surrounding the electroformed filament and therefore affect the device characteristics. As a consequence, the behaviour reported in Figure The above data clearly show that the NDR characteristics of simple two-terminal metal/oxide/metal devices are sensitive to the relative resistances of the filamentary conduction path and the surrounding device area, including effects due to polarity dependent contact resistance that arise from the metal/oxide contacts. While the dependencies appear complex, they can be understood with reference to a recently developed parallel-memristor or core-shell model of NDR In its simplest form the core-shell model assumes that the current distribution in post-formed metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures is localized, with the NDR response dominated by the high current density filament (core) while the surrounding film (shell) acts as a parallel resistance, as shown schematically in Figure For the case where RS is independent of bias polarity, the above model predicts either smooth 