As the optical analogue to integrated electronics, integrated photonics has already found widespread use in data centers in the form of optical interconnects. As global network traffic continues its rapid expansion, the power consumption of such circuits becomes a critical consideration. Electrically tunable devices in photonic integrated circuits contribute significantly to the total power budget, as they traditionally rely on inherently power-consuming phenomena such as the plasma dispersion effect or the thermo-optic effect for operation. Here, we demonstrate ultra-low-power refractive index tuning in a hybrid barium titanate (BTO)silicon nitride (SiN) platform integrated on silicon. We achieve tuning by exploiting the large electric field-driven Pockels effect in ferroelectric BTO thin films of sub-100 nm thickness. The extrapolated power consumption for tuning a free spectral range (FSR) in racetrack resonator devices is only 106 nW/FSR, several orders of magnitude less than many previous reports. We demonstrate the technological potential of our hybrid BTO-SiN technology by compensating thermally induced refractive index variations over a temperature range of 20 °C and by using our platform to fabricate tunable multiresonator optical filters. Our hybrid BTO-SiN technology significantly advances the field of ultra-low-power integrated photonic devices and allows for the realization of next-generation efficient photonic circuits for use in a variety of fields, including communications, sensing, and computing. D ecades ago, the development of integrated electronic circuits revolutionized the electronics industry by enabling electronic circuits to be made smaller, faster, and more cheaply. A similar trend has reached optical networks, where the integration of bulk-and fiber-based circuits can nowadays be realized in photonic integrated circuits (PICs) on compact semiconductor substrates. PICs already play a major role in data centers, and their use is expected to rapidly expand in the coming years owing to the explosive growth of global network traffic. Several different mechanisms have been exploited for tuning the effective refractive index in integrated photonic devices. The most prominent are the thermo-optic effect, which is present in both silicon-and SiN-based platforms, In contrast to the thermo-optic and plasma dispersion effects, the Pockels effect is a second-order nonlinear optic effect describing the electric field-driven modulation of the refractive index. The Pockels effect is therefore uniquely suited for use in ultra-low-power integrated photonics applications, as no electric current flow or doped regions in the waveguide are required for operation. As neither silicon nor SiN inherently displays a strong Pockels effect, While hybrid BTO-silicon photonic devices have recently garnered significant attention, the combination of BTO with SiN potentially offers many advantages over a silicon-based platform. For example, the integration of SiN strip waveguides with BTO allows for the combination of ultra-low-power refractive index tuning via the Pockels effect in BTO with the low optical losses available in SiN. Electro-optic Characterization. Light from a fibercoupled, tunable continuous-wave laser operating around 1.55 μm was coupled into and out of the devices via grating couplers and detected with a power meter. The incoming polarization was set using a polarization controller. A parameter analyzer was used to apply the bias to the devices and to determine the leakage currents. Device temperature was adjusted and monitored via an external temperature controller for temperature-dependent measurements. A detailed schematic of the setup used for electro-optic characterization is presented in the Supporting Information Section 1. We measured the resonance shifts Δλ for different electric fields and converted them to effective refractive index shifts Δn eff using the relation Δn eff = λ 0 Δλ/FSR(L e ), where λ 0 is the resonance wavelength at 0 V bias, FSR is the free-spectral range in terms of wavelength, and L e is the total length of the electrodes. Optical Mode Simulations. Optical mode simulations were performed using COMSOL Multiphysics and the COMSOL RF module. The refractive indices used for the simulations are presented in Supporting Information Table Ultra-Low-Power Refractive Index Tuning. The waveguides of the fabricated devices support a single TE-like mode (Figure Upon applying an electric field across the device, the resonance positions shift, indicating a change in the effective refractive index within the resonator. The electric field E across the waveguide was estimated according to E = V/d, where V is the applied bias and d is the separation between electrodes. Following the procedure outlined in the Methods section, we track the shift of the effective index as a function of applied field (Figure The application of a bias across the device does not alter the extinction ratios even up to 40 V (78 kV/cm). This behavior is expected, as the Pockels effect does not impact the imaginary part of the refractive index. In contrast, active operation of devices exploiting the plasma dispersion effect typically results in undesired, additional optical absorption. It should be noted that a full FSR of tuning is not achieved in the devices reported here. However, the tuning range can be significantly increased for a given electric field and the resonator devices can be optimized for low-bias operation. Example optimizations include improvements to the electrode design, such as the use of transparent conducting electrodes, The measured power consumption is the result of a small leakage current across the nominally insulating BTO layer (Supporting Information Section 5). The leakage current in oxides is typically associated with a Pool-Frenkel-type conduction mechanism. Thermal Compensation. Having established ultra-lowpower refractive index tuning in the hybrid BTO-SiN electrooptic devices, we use the platform to demonstrate two example applications of this technology. First, we use racetrack resonator devices to compensate for thermal refractive index variations. A key challenge facing future integrated photonics technology is the ability to sustain reliable operation in environments subject to temperature fluctuations. To demonstrate thermal refractive index drift compensation via Pockels tuning, we analyzed the transmission of the devices in the temperature range from room temperature (25 °C) up to 45 °C (Figure We have utilized our BTO-SiN platform to fabricate tunable, multiracetrack resonator optical filters (Figure In summary, we have demonstrated ultra-low-power refractive index tuning in silicon-integrated hybrid BTO-SiN photonic devices. By exploiting the large electric field-driven Pockels effect in BTO, we have realized index tuning with static power consumption of approximately 106 nW/FSR in racetrack resonator devices. We use our devices to compensate for thermal refractive index variations and demonstrate the ability to compensate for heating of 20 °C while consuming less than 1 nW of static power. Additionally, we fabricate multiresonator optical filters and provide a proof-of-concept demonstration for using the Pockels effect to perform optical path length trimming and overcome decoupling arising from fabrication imperfections. The devices we present outperform previously reported tuning elements in terms of power consumption by several orders of magnitude. Furthermore, the combination of BTO with SiN enables fully dielectric waveguides with very low propagation losses that extend the optically transparent window into the visible range, allowing the hybrid BTO-SiN platform to find use in a wide variety of next-generation technologies including biosensors The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00558. Experimental details of electro-optical characterization, optical mode simulations, additional electrical, optical, and electro-optical characterization of devices, and calculations describing opportunities for device performance optimization (PDF) Corresponding Authors *E-mail: jortmann13@gmail.com. *E-mail: sab@zurich.ibm.com. This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes. Downloaded via 12.201.4.178 on November 26, 2019 at 19:51:45 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. DOI: 10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00558 ACS Photonics 2019, 6, 2677-2684