Soliton microcombs constitute chip-scale optical frequency combs, and have the potential to impact a myriad of applications from frequency synthesis and telecommunications to astronomy. The demonstration of soliton formation via selfinjection locking of the pump laser to the microresonator has significantly relaxed the requirement on the external driving lasers. Yet to date, the nonlinear dynamics of this process has not been fully understood. Here we develop an original theoretical model of the laser self-injection locking to a nonlinear microresonator, i.e. nonlinear self-injection locking, and construct stateof-the-art hybrid integrated soliton microcombs with electronically detectable repetition rate of 30 GHz and 35 GHz, consisting of a DFB laser butt-coupled to a silicon nitride microresonator chip. We reveal that the microresonator's Kerr nonlinearity significantly modifies the laser diode behavior and the locking dynamics, forcing laser emission frequency to be red-detuned. A novel technique to study the soliton formation dynamics as well as the repetition rate evolution in real time uncover non-trivial features of the soliton self-injection locking, including soliton generation at both directions of the diode current sweep. Our findings provide the guidelines to build electrically driven integrated microcomb devices that employ full control of the rich dynamics of laser self-injection locking, key for future deployment of microcombs for system applications. Recent advances in bridging integrated photonics and optical microresonators However, despite the inspiring and promising experimental results the principles and dynamics of the soliton self-injection locking have not been sufficiently studied yet. Only recently some aspects of the soliton generation effect were investigated Here, we first develop a theoretical model, taking into account nonlinear interactions of the counter-propagating waves in the microresonator, to describe nonlinear SIL, i.e. SIL to a nonlinear microresonator. Using this model, we show that the principles of the soliton generation in the self-injection locked devices differ considerably from the conventional soliton generation techniques. We find that the emission frequency of the laser locked to the nonlinear microresonator is strongly reddetuned and located inside the soliton existence range. For experimental verification, we develop a technique to experimentally characterize the SIL dynamics and study it in a hybrid-integrated soliton microcomb device with 30 GHz repetition rate, amenable to the direct electronic detection, using an InGaAsP DFB laser self-injection locked to a high-quality-factor (Q 0 > 10 7 ) integrated Si 3 N 4 microresonator. We demonstrate the presence of the nontrivial dynamics upon diode current sweep, predicted by the theoretical model, and perform the beatnote spectroscopy, i.e. study of the soliton repetition rate evolution under SIL. First, we introduce the general principles of the laser self-injection locking to the microresonator (Fig. It is convenient to introduce the normalized laser cavity to microresonator detuning ξ = 2(ω 0 -ω LC )/κ and the actual effective detuning ζ = 2(ω 0 -ω eff )/κ, where ω 0 is the frequency of the microresonator resonance and κ is its loaded linewidth. Note that ξ practically linearly depends on the injection current I inj . The ζ is the actual detuning parameter that determines the dynamics of the nonlinear processes in microresonator When the laser frequency ω LC is far detuned from the resonance ω 0 (|ξ| 0), the tuning curve first follows the line ζ = ξ (Fig. Such tuning curves (Fig. Previous works where f = 8ω 0 cn 2 ηP in /(κ 2 n 2 V eff ) is the normalized pump amplitude, ω 0 is the resonance frequency, c is the speed of light, n 2 is the microresonator nonlinear index, P in is the input pump power, n is the refractive index of the microresonator mode, V eff is the effective mode volume, κ is the loaded resonance linewidth and η is the coupling efficiency (η = 1/2 for critical coupling). Note, however, that the lower boundary (bistability) includes also a region of breather existence for high pump power We attribute this contradiction to the absence of the microresonator Kerr nonlinearity in the linear SIL model. The modified nonlinear SIL model including the Kerr nonlinearity Consider the microresonator coupled mode equations where Γ is the normalized coupling rate between forward and backward modes (mode splitting in units of mode linewidth), α x is a coefficient derived from mode overlap integrals and ζ μ = 2(ω μ -μD 1 -ω eff )/κ is the normalized detuning between the laser emission frequency ω eff and the μ-th cold microresonator resonance ω μ on the FSRgrid, with μ = 0 being the pumped mode and D 1 /2π is the microresonator free spectral range (FSR). For numerical estimations we use α x = 1 as for the modes with the same polarization. Eqs. (2) provide a nonlinear resonance curve and the soliton solution - where we define a = a 0 , b = b 0 and ζ = ζ 0 for simplicity. These equations define the complex reflection coefficient of the WGM microresonator which is used for SIL theory. To solve Eq. ( and nonlinear coupling shift δΓ nl We further transform ζ = ζ -δζ nl , Γ2 = δΓ 2 nl + Γ 2 , in order to achieve Eq. ( where K 0 = 8ηΓκ do 1 + α 2 g /(κR o ) is the self-injection locking coefficient and ψ = ψ 0 -κτ s ζ/2 is the selfinjection phase, κ do is the laser diode output mirror coupling rate, α g is the Henry factor Eqs. ( We show the distinctions between conventional generation of the dissipative Kerr solitons and self-injection locked soliton excitation in Fig. Next, we consider tuning curves corresponding to the nonlinear SIL, described by Eq. ( More study of the nonlinear tuning curves dependence on the locking phase ψ 0 , pump power, and the mode-coupling parameter Γ is presented in Supplementary Note 2. For experimental verification, the integrated soliton microcomb device consisting of a semiconductor laser diode and a high-Q Si 3 N 4 microresonator chip is developed. In our experiment, we use a commercial DFB laser diode of 120 kHz linewidth and 120 mW output power, which is directly butt-coupled to a Si 3 N 4 chip (Fig. The Si 3 N 4 chip is fabricated using the photonic Damascene reflow process Having access to the stable operation of these soliton states, we prove experimentally (in addition to their ultra-low noise RF beatnote signal (Fig. To clarify these principles and corroborate our findings from the theoretical model of nonlinear SIL, we develop a technique to experimentally investigate the soliton dynamics via laser self-injection locking, based on a spectrogram measurement of the beatnote signal between the SIL laser and the reference laser. This approach allows experimental characterization of the nonlinear tuning curve ζ(ξ), which can be compared to the theoretical model. First, we measure the microresonator transmission trace by applying 30 Hz triangle diode current modulation from 372 to 392 mA, such that the laser scans over a nonlinear microresonator resonance. As shown in Fig. Then we measure the tuning curve inside this transmission trace. The reference laser's frequency is set higher than the free-running DFB laser frequency, such that the heterodyne beatnote signal is observed near 15 GHz. The laser diode current is swept rather slow at 10 mHz rate, such that the laser scans across the resonance in both directions. The spectrogram data in the range of 0 to 25 GHz is collected by ESA (Fig. Initially, the DFB laser is free-running (Frame I). The diode current and ξ is decreasing, the laser is tuned into a nonlinear microresonator resonance (Frame II). Further decreasing of the diode current locks ζ to the microresonator inside the soliton existence range (Frame III). In this case, two effects can be observed: the appearance of the 20 GHz beatnote signal (Frame IV) between the reference laser and the first comb line, and the narrowlinewidth and powerful signal of the 30.6 GHz soliton repetition rate, as shown in Fig. In our experiment, the DFB laser remains locked when the current scan direction reverses from backward to forward (Frame V). This region V, which represents the multi-frequency regime of the DFB (see Supplementary Note 1 for details), is truncated for better visual representation. The DFB laser then changes it regime to a singlefrequency locked emission again (Frame VI), and generates a chaotic Kerr comb with a wide beatnote signal (Frame XI). As the effective detuning ζ rises with increasing ξ, switching between different soliton states and the first comb line beatnote (Frame VII) is observed, as well as the appearance of the breather soliton states (Frame VIII). Note that the soliton repetition rate reduces with increasing ζ (Frame X), and vice versa (Frame XII). Further diode current tuning causes the DFB laser to jump out of the SIL regime, its frequency returns to the freerunning regime, and thus ζ = ξ again (Frame IX). Based on the spectrogram data shown in Fig. Thus, we can conclude that conducted experiments confirm the presence of the non-trivial soliton formation dynamics predicted by the theoretical model. We demonstrate several predicted effects: first, soliton generation at both directions of the diode current sweep; second, switching of soliton states when the effective detuning ζ is decreasing In summary, we have studied theoretically and experimentally the effect of the soliton generation by the diode laser self-injection locked to an integrated microresonator. We have developed a theoretical model to describe self-injection locking to a nonlinear microresonator ("nonlinear SIL") and have showed that the complicated dependence of the emission frequency on the injection current leads to the non-trivial dynamics of nonlinear processes. It has been shown that the effective emission frequency of the self-injection locked laser is red-detuned relative to the microresonator resonance and is located inside the soliton existence region for most combinations of parameters. We have checked theoretical results experimentally and we have demonstrated single-soliton generation enabled by a DFB laser self-injection locked to an integrated Si 3 N 4 microresonator of 30 GHz and 35 GHz FSRs. Also, it has been predicted that in contrast with the free-running laser, in the SIL regime soliton generation is possible for both forward and backward scan of the laser diode injection current. We have developed a spectrogram technique that allows to measure accessed soliton detuning range, and to observe features of nonlinear self-injection locking. Obtained experimental results are in a good agreement with theoretical predictions. Some deviations from the predicted behavior can be attributed to the nonlinear generation of sidebands not included in our theory, which depletes the power in the pumped mode and changes the nonlinear detuning shift The radiophotonic signal of the soliton repetition rate provides better phase fluctuations at high offsets (> 10 kHz) than the commercial microwave analog signal generator (Keisight N5183B). Note that different soliton states correspond to different phase fluctuations, i.e. optimization of the SIL soliton state may lead to the further decreasing of the phase noise. Therefore, the soliton self-injection locking provides, first, laser diode stabilization, second, microcomb generation, third, ultra-low noise photonic microwave generation. The main problem of this technique is the limitation of achievable effective detunings: a single-soliton state with a large detuning and broad bandwidth may be hard to obtain in the SIL regime. Further careful parameter optimization is needed for the comb bandwidth enhancement. One possible solution may be based on the fact that backscattering plays a major role and different schemes with increased backscattering may extend the range of the effective detunings in the locked state. Another important question is the increase of the total comb power (see Supplementary Our results provide insight into the soliton formation dynamics via laser self-injection locking, which has received wide interest recently from the fields of integrated photonics, microresonators, and frequency metrology. Also, they may be used for the determination of the optimal regimes of the soliton generation and for the efficiency enhancement of integrated microcomb devices. We believe, that our findings, in combination with recent demonstrations of industrial packaging of DFB lasers and Si 3 N 4 waveguides, pave the way for highly compact microcomb devices operated at microwave repetition rates, built on commercially available CMOS-compatible components and amenable to integration. This device is a promising candidate for high-volume applications in data-centers, as scientific instrumentation, and even as wearable technology in healthcare. This result is significant for laser systems with strong optical feedback (such as low-noise III-V/Si hybrid lasers and mode-locked lasers), oscillator synchronization, and other laser systems beyond integrated microcombs. A related example microrings is made of quantum cascade active media Silicon nitride chip information: The Si 3 N 4 integrated mi-croresonator chips were fabricated using the photonic Damascene process 