Magnetotransport theory of layered superconductors in the flux flow steady state is revisited. Longstanding controversies concerning observed Hall sign reversals are resolved. The conductivity separates into a Bardeen-Stephen vortex core contribution, and a Hall conductivity due to moving vortex charge. This charge, which is responsible for Hall anomaly, diverges logarithmically at weak magnetic field. Its values can be extracted from magetoresistivity data by extrapolation of vortex core Hall angle from the normal phase. Hall anomalies in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8-x , and Nd 1.85 Ce 0.15 CuO 4-y data are consistent with theoretical estimates based on doping dependence of London penetration depths. In the appendices, we derive the Streda formula for the hydrodynamical Hall conductivity, and refute previously assumed relevance of Galilean symmetry to Hall anomalies. The Hall effect in the flux flow (FF) regime of superconducting films has long been an intriguing and controversial subject. The pioneering theory of However, the microscopic origin of non-dissipative vortex forces and imaginary relaxation rates, as well as the definition of the relevant vortex charge in a screened environment, have been subjects of ongoing debates, lasting for more than 50 years. In this paper, we take on the Hall anomaly problem with a new approach to flux flow transport theory. This approach allows us to show that an additional Hall current is carried by moving vortex charge (MVC), which does not vanish in a layered superconductor geometry. The MVC can be estimated from independently measured thermodynamic coefficients, and compared to the value extracted from magnetoresistivities data. The strategy of this paper is as follows. (i) We first revisit FF transport theory. While a vortex dynamical equation was used to explain dissipative FF transport Here, in contrast, we completely avoid bias currents, vortex forces and their phenomenological equations of motion. The mean vortex velocity in the steady state is constrained by the external electric field. The current is calculated as a linear response to the applied electric field, and Galilean symmetry is not assumed. (ii) We show that the conductivity (per layer) separates into two additive terms, e < 0 is the electron charge, and αβ with α, β ∈ {x, y} is the antisymmetric tensor. The first term recovers BS formula (iii) We use the Streda formula Q 0 is proportional to the derivative of superfluid stiffness with respect to electron density, and to the interlayer dielectric constant, which can be experimentally determined without microscopic knowledge of the normal state correlations. α represents vortex core properties and is of order unity. Generically, Q 0 has opposite sign to first term in Eq. (iv) Q v can be extracted from experimental magnetresistivity data, and compared to Eq. ( We briefly discuss effects of inhomogeneous pinning at low magnetic field, and superconducting fluctuations. The paper ends with a summary of our results and their comparison to previous theories. We consider a homogeneous thin film of a type-II superconductor, below the zero field transition temperature T < T (0) c , A magnetic field B = Bẑ induces a two dimensional (2D) vortex density , where Φ 0 = hc/(2|e|) is the Josephson flux quantum. The FF regime is defined by (see Fig. where B c2 ≡ Φ 0 /2πξ 2 , ξ is the vortex core radius, and B melt is the vortex lattice melting field In cuprates, and other highly anisotropic layered superconductors, B melt (T ) B c2 (T ) at low temperatures The global phase field of the superconductor, outside the vortex cores, can be separated into the vorticity phase and transport phase: A core EMF, E core , is imposed by the voltage drop (V 1 -V 2 ) across the metallic region (yellow disk) of radius ξ. where X i are the vortices' positions, and d • ∇φ tr = 0 on any orbit. Henceforth we fix the gauge choice to be A 0 (x, t) = 0 throughout the paper. For a configuration of static vortices φ(x) = 0. We introduce an external DC electric field into the vector potential as A = A B -cEt, where ∇ × A B = Bẑ. If φ(x) remains time-independent, the 2D current density will increase linearly in time, viz. where ρ s is the 2D superfluid stiffness, and the mean free energy density will increase as f (t) ∼ ρ s t 2 . The runaway energy will be cut off by destruction of the superfluid stiffness, or by mobilization of the vortices, which will result in ∇ φ = 0. Let us first consider a single moving vortex with velocity V as depicted in Fig. where From the definition of φ v (x -V t), the core EMF is linearly related to the vortex velocity by, Since ∇ 2 φ v = 0 everywhere, E is divergence free, in analogy to an in-plane 2D "magnetic field". The EMF produced by each moving vortex can be parameterized by a 2D "magnetic moment", In analogy with magnetostatics V denotes the average vortex velocity, and J v is the vorticity current. The last equality in Eq. ( Here we turn this relation on its head. By demanding a steady state d dt j = 0, the externally imposed electric field must be cancelled, on average, by -2e ∇ φ , and hence E = Ē. This constrains the average vortex velocity to be, It should be emphasized that in our approach, the vortex velocity is independent of any Hamiltonian parameters. The transport problem is formulated in terms of a linear response of the transport current to the externally applied electric field E. The current has two separate components: the metallic vortex cores which serve as ideal current pumps, and the MVC transported by the moving vortices (see Fig. Within the BS model, the vortex cores are metallic disks of radius ξ, with ρ s = 0 inside the core and constant outside. The electrons in the disk are subjected to a core EMF which interpolates between its boundaries which move at velocity V of Eq. ( the EMF from the moving frame to the lab frame (to linear order in V /c) combined with the external field E, yields E core + E + V × B/c = E core , where we have used Eq. ( For a homogeneous superconducting film, we assume that all vortices move at the same average speed and produce the same core current density. The moving vortex cores act as ideal current pumps of the DC transport current. Due to the finite viscosity of the core electrons, the current density is continuous at the core boundaries, where φ tr was defined in Eq. ( Local fluctuations in core currents and charge density are eliminated in the coarse grained DC current density jtr . Substituting Eq. ( which constitutes the first term in Eq. ( In the "dirty limit" ξ l tr Fig. In this section we discuss the contribution of MVC to the Hall conductivity. In the static E = 0 case, in the absence of micrscopic particle-hole symmetry, one expects local vorticity currents to induce charge density modulations δρ vc (x -X i ), which would be centred around the vortex positions {X i }. Vortex charge has been previously proposed in the context of Hall anomalies which will produce the second term of Eq. ( Here, MVC is well defined using Kubo linear response theory. In the case of λ l B , the vortex system behaves as an incompressible fluid due to the long range logarithmic interactions between vortices. The coarse-grained charge density response to any local variation of the magnetic field δB v is given by where, by the aforementioned incompressibility, R is a local function of space and time. The dynamical Hall conductivity of the charged vortex fluid is proportional to the Fourier transform of R which is shown in Appendix A. The second term in Eq. ( where the first equality is known as the Streda formula that is to say, Q v is the change in total charge after inserting one additional flux quantum into the system. For the calculation in the following section, we note that the background charge density which is not created by the vorticity, does not contribute to the MVC Hall current. Streda formula is known for its application to gapped quantum Hall (QH) phases. There, the order of limits (q, ω) → 0 also commute due to the locking of local charge and magnetic flux variations. Intriguingly, the local flux-charge attachment property is shared between the QH and the vortex liquid phases Three dimensional screening ensures that the total charge accumulated around a static vortex vanishes, except near the surface This question is answered by applying the theory of vortex charge screening of Khomskii and Freimuth Figure In the absence of pinning, our vortex fluid is described as a slowly flowing hexagonal vortex lattice (VL). The quantities calculated will be accurate to leading order in the vortex velocity. We begin with the 2D Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy density of the superconducting condensate, In the superconducting phase, a < 0 and the coherence length is ξ = (-K/a) 1/2 . Throughout we assume B B c2 , in which case we may write Ψ(x) ≈ (-a/b) 1/2 exp(iφ), where φ is given by Eq. ( where ρ s = -2Ka/b is the superfluid stiffness, ε core is the dimensionless vortex core energy, and Setting ∇ 2 Φ = 0 (charge neutrality of a 2D Coulomb gas) forces the vortex density to be rigidly determined by n v = B/Φ 0 . The profile of f (x), outside the vortex cores, is depicted in Fig. In isotropic three dimensional superconductors, ∂ z δμ(x, z) = 0. The in-plane screening case is depicted in Fig. which is the consequence of ∇ ⊥ δμ vl (r) vanishing by symmetry on the 2D unit cell boundaries, see Fig. In layered superconductors, neighboring dopant layers are positioned at z = ±a c /2, with δμ(x, ±a c /2) ∝ ρ dop s ρ s . The interlayer modulation can be approximately modelled by, This modulation results in interlayer screening. The charge deviation given by Eq. ( The MVC, by We can discard the uniform condensation energy -ρ s /4ξ 2 in Eq. ( Averaging Eq. ( where ε M is the dimensionless Madelung energy, where (1, τ = exp(iπ/3)) are the complexified triangular lattice vectors, q = exp(2iπτ ) and is the Dedekind eta function. The dimensionless vortex core energy ε core is of order unity in BCS theory where the temperature dependent parameters are, α(T ) is of order unity, and depends on ξ, and ε core (n e ). These quantities require a microscopic theory of the core properties, but do not effect the value of Q 0 and the logarithmic dependence of Q v on magnetic field. One would like to extract MVC values from experimental Hall and longitudinal magnetoresistivities. The problem is that in unconventional superconductors, we often do not fully understand the behavior of the metallic core conductivities, which are required for the subtraction. Fortunately, the Hall conductivity in Eq. ( We can use the result that the BS Hall angle inside the metallic cores reflects the extrapolated behavior of the normal phase. For temperatures not too far from T c , it is reasonable to linearly extrapolate of the normal state temperature dependences of ρ xx , ρ yx to below T c , as depicted in Fig. Thus, the BS Hall conductivity can be deduced by multiplying the measured σ exp xx (which is not affected by the MVC), by the extrapolated Hall angle, Using Eq. 1, we can extract the experimental values of the MVC by subtracting σ BS xy from the experimental Hall conductivity σ exp xy , A crude theoretical estimation of Q 0 of Eq. ( a c is the c-axis layer separation, which will later drop out of Q 0 . In the underdoped regime x ≤ 0.15, the doping and temperature dependent ρ s of cuprates for |x| < x opt , where x = 1-n e a 2 is the doping concentration per copper, x opt ≈ 0.16 is optimal doping, and a 3.8 Å. is the copper-copper distance in the superconducting planes. Note that x is positive (negative) for hole (electron) doped materials, and that γ is weakly doping and temperature dependent, which is consistent with the empirical Uemura scaling which by Eq. ( whose values for hole-doped Bi This paper has implicitly assumed weak effects of disorder and pinning in the FF regime. Eq. ( The FF conductivity, Eq. ( The MVC Hall current, however, remains unchanged, because it is proportional to the total vorticity current, and the effective conductivity due to partial pinning is The partial pinning parameter L ff /L < 1 depends on the sample inhomogeneities, and is an increasing function of field, temperature, and current. A signature of the partial pinning regime, would be a non linear current-voltage relation. We note partial pinning enhances both the BS Hall and longitudinal conductivities. Therefore, we can still extract Q exp v from σ exp xx , σ exp xy , and the extrapolated Hall angle, using Eq. ( Fig. Hall anomalies in superconductors have been an open theoretical problem for more than four decades. Some of the confusion in the field originates in the formulation of vortex forces and viscosities. Vortex dynamics approaches calculate the vortex velocity (and the associated EMF it generates) as a response to the force exerted by a bias current, in addition to other forces. The conductivity tensor depends on the coefficients of these forces. However, conductivities can only be methodically computed by Kubo formulas, where the current is derived as a response to an applied electric field (as in our approach), and not vice versa. The vortex dynamical equation has seen endless debates since first introduced by BS [1] and Nozieres and Vinen 1. Superconductors in a periodic potential with impurities are not Galilean invariant. Kelvin's circulation theorem is valid for a perfectly Galilean liquid, where vortices must move at the velocity of the background current, i.e. "go with the flow". This rule would indeed produce the Galilean Hall conductivity of σ xy = cρ/B. However, de Gennes and Nozieres 2. As shown by several arguments in Appendix B, the onset of short range superconducting stiffness prevents the vortices from "going with the flow". The vortex liquid is incompressible due to its long range interactions. As a consequence, the Hall conductivity is given by the non Galilean invariant Streda formula, Eq. ( In this paper the vortex velocity is not driven by various forces, but dictated by the electric field via Josephson relation An important feature of the present approach is the separability of the conductivity tensor in Eq. ( Hall sign reversals are a result of Q v σ core xy < 0. Whether there are one or two sign reversals, depends on the individual temperature dependence of each of the two terms in Eq. Previous authors Eq. ( At very strong magnetic fields, Hall sign reversals in cuprates have been attributed to Fermi surface reconstructions in the normal metallic phase When the limits (q, ω) → (0, 0) of Eq. ( . This condition is satisfied in gapped quantum Hall phases, and for the vortex liquid discussed in Section 4. In both of these systems the response of δρ(x, t) to δB(x , t ) defined by R(xx , tt ) in Eq. ( To discuss the hydrodynamic contribution to the Hall current we consider "coreless" vortices by setting σ core xy → 0 in Eq. ( In a perfect Galilean invariant liquid with total charge density ρ, vortices "go with flow" as dictated by Kelvin's circulation theorem. That is to say the averaged particles' velocity should be equal to that of the vortices, i.e. j Hall = ρV . In the presence of an electric field, Josephson's mean vortex velocity is V = cE × ẑ/B -see Eq. ( In this Appendix, we show that Eq. ( 1. The current induced by a moving vortex in the (Galilean invariant) dynamical Gross-Pitaevskii theory was calculated in the superfluid phase by Arovas and Freire This current integrates to zero, and does not produce a global Hall current j Hall = ρV , which is required for Eq. (47). 2. Consider a charged two dimensional bosonic superfluid of density n and charge q, and Hamiltonian 2m * (49) on a narrow ring, subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field A = -B 2 r × ẑ. A vortex lattice of density n v = B/Φ 0 is produced in the bulk of the ring. Now a radial electric field E r is adiabatically turned on. The vortex lattice will start moving around the annulus at Josephson's velocity V = cE × ẑ/B. We can understand the null drag effect of the moving vortex lattice by analogy to that of moving potential term d 2 x φ(x -V t) ρ(x). At low velocities, the rigid condensate "sticks" to the lab frame in which it was prepared, and is not dragged by the moving potential (in other words: it is hard to pump a superfluid). This statement can be verified by the following Gedankenexperiment: we boost the Hamiltonian to the rotating frame of velocity V , which is implemented by inserting an effective Aharonov-Bohm (AB) flux Φ AB = (m * c/q)V L. Superconducting stiffness ensures that the circulating persistent current in the moving frame would be j = -nqV at a finite flux. The persistent current does not decay even in the presence of the (now) static potential φ(x). (This is to be contrasted with the metallic phase, the current decays to zero by scattering at all fluxes Φ AB = integer × Φ 0 .) Boosting back to the non-rotating lab frame, by setting Φ AB → 0, restores the motion of the potential, and rewinds the current back to zero. Thus the moving potential does not drag the condensate. 3. Due to the local stiffness (rigidity) of the superconductor, the vortex liquid is incompressible due to the logarithmic interactions between vortices. This justifies the interchange of q, ω order of limits of the hydrodynamical Hall conductivity, resulting in the applicability of the Streda formula σ xy = c (∂ρ/∂B). The Streda formula for the vortex liquid is proven in Appendix A. Thus, the distinction between a Galilean metal and its lower temperature flux flow regime can be captured by the inequality of ρ/B = (∂ρ/∂B). .