Traditional cobalt selenides as active materials in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) would suffer from drastic volume expansions and large stacking effects, leading to a low cycling stability. In this work, we utilized a facile template method for preparing Co3Se4@N-CN (CSNC) that encapsulated Co3Se4 nanoparticles into 3D interconnected nitrogen-doped carbon network (N-CN). Satisfactorily, it possesses excellent cycling stability with enhanced lithium and sodium energy storage capacity. As an anode material in LIBs, CSNC exhibited a prominent reversible discharge performance of 1313.5 mAh g -1 after 100 cycles at 0.1 A g -1 and 835.6 mAh g -1 after 500 cycles at 1.0 A g -1 . Interestingly, according to the analysis from cyclic voltammetry, the in-situ generated Se might provide extra capacity that leaded to a rising trend of capacity. When utilized as an anode in SIBs, CSNC delivered an outstanding capacity of 448.7 mAh g -1 after 100 cycles at 0.1 A g -1 and could retain 328.9 mAh g -1 (77.2% of that of 0.1 A g -1 ) even at a high current density of 5.0 A g -1 . The results demonstrate that CSNC is a superior anode material in LIBs and SIBs with great promise. More importantly, this strategy opens up an effective avenue for the design of transition metal selenide/carbonaceous composites for advanced battery storage systems. For the past few decades, people have constantly explored novel advanced electrode materials, in order to reduce the gap between demand and supply of energy storage. The carbon-based functional materials play a pivotal role in the field of electrochemical energy storage due to their low cost and abundant resource However, the major drawback limiting the widely practical application of carbon materials is relative lower theoretical capacity of 372 mAh g -1 In our work, utilizing a facile template method, we use the NaCl as a pore-forming agent and glucose as a carbon source to successfully prepare ultrathin 3D interconnected nitrogen-doped carbon network (N-CN). By mixing as prepared N-CN with various concentration of cobalt contained solution, following by in-situ selenization, Co3Se4@N-CN (CSNC) electrodes was obtained. A reversible lithium storage capacity as high as 1313.5 mAh g -1 could be achieved at the current density of 0.1A g -1 . During the cycling, a large increase in capacity, and this unusual phenomenon is reasonably explained by in-situ selenium precipitation reaction. Meanwhile, the hybrid electrode also maintains a high reversible capacity of 448.7 mAh g -1 at 0.1A g -1 after 100 cycles, with an excellent rate capability of over 77% retention as the current densities go up to 5 A g -1 , applying as the anode for sodium ion batteries. Firstly, 50 g NaCl and 3 g glucose powder were dissolved in 150 ml deionized water to form a transparent solution under continuous stirring for 2 h. Then, the resulting mixed solution was directly freeze-dried in vacuum, and the obtained mixture was ground with 3 g urea in an agate mortar. After that, the sample was heated at 700 °C for 3 h in a tube furnace under Ar atmosphere with the heating rate of 3 °C/min. The mixed powder was cooled down naturally and washed several times by deionized water to remove the NaCl and dried at 60 °C in the air overnight. For Co3Se4@N-CN composite, 0.1 g of the as-obtained N-CN powder was added into 30 ml solutions containing various concentration of Co(NO3)2 (0.05 M, 0.1 M, 0.2 M, and 0.5 M), respectively, all the solutions were stirred for 12 h at 45 °C. Then, the mixture was filtered, and dried at 60 °C for 12 h in the air. During annealing process, the obtained mixture was placed in the downstream side and 0.4g selenium powder was placed in the upstream side of the porcelain boat and heated at 650 °C for 2 h in a tube furnace under nitrogen atmosphere. The Co3Se4@N-CN samples were labeled as CSNC-0.05, CSNC-0.1, CSNC-0.2, CSNC-0.5 by adjusting the concentration of Co(NO3)2 (0.05 M, 0.1 M, 0.2 M and 0.5 M). X-ray diffraction (XRD, Japan Rigaku 2550) with Cu K_α radiation (λ=1.54056 Å) operating at 40 kV and 300 mA is employed to investigate the phases and crystalline structures. The microstructure and morphology of samples are analyzed by Transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JSM-2010F) and Scanning electron microscope (SEM, Magellan 400). The specific surface area and the pore size distribution are measured by a Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET, JW-BK 132F) analyzer. And a Thermo escalab 250Xi electron spectrometer is used to conduct the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra. The electrochemical performance of CSNC was tested using 2032 coin-type cell. The working electrode comprised CSNC (the active material), acetylene black (the conductivity agent), and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) (the binder) with a weight ratio of 7:2:1. The slurry was coated on copper foil and dried under vacuum at 80 °C overnight. And there was about 1.5 mg mass loading of active material on each electrode. The electrolyte was a 1.0 M solution of LiPF6 in ethylene carbon (EC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylmethy carbonate (EMC) (1 : 1 : 1, v/v/v) and a 1.0 M solution of NaClO4 in ethylene carbon (EC), diethy carbonate (DEC) (1 : 1, v/v). Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure for the Co3Se4@N-CN Scheme 1 illustrates the as-synthesized process of CSNCs. Firstly, a uniformly distributed hybrid precursor consisted of glucose and sodium chloride crystals was obtained by a simple dissolution and vacuum freeze-drying routine. Then the precursor was ground with urea and annealed in Ar atmosphere and washed to obtain the conductive N-CN. Finally, the N-CN was adequately soaked in various concentrations of Co 2+ solutions and dried overnight, then the Co 2+ @N-CN undergone selenization in a tube furnace with the assistance of the selenium powder to form CSNC nanocomposite. The Raman spectra in Figure where i is the measured current density, v stands for the scan rate, and b is a constant. Generally, value of 0.5 discloses a total diffusion-controlled charge storage behaviors, while b value of 1 reveals that it is the pseudocapacitive behavior dominates the charge storage process. The b value can be determined by the slope of plotting log i versus log v . As shown in Figure Furthermore, the contribution ratio of capacitive behavior at different scan rate can be calculated by dividing between the diffusion-controlled contribution and the capacitive contribution in the light of the following equation: where i(V) stands for the current density at different potential, v represents the scan rate, and k1 and k2 are constants at a given potential. The results of the diffusioncontrolled and capacitive contributions of LIB are calculated and displayed in Figure In conclusion, we report a 3D interconnected carbon network prepared by an in-situ template method, and Co3Se4@N-CN was further synthesized as the anode of high performance lithium ion and sodium ion batteries. N-CN possesses several advantages: (1) N-CN has a high specific surface and abundant pore size, which can provide a large number of ion transport channels to increase the reaction speed. (2) The unique stable three-dimensional structure can reduce the capacity loss by protecting the active material from violently volume expansion. (3) N-doping can make N-CN more easily to adsorb Co 2+ , and help N-CN to provide tantalum capacity during the reaction. Co3Se4 has a higher theoretical capacity than carbon materials, so we prepared CSNC to enhance the overall electrochemical performance of the composite by synergistic effects. In this experiment, we optimized the mass ratio of Co3Se4 in CSNC by adjusting the concentration of Co 2+ soaked with N-CN to obtain the best ratio. In the case of lithium ion battery, CSNC-0.1 possesses a constant increased capacity of 1313.5 mA g - 1 at a current density of 0.1 A g -1 after 100 cycles, and the phenomenon of increased capacity is fully explained above. The CSNC-0.1 shows a capacity of 835.6 mAh g -1 at a current density of 1.0 A g -1 after 500 cycles. In addition, in the sodium ion battery test, CSNC-0.1 achieved a capacity of 448.7 mAh g -1 at 0.1 A g -1 after 100 cycles, and the reversible capacity reached 328.9 mAh g -1 at 5 A g -1 , which is 77.2% of the capacity at 0.1 A g -1 . Compared with the transition metal selenide, cobalt sulfide and cobalt oxide anodes for LIBs or SIBs, the CSNC shows much better rate and cycling performances, as listed in Table 