While similar in nature, the properties of silica and silsesquioxane are very different, but little is known about these differences. In this paper, functionalized silsesquioxane microparticles are synthesized by adapting the modified Stöber method and post-functionalized with rhodamine-B. The as synthesized silsesquioxane particles are characterized by a variety of physical and chemical methods. The synthesized particles are amorphous and nonporous in nature and are less dense than silica. While silsesquioxane and silica have some similar physical properties from their siloxane core, the organic functional group of silsesquioxane and the one-half oxygen difference in its structure impact many other properties of these particles like their charging behavior in liquids. These differences not only allow for the ease surface modification as compared to that necessary to modify silica, but also the use in a variety of colloidal systems that due to pH or electrolyte concentrations may not be suitable for silica particles. Colloidal particles and suspensions have been investigated widely due to their extensive applications from advanced materials to drug delivery Para-(chloromethyl)phenyltrimethoxy silane was purchased from Gelest Inc. Potassium carbonate (ACS reagent) was purchased from Fischer Scientific. 3-aminopropyltriethoxy silane (3-APT), anhydrous ethanol (200 proof), ammonium hydroxide (28%), and Rhodamine-B carboxylic acid were purchased from VWR international. For synthesizing BC-SSQ particles, 10 mL of anhydrous ethanol and 4 mL of 28% ammonium hydroxide were mixed on a magnetic stirrer for 5 minutes. Then 1.8 mL of benzyl chloride trimethoxy silane was added to the reaction at a rate of 0.08 mL/minute and was allowed to stir for 18 hours. Particles were separated by centrifuging at 3000 rpm for 20 minutes. Then, particles were washed multiple times with ethanol followed by distilled water to remove any impurities. Finally, particles were dried under the hood for 48 hours to yield BC-SSQ particles. For synthesizing BC-A-SSQ particles, 65 mL of anhydrous ethanol and 3.5 mL of 28% ammonium hydroxide were mixed on a magnetic stirrer for 5 minutes. Then 2 mL of 3-APT silane was added to the flask dropwise followed immediately by 1 mL of benzyl chloride trimethoxy silane at a rate of 0.08 mL/minute and was allowed to stir for 18 hours. Then the BC-A-SSQ particles were washed and dried the same way as BC-SSQ particles. In order to functionalize the as synthesized particles with Rhodamine-B, 500 mg of particles were dispersed in 30 mL of anhydrous ethanol and were mixed on a magnetic stirrer until the particles were dispersed completely. Then 79 mg of potassium carbonate was added followed by 230 mg of Rhodamine-B and was allowed to stir for 18 hours. In order to keep the reaction away from visible light, the reaction flask was covered with aluminum foil. The same procedure was used to wash and dry the particles. In this work, the morphology of particles was investigated using a Zeiss Auriga Crossbeam FIB-FESEM scanning electron microscope and a Zeiss Orion helium ion microscope. A TESCAN scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used for surface analysis of the particles. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer. Patterns were recorded over the range from 10 to 90° (2θ) in steps of 0.02° with a scan speed of 2s at each step. A Brookhaven 90 Plus-Zeta particle size analyzer was used to measure the average sizes of particles and their size distributions. The Brookhaven 90 Plus-Zeta particle size analyzer was used to measure the zeta potential of colloidal particles as well. Zeta potential of particles was measured at 0.01 volume percent concentration of particles in solutions with pH ranging from 3 to 11. Acidic and basic solutions were made by adding proper amount of nitric acid or potassium hydroxide to DI water. Each sample was sonicated and well-suspended in the pH solution before zeta potential measurements. These measurements also revealed the isoelectric point of the particles. A Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope was then used to observe any agglomerates that formed during settling. Particle density is required for sedimentation analysis, or calculations involving volumes or mass of particles. The particle density of different SSQ particles was measured by a AccuPyc II 1340 Pycnometer which is a fully automatic gas displacement pycnometer. Particles were first dried in the desiccator to obtain true sample mass and to avoid the distorting effect of water vapor on the volume measurement. Mass was determined by precisely weighing particles on an analytical balance. Knowing the mass of the particles, the density was measured by the pycnometer using a 1.0 cm 3 cup. After drying the particles in a desiccator, particles were degassed using a SmartPrep degasser to remove any gas trapped in the pores and on the other surfaces of the particles. To degas, particles were heated to 120 ̊C and degassed for 2 hours. After degassing, a TriStar 3000 gas adsorption analyzer was used to measure the surface area and porosity of the particles by measuring gas (N2) adsorption. In the literature, silsesquioxanes have been reported to have a variety of different structures, including a random structure, ladder structure, cage structures, and partial cage structure In Table Fig. The measured particle density for BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ was 1.68±0.05 and 1.48±0.04 g/cm 3 at 22 o C, respectively. This is lower than the density of silica which is reported to be 2.196 g/cm 3 [34]. This result is not unexpected as the structure of the silsesquioxane is highly amorphous and has a random cage structure which is more open than the structure of amorphous silica. The BET surface area (SBET) of BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ particles with size of 1.2 μm and 2.3 μm was 3.83±0.07 m 2 /g and 4.72±0.04 m 2 /g, respectively. The average pore width of BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ particles was 7.97 nm and 8.76 nm, respectively. Fig. Based on the characterization results, all four types of functionalized silsesquioxane particles tested in this study were spherical and had a nonporous, amorphous structure. It was also shown that the silsesquioxane particles were less dense than silica. Compared to silica, the potential colloidal stability of silsesquioxane was different due to the difference in the structure and surface charges. Benzyl chloride and amine functionalization of different silsesquioxane particles significantly affected the charge of particles. The isoelectric points of all four types of silsesquioxane particles were significantly higher than the isoelectric point of silica. These differences may make these particles more viable in applications where an isoelectric point closer to a neutral pH or a lower density particle is necessary. Silsesquioxane is most often treated the same as silica. But in this study, it was shown that although silsesquioxane and silica have a number of similarities in their physical properties such as thermal stability and rigidity which result from their siloxane core, the one-half oxygen difference in the silsesquioxane structure along with its' organic functional groups significantly impact many other properties of these particles. The more open structure of silsesquioxane makes it less dense when compared to silica. The difference in the number of oxygen molecules, as well as the type of the functional groups in the structure of the silsesquioxane particles as compared to silica particles, changes the overall charge of the particles in the solution and results in a significantly higher isoelectric point. Silsesquioxane particles can be positively charged in higher range of pH while silica is almost always negatively charged due to its low isoelectric point. Charging behavior of colloids impacts the stability of the suspension and is very important for designing a particular colloidal suspension based on the desired properties of that suspension. The post-functionalization capabilities of silsesquioxanes, based on both silane and halogen chemistry, are also beneficial for numerous applications in colloid science and ultimately give them a wider range of application when compared to silica. Silsesquioxane microparticles with different functional groups were synthesized by the modified Stöber method and post-functionalized with rhodamine-B. Both BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ particles were spherical with a smooth surface. The XRD results showed that both particles had amorphous structure. The isoelectric point of the BC-SSQ particles and BC-A-SSQ were near pH 4 and 7. Density of BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ was 1.68±0.05 and 1.48±0.04 g/cm 3 at 22 o C, respectively. Both BC-SSQ and BC-A-SSQ were nonporous with an average pore width of 7.97 nm and 8.76 nm and BET surface area of 3.83±0.07 m 2 /g and 4.72±0.04 m 2 /g, respectively. While these particles share some similarities with silica particles, the elimination of the one-half oxygen atom and the inclusion of the organic ligands into the overall structure changes the physical and chemical properties in significant ways. These property changes will not only allow silsesquioxane particles to be used in a wider variety of applications and but will also provide a greater means for tailoring system properties for desired behaviors and products. This work was financially supported by a grant from NASA EPSCoR (Grant No. NNX14AN28A).