We theoretically investigate the plasmonic heating of graphene-based systems under the midinfrared laser irradiation, where periodic arrays of graphene plasmonic resonators are placed on dielectric thin films. Optical resonances are sensitive to structural parameters and the number of graphene layers. Under mid-infrared laser irradiation, the steady-state temperature gradients are calculated. We find that graphene plasmons significantly enhance the confinement of electromagnetic fields in the system and lead to a large temperature rise compared to the case without graphene. The correlations between temperature change and the optical power, laser spot, and thermal conductivity of dielectric layer in these systems are discussed. Our numerical results are in accordance with experiments. Photothermal effects have been of interest in efficient solar vapor generation Graphene has been recently considered as a novel plasmonic material There are several methods to investigate the performance of graphene-based devices. While experimental implementation is very expensive and simulation is timeconsuming, theoretical approaches are scalable and pro- * Electronic address: anh.phanduc@phenikaa-uni.edu.vn vide good insights into the physics underlying design of metamaterials. Furthermore, the scalability is important in generating huge amount of data for machine learning and deep learning analyses. Thus, reliable theoretical models are useful for enhancing the highly accurate fabrications in both size and morphologies. In this letters, we present a theoretical approach to calculate plasmonic properties of graphene-based nanostructures and temperature distribution in the systems when irradiated by a mid-infrared laser light. The systems are modeled to be similar to mid-infrared graphene detectors fabricated in Ref. Our graphene-based systems as depicted in Figure When the size is much smaller than the wavelength of incident light, we can apply quasi-static approximation to analytically determine the polarizability of a single graphene resonator where ε 1 = 1, ε 2 = 6.25, ε 3 = 11.56, ω is frequency, and ζ and η are geometric parameters calculated using the lowest-order dipole plasmon model. The analytical dependence of ζ and η on the morphology and thickness can be found in Ref. According to the random-phase approximation with zero-parallel wave vector, the N -layers graphene conductivity in mid-infrared regime is where e is the electron charge, is the reduced Planck constant, τ is the carrier relaxation time, and E F is a chemical potential. Typically, σ(ω) contains both interband and intraband transitions. However, in the midinfrared regime, the intraband conductivity is completely dominant. The in-plane optical conductivity of graphene in Eq. ( The reflection and transmission coefficient of the graphene-based nanostructure are where where c is the speed of light, g ≈ 4.52 is the net dipolar interaction over the whole square lattice, r pq and t pq are the bulk reflection and transmission coefficients, respectively, when electromagnetic fields strike from medium p to q. From these, we compute the transmission |t 13 | 2 ≡ |t 13 (N )| 2 for N > 0 and N = 0 corresponding to systems with and without graphene plasmonic resonators. The extinction spectra measured in the experiments is the relative difference in these transmissions 1-|t 13 (N )| 2 /t 13 (N = 0)| 2 . The calculations clearly determine confinement effects of electromagnetic fields due to graphene plasmons. Under infrared laser irradiation, the diamon-like carbon layers and graphene-disk resonators absorb electromagnetic energy and are heated up. The temperature rise in cylinderical coordinate, ∆T ≡ ∆T (ρ, z), obeys the heat diffusion equation. Since the graphene resonator is a two-dimensional material, the thermal conductivity is anisotropic. This diffusion equation in the layer including all stacked plasmonic disks is where p 0 is the laser power per unit volume, w is the laser spot, ν 1 is the absorption coefficient, κ 1 and κ 1⊥ are the effective in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivity, respectively. To consider a uniform illumination condition, one simply takes w = ∞ and follows the same analysis as in Ref. where κ bulk ≈ 630 W/m/K According to Beer-Lambert's law, one can estimate is the absorption cross section, L = N δ is the thickness of graphene nanostruc-tures with δ = 0.335 nm, and 1/(a 2 L) is the density of graphene resonators on the surface of the dielectric film. In the diamond-like layer, the diffusion equation is w 2 e -ν1L-ν2(z-L) ,( where κ 2 ≈ 0.6 W/K/m To solve these differential equations, we take the Hankel transform of the above equations in ρ and it gives where ∆T (ρ, z) = ∞ 0 Θ(u, z)J 0 (ρu)udu with J 0 being the Bessel function of the first kind. P 0 is the power of the incident flux. A correction factor (1 -R) implies that only the absorption and transmission component of light play a role in the heating process. The analysis is consistent with a recent work where A 1 (u), B 1 (u), A 2 (u), and B 2 (u) are parameters determined by boundary conditions Figure To investigate effects of the graphene plasmon layers on the heating of graphene-disk systems, we use Eq. ( The temperature rise strongly depends on the incident power P 0 and the laser spot w. On the basis of Eqs. While a prior work Figure We have proposed to investigate the plasmonic heating of graphene-based systems under irradiation of a midinfrared laser. The nanostructures comprise a square array of multilayer graphene nanodisks deposited on the diamond-like carbon thin film, which is supported by a silicon substrate. We employ the dipole model associated with the random-phase approximation to calculate the polarizability of graphene on the substance and its absorption cross section. From these, the reflection and transmission coefficients are theoretically computed to estimate the confined power of the incident light. Our numerical results are in accordance with experiments 