Space-division multiplexing optical fibers can provide not only parallel channel transmission but also parallel distributed signal processing, being this a feature particularly attractive in Microwave Photonics applications. We present here few-mode fiber links with tailored modal propagation and dispersion properties that operate as sampled true time delay lines for radiofrequency signals. Space-division Multiplexing (SDM) technologies in optical fibers We must assure, in addition, a low level of coupling between groups of modes, what calls for the predilection of refractive step-index (SI) profiles and the use of short distances combined with direct detection techniques. In of the sample associated to that mode. Although that scheme resulted in a constant differential delay between samples, it did not allow TTDL tuneability with the optical wavelength. We propose here a FMF-based 4-sample TTDL approach where we obtain, for the first time to our knowledge, time delay tuneability over a specific optical wavelength range. This approach combines the custom design of a 7-LP-mode ring-core fiber and the inscription of 5 LPGs at the appropriate locations along the FMF to achieve both constant differential time delay and differential chromatic dispersion values between the different signal samples. Sampled TTDL operation requires constant basic differential delays ∆τ between adjacent samples. In addition, time delay tunability can be added by assuring a linear increment of the basic differential delay with the optical wavelength. In the particular case of a FMF-based TTDL, the different samples can be created in the spatial diversity domain by the use of the different modes that propagate along the fiber. The group delay per unit length of a given LPlm mode, τlm, can be expanded in 1 st -order Taylor series around a central wavelength λ0 as ( ) ( ) where τlm(λ0) is the group delay per unit length at λ0 and Dlm is the chromatic dispersion at λ0 for the LPlm mode. For TTDL operability, both τlm and Dlm must increase linearly between consecutive samples. Thus, a TTDL built upon a single FMF would require the use of a particular set of propagating modes that satisfies these two characteristics. However, this is, in general, impossible to accomplish in FMFs with classic refractive index profiles (i.e., step index, graded index, ring-core index, etc.). And, even in the hypothetical case that it was possible, the differential group delays between modes would probably be extremely high for MWP applications (i.e., very low operating radio frequencies), limiting the fiber length to a few meters. These differential group delays would be in addition much greater than the incremental dispersion effect itself, so that the differential delay tunability would be insignificant. We propose then to obtain the signal samples as a combination of different modes. A set of LPGs inscribed at specific positions along the FMF link will not only act as mode converters, With the proper combination of modes, we can assure a set of samples with constant incremental equivalent group delays and chromatic dispersion values, that is, being τeq,1 the equivalent group delay per unit length of the first sample, Deq,1 the equivalent chromatic dispersion of the first sample, and ΔD the incremental dispersion parameter between adjacent modes. We have designed a FMF for tuneable sampled TTDL operation. We choose a step-index profile to minimize the mode-coupling by increasing the effective index difference between modes with a ring-core architecture to provide more design versatility and allow us to properly manage the propagation characteristics of the symmetric modes (in a different way than the rest of the modes). Fig. where the superindex of the normalized length l02 = l02 (1) = l02 (2) = l02 (3) has been suppressed for simplicity. Then, substituting the mode parameters of Table We have presented, for the first time to our knowledge, TTDL operation for radiofrequency signals over a fewmode fiber link exhibiting time delay tuneability with the optical wavelength. The required control over both the group delay and the chromatic dispersion of the TTDL samples is achieved by the custom design of a ring-core SI FMF and the inscription of the adequate LPGs to excite higher-order modes at specific longitudinal locations along the fiber. The optical wavelength range of TTDL operation is subject to the optical bandwidth of the LPGs to be inscribed. This approach allows the implementation of tuneable MWP signal processing while the radiofrequency signal is distributed between the transmitter and the receiver ends. A particular potential field of application can be found in fiber-wireless radio access networks where different functionalities as microwave signal filtering or optical beamforming could be implemented while transmitting the signal, for instance, between a central office and a given remote antenna. 