The properties of topological systems are inherently tied to their dimensionality. Higherdimensional physical systems exhibit topological properties not shared by their lower dimensional counterparts and, in general, offer richer physics. One example is a d-dimensional quantized multipole topological insulator, which supports multipoles of order up to 2 d and a hierarchy of gapped boundary modes with 0-D corner modes at the top. While multipole topological insulators have been successfully realized in electromagnetic and mechanical 2D systems with quadrupole polarization, and a 3D octupole topological insulator was recently demonstrated in acoustics, going beyond the three physical dimensions of space is an intriguing and challenging task. In this work, we apply dimensional reduction to map a 4D higher-order topological insulator (HOTI) onto an equivalent aperiodic 1D array sharing the same spectrum, and emulate in this system the properties of a hexadecapole topological insulator. We observe the 1D counterpart of zero-energy states localized at 4D HOTI cornersthe hallmark of multipole topological phase. Interestingly, the dimensional reduction guarantees that one of the 4D corner states remains localized to the edge of the 1D array, while all other localize in the bulk and retain their zero-energy eigenvalues. This discovery opens new directions in multi-dimensional topological physics arising in lowerdimensional aperiodic systems, and it unveils highly unusual resonances protected by topological properties inherited from higher dimensions. The dimensionality of a topological system plays a determining role in defining the symmetry classification and, therefore, the topological invariants that identify the topological phase specific to such system Higher dimensions are crucial to unveil the new physics in the recently introduced class of higher-order topological insulators In this work, we apply dimensionality reduction to demonstrate the crucial role of higherdimensional topological physics by implementing a 4D hexadecapolar HOTI (h-HOTI), which is mapped onto its aperiodic 1D counterpart, and we experimentally confirm localization of projected topological 4D corner states in one dimension. To this aim, we apply Lanczos tridiagonalization and map a 4D tight-binding model of h-HOTI onto a one-dimensional acoustic system with strictly local aperiodic coupling distributions along the array. We obtain one pinned corner state of the 4D HOTI being preserved onto the edge of our sample by such mappinga unique feature enabled by the Lanczos transformation The proposed 4D h-HOTI is described by a tight-binding Hamiltonian with nearest-neighbor coupling in 4D hypercubic unit cell, as schematically shown in Fig. where t 1 andt 2 are the nearest-neighbor intracell and intercell hopping amplitudes, respectively. In Eq (1), the matrices are Pauli matrices, and σ 0 is the identity matrix. The energy spectrum found from the 4D tight-binding model (TBM) of a finite (3x3x3x3x16) h-HOTI lattice with π-flux through each 2D plaquette of the unit cell is shown in Fig. We now map this finite four-dimensional h-HOTI onto a one-dimensional array of coupled resonators with aperiodic hopping amplitudes using the Lanczos transformation. The Lanczos tridiagonalization transforms a general Hermitian matrix into a tridiagonal form and, therefore, allows for an immediate mapping onto a one-dimensional tight-biding model with an only-nearestneighbor hopping distribution characterized by an inhomogeneous (aperiodic) profile. The Lanczos transformation is unitary, which ensures to preserves spectrum and eigenstate orthogonality of the original Hamiltonian, and it can be performed with a specific site of choice (i.e., a component of the eigenvector) being fixed, known as anchor site. The first property guarantees that the final (tridiagonal) effective 1D Hamiltonian will still be Hermitian H ̂1D , where U ̂L is the Lanczos transformation operator, and ε i and τ i are the effective on-site energy and hopping amplitudes in the 1D array, and that the number of degrees of freedom of the 4D Hamiltonian is preserved. The second property ensures that any chosen site of the 1D array will have a one-to-one correspondence with one of the sites of the original higher-dimensional lattice, implying that a component of the eigenstate at a chosen site is fully preserved. This property can be used to make sure that at least one corner site in 4D is still anchored and pinned to the edge of the 1D array, implying that the corresponding corner state confined to this site in 4D will remain localized at the physical boundary of our aperiodic 1D lattice. The results of Lanczos transformation applied to the 4D Hamiltonian (Fig. We numerically confirmed that the mapped 1D Hamiltonian has a spectrum identical to the one of the 4D HOTI, as expected, and that the anchored corner state appears pinned to the edge of the 1D system. Moreover, we confirmed that the inverse transformation of a 1D boundary state maps it onto corner states localized at the anchor site in 4D HOTI. It is worth mentioning that the unitary character of the transformation was enforced by implementing Lanczos biorthogonalization algorithm Interestingly, as the used transformation preserves only the anchor site, all other zeroenergy 4D corner states appear in the bulk of the 1D lattice, but they have to remain spatially localized and topologically protected (a proof can be found in Supplement Section S3). However, since the number of higher-order boundary states (16 for the 4D case considered here) exceeds the number of boundaries of the projected 1D system (only two), most of the projected topological corner modes localize in the bulk of the 1D array. The proposed procedure thus not only offers an emulation of higher-order topological states in lower-dimensional systems, but it also unveils a new class of localized bulk resonances topologically protected by higher-dimensional symmetries of HOTIs. Indeed, the inspection of the eigenstates of the effective 1D system confirms that all other corner states of the original h-HOTI are localized modes in the bulk of the array. (See amplitude distribution of these corner modes in Supplementary Section S4). The dimensional reduction allows for one more simplification of significant relevance for the experimental realization of D-dimensional HOTIs, whose number of sites increases rapidly as (2N) D , where N is the number of unit cells along one edge of the finite (hyper-) cubic array: the size of the system can be dramatically reduced by cutting the array at any of the weak bonds (τ n ≈ 0) in the projected 1D lattice, without affecting the anchored higher-order topological corner state due to its localization at the boundary. The same holds true for the projected corner states that localize in the bulk of the 1D system, provided that the truncation is far enough from their localization site. The simulated results for the truncated 1D lattice with only 20 sites (out of 1296 original sites in 4D) are shown in Fig. To confirm that the corner modes and their 1D projections are not affected by the truncation, we performed inverse Lanczos transformation and mapped the eigenstates of the truncated 1D system back to 4D. To this aim, we assigned zero amplitudes to the missing sites of the truncated 1D lattice to restore number of degrees of freedom. The comparison of the field distribution on the xyz hyperplane for the boundary modes of different order (indicated by numbers in Fig. Clearly, only some of the modes are retained after the truncation of the array due to reduction in the number of degrees of freedom. As some of these states have an extended distribution in the 1D array, it is not surprising that their spectrum is slightly perturbed (due to weak coupling with the rest of the array). The rest of the states, which primarily localized in the removed part of the lattice, are dropped by the cutting procedure. We also calculated the band spectra and amplitude distribution of the effective 1D model truncated after the 30 th site, finding that the zero energy and the corresponding amplitude distribution are not changed (See the Supplementary Section S5). To experimentally confirm the feasibility of the dimensional reduction for the h-HOTI, we designed an acoustic aperiodic array of resonators emulating the 1D TBM using the finite-element method (FEM) software COMSOL Multiphysics (Acoustic Module). The individual resonators have the same height 3.0 cm, so that the lowest-frequency resonance, corresponding to an odd pressure profile in the vertical (axial) direction (with a single node at the center), arises at f~5720 Hz. Coupling is introduced by adding narrow channel-waveguides connecting the resonators in the array. The coupling strength between resonators (the hopping in the TBM) is modulated aperiodically in accordance with the mapping by vertically shifting the position of the connectors with respect to the node of the resonant mode. The simulation results for the system of 20 coupled resonators are presented in Fig. The frequency-response spectra for selected groups of resonators -the anchor boundary site (red band), the 10th resonator in the bulk (blue band), and averaged over all other bulk sites (yellow bands), are shown in Fig. The emergence of a quantized multipole moment and corner states is deeply related to the symmetries of the system, i.e., the presence of anti-commuting reflection symmetries in the 4D h-HOTI. Similarly, the "zero-energy" of the states is ensured by chiral symmetry, which stems from the fact that in the 4D h-HOTI the sites that belong to the same sublattice do not couple with each other. In addition, the Hamiltonian (1) possesses reflection symmetries that anti-commutate with each other because of the flux of π in each plaquette of the hypercubic lattice. The chiral symmetry of the system, on the other hand, with matrix representation Γ ̂= σ 3 ⊗ σ 3 ⊗ σ 3 ⊗ σ 0 , is expressed as Γ ̂H ̂4D Γ ̂-1 = -H ̂4D , which ensures the overall symmetry of the spectrum and "zero-energy" of the corner states. The fact that this property is retained during the dimensional reduction implies that the chiral symmetries is preserved in new form and can be expressed as U ̂LΓ ̂U ̂L -1 . Indeed, due to its local character, the chiral symmetry can be written as a symmetry operator for the finite h-HOTI as Γ ̂finite = I N×N ⊗ Γ ̂, where I N×N is the N by N identity matrix and N is the number of degrees of freedom (sites), and thus is (block)-diagonal. The Lanczos transformation changes the local character of the chiral symmetry by mixing different sites (except the anchor site) Γ ̂1D eff = U ̂LΓ ̂finite U ̂L-1 , thus inducing the new non-local form of chiral symmetry Γ ̂1D eff H ̂1D eff Γ ̂eff -1 = -H ̂1D eff of the effective 1D Hamiltonian. This effective chiral symmetry of the 1D Hamiltonian plays the same role as the original chiral symmetry for 4D h-HOTI and it ensures spectral stability of the modes of aperiodic 1D array. However, the non-local character of the symmetry operator Γ ̂1D eff in 1D is reflected in the presence of correlations of parameters in different part of array, hopping amplitudes and on-site energies, within the 1D system, responsible for the "zero-energy" of the localized states. The reflection symmetries and the resultant quantized multipole moment can be similarly analyzed in the dimensionally reduced system, and the quantized multipole moment of the bulk bands in the finite array can be extracted from the respective wave functions. Thus, despite its low-dimensional character, the effective 1D system inherits the properties of higher-dimensional h-HOTI. Therefore, the projected corner states, localized either in the bulk or on the edge of the 1D array, are induced and protected by the symmetries of the original 4D system, thus ensuring their very existence and stability specific to topological systems. (See more detailed discussion in the Supplementary Section S6). In this work we have demonstrated a new approach to emulating higher-dimensional topological systems, such as 4D HOTI with quantized hexadecapolar multipole moment, in a dimensionally reduced 1D system. We have theoretically mapped the 4D HOTI system onto an effective 1D tight-binding model with the use of Lanczos tridiagonalization, which was then experimentally implemented in an array of coupled acoustic resonators. We have proven that higher-dimensional topological corner states arise in the effective 1D system in the form of localized resonant modes confined to the edge of the system or in the bulk. More importantly, we have shown that these modes retain their spectral features enforced by chiral symmetry and reflection symmetries, which assumes a non-local character in the 1D system, and thus establishes correlation of parameters within the array. Thus, the symmetries inherited from the original 4D system are mapped into 1D and ensure the very existence and spectral stability of the 1D projections of higher-order topological corner states. The possibility to engineer multiple localized resonances via dimensional reduction and their unique features, such as precise spectral properties and topological robustness, open remarkable opportunities for practical applications, from robust resonators to sensors and aperiodic topological lasers. More broadly, our work shows how higher-dimension topological physics may be mapped into easily realizable devices using dimensionality reduction, opening unique opportunities to implement and verify the exotic features of higher-dimension topological physics in quantum and classical photonic and phononic systems. 1. Structure design, 3D printing, and generic measurements -The unit cell designs of the topological expanded lattice are shown in Fig. 2. Numerical method -Finite element solver COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2a with the Acoustic module was used to perform full-wave simulation. In the acoustic propagation wave equation, the speed of sound was set as 343.2 m/s and density of air as 1.225 kg/m^3. Other dimensional parameters of the structure are the same as the fabricated parameters.