We show that magnetic fluctuations can destroy the Hebel-Slichter peak in conventional superconductors. The Hebel-Slichter peak has previously been expected to survive even in the presence of strong electronic interactions. However, we show that antiferromagnetic fluctuations suppress the peak at q = 0 in the imaginary part of the magnetic susceptibility, χ +-(q, ω), which causes the Hebel-Slichter peak. This is of general interest as in many materials superconductivity is found near a magnetically ordered phase, and the absence of a Hebel-Slichter peak is taken as evidence of unconventional superconductivity in these systems. For example, no Hebel-Slichter peak is observed in the κ-(BEDT-TTF)2X organic superconductors but heat capacity measurements have been taken to indicate s-wave superconductivity. Similarly, experiments indicate nodeless superconductivity in many iron pnictide superconductors which exhibit no peak in the relaxation rate. If antiferromagnetic fluctuations destroy the putative Hebel-Slichter peak in organic superconductors then the peak should be restored by applying a pressure, which is known to suppress antiferromagnetic correlations in these materials. Unconventional superconductivity, and the identification of the underlying mechanism, remains one of the most active areas of research in modern physics Understanding the exact form of the superconducting gap is of considerable importance for developing an understanding of the microscopic basis for unconventional superconductivity, however, it is often far from straightforward in practice. The Josephson interference experiments responsible for unambiguously identifying the 'd x 2 -y 2 -wave' symmetry of the cuprates In many experiments, the bulk of the insight comes from the low temperature behavior of experimental probes, which reflect the density of states of the superconductor More detailed probes of the gap function are available for determining the presence and position of gap nodes on the Fermi surface. Such probes include the measurement of thermodynamic properties such as the heat capacity under a varying orientation of magnetic field One of the most notable probes of the superconducting gap is the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 measured in nuclear magnetic resonance. For conventional superconductors, 1/T 1 displays a peak below the superconducting transition temperature known as the Hebel-Slichter peak In the most interesting superconductors, both strong antiferromagnetic fluctuations and the absence of a Hebel-Slichter peak in 1/T 1 are ubiquitous While Knight shift measurements on κ-Br consistently indicate singlet pairing Despite the lack of an observed Hebel-Slichter peak in 1/T 1 Early attempts to understand the unconventional superconductivity in the cuprates, found that coherence effects can, in principle, be disguised by a combination of strong-coupling and electronic interactions These materials are of particular interest because the bandwidth, and therefore the relative strength of electronic interactions, in these materials is tunable by the application of external pressure We additionally consider a model of the iron pnictide superconductors, a large family of complex materials with strong spin-orbit coupling and multiple bands at the Fermi level. While various superconducting gaps have been proposed In a previous work The spin lattice relaxation rate, 1/T 1 , measured in nuclear magnetic resonance, is related to the transverse spin susceptibility, where γ e is the electronic gyromagnetic ratio, A H (q) is the hyperfine coupling, which we will approximate by a point contact interaction, constant with respect to q. In a conventional nodeless superconductor, the relaxation rate increases below T c to a peak before decreasing rapidly as temperature is lowered. Formally, the peak arises due to a divergence in the relaxation rate that is cut off by a combination of effects due to impurities, slight anisotropy of the gap, electronic interactions or in the extreme limit, by the influence of the crystal lattice, which sets a characteristic length scale where k is the superconducting quasiparticle energy, defined in terms of the electron dispersion and in the absence of interactions the limit of the lifetime η → 0 + is implied. Previously Lifetime effects (via the self-energy) on 1/T 1 T have already been investigated to a degree in Ref. In the absence of vertex corrections, the transverse spin susceptibility can be expressed in terms of a convolution of single-particle propagators, in which case the relaxation rate can be expressed with the influence of the two Green's functions separated where A k,σ (E) is the quasiparticle spectral density function. The last two terms in Eq. 4 arise from the coherence factors of the Green's functions and represent a Fermi surface average of the dispersion and superconducting gap, the later of which is the origin of the Hebel-Slichter peak and the related peak in superconductors with accidental nodes The simplified expression 4 is valid only when vertex corrections, in particular those due to spin-fluctuations, are absent. In this limit, the susceptibility, χ +-(q, ω), depends on the momentum q solely through the spectral density functions. In the presence of strong spin fluctuations, the susceptibility can no longer be written in this way, and must take account of the influence of the spin fluctuations. In order to investigate these effects, we turn to the random phase approximation, as the simplest treatment. As it is not our intention to discuss the influence of the spin fluctuations on the superconductivity itself, we refrain from the use of more compu-tationally expensive self-consistent methods (such as the fluctuation-exchange, or FLEX, approximation). While treating spin fluctuations via the RPA alone is not sufficient to ensure thermodynamic consistency Within the RPA, the susceptibility is given by a sum over' ladder diagrams where χ 0 (q, ω) is the bare transverse magnetic (superconducting) susceptibility, and U is a Hubbard interaction parameter (longer range interactions introduce a momentum dependence in this interaction parameter). The ladder diagrams here are in marked contrast with the bubble diagrams that emerge in the RPA for the contributions of the long-range Coulomb interaction to the dielectric function The imaginary part of the susceptibility, which enters into 1/T 1 T , is then given by Within the framework of the RPA, the transition to a magnetically ordered state is described by a divergence in the static (ω = 0) susceptibility. The real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility are related by a Kramers-Kronig transformation, as a result of a fluctuation-dissipation theorem To fully understand the effects of spin fluctuations on 1/T 1 T , it is necessary to resort to numerical calculations (see Section III), but some insight may still be gained analytically. In the low frequency limit, the susceptibility may be approximated by in which case the relaxation rate is given by In the absence of antiferromagnetic fluctuations the relevant features are given by the form of C q , which are influenced, when U = 0, by features of the static real part of the susceptibility. In particular, since U B q ≤ 1, whenever B q ≈ 1, the contribution to the relaxation rate is enhanced, and when B q is small, features of C q are suppressed. The static part of the susceptibility in a superconductor is given by and the structure of B q can be seen to depend in a complicated manner on the band structure and gap symmetry, particularly with regards to approximate nesting of the Fermi surface (which may enhance the first term). The real part of the susceptibility can, in principle, enhance the features dominating the relaxation rate (i.e. if C q (T ) and B q (T ) have similar momentum-dependence, large contributions to the relaxation rate will be enhanced while smaller contributions will be unaffected). There is, however, no a priori reason to expect such enhancement, as the momentum-dependences of C q (T ) and B q (T ) may differ drastically. To gain further insight into the influence of antiferromagnetic fluctuations on the relaxation rate, it becomes necessary to turn to specific models and numerical calculations, as is the focus of the remainder of this work. In order to explore the behavior of 1/T 1 T in the presence of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations, we numerically calculate the relaxation rate for various interaction strengths. To highlight the generality of our results, we consider three concrete examples. The first two models specifically include strong anisotropy and in both cases consider fully gapped superconducting states and those with ac-cidental nodes. As a final example, we consider a model iron pnictide superconductor, a system for which spinfluctuations are known to be strong and the gap is believed to belong to the trivial representation despite the lack of a Hebel-Slichter peak in 1/T 1 T The first example is a toy model with anisotropic hopping parameters along the two axes, (11) Such a model is useful in demonstrating effects arising in a d-wave superconducting state with accidental nodes. For example, for t x = t y the nodes in a superconducting gap with are not symmetry required (for example, adding a small s-wave component does not change the symmetry or cause a phase transition) and (even without an s-wave component) the average of the order parameter over the Fermi surface is non-zero The second model we consider is a two-band effective tight-binding model for κ-Br, with hopping magnitudes parametrized by density functional theory where t and t 2 are (anisotropic) hopping parameters be-tween next-nearest-neighbor dimers, t = (t 1 + t 2 ) /2 is the average hopping along the x and y directions, and δ t = (t 1 -t 2 ) /2 the difference between the alternating hopping strengths (which are dependent on the dimer orientation). Due to the anisotropy of this model, the 'd xy -wave' state has accidental nodes, giving rise to a Hebel-Slichterlike peak in 1/T 1 T , and is given by Finally, for the iron pnictide superconductors we use a simple two-orbital model, as proposed in Ref. and we take (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , λ) = (-1, 1.3, -0.85, 0.1)|t 1 | with μ = 1.45|t 1 |. For brevity, we consider only a simple s ±wave gap, which is the most common used for analysis of the iron pnictide materials, We note that, while here we do not consider the possibility of accidental nodes in the iron pnictide model, there have been reports of nodal superconductivity in some regimes for these materials The suppression of the Hebel-Slichter peak is shown for a purely isotropic s-wave gap function in Fig. At low temperatures, the increasing interaction strength reduces the overall magnitude of the relaxation rate but does not alter the temperature dependence, which displays the exponential suppression of quasiparticle states at low energies. The Hebel-Slichter peak is noticeably more resilient to the strength of the spin fluctuations for the effective model of κ-Br than the toy orthorhombic model, and the absence of any such peak in experiments In order to better understand the origin of this suppression of the peak we examine, in Fig. As can be seen in Fig. In Fig. b) Figure intermediate interaction strength, not sufficient to suppress the Hebel-Slichter peak entirely. In this case, there is clearly still a large enhancement of the imaginary part of the susceptibility, though the prominent peak around q = 0 is no longer present. As the interaction strength increases, the overall magnitude of the susceptibility decreases further, ultimately suppressing the peak in 1/T 1 T entirely. Additionally, the features away from q = 0, while greater in magnitude, have not yet reached the definition seen in Fig. We wish also to understand how this suppression influences the Hebel-Slichter like peak expected in superconductors with accidental nodes The low temperature behavior for the gaps with accidental nodes in Fig. In Fig. Finally, we make comparison between our results for the model of κ-Br and experimental data Figure structure may be performed by the application of pressure, which for the BEDT-TTF-based superconductors reduces the effective interaction strength U . Applied pressure would then restore the Hebel-Slichter like peak for the d xy -wave gap but affect the relaxation rate for the d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap less significantly. We make comparison between the relaxation rate calculated for the two-orbital iron pnictide model, with s ± -wave superconductivity, and experimental data for LaFeAsO 1-x F x in Fig. We have found that, for all model bandstructures we consider, sufficiently strong antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations suppress the Hebel-Slichter peak in a fully gapped superconductor, and the similar peak found for gaps with accidental nodes. Even when the peak is suppressed by the spin fluctuations, near U/U c ≈ 1, the low temperature behavior of the nuclear magnetic relaxation rate remains qualitatively unchanged by the interactions. This is because the magnitude of both the real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility near q = 0 decreases as the temperature is lowered. And so, just as the Hebel-Slichter peak is only evident near T = T c , the influence Br with an isotropic superconducting gap, at T = 0.98Tc and ω = 10 -3 t, with an intermediate interaction strength of 0.6Uc, for which the Hebel-Slichter peak is only partially suppressed. While the susceptibility shares many of the same features as the dressed susceptibility in Fig. of the spin fluctuations is less significant at low temperatures. In the organic superconductors, the application of pressure can be used to decrease the effective interaction strength, which will increase the magnitude of any peak in 1/T 1 T . Therefore, we propose an additional experimental probe of the superconducting gap in these materials, by measuring the temperature and pressure (and therefore U/U c ) dependence of 1/T 1 T to give further insight into the gap symmetry. In particular, for a nodeless gap, or one with accidental nodes, a Hebel-Slichter peak should appear as pressure is increased. For a gap with symmetry required nodes, no such peak will emerge under pressure. Figure 