We deposit a Ta(5nm)/Pt(4)/Co(1)/Cu(1)/Ta(4)/Pt(1) stack (shown in Figure Reducing energy dissipation while increasing speed in computation and memory is a long-standing challenge for spintronics research There is a largely held belief Experimentally, current induced magnetization switching has been demonstrated The limitations of scientific instruments are a major obstacle to switching on time-scales shorter than 200 ps. Commercial electrical current do not have sufficient bandwidth and/or amplitude to switch SOT devices on ps time-scales. However, picosecond-ready CMOS transistors exists since 2007 To investigate picosecond SOT phenomena, we use an experimental platform that employs photoconductive switches We use low-temperature GaAs (LT-GaAs) photoconductive switches to generate picosecond pulses of high intensity To measure the ultrafast magnetic response to the current pulses, we perform time-resolved MOKE measurements under various configurations of current polarity and magnetic fields. We were unable to obtain time-resolved switching dynamics due to technical limitations (see supp. mat.). We therefore perform low intensity time-resolved studies with an 80 MHz oscillator laser with ~250 fs-duration pulses centered at 780 nm (see methods). With this system we obtain 3.7 ps-duration electrical pulses (inset in .a). In these experiments, we monitor the change in the out-of-plane component of the magnetization (ΔM ) via polar-MOKE with a time-delayed (Δt) probe pulse. The typical magnetic response to the pulses is shown in .a. We first focus our attention on the dynamics under zero inplane field (black symbols in .a). The response of the Co magnetization to the current is instantaneous (see methods for time-delay Δt calibration). Both for +M and -M , the out-ofplane magnetization abruptly decreases, and slowly recovers. The decrease of |M | is due to two mechanisms. First, the SOT pulls the magnetization towards the plane. Second, the picosecond charge current induces Joule heating which leads to an ultrafast loss of magnetic order We now focus on the dynamics under in-plane magnetic fields (blue and red symbols in .a). Unlike in the zero field case (black symbols in .a), the magnetic moment is not initially oriented along z . In the presence of an in-plane field pointing along x , the moment at negative time-delays is tilted in the xz plane, to be parallel with the effective field H (Δt < 0), see .c. The in-plane field breaks the symmetry of the system and, together with the injected spin polarization σ y , determines the sign for the observed coherent precession. A parallel (antiparallel) in-plane field and current causes the moment to precess towards (away from) -z, causing ΔM to decrease (increase) on a 10 ps timescale. This occurs regardless of the initial up (+M ),or down (-M ) state, as expected from SOT and in agreement with the result of our quasi-static SOT switching experiments from Figure The precessions in .a are offset by the heating induced demagnetization (reduction of |M |). In addition to reducing the magnetization, ultrafast Joule heating reduces the magnetic anisotropy. We also depict this effect in .e. As temperature rises, the anisotropy field H (T) drops and, under a constant external field, the angle (and amplitude) of the effective field H (Δt > 4ps) changes. The moment experiences a torque τ H eff due to the change in angle of H . The torque τ H eff is enhanced by the SOT τ DL which pulls the moment even further from H . The torque τ H eff , which we call the thermal anisotropy torque, is commonly used in ultrafast pump-probe FMR experiments as a way to trigger oscillatory dynamics To understand the ultrafast dynamics, we use a simple LLG macrospin model. The model includes SOTs and ultrafast Joule heating (for details see suppl. mat.). The model assumes simplistic temperature dependence laws for the anisotropy and magnetization to calculate the thermal anisotropy torques. We set the spin Hall angle to 0.3 from Ref We now describe the model predictions of the dynamics in response to current pulses in the presence of an in-plane field. The model predictions are shown in .b-e: The magnetization m is initially in its equilibrium position, along H (Δt < 0), as in .c. As soon as the current pulse arrives, a damping-like SOT Even though the LLG model describes the overall dynamics, its predictions don't agree with certain features of the data. In particular, the model does not match the dynamics of the black trace at H =0 between 3 and 10 ps. A possible explanation is inhomogeneous broadening. In the time-resolved MOKE measurements of damping and anisotropy we observed that the samples have large inhomogeneous broadening in the effective damping, which is consistent with prior pump/probe studies of dynamics of perpendicularly magnetized films Simulations performed with the same parameters at higher currents are presented in the suppl. materials, and suggest the thermal anisotropy torque plays an important role for switching. Including the effect of thermal anisotropy torques in the LLG simulations reduces the energy required for switching by a factor of two. A switching (crossing M = 0) as fast as 16ps is predicted, with a recovery of 80% of the magnetization reached after 50ps. Finally, we highlight that just as in Ref We can set an upper limit to the energy dissipated at the load by estimating the total initial energy stored in the photoswitch capacitor (see methods), which is the energy that drives both the THz current pulse in the lines and the losses to THz radiation A/m 2 . Therefore, the energy requirements in this ultrafast SOT regime compare extremely favorably with state of the art, ns and sub-ns switching SOT results Switching via a spin (orbit) torque on such a fast timescale brings up interesting questions about the mechanisms involved. According to our fits, the low current dynamics are almost fully coherent. However, as we approach the switching currents, more complex mechanisms such as magnetic domain nucleation and magnetic domain wall propagation might play a role. We will discuss some of these mechanisms in the following paragraphs. In particular, we will distinguish stochastic nucleation due to thermal noise and deterministic nucleation due to geometry, defects or spatial inhomogeneities in the sample properties. For long pulses it is well known that thermal activation plays an important role in the nucleation of reversed magnetic domains, which followed by domain wall motion allows for full switching If we then consider the switching to be purely deterministic, a few different scenarios are possible. We can first consider an edge-to-edge single domain wall sweeping scenario, assuming a deterministic nucleation at one sample edge. Recently, it was experimentally shown A second possible scenario would be one considering multiple domain nucleations at specific sample sites, due to spatial inhomogeneities in material properties. Based on our estimated peak current density (J ~ 6 • 10 A/m 2 ), if we extrapolate the expected domain wall velocity based on results of the fastest measured velocities in ferromagnets A final alternative scenario would be to consider some form of heat-assisted magnetic recording due to Joule heating. In such scenario the anisotropy barrier and/or magnetic order would be completely reduced by heating up to the Curie temperature T and any tiny torque could then determine the switching direction. To test for this scenario, we performed experiments where the in-plane field was replaced by an out-of-plane field, just below the coercive field and favoring a reversal (see suppl. mat.). No reversal was observed after injection of a single current pulse at the critical current, which allows us to discard the HAMR scenario. Therefore, we believe that, depending on the homogeneity of the sample properties, the switching in our samples could be either nearly-coherent or governed by multiple nucleation events that happen within the current pulse and cover at least 50% of the area. Tracking the dynamics during the reversal could help in distinguishing between these mechanisms. In conclusion, we have demonstrated spin orbit torque switching of a thin Co film with a single 6 ps electrical pulse. We show that picosecond-duration electrical pulses can inject spin into a magnet at ultrafast timescales. We can then probe the generated magnetization torques with picosecond resolution. All our experiments are in agreement with the symmetries expected from SOT. Macrospin simulations can accurately predict the observed dynamics, showing a damping-like torque dominated effect. Finally, we have shown that the reversal process is extremely energy efficient. Future work will include tracking different components of the magnetization via different magneto-optical effects, in order to spatially reconstruct the time-dependent spin torque dynamics. We believe our approach will trigger new interest in ultrafast electrical studies of spin torque dynamics, opening the door for the possible observation of elusive phenomena such as inertial dynamics in ferromagnetic materials The LT GaAs substrate was obtained by first depositing, in a molecular beam epitaxy chamber, at high temperature (550°C) a 300 nm thick GaAl0.8As buffer followed by a 5nm thick GaAs layer on a semi-insulating GaAs (100) substrate. Then the LT GaAs layer (1 μm thick) was deposited at 260°C with a As/Ga beam equivalent pressure ratio of 50. The magnetic stacks were grown by DC magnetron sputtering in an AJA system. The Ta(5nm)/Pt(4) buffer layer ensures a welldefined (111) texture for the growth of Co(1) and guarantees an interface anisotropy that promotes PMA for Co (1). The Cu(1)/Ta(4) bilayer, capped by Pt(1) to prevent Ta oxidation, has been added to preserve PMA and enhance the torques on the Co layer since Pt and Ta have spin Hall angles with opposite sign. First trials with Pt/Co/Ta stacks resulted in non-square magnetic hysteresis curves with small remanence indicating a possible large effective Dylazhosinkii-Moriya interaction (DMI) as in Ref. In order to generate the picosecond pulses (schematic shown in Figure The images where obtained with a home-made magneto-optical Kerr effect microscope. We use a 633nm light source in the Köhler configuration, a long-working distance 50x objective and a 6fps monochrome CCD. Due to the highly reflective Au transmission lines that are next to the magnetic section, we are very susceptible to pixel overflowing, which means the exposure time has to be kept short, which results in an important degradation of magneto-optical signal. As a solution we use 8x binning, without loss of spatial resolution, to speed up the camera up to 15fps and average 60 images to reduce noise and boost back the signal to noise ratio. Finally, mechanical drift and vibrations importantly degrade the quality of the images, in particular when live background subtraction is used in order to the enhance the magneto-optical contrast. All the presented small-current induced dynamics where measured with the 80MHz oscillator laser system focused through a 50x objective into a ~1μm sized spot. The experiments where performed with no out-of-plane field, since at small excitations the sample naturally relaxed back between pulses, as is typical with low-excitation optical pump-probe experiments. We determined the zero delay time, i.e. the arrival of the electrical pulse, by monitoring the time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) response (see supp. mat.). A pump beam is focused on the photoconductive switch to generate the pulse. The pump beam is chopped by an optical chopper at about 300 Hz. We place the Teraspike® probe on top of the transmission lines. A probe beam is focused at the tip of Teraspike® probe, exciting the free-standing photoconductive switch. A Stanford Research Systems 865A Lock-In amplifier is used to directly measure the change in current induced by the transient electric field at the tip of the probe. This change in current is only present when both the electric field and probe beams coincide in time. Therefore, changing the delay between optical pump and probes allows us to sample the transient electric field associated with the picosecond current pulses. The resulting trace is a convolution of the real electric field and the Teraspike®'s response. We note that we do not measure the electric pulse at the sample position. The capacitance of an interdigitated electrode (IDE) capacitor C is roughly C = (N -1)ε ε A/d where N is the number of electrodes, ε is the effective relative permittivity due to LT-GaAs substrate and air (measured as 15), ε is the vacuum permittivity, A is the surface area of an electrode and d is the center-to-center distance between electrodes. We find a capacitance of about ~10 F for our photoconductive switch. As a second verification, it is also well known that the RC time constant due to the capacitance of the photoswitch limits the pulse duration of the generated pulses Figure Figure Time-resolved pump/probe measurements of the switching dynamics are not yet possible with our 80 MHz laser system, since the energy per pulse is not high enough to generate sufficiently intense current pulses. The time-resolved dynamics shown in was taken with almost the full pump power irradiating the switch, and the strongest in-plane field available in our setup. Probing the switching dynamics was also not possible with our 5 kHz amplified laser system. On our MOKE setup, measurements require a minimum probe power of ~60 μW to resolve Kerr rotations of ~100 μrad. The full amplitude of the hysteresis (2M ) measured with the 80MHz oscillator system, shown in Figure Figure In order to check for a heat assisted magnetic recording-like scenario, we injected single pulses at the switching threshold current, under no in-plane field, and monitored the variation of the coercive field (the applied out-of-plane field leading to ~50% reversal or more) with the number of applied current pulses. If the sample was to be heated near T , then any out-of-plane magnetic field would lead to reversal even after excitation with a single current pulse. However, we did not observe any switching when injecting a single pulse and applying an out-of-plane field as large as 93% of the switching field. In fact, we only observe a small decrease of ~30% in the coercivity when increasing the number of pulses by a factor of 10 (see Figure To model the ability of picosecond electrical pulses to reverse the magnetization via spin orbit torques, we solve the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation of motion with anti-damping like and field-like damping terms from the spin-current in the following form: where C = (eq.S2) Here, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ is the vacuum permeability, α is the damping parameter, M is the saturation magnetization, σ ⃗ is the direction of spin-polarization, θ is the damping-like spin Hall angle, θ is the field-like spin Hall angle, J is the current density, d is the thickness of the magnetic layer, q is the charge of the electron and μ is the Bohr magneton. The effective field in the first term consists of a magneto-crystalline anisotropy field, a demagnetization field, and any applied external field, Here, H ⃗ , H ⃗ and H ⃗ are the x, y, and z-components of the external field, K is the perpendicular anisotropy constant, and M ⃗ = M m ⃗ m ⃗ m ⃗ . The -M m ⃗ term in the z-direction is the demagnetization field due to thin-film shape anisotropy. In this work, we use the macrospin approximation, i.e. we assume that the properties in Eq. (eq.S1) are independent of position. To solve for the dynamics, we first set dM ⃗ /dt = 0 and solve for the equilibrium orientation of the moment, M ⃗ (t < 0) = M ⃗ . We identify the stable solution to dM ⃗ /dt = 0 by choosing the solution with the lowest free energy. We then use a finite-difference scheme to evolve M ⃗ (t) forwards in time in response to a charge current J (t). We evolve the magnetization forward in time with time-increments of Δt = 1 fs (we verified that the results were unchanged with smaller time-increments). Ultrafast heating of a magnetic material leads to temperature-induced changes to the magnetic moment and the interfacial anisotropy. We estimate the temperature response of the metal film in our experiments by solving the heat-diffusion equation, Here, T is the temperature, C is the heat-capacity per unit volume, Λ is the thermal conductivity, and q(t) is the volumetric heating from either a laser or electrical pulse. Based on literature values of the heat-capacity of metals [1] and the thickness of each layer, we estimate an average value for C of the multilayer of 2.6 J m -3 K -1 for our stack at room temperature. We fix Λ according to the Wiedemann-Franz Law Λ = L T/ρ ~9 Wm -1 K -1 , where ρ = 81 μΩ • cm is the measured electrical resistivity of the film. For the optical experiments described in section 7.3., we assume q(t) = P (t)/(πw d), where P (t) the absorbed laser power vs. time, w is the 1/e 2 radius, and d is the total film thickness of 16 nm. For electrical experiments, we set q(t) = ρ J (t), where J(t) is the charge current density. Solving Eq. (eq.S4) for T(t) requires boundary conditions. We assume an adiabatic boundary condition at the metal film surface. We assume the heat-current J at the bottom of the metal film is limited by the interfacial thermal conductance G between the Ta and sapphire, J = G T(z = d) (eq.S5) Typical values for the conductance between metal films and oxide substrates are 100-300 MWm -2 -1 [2-4]. We treat G as a fit parameter and deduce G ~170 MWm -2 K -1 . By using Eq. (eq.S4) to model the temperature response of the stack to heating, we are assuming that electrons, phonons, and spins are in thermal equilibrium with one another. Such an assumption is not always valid on picosecond time-scales, and nonequilibrium between thermal resevoirs can drive ultrafast magnetic phenomena [5]. In our experiments, nonequilibrium effects should be small due to the 4-6 picosecond pulse duration of the electrical experiments, together with the strong thermal coupling between electrons and phonons in the Co layer [6]. The picosecond time-scale for heating is much greater than the electron-phonon relaxation time in transition metals [7]. Therefore, we can estimate the nonequilibrium between electrons and phonons by assuming a quasi-steady-state condition where rate of heat absorption of electrons equals the rate of heat-loss to the phonons. In other words, we assume q(t)~g ΔT (t), where g is the electron-phonon volumetric energy transfer coefficient [8], which we take from Ref. [6]. For our estimated maximum electrical current density of 6 • 10 A m -2 , we can estimate the upper bound for the nonequilibrium during our experiments to be ΔT (t)~15K, or about 25% of the average peak temperature rise at those currents. The anisotropy field and magnetization are both temperature dependent [9]. As a result, picosecond changes in the temperature of the Co film induce precessional dynamics [10], even in the absence of spin-orbit-torques or Oersted fields. To experimentally investigate the effect of temperature, we perform time-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect measurements on the sample in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. Prior to these time-resolved measurements, we orient the magnetic moment of the Cobalt with an out-of-plane magnetic field of 0.3 Tesla. After removing the out-of-plane magnetic field, we optical heat the sample surface with 250 fs duration pump pulses at a fluence of 0.7 J m -2 under the application of an in-plane magnetic field. The transient temperature response causes precessional dynamics. We track the resulting out-of-plane component of the magnetic moment by monitoring the polar Kerr angle with a timedelayed probe pulse. We repeat this experiment with varied in-plane magnetic fields. Fig. Using an optical multilayer calculation like described in Ref. [11], we estimate the absorbed fluence per pump pulse (F) is 0.3 J m-2. We estimate that this absorbed fluence should cause a per-pulse temperature rise of approximatively F/(d • C)~7 K. Comparing this temperature rise to our experimental measurements of the resulting ΔM , allows us to quantify dM /dT close to room temperature (i.e. for small heatings, just like in the SOT time-resolved dynamics). The amplitude of precession of M (t) following heating provides information about dK /dT. The frequency and decay rate of precession allow us to determine the total anisotropy field and effective damping. To theoretically quantify the effects of the temperature-evolution after optical heating we added temperature effects to Eq. (eq.S1-S3). We allow M and K in Eq. (eq.S1-S3) to evolve in time based on the predictions of our thermal model described in Eq. (eq.S4-S5). We follow Ref. [9], and assume the temperature dependencies of the magnetization and magneto-crystalline anisotropy to be described by Here, T is the Curie temperature, M (0) is the magnetization at absolute zero, and K (0) is the anisotropy constant at absolute zero.. We fix M (T = 300 K) to 10 A/m based on VSM measurements. We treat K (T = 300 K) as a fit-parameter. The precessional frequency in Fig. critical current density (Fig When using the macrospin LLG model (red line in Figure Finally, it is interesting to look at the energy requirements on the right Figure To evaluate the role of temperature rises on the switching dynamics, we use the model parameters described above, to estimate the change in dynamics that results from the addition of temperature-induced precessional dynamics. We set an in-plane magnetic field of 0.16T and a 6ps wide pulse. The results of these simulations for two opposite current directions (plotted as blue and red) are shown in Figure Interestingly, even if we set the spin Hall angles to zero (and thus have zero SOT), if we increase the current density to have enough of a temperature rise, then a strong enough thermal anisotropy torque will be present and lead to switching. We show this in the simulation of Figure Figure 