In this work, the consistent, predictive and empirically adequate microscopic theory of pseudogap phenomena and unconventional Bose-liquid superconductivity (superfluidity) is presented, based on the fact that in high-Tc cuprates and other related systems the energy εA of the effective attraction between fermionic quasiparticles is comparable with their Fermi energy εF and the bosonic Cooper pairs are formed above Tc (the temperature of the superfluid transition) and then a small part of such Cooper pairs condense into a Bose superfluid at Tc. According to this theory, the doped high-Tc cuprates and other systems with low Fermi energies (εF ∼ εA) are unconventional bosonic superconductors/superfluids and exhibit pseudogap phases above Tc, λ-like superconducting transition at Tc and Bose-liquid superconductivity below Tc. The relevant charge carriers in high-Tc cuprates are polarons which are bound into bosonic Cooper pairs above Tc. Polaronic effects and related pseudogap weaken with increasing the doping and disappear at a quantum critical point where a small Fermi surface of polarons transforms into a large Fermi surface of quasi-free carriers. The modified BCS-like theory describes another pseudogap regime but the superconducting/superfluid transition in high-Tc cuprates and related systems is neither the BCS-like transition nor the usual Bose-Einstein condensation. A good quantitative agreement is found between pseudogap theory and experiment. Universal criteria for bosonization of Cooper pairs are formulated in terms of two fundamental ratios εA/εF and ∆F /εF (where ∆F is the BCS-like gap). The mean-field theory of the coherent single particle and pair condensates of bosonic Cooper pairs describes fairly well the novel superconducting states (i.e., two distinct superconducting A and B phases below Tc and a vortexlike state above Tc) and various salient features (λ-like transition at Tc, kink-like anomalies in all superconducting/superfluid parameters near the first-order phase transition temperature T * c lower than Tc, gapless excitations below T * c and two-peak specific heat anomalies) of high-Tc cuprates in full agreement with the experimental findings. Though Bose-liquid superconductivity in the bulk of high-Tc cuprates is destroyed at Tc, but it can persist above Tc at grain boundaries and interfaces of these materials up to room temperature. The unusual superconducting/superfluid states and properties of other exotic systems (e.g., heavy-fermion and organic compounds, Sr2RuO4, 3 He, 4 He and atomic Fermi gases) are explained more clearly by the theory of Bose superfluids. Finally, the new criteria and principles of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity are formulated. The usual band theory has been successful enough in describing the normal state of conventional metals with large Fermi energies ε F > 1 eV In the case of high-T c cuprates which are prototypical unconventional superconductors/superfluids and are of significant current interest in condensed matter physics and beyond (e.g., in the physics of low-density nuclear matter In high-T c cuprates and other complex systems, unconventional interactions between pairs of quasiparticles may take place, leading to new and unidentified states of matter. Specifically, the enigmatic pseudogap, diamagnetic and vortex-like states are formed in high-T c cuprate superconductors above T c In alternative theoretical scenarios, the unconventional (i.e. non-superconducting) Cooper pairing can be expected in the low carrier concentration limit at T = 2T c in superconducting semiconductors Attempts to understand the different pseudogap regimes in high-T c cuprates have been based on the different temperature-doping phase diagrams showing only one pseudogap crossover temperature Many theoretical scenarios for high-T c cuprate superconductivity are based on the BCS-like pairing correlations and on the usual Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of an ideal Bose-gas of Cooper pairs and other bosonic quasiparticles (e.g., bipolarons and holons). However, the BCS-type (s-, p-or d-wave) superconductivity is most likely to occur in systems that satisfy at least the following three conditions. First, they should have large Fermi energies. Second, the attractive interaction between pairs of fermionic quasiparticles near Fermi surface must be sufficiently weak. Third, the Cooper pairs should have fermionic nature due to their strong overlapping just like in metals. The transition from BCS-type condensation regime to BEC regime can be expected in a Fermi system, if either the attractive interaction between fermions is increased sufficiently or the density of fermions is decreased to a certain critical density. Such a transition was studied, first, in superconducting semiconductors (where the Cooper pairing without superconductivity at low carrier concentrations may occur) Successful solutions of complex problems posed by high-T c cuprate superconductors may provide new insights into the microscopic physics and thus contribute toward a complete understanding of unsolved problems of other unconventional superconductors and superfluids. So far, the pseudogap phenomena and unconventional superconductivity (superfluidity) in high-T c cuprates and other systems are often misinterpreted. In particular, the high-T c cuprates are similar to the superfluid 4 He and might be genuine superfluid Bose systems that cannot be understood within the BCS-like and BEC theories. Further, the superconductivity in other exotic systems and the superfluidity both in 3 He and in ultracold atomic Fermi gases with an extremely high superfluid transition temperature with respect to the Fermi temperature T F 5T c The purpose of this paper is to construct a consistent, predictive and empirically adequate microscopic theory of pseudogap phenomena and unconventional Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity, which accounts for essentially all the observed pseudogap features and novel superconducting/superfluid properties of high-T c cuprates and other intricate systems. By studying the ground states of doped charge carriers in polar cuprate materials, we show that the relevant charge carriers in such systems are large polarons. Polaronic effects in doped high-T c cuprates can give rise to a pseudogap state and a polaronic pseudogap weakens with increasing the doping and disappear at a specific QCP. We demonstrate that the pairing theory of polarons in real-space describes the formation of large bipolarons at low dopings, while the modified BCS-like pairing theory describes the formation of bosonic Cooper pairs at intermedate dopings in these systems. Our results provide deeper insights into the emergence of the two different pseudogap regimes above T c and the pseudogap phase boundary terminating at specific QCPs in various high-T c cuprates and the pseudogap effects on the normal-state properties of high-T c cuprates. We then apply the BCS-like pairing theory to describe the pseudogap state in other unconventional superconductors and superfluids. For all cases considered, good quantitative agreement is found between pseudogap theory and experiment. Next we address the key issue of whether Cooper pairs have fermionic nature just like in the BCS theory or they are bosonic quasiparticles. We formulate the universal criteria for bosonization of Cooper pairs in high-T c cuprates and other related systems using the uncertainty prinsiple. We then elaborate a consistent mean-field microscopic theory of Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity by starting from the boson analogs of the BCS-like pair Hamiltonian. This theory describes the superfluidity in three-dimensional (3D) and two-dimensional (2D) attractive Bose systems originating from the pair condensation (at T c ) and single particle condensation (at a certain temperature T * c below T c in 3D systems or at T = 0 in 2D systems) of bosonic Cooper pairs and 4 He atoms. The self-consistent solutions of mean-field integral equations for attractive 3D and 2D Bose systems are capable of giving the new predictions and the adequate description of the three distinct regimes of Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity, λ-like superconducting transition at T c , first-order phase transition at T * c , half-integer h/4e magnetic flux quantization and two distinct superconducting phases below T c , the novel gapless excitations below T * c and vortex-like excitations above T c and other observed puzzling superconducting properties of high-T c cuprates. The unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity observed in other systems, such as in heavy-fermion and organic compounds, Sr 2 RuO 4 , quantum liquids ( 3 He and 4 He) and atomic Fermi gases are also well described by the mean-field theory of Bose superfluids, while the meanfield theory of the BCS-like (s-, p-or d-wave) pairing of fermionic quasiparticle can describe only the formation of Cooper pairs in these intricate systems. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the unconventional electron-phonon interactions, the new in-gap states and the relevant charge carriers in doped high-T c cuprate superconductors are described. In Sec. III, the microscopic theory of pseudogap phenomena in these high-T c materials is presented. In Sec. IV, the pseudogap effects on the normal-state properties of underdoped to overdoped cuprates are discussed. In Sec. V, the pseudogap phenomena in other systems are described. In Sec. VI, the problem of the bosonization of Cooper pairs in high-T c cuprates and other systems is solved. In Sec. VII, the mean-field theory of 3D and 2D superfluid Bose liquids is elaborated. In Sec. VIII, the microscopic theory of unconventional Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other systems is presented. In Sec. IX, the new criteria and principles of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity are formulated. In Sec.X, we summarize our results. Computational details are presented in Appendixes. Since the discovery of high-T c superconductivity in doped cuprates According to the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen classification scheme One distinguishes three distinct regimes of electron (hole)-phonon coupling in doped polar cuprates: (i) the weak-coupling regime in heavily overdoped cuprates describes the correlated motions of the lattice atoms and the quasi-free charge carriers which remain in their initial extended state, (ii) the intermediate-coupling regime (corresponding to the underdoped, optimally doped and moderately overdoped cuprates) characterizes the selftrapping of a charge carrier, which is bound within a potential well produced by the polarization of the lattice in the presence of the carrier and follows the atomic motions in the non-adiabatic regime, and (iii) the strongcoupling regime in lightly doped cuprates describes the other condition of self-trapping under which the lattice distortion cannot follow the charge carrier motion and the self-trapping of carriers is usually treated within the adiabatic approximation (i.e., the lattice atoms remain at their fixed positions). In the latter case the carrier is strongly bound to a lattice distortion by a strong and very localized carrier-lattice interaction. Under certain conditions, two charge carriers interacting with the lattice vibrations and with each other can form a bound state of two carriers in polar materials within a common self-trapping well. In these systems the attractive electron-phonon interaction can be strong enough to overcome the Coulomb repulsion between two charge carriers. The self-trapped state of the pair of charge carriers is termed as a bipolaron. In the following, we will consider the self-trapping of hole carriers in the continuum model and where ψ(r) and Ψ(r 1 , r 2 ) are the one-and two-particle wave functions, respectively, r is the position vector of a carrier, ε = ε ∞ /(1 -η) is the effective dielectric constant, E d is the deformation potential of a carrier, B is an elastic constant of the crystal lattice. Minimization of the functionals (1) and ( where N 1 = σ 3/2 / √ π and N 2 = σ 3 /π C 1 (γ) are the normalization factors, σ = β/a 0 , C 1 (γ) = 1 + 35 8 γ + 6γ 2 is the correlation coefficient, σ and γ are the variational parameters characterizing the carrier localization and the correlation between carriers, respectively, a 0 is the lattice constant. Substituting Eqs. ( and where A = 2 /2m * a 2 0 , g s = E 2 d /16πBa 3 0 A and g l = 5e 2 /16ε ∞ a 0 A are the dimensionless short-and longrange carrier-phonon coupling constants, respectively, By minimizing the functionals We now calculate the ground state energies of strong coupling large polarons and bipolarons in lightly doped cuprates using the values of the parameters entering into Eqs. From Eq. ( Using the values of parameters m * = m e , a 0 = 5.4 Å, E d 4.67 eV ε ∞ = 4 and B = 1.4 • 10 12 dyn/cm 2 , we find E a 4.21eV at η = 0.08. It follows that the large and small polaron states are separated by very high potential barrier. Such a high potential barrier prevents the formation of small polarons and bipolarons in the bulk of hole-doped cuprates, where the relevant charge carriers are large polarons and bipolarons. The binding energies of strong-coupling 2D polarons determined using the relation E 2D p = (π/8) ω 0 α 2 F (where ω 0 is the optical phonon energy, α F is the Fröhlich polaron coupling constant) There is now experimental evidence that polaronic carriers are present in the doped cuprates There is now serious problem in describing excitations in lightly doped cuprates. If the insulating state of these materials is considered as the non-conducting state of the Mott insulator with the AF ordering, then it is difficult to describe the insulating behavior of lightly doped cuprates above the Neel temperature T N . The puzzling insulating state of lightly doped cuprates both above T N and above some doping level (e.g., at x 0.02 in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO)) can be described properly on the basis of the above theory of large (bi)polarons. Therefore, it is of interest to compare the above presented results with experimental data on localized in-gap states (or bands) and energy gaps which are precursors to the pseudogaps observed in the metallic state of hole-doped cuprates. The (bi)polaronic states emerge in the CT gap of the cuprates and are manifested as the localized in-gap states (at very low doping) or the narrow in-gap bands (at intermediate doping) in the cuprates, as observed in various experiments Apparently, two distinct pseudogaps observed in the metallic state of the underdoped high-T c cuprates The electronic structure of doped cuprates is quite different from that of parent cuprate compounds, since the in-gap polaronic states are formed in the CT gap and develop into metallic state with increase of the carrier concentration. As the doping level increases towards underdoped regime (x > 0.05), the polaronic carriers are ordered specifically with the formation of superlattices where ε F = 2 (3π 2 n) 2/3 /2m p is the Fermi energy of large polarons. Obviously, large bipolarons can exist only in carrier-poor regions and remain localized. At a certain doping level n = n c or x = x c = n c /n a (where n a = 1/V a is the density of the host lattice atoms, V a is the volume per CuO 2 unit in cuprates), ∆ b = 0 and the large bipolaron will dissociate into two polarons. The critical concentration of polarons n c determined from Eq. ( For the LSCO system, we can evaluate n c using the values of parameters m p = 3m e , ε ∞ = 3, η = 0.02 -0.12, E bB ≈ 0.01 -0.07 eV (Table The formation of the in-gap polaronic band immediately above the oxygen valence band explains naturally the possible shift of the Fermi level to the top of the oxygen valence band (Fig. When the energy band of polarons is formed in the CT gap of the cuprates, the states of quasi-free hole carriers in the oxygen valence band become the excited states of a polaron. The Fermi level of polarons ε F lies inside the CT gap and the threshold energy for photoexcitation of a hole carrier from the polaronic state to a free hole state is given by where ε f F = 2 (3π 2 n) 2/3 /2m * is the Fermi energy of quasi-free hole carriers, m * is the effective mass of these carriers. The polaronic effects are caused by the unconventional electron-phonon interactions and result in lowering the electronic energy (i.e., the Fermi level or chemical potential μ F is shifted) by an amount ∆ε F and the suppression of the density of states at the Fermi surface of quasi-free electrons (or holes). The so-called non-pairing pseudogap is opened on the former Fermi surface due to the polaronic shift of the electronic states of free carriers. As a result, a large Fermi surface of quasi-free carriers transforms into a small polaronic Fermi surface. Therefore, the excitation energy ∆ε F of polarons is manifested in the single-particle spectrum of doped high-T c cuprates as the suppression of the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level ε f F and as the non-pairing polaronic pseudogap. As the doping (or n) is increased, the Coulomb repulsion between polarons increases and the binding energy E p of polarons decreases, so that the polaronic effect weakens and disappears in the overdoped region. Indeed, the binding energies of polarons E p = 0.12 eV and E p = 0.06 eV were observed experimentally in the underdoped and optimally doped cuprates, respectively where E c = e 2 /ε 0 a p is the Coulomb interaction energy between two large polarons, a p = (3/4πn a x) 1/3 is the mean distance between these polarons. According to the above considerations, depending on the excitation ways, the non-pairing polaronic pseudogap can be determined either from Eq. The formation of large strongly overlapping Cooper pairs and the superfluidity of such fermionic Cooper pairs in weak-coupling BCS superconductors are assumed to occur at the same temperature T c . However, the situation is completely different in more complex systems, in particular, in high-T c cuprates in which the BCS-type Cooper pairing of fermionic quasiparticles without superconductivity can occur above T c and the superfluidity of preformed Cooper pairs becomes possible only at T c . In this case, one expects a significant suppression of the density of states at the Fermi surface above T c in the normal state. This so-called BCS-like pairing pseudogap regime extends up to a crossover temperature T * = T F > T c The symmetry of the BCS-like pairing pseudogap is still one of the most controversial issues in the physics of high-T c cuprates. Although some experimental observations advocate in favor of a d-wave symmetry (see Ref. The high-T c cuprates with low Fermi energies (ε F 0.1 -0.3 eV By applying the modified BCS formalism to the interacting Fermi-gas of polarons, we can write the Hamiltonian of this systems with the pair interaction in the form where ξ(k) = ε(k)-ε F is the energy of polarons measured from the Fermi energy ε F , ε(k) = 2 k 2 /2m p , a + kσ (a kσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for a polaron having momentum k and spin projection σ (=↑ or ↓), V p ( k, k ) is the pair interaction potential (which has both an attractive and a repulsive part) between large polarons. The ground state energy of the interacting manypolaron system is calculated by using the model Hamiltonian Eq. ( , can be replaced by its average value. We can write further the identity, following Tinkham where F k =< a -k↓ a k↑ >. This is a mean-field approximation and the quantity in the bracket in Eq. ( , which is the second-order in the fluctuations and is assumed to be very small, the model mean-field Hamiltonian can be written as Now, we introduce the gap function (or order parameter) The function ∆ F ( k) and the Hermitian conjugate function ∆ * F ( k) can be chosen as the real functions The Hamiltonian ( where b + k (b k ) is the new creation (annihilation) operator for a Fermi quasiparticle, u k and v k are real functions satisfying the condition The new operators b kσ and b + kσ just as the old operators a kσ and a + kσ satisfy the anticommutation relations of Fermi operators: Substituting Eq. ( We now choose u k and v k so that they are satisfied the condition Then the Hamiltonian (21) has the diagonal form and it includes the terms of the ground-state energy E 0 and the energy E( k) of quasiparticles where As can be seen from Eq. ( Substituting Eqs. ( For the unconventional pairing interactions, it is argued We can now determine the BCS-like energy gap ∆ F ( k) and related normal state pseudogap crossover temperature T * . After replacing the a kσ operators by the b kσ operators and dropping the off-diagonal operators b , which do not contribute to the average value of the product of operators a -k ↓ a k ↑ , the gap function or order parameter ∆ F ( k) is given by This BCS-like energy gap exists in the excitation spectrum E( k) of fermionic quasiparticles. Therefore, the number of such quasiparticles populating the state k at the temperature T is Using this relation the gap equation ( At T = 0 there are no quasiparticles, so that f (E( k, T )) = 0. Thus, the temperature-dependent BCS-like gap equation is given by (31) Further we use the model potential which may be chosen as where ε A = E p + ω 0 is the cutoff parameter for the attractive part of the potential V p ( k, k ), V ph is the phononmediated attractive interaction potential between two polarons, V c is the repulsive Coulomb interaction potential between these carriers, ε c is the cutoff parameter for the Coulomb interaction. Using the model potential Eq. ( where λ * p = D p (ε F ) Ṽp is the effective BCS-like coupling constant for pairing polarons, D p (ε F ) is the DOS at the polaronic Fermi level, Ṽp = V ph -Ṽc is the effective pairing interaction potential between two large polarons, Ṽc = V c /[1 + D p (ε F )V c ln(ε c /ε A )] is the screened Coulomb interaction between these polarons. We can find the temperature-dependent pseudogap ∆ F (T ) and the pseudogap formation temperature T * from Eq. ( Evidently, as T → T * , the BCS-like pairing gap ∆ T (T ) tends to zero and the Eq. ( where In order to evaluate the second integral in Eq. ( from which C 2 is determined for a given value of y * . Substituting this expression into Eq. ( where C * = 0.5 exp[C 2 + 0.909675]. Thus, the onset temperature of the precursor Cooper pairing of polarons is determined from the relation As seen from this equation, the BCS-like mean-field pairing temperature T * depends on the phonon energy ω 0 and on the polaron binding energy E p . The important point is that the relation which is characteristic quantity measured in experiments. The smooth evolution of the energy gap observed in the tunneling and ARPES spectra of high-T c cuprates with lowering the temperature from a pseudogap state above the critical temperature T c to a superconducting state below T c , has been poorly interpreted previously as the evidence that the pseudogap must have the same origin as the superconducting order parameter, and therefore, must be related to T c . According to the tunneling and ARPES data To determine the characteristic doping dependences of ∆ F and T * , we can approximate the DOS at the Fermi level in a simple form Using this approximation we obtain from Eqs. ( and As seen from Eqs. ( ∆ F (x) and T * (x) were observed experimentally in high-T c cuprates La-, Y-and Bi-based high-Tc cuprates We now construct the unified normal-state phase diagrams of high-T c cuprates in the space of x vs T based on the above theoretical and experimental results. In Figs. 8-10, we summarise characteristic pseudogap temperatures as a function of doping and temperature to demonstrate the existence of two distinct pseudogap regimes above T c and QCP at the end point of the pseudogap phase boundary in LSCO, YBCO and Bi-2212. The key feature of these proposed phase diagrams is the existence of three distinct phase regions (which correspond to three distinct metallic phases) above T c , separated by two different pseudogap crossover lines T * (x) and T p (x). In each T -x phase diagram has a very important phase boundary separating two fundamentally different (pseudogap metal and ordinary metal) states of underdoped and optimally doped cuprates. The T p (x) curve (pseudogap phase boundary) crosses the dome-shaped T c (x) curve at around the optimal doping level, and then fall down to T = 0 at the polaronic QCP, x = x p , inside the superconducting phase. Since the discovery of the pseudogap phase boundary According to the proposed normal-state phase diagrams of high-T c cuprates, one can observe above T c such properties as the two gap-like features and related abnor- Normal-state phase diagram of LSCO, showing two distinct characteristic pseudogap temperatures Tp (solid line which is the same crossover line Tp(x) as in Fig. mal metallic properties, anomalous diamagnetism, from underdoped to overdoped regime, that is, many features that are characteristic of a pseudogap state. In particular, the diamagnetism observed above T c In the underdoped and optimally doped cuprates we have a great variety of experimental evidence that there is a large pristine Fermi surface above the pseudogap crossover line T p (x) but below this line the unusual metallic state is based upon a small polaronic Fermi surface. Further, various experiments and above presented theoretical results indicate that the other pseudogap crossover line T * (x) does not intersect the superconducting dome and smoothly merges into the T c (x) line with overdoping in LSCO, YBCO and Bi-2212. This explains why the pseudogap state was never observed in the overdoped regime except the moderately overdoped region in high-T c cuprates. The smooth merging of T * (x) and T c (x) lines in the overdoped region suggests that cuprates become a conventional superconductor with T c = T * . Because the Cooper pairing and Fermi-liquid superconductivity occur at the same temperature T c . However, in underdoped and optimally doped (including also slightly overdoped) regimes the BCS-like pseudogap (below T * ) and the polaronic pseudogap (below T p ) exist in the normal state of high-T c cuprates. So we have, as a function of x and T , another very fundamental BCS-like pseudogap phase boundary: between the state based upon a polaronic Fermi surface and the state where the polarons have already paired up in the BCS regime and there remains only a small collapsed Fermi surface. The pseudogap crossover line T p (x) intersects the T * (x) line and the superconducting dome in the slightly overdoped regime and then ends at a specific QCP in LSCO, YBCO and Bi-2212. The above two distinct pseudogaps, especially BCSlike pairing pseudogap, discovered in underdoped, optimally doped and moderately overdoped cuprates affect the normal-state properties of these high-T c materials and result in the appearance of their anomalous behaviors below the characteristic pseudogap crossover temperatures. Because the pseudogaps have strong effects on the electronic states of the doped high-T c cuprates and manifest themselves both in doping dependences and in temperature dependences of various physical quantities such as the optical, transport, thermodynamic and other properties of these intricate materials. In this section, we discuss the possible effects of the pseudogaps on the normal state properties of underdoped to overdoped cuprates. In the layered cuprates the normal-state in-plane resistivity ρ(T ) shows various anomalous behaviors below the crossover temperature T * and above this temperature ρ(T ) exhibits a T -linear behavior. Below T * , ρ(T ) deviates either downwards (i.e. ρ(T ) shows a bending behavior) or upwards from the high-temperature behavior In a more realistic model, the charge carriers in polar crystals are scattered by acoustic and optical phonons and these scattering processes are major sources of temperature-dependent resistivity in the cuprates above T c and can describe better the normal-state transport properties. Therefore, we consider here the scattering of charge carriers by the acoustic and optical lattice vibrations, in order to find the variation of the conductiv-ity (resistivity) with the temperature of the crystal. We believe that the in-plane conductivity of underdoped to overdoped cuprates will be associated with the metallic transport of large polarons, bosonic Cooper pairs and polaronic components of such Cooper pairs in the CuO 2 layers. Using the Boltzmann transport equations in the relaxation time approximation, we can obtain appropriate equations for the conductivity of large polarons above T * and for the conductivities of the excited Fermi components of polaronic Cooper pairs and the very bosonic Cooper pairs below T * . It is natural to believe that the polaronic carriers and bosonic Cooper pairs are scattered effectively by optical phonons having the specific frequencies ω 0 = ω 01 and ω 0 = ω 02 , respectively. The total scattering probability of polaronic carriers scattered by acoustic and optical phonons is defined by the sum of two possible scattering probabilities. Above T * the total relaxation time τ p (ε) of such carriers having the energy ε is determined from the relation where τ ac (ε) = A p /t √ ε is the relaxation time of large polarons scattered by acoustic phonons, τ op = B p exp[ ω 01 /k B T * t] is the relaxation time of such carriers scattered by optical phonons, is the material density, υ s is the sound velocity. We now consider the layered cuprate superconductor with a simple ellipsoidal energy surface and the normalstate conductivity of polaronic carriers in the quasi-2D CuO 2 layers (with nonzero thickness). We will take such an approach, since it seems more natural. We further take the components of the polaron mass m p1 = m p2 = m ab for the ab-plane and m p3 = m c for the c-axis in the cuprates. Then the effective mass m p of polarons in the layered cuprates is (m 2 ab m c ) 1/3 . When the electric field is applied in the x-direction, the conductivity of polaronic carriers in high-T c materials above T * in the relaxation time approximation is given by where, f p (ε) = (e (ε-μ)/k B T + 1) -1 is the Fermi distribution function, ε = 2 k 2 /2m p and v x = 1 ∂ε ∂kx are the energy and velocity of polarons, m p = (m 2 ab m c ) 1/3 . In the case of an ellipsoidal energy surface, we make the following transformations similarly to Ref. Then the inplane and out-of-plane kinetic energies are transformed from 2 (k 2 x +k 2 y )/2m ab and 2 k 2 z /2m c to (k 2 x +k 2 y )/2 and 2 k 2 z /2 respectively. As a result, average kinetic energy of a carrier over the energy layer ∆ε along three directions k x , k y and k z is the same and equal to one third of the total energy ε. Therefore, replacing v 2 x by 2 k 2 x /m ab and using the relation d 3 k = (m 2 ab m c ) 1/3 d 3 k , we may write Eq. ( Replacing k 2 x by 2ε/3 2 and using further the carrier density n given by the expression ( When the Fermi energy of large polarons ε F is much larger than their thermal energy k B T , we deal with a degenerate polaronic gas. For a degenerate polaronic Fermi-gas, we have approximately f p (ε < ε F ) = 1 and f p (ε > ε F ) = 0. In this case the function -∂f p /∂ε is nonzero only near ε = ε F = μ F and close to the δ-function. Therefore, we may replace -∂f p /∂ε by δ(ε -ε F ) and the integral in (47) may be evaluated as where α p = ω 01 /k B T * , c p (t) = (B p /A p )te αp/t . Using the above property of the Fermi distribution function, the integral in the denominator in Eq. ( Inserting the relations C. Normal-state conductivity of the Fermi components of Cooper pairs and the bosonic Cooper pairs below T * As mentioned above, the polaronic carriers in the energy layer of width ε A around the Fermi surface take part in the BCS-like pairing and form polaronic (bosonic) Cooper pairs. The total number of the excited (dissociated) Fermi components of such Cooper pairs and nonexcited bosonic Cooper pairs is determined from the relation where F , u k and v k are defined in Eq. The contribution of the excited Fermi components of Cooper pairs to the conductivity in quasi-2D cuprate superconductors below T * in the relaxation time approximation is given by (see Appendix A) When we consider a thin CuO 2 layer of the doped cuprate superconductor with an ellipsoidal energy surface, the expression for σ * p (T < T * ) can be written as If we use the property of δ- in the expression for τ p (k) below T * , the relaxation time of polaronic carriers at their BCSlike pairing is given by Substituting Eq. ( The pairing pseudogap ∆ F and characteristic temperature T * are determined from the BCS-like gap equation Here, we have compared numerically the BCS-like equation for ∆ F (T ) and the more simple (i.e. convenient) expression In the calculation of the contribution of bosonic Cooper pairs to the normal-state conductivity of the cuprates, the mass of the Cooper pair in layered cuprates can be defined as m B = (M 2 ab M c ) 1/3 , where M ab = 2m ab and M c = 2m c are the in-plane and out-of-plane (c-axis) masses of the polaronic Cooper pairs, respectively. Below T * the density of Cooper pairs is determined from the equation Numerical calculations of the concentration n B and the BEC temperature of bosonic Cooper pairs ), but somewhat below T * , T BEC >> T * . Therefore, we can consider polaronic Cooper pairs below T * as an ideal Bosegas with chemical potential μ B = 0. Below T BEC the total number of bosonic Cooper pairs with zero and nonzero momenta K or energies ε is given by where Obviously, bosonic Cooper pairs with zero center-of-mass momentum (K = 0) or velocity do not contribute to the current and only the Cooper pairs with K = 0 and density n B (ε > 0) contribute to the normal-state conductivity of the layered cuprate superconductors with the ellipsoidal constant-energy surfaces. The conductivity of bosonic Cooper pairs below T * is given by (see Appendix A) where is the relaxation time of Cooper pairs scattered by acoustic and optical phonons and determined as τ B (ε α K , where α = x, y, z. In the case of an ellipsoidal energy surface, the expression for the conductivity σ B (T < T * ) of bosonic Cooper pairs in the anisotropic cuprate superconductor at their scattering by acoustic and optical phonons can be written as Using Eq. ( After evaluating the integral in the denominator in this equation, we can write Eq. ( where The resulting conductivity of the excited polaronic components of Cooper pairs and the bosonic Cooper pairs below T * in the CuO 2 layers is calculated as By using the resistivity data from various experiments, we were able to obtain both qualitative and quantitative agreement with the experimental data presented in section D. Equation ( where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity, due presumably to impurity or disorder in samples of high-T c cuprates. Below T * the in-plane resistivity of high-T c cuprates is determined from the expression In this case we use Eq. ( Experimental studies of doped high-T c cuprates show For the comparison with other existing experimental resistivity data we also present our results for the temperature dependences of the in-plane resistivity of high-T c cuprates with the realistic sets of fitting parameters, which in many cases have been previously determined experimentally and are not entirely free parameters. Experimentally, in these materials one encounters a crossover from linear-in-T behavior of the resistivity to nonlinear (including nonmonotonic)-in-T behavior below T * even though the anomaly near T * is weak. We believe that the inhomogeneity and other imperfections in the samples of the doped high-T c cuprates have an effect on this crossover which may be obscured due to such extrinsic factors and may become almost masked or less pronounced BCS-type resistive transition. In fact, a variety of different crossovers in resistivity have been observed in underdoped, optimally doped and even overdoped materials near T * , where ρ ab (T ) displays a finite negative or positive curvature. It is often incorrectly assumed that optimally doped cuprates possess a T -linear resistivity over a wide temperature region which extends down to T c . However, close examination of the experimental resistivity data in various optimally doped cuprates shows that the resistivity will be linear-in-T from 300 K down to T * and then different deviations from linearity occur below T * in these materials. Below T * the resistivity ρ ab (T ) shows nonlinear T dependence and starts to deviate either downward or upward from the T -linear behavior, depending on specific materials parameters. Quite generally, in different hole-doped cuprates, the downward deviation of ρ ab (T ) from linearity occurs below T * , which indicates the appearance of some excess conductivity due to the transition to the PG state and the effective conductivity of bosonic Cooper pairs. The crossover between the high-and low-temperature regimes occurs near T * where the change of ρ ab (T ) is controlled by the temperature variation of σ * p (t < 1) and σ B (t < 1) below T * . The above expressions for ρ ab (T > T * ) and ρ ab (T < T * ) allow us to perform fits of the measured in-plane resistivity ρ ab (T ) in various high-T c cuprates above T c using their specific parameters (Table 3.04 × 10 -27 g, n = 1.0 × 10 21 cm -3 , ω 01 = 0.05 eV, ω 02 = 0.07 eV, ρ 0 = 0.1mΩcm for underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 . Figure Our numerical results on nonmonotonic temperature dependence of ρ ab (T ) for underdoped La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 (with x = 0.10) are also plotted in Fig. Finally we conclude that the agreement between the theoretical results and the various experimental resistivity data obtained for underdoped and optimally doped cuprates is quite good. The above quantitative analysis of the resistivity data shows that our theory describes consistently both the T -linear resistivity above T * and the distinctly different deviations from the high temperature T -linear behavior in ρ ab (T ) below T * in these materials. The scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM and STS) [127] and ARPES Here we argue that the anomalous features of the SIN tunneling spectra of high-T c cuprates is linked in some way to the polaronic effects and two distinct (polaronic and BCS-like) pseudogaps rather than other effects. We examine the effects of polaronic and BCS-like pseudogaps and gap inhomogeneity on the tunneling characteristics of high-T c cuprates and give an alternative explanation of the anomalous features (e.g., U -and V -shaped subgap features, asymmetric peaks and peak-dip-hump features) observed in SIN tunneling spectra. We now consider the model which describes two different mechanisms for quasiparticle tunneling across the SIN junction at the bias voltages V < 0 and V > 0 applied across the junction and explains the asymmetry of the tunneling current taking into account the different tunneling DOS existing in these cases In the case V < 0, the total current is the sum of two tunneling currents and is proportional to the square of the tunneling matrix element, |M | 2 where D(ε f F ) is the DOS at the Fermi energy of quasifree carriers ε f F , which can be approximated as For the normal metal, the DOS at the Fermi level is independent of energy E, i.e., D(E) D(0). Thus, at V > 0 the tunneling current from the normal metal to the cuprate superconductor is where where At negative bias voltages V < 0, two different tunneling processes or currents associated with the Cooperpair dissociation and the polaron dissociation contribute to the total current (which is a simple sum of two currents described by two independent conductance factors). Therefore, the resulting tunneling current and differential conductance are given by and where The parameters G(ε F ) and a F (T ) are adjusted to the experimental data. For the case of single polaronic gap ∆ p and single BCS gap ∆ F the SIN tunneling conductance exhibits a rounded U -shaped spectral behavior at low bias (Fig. The physics of quasiparticle tunneling from the cuprate superconductor to the normal metal and vice versa is essentially influenced by the doping-induced inhomogeneities. Therefore, the inhomogeneous high-T c cuprates show very different, asymmetric and more Vshaped spectra with different local tunneling gaps, which might be expected not only within the d-wave gap model, but also within the s-wave multiple-gap model. One can expect that the electronic inhomogeneity in high-T c cuprates may produce regions with different doping levels and gap amplitudes (∆ F (i) and ∆ p (i)) and a variation in the local DOS. STM and STS experiments on Bi-2212 and other high-T c cuprates confirm this conclusion and indicate that the gap inhomogeneity commonly exists in these high-T c materials regardless of doping level [127, For V > 0, the tunneling of electrons from the normal metal into these metallic microregions of high-T c cuprate superconductor with different BCS DOS D BCS (E, ∆ F (i)) takes place and the contribution of the i-th N→S tunneling channel to the total tunneling conductance is given by Eq. For V < 0, the contributions of parallel conduction channels to the S→N tunneling current come from various metallic microregions of cuprate superconductors at the dissociation of different polaronic Cooper pairs and large polarons. Therefore, the total current is the sum of tunneling currents flowing from these metallic microregions of cuprate superconductor with different local DOS (D BCS (E, ∆ F (i)) and D f (E, ∆ p (i))) to the normal metal. The contribution of the i-th S→N tunneling channel into the total tunneling conductance is given by Eq. In such a multiple-gap model, the tunneling spectra exhibit a more V -shaped behavior at low bias, the peakdip-hump feature at negative bias and the asymmetry of the conductance peaks. The shape of the SIN tunneling spectra between the two conductance peaks tends to be more V -shaped in the inhomogeneous multiple-gap regions (with different local gap amplitudes ∆ F (i) and ∆ p (i)) due to the superposition of different BCS tunneling conductances, and more rounded U -shaped in the homogeneous single gap regions. Indeed, Fang et al. observed such two types of spectra, one nearly V -shaped in the average-and large-gap regions and the other showing more rounded U -shaped in the small-gap regions of inhomogeneous Bi-2212 The experimental tunneling spectra of the well-studied high-T c cuprates The high energy part of the experimental tunneling spectra on the negative bias side show a broad linewidth which grows almost linearly in energy and the peak-dip separation decreases with overdoping. As can be seen in Fig. It is clear that the single-particle tunneling spectroscopy and ARPES provide information about the excitation gaps at the Fermi surface but fail to identify the true superconducting order parameter appearing below T c in non-BCS cuprate superconductors The existing experimental facts give evidence that the thermodynamic properties, especially specific heat properties of high-T c cuprate superconductors are very unusual in many respects, both in the superconducting state and in the normal state. In particular, measurements of the specific heat of LSCO and YBCO give clear evidences for the existence of more or less pronounced BCSlike anomalies somewhat above T c or even well above T c where is the density of states at the polaronic Fermi level ε F i (including both spin orientations), N i is the number of the i-th type of large polarons, N = N 1 + N 2 is the total number of polaronic carriers in the system , f i = N i /N is the fraction of the i-th type of large polaronic carriers. For doped cuprates, the coefficient of the linear term in C e (T > T * ) is defined as where the number of CuO 2 formula unit (or the host lattice atoms) per unit molar volume is equal to the Avogadro number N A = 6.02 × 10 23 mole -1 , x = N/N A is the dimensionless carrier concentration or doping level, k B N A = 8.314J/moleK. The important parameters that describe the real experimental situation and the quantitative behavior of C e (T ) in doped high-T c cuprate superconductors are ε F i and f i . Let us estimate the values of γ e for LSCO and YBCO. Using the specific values of ε F i and f i in the polaronic band (ε F 1 0.15 eV, f 1 = 0.6) and impurity band (ε F 2 = 0.06 eV, f 2 = 0.4), we obtain γ e 5.67mJ/moleK 2 at x = 0.1 for LSCO. The experimental value of γ e lies in the range (4.9-7.3)mJ/moleK 2 (1 -δ) 3 for 0 ≤ 1 -δ ≤ 0.5, (0.5 -δ) 3 + 0.125 for 0.5 < 1 -δ ≤ 1 where The energy of an ideal Bose-gas below the BEC temperature T BEC is given by where n c is the number of Bose particles. The specific heat of such a Bose-gas of incoherent Cooper pairs is determined from the relation Then the total electronic specific heat below T * is given by where The BCS-like gap, ∆ F (T ) appearing below T * is determined from Eq. which turns out to be a good approximation only in the narrow temperature range 0.9T * < T ≤ T * . So, if we want a more accurate approximation to find d∆ 2 F (T )/dT in a wide temperature range below T * , then we can use a more accurate analytical expression The number of incoherent Cooper pairs N c and their BEC temperature are determined from the relations and where m c = 2m p is the mass of polaronic Cooper pairs, ε F 1 > ε A > 0.1 eV, m p 2m e When the BCS-type contribution to C e (T < T * ) coming from the excited Fermi-components of Cooper pairs and from the bosonic Cooper pairs predominates over the contribution coming from the unpaired carriers in the impurity band, the pronounced BCS-type anomaly of C e (T ) is expected at T * . However, the situation changes markedly if the impurity contribution dominates the BCS-type contribution and the contribution of bosonic Cooper pairs to C e (T ). In this case the jumps of C e (T ) above T c will be largely modified (i.e., strongly depressed) by the relatively large impurity contribution to the C e (T ) and become less pronounced BCS-type anomalies, as observed in experiments However, we argue that this normal-state specific heat anomaly observed also near 220K by other authors (for a review, see Ref. Thus, considering the possible noises or errors in experiments and large enough spread of experimental points (e.g., in Fig. G. Polaronic isotope effects on the pseudogap formation temperature in high-Tc cuprates The experimental observations of the isotope effects on the pseudogap formation temperature T * in high-T c cuprates The polaronic effects may change significantly the simple BCS picture and lead to the novel isotope effects on T * . In the large polaron theory, m p , E p and ε F depend on the Fröhlich-type electron-phonon coupling constant α F which in turn depends on the masses M (= M O or M Cu ) and M (= M Cu or M O ) of the oxygen O and copper Cu atoms in cuprates: where , κ is a force constant of the lattice, m is the mass of the undressed carrier in a rigid lattice (i.e. in the absence of the electron-phonon interaction). In the intermediate electron-phonon coupling regime the mass and binding energy of a large polaron are given by and The exponent of the isotope effect on the pseudogap formation temperature T * is defined as Using Eqs. ( and where Some experiments showed that the oxygen and copper isotope effects on the pseudogap temperature T * in Yand La-based cuprates are absent or very small Note that the expression for α T * , Eq.( When the strength of the attractive interaction between fermionic quasiparticles becomes sufficiently strong, the Cooper-like pairing of such quasiparticles can occur at a higher temperature T * than the T c not only in high-T c cuprates but also in other unconventional superconductors and superfluids. Therefore, the idea of a normal state gap in high-T c cuprates might be extended in other exotic systems. In particular, the normal state of organic and heavy-fermion superconductors exhibits a pseudogap behavior above T c and is different from the normal state of conventional BCS superconductors One can assume that the ground state of charge carriers in organic materials just like in high-T c cuprates is a self-trapped state (polaronic state) with appreciable lattice distortion when the carrier-phonon interaction is strong enough The BCS-like gap ∆ F goes to zero continuously as T approaches T * from below and the characteristic pseudogap formation temperature is determined from the equation At λ * p 0.5 and E p + ω 0 > 6k B T * this equation gives (see Table If the Fermi energy ε F is smaller than E p + ω 0 , the cutoff energy ε A = E p + ω 0 in Eq. ( Br system superconductors , respectively The mean-field pairing temperature T * for 3 He and heavy-fermion superconductors is determined from the BCS-like gap equation Eq. ( where ˆ k = k/k F , k F is the Fermi wave vector. Further, the interaction potential V l ( k, k ) is assumed to be constant within a thin layer near the Fermi surface and zero elsewhere: Substituting Eq. ( where The summation in Eq. ( At a mean-field pairing temperature T * , ∆ F (T * ) = 0, so that for ε A > 6k B T * , Eq. ( where λ * l = V l D(ε F ) is the BCS-like coupling constant. The Fermi temperature T F in liquid 3 He is of the order 1K and the interaction between 3 He atoms should be strong enough in order to expect the BCS-like pairing correlation effect well above T c . By taking ε A 0.5k B T F and λ * l = 0.554, we find T * 93mK. Experimental results show One can assume that the energy of the exchange interaction in heavy-fermion systems just like in undoped cuprates There are key differences between strongly overlapping (weakly-bound) and non-overlapping (tightly-bound) Cooper pairs in superconductors and superfluids. When Cooper pairs begin to overlap strongly, they lose their composite nature under the exchange of their fermionic components, which move away from one Cooper pair to another. These Cooper pairs behave like fermions. In contrast, non-overlapping Cooper pairs behave like bosons. So, the superconductivity (superfluidity) of bosonic Cooper pairs are fundamentally different from the conventional superconductivity (superfluidity) of fermionic Cooper pairs described by the BCS-like (s-, p-or d-wave) pairing theory. A distinctive feature of unconventional superconductors and superfluids is that they might be in the bosonic limit of Cooper pairs. Therefore, in this section we study the possibility of the existence of bosonic Cooper pairs in unconventional superconductors and superfluids. As the binding between fermions increases, Fermi gas of large overlapping Cooper pairs evolves into Bose gas of small non-overlapping Cooper pairs, as pointed out by Leggett A. The criterion for the bosonization of Cooper pairs depending on two characteristic parameters εA and εF Here we are looking for bosonization criterion that depends on two characteristic parameters, ε A and ε F of superconductors and superfluids. If the size of the Cooper pairs a c (T ) is much larger than the average distance R c between them, the bosonization of such Cooper pairs cannot be realized due to their strong overlapping, as argued by Bardeen and Schrieffer where ∆x and ∆E are the uncertainties in the coordinate and energy of attracting polaronic carriers, respectively, ∆k is the uncertainty in the wave vector of polarons. The expression ( ∆k) 2 /2m p represents the uncertainty in the kinetic energy of polarons, which is of order ε F , whereas ∆k would be of the order of 1/R c . Taking into account that ∆x is of order a c and ∆E would be of the order of the characteristic energy ε A of the attractive interaction between polarons, equation ( This ratio is universal criterion for the bosonization of Cooper pairs in small Fermi energy systems, such as high-T c cuprates (for which ε A is replaced by E p + ω 0 ) and other exotic superconductors, liquid 3 He and ultracold atomic Fermi gases. The criterion ( B. The criteria for the bosonization of Cooper pairs depending on three characteristic parameters εA, εF and ∆F We now obtain the criteria for bozonization of Cooper pairs depending on three characteristic parameters of superconductors and superfluids. The bosonic nature of Cooper pairs in these systems can be specified by comparing the size of the Cooper pair a c with the mean distance R c between them. It may be important to identify which condensed matter systems characterized by the parameters ε A , ε F and ∆ F are the conventional BCS-type (s-, p-or d-wave) superconductors (superfluids) or the unconventional Bose-type (i.e., non-BCS-type) superconductors (superfluids). The size of a Cooper pair in a superconductor can be determined by using the uncertainty principle as where m * F is the effective mass of fermionic quasiparticles. The mean distance between Cooper pairs is determined by the expression where n c is the concentration of Cooper pairs. The concentration of Cooper pairs n c depends on the attractive pairing interaction energy ε A (i.e., on the width of the energy layer near the Fermi surface). If n is the total concentration of fermionic quasiparticles in the system, all of these quasiparticles (at small Fermi energies ε F ∼ ε A ) or some part of them, which is of order (ε A /ε F ) n, may take part in the Cooper pairing. The concentration of fermionic quasiparticles n enters into the expression for ε F , which is given by The concentration of fermions, which take part in the Cooper pairing, is roughly defined as Using Eqs. ( Then, the mean distance between Cooper pairs is determined from the relation If the size of Cooper pairs a c is smaller than the mean distance R c between them, we deal with the non-overlapping Cooper pairs, which behave like bosons. Thus, it is quite clear that we deal with the unconventional Bose-type superconductors and superfluids if the condition a c < R c is satisfied. Using the relations ( The phase diagram of the two fundamentally different types of Cooper pairs in superconductors and superfluids obtained by using three characteristic parameters ε A , ε F and ∆ F is shown in Fig. The theoretical interpretation of the unconventional superconductivity (superfluidity) in high-T c cuprates, heavy-fermion and organic systems and the superfluidity in liquid 3 He as the BCS-like (s-, p-or d-wave) superconductivity (superfluidity) without clarifying the fermionic nature of Cooper pairs might be misleading. Therefore, researchers should first determine the fermionic nature of the Cooper pairs in the superconductors (superfluids) under consideration, and then they should discuss the possibility of the BCS-like (s-, p-or d-wave) superconductivity (superfluidity). The fermionic Cooper pairs in superconductors and superfluids would exist under the condition a c > R c , so that the criterion for the existence of such Cooper pairs can be written as We demonstrate that this criterion is well satisfied only in conventional superconductors and heavily overdoped cuprates with large Fermi energies ε F >> ε A . The maximum values of the energy gap 2∆ F in conventional superconductors are about 3 • 10 -3 eV The bosonization of Cooper pairs is expected in unconventional superconductors and superfluids, in which the energy ε A of the effective attraction between fermions is comparable with Fermi energy ε F , i. e., ε A ε F << 1 eV. The criterion (106) allows us to determine the existence possibility of bosonic Cooper pairs in these systems. The Fermi energy ε F of underdoped to overdoped cuprates determined from the relation (102) at m * F = m p = 2m e and n (0.5-1.0)•10 21 cm -3 varies from 0.115 eV (for underdoped cuprates) to 0.182 eV (for overdoped cuprates). In these high-T c materials, the observed values of the energy gap ∆ F vary from 0.025 eV to 0.04 eV The observed values of the pseudogap in heavy-fermion superconductors range from 0.001 eV In organic superconductors the magnitude of the pseudogap is larger than 0.02 eV and the Fermi energy ε F is of order 0.1 eV. In these systems, the quantity ε A will be determined by E p + ω 0 , which is of order 0.06 eV. Then the criterion (106) for the existence of bosonic Cooper pairs in organic superconductors at ε A /ε F 0.6 has the following form: ∆ F /ε F (1/60π) 1/3 . We see that this criterion will be well satisfied when ∆ F /ε F 0.2. We now determine the existence possibility of bosonic Cooper pairs in liquid 3 He. If we take ε F ≈ 10 -4 eV and ε A 0.5ε F for liquid 3 He, we see that the criterion London suggested We first discuss briefly the existing theories of superfluid Bose systems and then present the adequate microscopic theory of the Bose superfluids. Landau Other microscopic theories of a nonideal Bose gas have been proposed by Valatin and Butler After the discovery of the layered high-T c cuprate superconductors, a 2D model of an interacting Bose gas adapted to a 2D boson-like holon gas has been discussed in Refs. becomes rather small in comparison with n c = n B . Actually, the number of bosonic Cooper pairs n c somewhat below T * becomes much larger than n * p and remains almost unchanged when the temperature decreases down to T c . Thus, fermions (which are products of the thermal dissociation of Cooper pairs) and bosonic Cooper pairs residing in the energy layer of width ε A near the Fermi surface are essentially decoupled just like the spin-charge separation in RVB model From what has been already stated, it follows that the possible superfluid states and basic superfluid properties of Bose liquids were not established as functions of interboson interaction strength or coupling constant and temperature for the complete temperature range 0 ≤ T ≤ T c , and the existing microscopic theories were not in a satisfactory state for understanding all the superfluid properties of 4 He and other Bose-liquids. In this section, we construct a quantitative, predictive microscopic theory of the genuine superfluidity and superconductivity of Bose liquids. In this theory the pair boson Hamiltonian and realistic BCS-like approximation for the interboson interaction potential are used to solve the self-consistent set of integral equations not only for T = 0 and weak interboson coupling, but also for the temperature range 0 < T ≤ T c and arbitrary interboson coupling strengths. We show that the coherence parameter (i.e. superfluid order parameter) will appear at a λ-like transition temperature, T c = T λ , which is also marks the onset of the superfluid condensation of attracting bosons. In the following, we describe the essentials of the complete and detailed microscopic theory of superfluid states of 3D and 2D Bose liquids. We consider a system of N B Bose particles of mass m B and density ρ B = N B /Ω (where Ω is the volume of the system) and start from the boson analog of the BCS-like Hamiltonian. These Bose particles repel one another at small distances between them and their net interaction is attractive at large distances. Therefore, in the pair Hamiltonian of an interacting Bose gas, we take explicitly into account both the short-range repulsive (preventing collapse of an attractive Bose system) and long-range attractive interboson interactions. The boson analog of the BCS-like Hamiltonian, which describes the pair interaction between Bose particles, is similar to Eq. ( where εB The Hamiltonian ( Substituting Eq. ( where is the ground state energy of a Bose-liquid, and E B ( k) is the excitation spectrum of interacting bosons given by which is different from the BCS-like excitation spectrum of interacting fermions. The coherence parameter ∆ B ( k) would represents the superfluid (or superconducting) order parameter appearing at a certain mean-field temperature T c which in turn represents the onset temperature of the superfluid phase transition in Bose liquids. Using the transformation of Bose operators (c + k and c k ), Eq. ( by means of their self-consistent solutions. We shall now see that the gapless excitation spectrum of a superfluid Bose-liquid is quite different from the gapless excitation spectrum of a BCS-like Fermi-liquid. As seen from Eq. ( where ρ B0 = N B0 /Ω is the density of Bose particles with k = 0. In order to simplify the solutions of Eqs. ( where ξ BA and ξ BR are the cutoff energies for attractive and repulsive parts of the V B ( k -k ), respectively. This approximation allows us to carry out the calculation thoroughly and so it gives us a new insight into the superfluididty of a Bose-liquid. Further, we assume that and μB is essentially positive. The cutoff parameter ξ BA characterizes the thickness of the condensation layer including almost all Bose particles. Therefore, the main contribution to the sums in Eqs. ( We now consider the possible superfluid states of a 3D Bose liquid. In so doing, we show that the analytical and numerical solutions of Eqs. ( Replacing the summation in Eqs. ( where γ * B is a critical value of the interboson coupling constant γ B = ṼB D B √ ξ BA . The excitation spectrum E B (k) of interacting bosons has a finite energy gap E B (0 B and becomes gapless (phonon-like) at γ B ≤ γ * B . Therefore, such a quasiparticle excitation spectrum satisfies the Landau criterion for superfluidity at k → 0. If E B (0) > 0, 2E B (0) is the minimum energy needed to break a condensed boson pair From Eqs. ( For γ B γ * B , the fraction of condensed bosons in the k = 0 state n B0 = ρ B0 /ρ B is determined as a function of γ B from the following equations (see Appendix B) From these equations we find where It follows from Eq. ( In this case we have deal with the usual BEC of an ideal Bose-gas. As can be seen from Fig. Dependence of the condensate fraction on the coupling constant γB in 3D Bose superfluids at T = 0 and ξBA/kBTBEC =10, 20 and 30. The ground state energy W 0 of a 3D Bose-liquid at T = 0 can be evaluated using the relation Substituting now this expression into Eq. ( Evaluating the integrals in Eq. ( It follows from Eq. ( Thus, the superfluid condensation energy of attracting 3D bosons is defined as 2. Distinctive single particle and pair condensations of attracting bosons at T = 0 We now examine the numerical and analytical solutions of Eqs. ( B and ∆ g > 0 the numerical and analytical solutions of Eqs. ( where ρ B0 (T ) = 0 for T T * c . The values of T * c (γ B ) and n B0 (T ) can be obtained from Eqs. ( where sound velocity. Such an expression for n B0 (T ) was also obtained in the framework of the phenomenological approach from which at T = T c and ∆ B = 0, we obtain This equation yields It is interesting to examine the behavior of μB (T ) and ∆ B (T ) near T c . According to Eqs. ( where a = 2(c 0 γ B T c ) -0.5 (ξ BA /k B T c ) 0.25 . The prediction of the behavior of μB (T ), ∆ B (T ) and n B0 (T ) in the vicinity of T * c is also interesting. When T approaches T * c from below, the solutions of Eqs. ( where b = (c 0 γ B T * c ) -0.5 (ξ BA /k B T * c ) 0.25 . According to Eqs. ( from which we obtain Thus, from Eqs. ( We believe that the relation T c √ 2T * c holds in the intermediate coupling regime (0.3 γ B < 1). But both T * c and T c approach T BEC with decreasing γ B . For γ B << γ * B , the energy gap appears in the boson spectrum E B (k) somewhat below T c and its magnitude near T c is determined from the relation The values of γ * B in interacting 3D Bose systems are approximately equal to 2.0, 1.7, and 1.5 for ξ BA /T BEC = 10, 20 and 30. It is important to notice that the thickness of the condensation layer ξ BA increases with increasing γ B and becomes much more larger than k B T c at γ B 1, but ξ BA is about k B T c or even less at γ B << 1. Therefore, the magnitude of γ B k B T c /ξ BA in Eq. ( where c 0 = π 3/2 /3.918. Phase diagram of a 3D Bose-liquid, illustrating the successive phase transitions with decreasing T and γB, from normal state to the superfluid A-phase (superfluid pair condensate) and from the superfluid A-phase to the superfluid B-phase (superfluid single-particle condensate). Temperature dependence of condensate fraction nB0 in a superfluid 3D Bose-liquid. As γ B → 0, T c approaches T BEC , and therefore, the T c in the right-hand side of Eq. ( The phase diagram of a 3D Bose-liquid derived from studies of the onset temperatures (T * c and T c ) of the single particle and pair condensations of attracting bosons is presented in Fig. We now turn to the case of an interacting 2D Bose system and examine the possibility of the existence of two distinct single particle and pair boson condensates and superfluid states arising in this system. We first consider the single-particle and pair condensations of attracting 2D Bosons at T = 0. Replacing the summation in Eqs. ( where The dependence of the condensate fraction n B0 on the coupling constant γ B in attractive 2D Bose systems at T = 0 is shown Fig. The ground-state energy of a 2D Bose-liquid at γ B ≤ γ * B and μB = ∆ B << ξ BA is given by Then the superfluid condensation energy of attracting 2D bosons at ξ BA /∆ B 5 is defined as We turn next to the case T = 0. In this case, the energy gap always exists in E B (k), and where the value of q must be determined for the given values of γ B and T /T c by means of the self-consistent solution of Eq. ( It is important to go beyond the weak coupling limit and to derive a simple and more general expression for T c , which should be valid not only for γ B << 1 but also for γ B 1. Such an expression for T c can now be derived by equating the chemical potential of an ideal 2D Bose gas with the expression (157) at T = T c (see dashed and solid curves in Figs. from which at a particular case γ B << 1 follows the result for T c presented in Ref. In 3D and 2D Bose liquids the interaction between Bose particles may change significantly the characteristic temperatures T BEC and T 0 entering the expressions for T c and T * c . In particular, the actual BEC temperature T BEC in a nonideal Bose gas is turned out to be less than that in an ideal Bose gas We consider first the question of the effects of mass renormalization in 3D Bose-liquid. We will indicate how the desired expression for εB (k) can be obtained using the effective mass approximation proposed in Ref. where W and R are the energy and range parameters, respectively, x = r/R. After expanding the V B (k) in a Taylor series around kR = 0 (with a radius of convergence not smaller than kR = 1 for Φ(x) = e -x /x) and some algebraic transformations where where k R = √ 2m B ξ BR / . Further, the density of Bose particles can be defined as Comparing Eq. ( Then, the BEC temperature of bosons in a 3D Boseliquid is defined as (see also Ref. Accordingly, the BEC temperature T BEC (ρ B ) of free bosons entering the expression A similar result can be obtained for the renormalized temperature T * 0 (ρ B ) in a 2D Bose-liquid. In this case, the Fourier transform of V B (r) is given by where J 0 (kr) is the zero-order Bessel function. Further, the potential V B (r) may be approximated just like in the case of a 3D Bose-liquid as V B (r) = W Φ(x). Then we have After expanding J 0 (kRx) in a Taylor series around kR = 0 (with a radius of convergence not smaller than kR = 2 for Φ(x) = e -x /x) and some algebraic transformations (see Appendix E), we obtain the equations, which are similar to Eqs. ( The characteristic temperature T 0 entering the expression ( At low temperatures, we can assume k B T << μB , ∆ B and ∆ B ≈ const, μB ≈ const. Therefore, the specific heat of a 3D superfluid Bose-liquid is given by At γ B > γ * B and ∆ g > 2k B T the function sinh[E B (ε)/2k B T ] under the integral in Eq. ( However, for γ B < γ * B and T < T * c the excitation spectrum of a 3D superfluid Bose-liquid at small values of k is phonon-like E B (k) √ 2μ B ε = μB /m B k. Then Eq. ( where the value of the integral is equal to (2) -3 Γ(5)ζ(4) = π 4 /30 (see, e.g., Ref. As appears from the above, the phonon-like T 3 dependence of C v (T ) is expected at T < T * << T c , as it was observed in superfluid 4 He below 1 K Further, for ∆ g < 2k B T we obtain from Eq. ( In this case the temperature dependence of C v (T ) in a 2D superfluid Bose-liquid is also very close to phonon-like one. For attractive Bose systems, the problem of their stability relative to spontaneous collapse can arise in the study of the superfluid states in such Bose systems. To escape a collapse in a 2D attractive Bose gas of holons, the strong Hartree-Fock repulsion, which ensures a positive compressibility, has been introduced in Ref. In the weak coupling limit (γ B << 1), the single particle condensation in a 3D attractive Bose gas with ρ B ∼ ρ B0 is expected in a wide temperature range from T = 0 to T * c < T c . In this limiting case, one obtains ∆ B ρ B ṼB which is essentially positive at V BR > 1.5V BA . This means that the 3D Bose gas with the attractive and repulsive interboson interactions is stable. In the strong coupling limit (γ B > γ * B or μB > ∆ B ), we deal with the pair condensation of bosons in attractive Bose systems. Especially, for γ B >> γ * B the behavior of such Bose systems seems to be very close to a dilute gas limit. In this case, the quantities μB and K B for 3D and 2D Bose systems are determined from the rela- 2 (where E b = 2 μB is the binding energy of a boson pair in a dilute Bose gas Thus, the 3D and 2D attractive Bose systems undergoing the single particle and pair condensations are stable for V BR >> V BA (when γ B << γ * B ) and for V BR > V BA (when γ B > γ * B ). In this section, we convincingly prove that the underlying mechanisms of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity observed in various substances are fundamentally different from the BCS condensation of fermionic Cooper pairs and the so-called s-, p-or dwave BCS-type superconductivity (superfluidity). Actually, the superconducting/superfluid transition in high-T c cuprates We now present a radically new microscopic theory of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other systems based on the above theory of Bose superfluids, which describes the genuine superconducting/superfluid states arising at the pair and single particle condensations of attracting bosons (Cooper pairs and 4 He atoms). We demonstrate that only a small attractive part of a Bose gas in these systems can undergo a superfluid phase transition at T c and the mean field theory of 3D and 2D Bose superfluids is well consistent with existing experimental data and make experimentally testable predictions of the distinctive features of bosonic order parameter ∆ B , novel superconducting/superfluid states and properties of various high-T c cuprates and other related systems. The high-T c cuprate superconductivity is still invariably considered as the Fermi-liquid superconductivity based on the BCS-type (s-or d-wave) pairing of electrons and holes. In order to understand this phenomenon, we take an alternative view that the genuine superconductivity in high-T c cuprates results from the superfluid condensation of the attractive Bose gases of polaronic Cooper pairs with low densities (ρ B << n c ). Such composite bosons repel one another at small distances between them and their net interaction is attractive at large distances. In high-T c cuprates, attractive interactions between bosonic Cooper pairs result from their polaronic carriers interacting with lattice vibrations. The energy of such an attractive interaction between bosonic Cooper pairs would be of the order of ω 0 (i.e. ξ BA ∼ ω 0 ). The 3D mean-field equations for determining the coherence (i.e., superconducting order) parameter ∆ SC = ∆ B and the condensation temperature T c of such bosonic Cooper pairs can be written as (see Appendix B): Solutions of Eqs. ( in the temperature range 0 T < T c (see Fig. B and ∆ g = 0, Eqs. ( where ρ B0 is the density of bosonic Cooper pairs with k = 0 and ε = 0. The self-consistent equations ( Thus, single particle and pair condensates of bosonic Cooper pairs are two distinct superconducting phases in high-T c cuprates just like A and B phases in superfluid 3 He. The occurrence of the Bose-liquid superconductivity in these systems is characterized by a non-zero coherence parameter ∆ B which defines the bond strength of all condensed bosonic Cooper pairs -boson superfluid stiffness. Therefore, excitations of a superfluid Bose condensate of Cooper pairs in high-T c cuprates are collective excitations of many particles (all bosons participate in the excitation). Such excitations should not be measured by single-particle spectroscopies, as noted also in Ref. The high-T c cuprates are fundamentally different from the BCS-type superconductors. In conventional metals and heavily overdoped cuprates with large Fermi energies, the superconducting state is characterized only by the BCS-like (fermionic) order parameter ∆ F appearing at T c and the onset temperature of Cooper pairing T * coincides with T c . In contrast, for high-T c cuprates with small Fermi energies, the emergence of unconventional superconductivity is a two-stage process 1. Kink-like behavior of the bosonic superconducting order parameter near T * c < Tc The numerical and analytical solutions of the selfconsistent equations ( In high-T c cuprate superconductors, the binding energy 2∆ F of polaronic Cooper pairs will increase when the temperature decreases and their overlapping becomes impossible. However, the binding energy 2∆ g of boson pairs in 3D systems decreases rapidly below T c and becomes equal to zero at a characteristic temperature T * c at which the composite boson pairs begin to overlap strongly and lose their identity. This distinctive feature of composite boson pairs should be visually displayed in the magnetic flux quantization effects in 3D high-T c cuprates. Specifically, the integer and half-integer magnetic flux quantizations in units of h/2e and h/4e should be expected in these bosonic superconductors at T ≤ T * c and T > T * c , respectively. Since the bosonic Cooper pairs first would undergo pair condensation, which is responsible for the half-integer h/4e magnetic flux quantization below T c , while their single particle condensation is responsible for the integer h/2e magnetic flux quantization below T * c . If one takes into account that the energy gap ∆ g in the excitation spectrum of a 2D superfluid Bose-liquid of Cooper pairs at T > 0 is much larger than such a gap in the excitation spectrum of a 3D superfluid Bose-liquid of Cooper pairs at T > T * c , the half-integer flux-quantum effect is best manifested in the 3D-to-2D crossover region than in the bulk of high-T c cuprates. The effect of magnetic flux quantization in units of h/4e predicted earlier 3. Two-peak specific heat anomalies, λ-like and first-order phase transitions The existing experimental facts concerning the high-T c cuprate superconductors We now examine more closely the temperaturedependent behavior of C e (T ) in high-T c cuprates near T c and above T c by comparing the calculated results for C e (T ) with experimental data. As T approaches T c from below, the temperature dependences of μB and ∆ B are described by Eqs. ( of μB (T ) and ∆ B (T ) entering the second term of Eq. ( . These temperature derivatives of μB and ∆ B in the expression for C e (T ) give rise to a pronounced λ-like divergence at T c , which is different from the BCS/BEC transition. By introducing the quantity of superfluid matter ν B = N B /N A (where N B is the number of attracting bosonic Cooper pairs and N A is the Avogadro number, which is equal to the number of CuO 2 formula unit per unit molar volume) and the molar fraction of the superfluid bosonic carriers defined by f s = ν B /ν (where ν = N/N A is the amount of doped matter), we now write the molar specific heat of the superfluid Bose-liquid in high-T c cuprates as Here we have assumed that In doped cuprates the carriers are distributed between the polaronic band and the impurity band (with Fermi energy ε F I ) and the normal-state specific heat C n (T ) above T c is calculated by considering three contributions from the excited components of Cooper pairs, the ideal Bose-gas of Cooper pairs and the unpaired carriers bound to impurities (see Eq. ( In BCS-like pairing theories, the magnetic field penetration into the superconductor or the London penetration depth λ L (T ) is determined within the two Fermiliquid model. However, in bosonic superconductors the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth λ L (T ) should be determined within the two Boseliquid model where λ L (0) = (m B c 2 /4πρ B e * 2 ) 1/2 , c is the light velocity, e * = 2e is the charge of Cooper pairs, ρ B = ρ s + ρ n , ρ s and ρ n are the densities of the superfluid and normal parts of a Bose-liquid. The density of the normal part of a 3D Bose-liquid is determined from the expression where B , the excitation spectrum of a 3D Boseliquid becomes gapless below T * c . If γ B << γ * B , the excitation spectrum of such Bose-liquid will be phonon-like Then Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( Equation ( While the T -dependence of λ L in 3D bosonic superconductors at ∆ g > k B T can be approximately obtained after replacing E B (ε) by ∆ 2 g + 2μ B ε ∆ g + μB ε/∆ g in Eq. ( At γ B < γ * B and low temperatures the energy gap ∆ g in the excitation spectrum of a 2D Bose-liquid is vanishingly small. Therefore, E B (ε) may also be approximated by Then the density of the normal part of a 2D Bose-liquid ρ n is defined as Substituting this expression into Eq. ( At ∆ g >> k B T , we can again assume that E B (ε) For the case of 2D bosonic superconductors, we then obtain approximately the following law: which can be valid in some temperature range below T c . The exact results for λ L (T )/λ L (0) are obtained by numerical calculation of the integral in Eq. ( We now turn to the experimental evidence for λ L (T ) in high-T c cuprates. Experimental results on the London penetration depth in these high-T c materials It is now interesting to compare the numerical results for λ L (T )/λ L (0) and (λ L (0)/λ L (T )) 2 obtained using Eqs. ( We now discuss the main critical parameters in high-T c cuprate superconductors and show that the kink-like feature of the bosonic superconducting order parameter ∆ SC (T ) = ∆ B (T ) is responsible for the kink-like behavior of the critical current J c (T ) destroying superconductivity in these materials. The critical current density in bosonic superconductors is given by J c (T ) = 2eρ s (T )v c (T ), The other distinctive superconducting properties of high-T c cuprates not encountered before in conventional superconductors are the unusual temperature dependences of their lower and upper critical magnetic fields. We show that the kink-like features of ∆ SC (T ) and J c (T ) strongly influence the temperature dependences of the critical magnetic fields near T * c , as observed in high-T c cuprates The lower critical magnetic field H c1 is determined from the relation where χ(T ) = λ L (T )/ξ c (T ) is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter, ξ c (T ) = / 2m B ∆ B (T ) is the coherence length in bosonic superconductors, H c (T ) is the thermodynamic critical magnetic field, which can be defined as From Eqs. where B /k B m * B and m * B is determined from Eq. Unlike the case of 3D systems, the critical temperature of the superconducting transition in 2D systems for arbitrary γ B is determined according to the formula where We argue that the polaronic effects gives rise to the unexpected (i.e. unusual) isotope effects on T c in high-T c cuprates, since the mass of large polarons m p (> m e ) and the optical phonon energy ω 0 entering into the expression for T c could be the origin of such isotope effects on T c . In order to study the polaronic isotope effect on T c , the mass of polarons is determined from Eq. ( where α F = (e 2 / ε) m e /2 ω 0 , ω 0 = (2κ are the masses of the oxygen O and copper atoms in the cuprates. For Y -and Bi-based cuprates, we use Eq. where Next the exponent of the isotope effect on T c is defined as Using Eqs. where As seen from Eqs. For the given ionic masses M and M , Eqs. We now discuss the origins of the vortex-like excitations and diamagnetism above T c . Equations There are also some confusions in the literature about the origins of vortex-like and diamagnetic states, which have been found in unconventional cuprate superconductors above T c Finally, it is interesting to predict that the superconducting transition temperature can reach up to the room temperature in some unconventional quasi-2D cuprate materials with increasing γ B and ρ B (the density of the attractive part of bosonic Cooper pairs). If we assume ρ B = 3 • 10 13 cm -2 and γ B = 0.76 for such systems, we find T * 0 253K and T 2D c 1.164T * 0 294 K. It follows that the room temperature superconductivity can be realized in ultra-thin 2D films or on the surfaces (e.g. grain boundaries and interfaces) of cuprate superconductors and other related materials. The above presented microscopic theory of pseudogap phenomena and unconventional Bose-liquid superconductivity in high-T c cuprates allows us to construct a full and relevant phase diagram of these doped CT-type Mott insulators. The richness of the electronic properties of cuprate materials from lightly doped to overdoped region seems to be inevitably related to the complexity of their phase diagram and, the key probably lies in this complexity. In the lightly doped cuprates, the strong and unconventional electron-phonon interactions are responsible for the existence of localized carriers and (bi)polaronic insulating state. Specifically, a small level of doping (e.g., x 0.02 -0.03 The above results show that the high-T c cuprates are characterized by low density of superfluid (attracting) bosonic Cooper pairs ρ B << n c << n (cf. another view on the small superfluid density in high-T c cuprates, which is based on the BCS-like model of a superfluid Fermiliquid The values of T c in non-BCS cuprate superconductors are actually determined by low densities of bosons and only a small part of preformed Cooper pairs is involved in the superfluid Bose condensation. In 3D systems, the density of condensing (attracting) bosons is related to n as ρ B = f s n << n, where f s is the fraction of superfluid bosons. According to equations increases nearly as T c ∼ (f s n a x) 2/3 (in the 3D case) and T c ∼ (f 2D s n a x) (in the 2D case), then reaches the maximum at optimal doping and exhibits the saturating or decreasing tendency with increase of x and m * B . Thus, both curves T 3D c and T 2D c have a dome-like shape. A general advantage of quasi-2D versus 3D systems predicted by the superfluid Bose-liquid model is that superconductivity can be observed in a wider region of the phase diagram in the former than in the latter. Another important finding is that the onset temperature of the first-order phase transition T * c separates two distinct superconducting phases of 3D Bose-type cuprate superconductors. So far, the ideas of the BCS-like theory of superconductivity in simple metals based on the Cooper pairing of electrons is widely applied in various types of unconventional superconductors and superfluids. However, the mechanisms of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity in other systems might be different from the BCS condensation of fermionic Cooper pairs. In this connection, we briefly discuss the underlying mechanisms of the unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity in other systems, in which the genuine superconducting/superfluid states arise at the pair and single particle condensations of attracting composite bosons (Cooper pairs and 4 He atoms). We analyze the existing experimental data and explain the origins of the genuine superconducting/superfluid states and properties of other exotic matters using the theory of 3D and 2D Bose superfluids. There is much experimental evidence that the unconventional superconductivity in other systems (e.g., in organic and heavy-fermion compounds and ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 ) are actually similar to that in high-T c cuprates Interestingly, the temperature dependence of the London penetration depth λ L of organic and heavy-fermion superconductors has a close resemblance with that of λ L in high-T c cuprates. For example, the change in slope of [λ L (0)/λ L (T )] 2 observed near T * c 0.7T c in organic superconductor (BEDT -T T F ) 2 Cu(N CS) 2 (see Fig. Many researchers have attempted to explain the origins of the superconducting A and B phases in heavy-fermion systems in terms of the different BCS-like pairing theories. However, such an explanation of these superconducting phases seems to be inadequate and misleading. As discussed above, the superfluid single particle and pair condensates of bosonic Cooper pairs might be two distinct superconducting A and B phases in heave-fermion systems. Moreover, the origins of the gapless superconductivity and gapless excitations in these superconductors have also been poorly interpreted as the evidence for the existence of the nodes of BCS-like gaps. We argue that these distinctive superconducting properties of heavy-fermion systems are intimately related to the gapless excitation spectrum of a 3D superfluid Bose condensate of unconventional Cooper pairs, while the point or line nodes of the BCS-like gaps discussed in the current literature do not have direct relation to the heavy-fermion superconductivity. Next we discuss the similarities of heavy-fermion and cuprate superconductors above the bulk superconducting transition temperature T c . Experiments on heavyfermion superconductors CeRhIn 5 , CeCoIn 5 and CeIrIn 5 (see Ref. Finally, experimental results on unconventional superconductivity confirm clearly 2. Superfluid Bose-liquid states and properties of liquid 3 He and atomic Fermi gases The BCS-like pairing theories describe fairly good the formation of unconventional Cooper pairs in liquid 3 He, but fail to explain the genuine superfluidity in this system. We argue that these theories cannot explain the observed superfluid properties of 3 He both at T c and below T c . Actually, close examination of specific heat data shows that the observed behavior of the specific heat in liquid 3 He near T c (see Fig. where T * BEC = 3.31 The first-order phase transition between the A and B phases of liquid 3 He occurs without any doubt at T * c = T AB and these superfluid A and B phases are roughly characterized by the half-integer h/4m * 3 (at T > T * c ) and integer h/2m * 3 (at T ≤ T * c ) flux quantizations. The signs of the existence of half flux quanta in the superfluid 3 He-A were discussed in Ref. 3. Superfluid Bose-liquid states and properties of 4 He We now discuss the validity of the microscopic theory of Bose-liquid superfluidity in liquid 4 He. The mass density of liquid 4 He is 0.145g/cm 3 According to the above microscopic theory of superfluid Bose-liquid, the specific heat of superfluid 4 He, diverges as C v (T ) ∼ (T λ -T ) -1/2 and exhibits a clear λ-like anomaly at T λ . The excitation spectrum E B (k) of this Bose superfluid becomes gapless and phonon-like in the temperature range 0 ≤ T ≤ T * c below T λ . The en-ergy gap ∆ g appearing in E B (k) at the pair condensation of attracting bosons ( 4 He atoms) above T * c is responsible for the deviation of the specific heat C v (T ) from the phonon-like T 3 law (1.8 ± 10)% at T = 1.2 K and n B0 10% at T = 0) and the temperature-dependent n B0 (T ) has a feature manifesting in a marked (several times) increase of n B0 below T ∼ 1 K. This feature of n B0 (T ) observed in superfluid 4 He is indicative of the appearance of the energy gap in the excitation spectrum of this superfluid at T = T * c 1.2 K. Apparently, the interatomic interaction in liquid 3 He is relatively weaker than such an interaction in 4 He. Therefore, the condensate fraction in superfluid 3 He must be larger than in superfluid 4 He. Indeed, the condensate fraction in liquid 3 He-4 He mixtures was found to be n B0 0.18 Next we turn to the superfluid critical velocity in liquid 4 He. The helium critical velocities of 60-70 m/s, predicted by the Landau criterion for superfluidity, are much (two orders of magnitude) larger than measured velocities of superfluid flow Finally, the observed low temperature heat capacity C v (T ) ∼ T 2 of 2D superfluid 4 He in mesopores From the above considerations, it is clear to anyone by now that the high-T c cuprates and other related systems (e.g. organic and heavy-fermion systems, ruthenate Sr 2 RuO 4 , superfluid 3 He and atomic Fermi gases) with low Fermi energies cannot be BCS-type superconductors and superfluids. Therefore, most researchers at last should realize this fact and know that the underlying mechanisms of novel (unconventional) superconductivity and superfluidity can be fundamentally different from the often discussed currently s-, p-or d-wave BCStype (Fermi-liquid) superconductivity and superfluidity. While they should know new criteria and principles of unconventional superconductivity (or superfluidity) that in-corporate also the BCS-type superconductivity as a particular case. We are now in position to formulate such criteria and principles, which are valid for various superconductors and superfluids, as follows: (1) The BCS-type superconductivity and superfluidity occur, as a rule, in weakly interacting Fermi systems (e.g., in conventional metals, heavily overdoped cuprates and other systems), in which the Fermi energy is large enough ε F > 2ε A (or ε F >> ∆ F ) and the Cooper pairs have fermionic nature (2) In conventional superconductors/superfluids, the onset temperature of Cooper pairing T * coincides with T c and the formation of a BCS pairing gap ∆ F on the Fermi surface at T c is a criterion for the occurrence of superconductivity (or superfluidity) (3) The BCS-type Cooper pairing is a necessary, but not a sufficient for the occurrence of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity (4) Unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity in exotic matters (e.g. in high-T c cuprates, heavyfermion and organic compounds, Sr 2 RuO 4 , liquid 3 He and atomic Fermi gases), as a rule, require both the Cooper pairing of fermions and the bosonization of Cooper pairs. (5) The high-T c cuprates and other related systems having the small Fermi energies (ε F < 2ε A ) and exhibiting the pseudogap behaviors above T c are in bosonic limit of Cooper pairs, and therefore, they are unconventional (bosonic) superconductors and superfluids. (11) Only a small attractive part of a Bose gas of Cooper pairs condenses into a Bose superfluid at T c . Similarly, a certain attractive part of atoms in liquid 4 He condenses into a Bose superfluid at T λ . In this work, we have elaborated a consistent, predictive and empirically adequate microscopic theory of pseudogap phenomena and unconventional Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other systems with low Fermi energies. This theory based on the radically new and conceptually more consistent approaches enabled us to describe properly the pseudogap phenomena and the unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity in various substances. Now we conclude by summarizing the above theoretical results and the key physical features that distinguish unconventional superconductors and superfluids from the conventional BCS superconductors (superfluid Fermi liquids). This can serve as a quide for discriminating between superconducting/superfluid systems that have usual BCS behavior and those which cannot be consistently explained by the BCS-like (s-, p-or dwave) pairing theory. From the above considerations and experimental evidences, it follows that in BCS-type superconductors (i.e. in conventional metals and heavily overdoped cuprates) characterized by weak electronphonon coupling, the charge carriers are quasi-free electrons or holes and strongly overlapping Cooper pairs, which condense into a superfluid Fermi-liquid state at T c . In contrast, the high-T c cuprates falling between weak and strong electron-phonon coupling regimes are characterized by the pseudogap and non-overlapping bosonic Cooper pairs, which exist above T c and condense into a superfluid Bose-liquid state at T c . In these polar materials the relevant charge carriers are polarons which are bound into bipolarons (at low dopings) and polaronic Cooper pairs (at intermediate dopings). The unconventional electron-phonon coupling and polaronic effects are more relevant to the underdoped, optimally doped and moderately overdoped cuprates than other factors and control the new physics of these high-T c materials. The mechanisms for the formation of the two types of pseudogaps observed in doped high-T c cuprates above T c and not encountered before in conventional superconductors are intimately related to the unconventional electron-phonon interactions. Specifically, the so-called non-pairing and pairing pseudogaps are induced by the polaronic effect and the BCS-like pairing of large polarons above T c in various high-T c cuprates, from the underdoped to the overdoped regime. Our results provide a consistent picture of the microscopic origin of the two different pseudogap regimes and their respective crossover temperatures (T p and T * ) in the normal state of underdoped to overdoped cuprates. The polaronic pseudogap phase boundary ends at a specific QCP (x p = x QCP 0.20 -0.22) and controls the new physics of high-T c cuprates in a wide region of temperatures and dopant concentration. This upper pseudogap crossover temperature T p characterizes the Fermi surface reconstruction (any large Fermi surface existing above T p transforms into a small polaronic Fermi surface below T p ). Actually, such a Fermi surface reconstruction occurring at a QCP predicted first theoretically Most importantly, the bosonization of Cooper pairs and the unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity would occur in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap systems. We have formulated the universal and more relevant criteria for bosonization of Cooper pairs in these systems using the uncertainty principle. We have found that the bosonization of Cooper pairs would occur in high-T c cuprates, heavy-fermion and organic compounds, liquid 3 He, atomic Fermi gases and other systems under the conditions ε F 2ε A and ∆ F /ε F 0.34 • (ε A /ε F ) 1/3 . The unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity occurring in the bosonic limit of Cooper pairs are expected in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap systems where the superconductivity (superfluidity) is not simply caused by the formation of a BCS-like energy gap ∆ F on a Fermi surface. In these systems, the superconducting/superfluid transition at T c is more λ-like than the BCS or BEC transition and superconductivity (superfluidity) is not expected until the superfluid condensation temperature T c of the bosonic Cooper pairs is reached. In underdoped and overdoped cuprates, the bosonic Cooper pairs (with zero spin), the BCS-like gap ∆ F and related diamagnetic state exist below T * , but high-T c superconductivity is only established when the part of such Cooper pairs condenses into a Bose superfluid at T c . There is experimental evidence that the BCSlike fermionic excitation gap ∆ F exists as a pseudogap in high-T c cuprates Our results clearly demonstrate that superconductivity(superfluidity) of bosonic Cooper pairs just like superfluidity of 4 He atoms is well described by the mean field theory of attracting bosons and the superconducting/superfluid phase is identified with the coherence parameter ∆ B appearing below T c . We have established the following law: the attractive Bose gases of Cooper pairs and 4 He atoms undergo a λ-like superconducting/superfluid transition at T c (the onset temperature of pair condensation of bosons) and then a first-order phase transition at T * c (the onset temperature of single particle condensation of bosons) lower than T c (in a 3D system) or at T = 0 (in a 2D system). We have proved that the gapless superconductivity (superfluidity) occurs in 3D Bose systems below T * c due to the vanishing of the energy gap ∆ g in E B (k) and this phenomenon in unconventional superconductors and superfluids is not caused by the point or line nodes of the BCS-like gap discussed in some pand d-wave pairing models. We have discovered that the coherent single particle and pair condensates of bosonic Cooper pairs and 4 He atoms exist as the two different superfluid A and B phases in high-T c cuprates and other unconventional superconductors and superfluids (e.g., 3 He, 4 He and atomic Fermi gases). According to the theory of a superfluid Bose-liquid, the cuprate high-T c superconductivity is more robust in quasi-two-dimensions than in three dimensions, i.e., T c is higher in quasi-2D than in 3D systems. Therefore, we see that three different superconducting phases exist in high-T c cuprates where the coherent pair condensate of bosonic Cooper pairs persists as the superconducting phase up to the temperature T v = T 2D c > T 3D c at quasi-2D grain boundaries and the coherent pair and single particle condensates of such composite bosons in 3D systems exist as the two distinct superconducting phases below T c = T 3D c . It follows that the persistence of the vortex-like excitations in high-T c cuprates above T c is caused by the destruction of the bulk superconductivity. The existence of such vortices is expected below the temperature T v lower than T * but higher than T c . This means that diamagnetism and vortex formation above T c in high-T c cuprates are unrelated phenomena. Clearly, the condensate and excitations of a Bose-liquid are unlike those of a BCS-like Fermi liquid. Therefore, not all the experimental methods are able to identify the true superconducting order parameter ∆ SC = ∆ B in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap systems. For example, the single-particle tunneling spectroscopy and ARPES provide information about the excitations gaps at the Fermi surface but fail to identify the true superconducting order parameter appearing below T c in bosonic superconductors. For this reason, a prolonged disput about the origin of unconventional superconductivity (i.e. superconducting other parameter) in the cuprates on the basis of tunneling and ARPES data has nothing to do with the underlying mechanism of high-T c cuprate superconductivity. The unconventional cuprate superconductivity is controlled by the coherence parameter (boson superfluid stiffness) ∆ B ∼ ρ B and only some selected experimental techniques can provide information about such a superconducting order parameter. In particular, the thermodynamic methods and the methods of critical current and magnetic field measurements are sensitive to the identification of ∆ SC (T ) = ∆ B (T ) in unconventional superconductors. We have convincingly demonstrated that many puzzling superconducting/superfluid properties of high-T c cuprates, heavy-fermion and organic compounds, Sr 2 RuO 4 , quantum liquids ( 3 He and 4 He) and ultracold atomic Fermi gases observed experimentally are best described by the microscopic theory of the 3D Boseliquid superconductivity and superfluidity. In particular, we have shown that the bulk superconductivity described by the theory of a 3D superfluid Bose-liquid provides a consistent picture of the highly unusual and intriguing superconducting properties (e.g., λ-like secondorder phase transition at T c , first-order phase transition and kink-like temperature dependences of superconducting parameters ∆ SC (T ), J c (T ), H c1 (T ), H c2 (T ), λ L (T ) near T * c , gapless excitations and novel isotope effects on T c ) of high-T c cuprates. Experimental results confirming the occurrence of bulk superconductivity in the system PrBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ Finally, we have formulated the new criteria and principles of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity, which allow us to find the real applicability boundary (which up to now remains unknown) between BCS-type and Bose-type regimes of superconductivity and superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other systems. The above theoretical predictions and their experimental confirmations speak strongly about in favor of the existence of novel superconducting/superfluid states, which arise in condensed matter systems at single particle and pair con-densations of attracting bosonic Cooper pairs. Within the mean field theory of 3D and 2D superfluid Bose liquids, it is possible to describe the following unexplained features of high-T c cuprates and other superconductors and superfluids: (i) the novel features of the phase diagram of high-T c cuprates (e.g., vortex-like state existing in the temperature range T c < T < T v and two distinct superconducting phases below T c ); (ii) the existence of a vortex-like state above T c and two distinct superconducting A and B phases in heavy-fermion systems below T c ; (iii) the existence of two distinct superfluid A and B phases in liquid 3 He, (iv) the existence of first-order phase transitions in superfluid Note added. After writing this work, I learned from report made by D.G. Gulyamova I benefitted greatly from valuable discussions and criticism with C.M. Varma, J. Zaanen and D. Emin. I wish also to thank D.M. Eagles and V.D. Lakhno for helpful correspondences. I thank A. Rahimov, A.L. Solovjov, P.J. Baimatov, M.J. Ermamatov, U.T. Kurbanov, Z.S. Khudayberdiev, E.X. Karimbaev and Z.A. Narzikulov for useful discussions. This work was supported by the Foundation of the Fundamental Research, Grant No OT -Φ2-15. The Boltzmann transport equation for the excited Fermi components of Cooper pairs in the relaxation time approximation can be written as where f 0 C (k) is the equilibrium Fermi distribution function, τ BCS (k) is the relaxation time of the Fermi components of Cooper pairs in the BCS-like pseudogap regime, F is a force acting on a charge carrier in the crystal. We consider the conductivity of hole carriers in the presence of the electric field applied in the x-direction. Then we can write Eq. (A1) as where 3) the current density in the x-direction can be defined as where ξ and E are even functions of k, while v x f 0 C (k) is an odd function of v x . Since integration with respect to dk x ranges from -∞ to +∞, the first term in Eq. (A.4) becomes zero, and only the second term remains, resulting in (for F x = +eE x ) Similarly, the current density of bosonic Cooper pairs in the x-direction is given by (for F x = +2eE x ) Then Eqs. ( Here, we present the final result which has the form In order to determine the temperature dependences of μB and ∆ B near T c , Eqs. ( 2 ρ B /k B m * B . The mass of the interacting bosonic Cooper pairs m * B is determined from Eq. (164) and larger than 2m * 3 . The value of T The latter integrals in Eqs. (C.1) and (C.2) can be evaluated near T c making the substitution t B , (C.15) The entire phase diagram of Bi-2212 from Mott insulator to the heavily overdoped regime is shown in Fig.43, where the characteristic temperatures T * c , T c and T v describe three distinct superconducting regimes, whereas two unusual metallic states exist below the crossover temperatures T p and T * . The vortex-like state exists in the temperature range T c < T < T v , while the diamagnetic state persists up to the BCS-like pseudogap formation temperature T * .