We present a novel optical transient absorption and reflection microscope based on a diffractionlimited pump pulse in combination with a wide-field probe pulse, for the spatio-temporal investigation of ultrafast population transport in thin films. The microscope achieves a temporal resolution down to 12 fs and simultaneously provides sub-10 nm spatial accuracy. We demonstrate the capabilities of the microscope by revealing an ultrafast excited-state exciton population transport of up to 32 nm in a thin film of pentacene and by tracking the carrier motion in p-doped silicon. The use of few-cycle optical excitation pulses enables impulsive stimulated Raman microspectroscopy, which is used for in-situ verification of the chemical identity in the 100 -2000 cm - 1 spectral window. Our methodology bridges the gap between optical microscopy and spectroscopy allowing for the study of ultrafast transport properties down to the nanometer length scale. The performance of all optoelectronics materials is critically dependent on efficient carrier transport. Our understanding of the associated transport characteristics commonly relies on the interpretation of indirect measurements such as microwave conductivity, photoluminescence quenching, terahertz photoconductivity or time-of-flight techniques, which determine charge carrier mobilities or diffusion constants. The photophysics of optoelectronic materials often involve sub-100 fs photodynamics, typically resolved using femtosecond transient absorption or reflection spectroscopy. To achieve the highest temporal resolution, we employ a single-lens high-NA oil-immersion objective instead of the more conventional flat-field and chromatic aberration corrected multicomponent objectives. This choice compromises the absolute imaging capability but only weakly affects a differential pump-probe experiment over a small field of view (see also supporting information, section 2), allowing us to compress our pump pulses to 9.8 fs with commercially available optical elements (Figure The probe pulses in our setup are temporally compressed to 6.8 fs (Figure We incorporated two complementary probe channels to accommodate a broad range of samples irrespective of their optical properties. In the transmission channel, the probe is loosely focused onto the sample by a concave mirror (Figure To demonstrate the capabilities of our microscope, we first imaged the spatio-temporal dynamics of a ~120 nm thin film of the singlet fission material pentacene (Pc) in transmission. Following photoexcitation to S1, Pc undergoes singlet fission to form a correlated triplet-triplet ( 1 TT) state on a sub-100 fs time scale, which can be followed by monitoring the growth of the photoinduced absorption band at 790 nm. We remark that this wavelength range is free from other overlapping spectral components, allowing direct insight into the spatio-temporal characteristics of the singlet fission dynamics (supporting information, section 3.2). The transient photodynamics of pentacene at the central pixel of the point-spread function feature an initial coherent spike at zero-time delay, which evolves into a fast rise of the 1 TT population with a τ = 76 ± 6 fs time constant (Figure Gaussian fit with the temporal standard deviation error we retrieve a spatial accuracy of ~2.9 nm for this measurement. We refer the reader to section 2 of the supporting information for more details (Figure We can roughly estimate the underlying two-dimensional diffusion dynamics from the meansquare displacement (MSD) curves according to the (linear) diffusion Equation where D is the diffusion coefficient and t the time delay (Figure Based on the diffusion coefficient and retrieved singlet fission lifetime, we can estimate the effective carrier diffusion length for this fully temporally resolved ultrafast regime as L fast = √Dτ = 32.2 ± 2.1 nm. To generalize this result, we repeated the same experiment by detecting different probe wavelengths (supporting information, section 4). Within a probe range from 710 -790 nm, coinciding with the photoinduced The extraordinarily high diffusion coefficients (Dfast) and associated carrier lengths (Lfast) thus point to a previously unknown transport regime during the earliest times following photoexcitation in Pc. While a detailed interpretation of the above results is beyond the scope of this work, the established photophysics of Pc allows us to provide a first qualitative explanation of our results. In addition to our ability to visualize exciton population transport in Pc during singlet fission, the high temporal resolution of our setup allows us to also monitor the chemical fingerprint of the excitation spot via impulsive stimulated Raman scattering for in-situ verification of the chemical composition of the probed sample region. To highlight how our approach can be applied for optically thick or non-transparent materials, we investigated the ultrafast spatio-temporal properties of p-doped Silicon (Si) using the reflection channel of our microscope. Si is a prototypical, well-characterized material commonly used in solar cells, which is non-transparent to visible light and therefore cannot be measured in transmission. Here, we recorded transient reflection images probed above the optical bandgap (740 nm). A typical point-spread function at a time delay of ~3 ps shows of a negative, isotropic differential reflectivity signal in the form of an Airy disk, in agreement with previous reports (Figure Analogous to our analysis on Pc, we described each transient reflection image with a twodimensional isotropic Gaussian function to analyze the spatial profiles. The retrieved timedependent amplitudes match the central pixel amplitudes (Figure Figure behavior. An inherent benefit of our approach is the ability to simultaneously monitor the chemical identity of the selected region via impulsive stimulated Raman scattering alongside the spatiotemporal dynamics. The combination of these functionalities provides comprehensive insight into charge carrier and exciton population transport in a wealth of materials with morphological and chemical specificity. Consequently, our approach can be readily applied to hetero-junctions and other inhomogeneous morphologies to elucidate interfacial population transport. in addition to a narrow bandpass filter (FB790-10 for pentacene and FB740-10 for silicon, Thorlabs) as shown in Figure An automatic focus control loop based on total internal reflection of a reference continuous wave laser (405 nm) was used to stabilize the focus position via an objective piezo (NP140, Newport) in pentacene. The camera exposure time was set to 9 ms for pentacene and 12 ms for silicon at a camera frame rate of 30 Hz. For the experiments on pentacene shown in Figure Normalized differential images were calculated from the raw images and described for each time delay with an isotropic two-dimensional Gaussian function according to: G(x, y) = A exp (- ) + offset where A encodes the signal amplitudes, x0 and y0 the position and σ is the standard deviation. Initial guesses for the position were taken from the center of mass position of each image, the amplitude was taken from the corresponding pixel amplitude and we set σ = 100 nm and offset = 0. We note that this approach does not describe the diffraction rings present in the Airy-disk. This results in a systematic overestimation of the fitted signal amplitude and we therefore scaled the reported amplitudes in Figure Population kinetics were modelled with a sum of two exponentially decaying Gaussian functions, and stated error bars in the retrieved lifetimes correspond to the standard deviation error.