Producing intense radioactive beams, in particular those consisting of short-lived isotopes requires the control of the release efficiency. The released fractions of 11 elements were measured on 14 samples that were characterized by various physicochemical analyses in a correlated paper (Part 1). A multivariate statistical approach, using the principal component analysis, was performed to highlight the impact of the microstructure on the release properties. Samples that best release fission products consist of grains and aggregates with small size and display a high porosity distributed on small diameter pores. They were obtained applying a mixing of gro und uranium dioxide and carbon nanotubes powders leading to homogeneous uranium carbide samples with a porous nanostructure. A modelling under on-line ALTO conditions was carried out using the FLUKA code to compare the yields released by an optimized and a conventional target. The research and development program at the ALTO facility (Accélérateur Linéaire et Tandem d'Orsay) of the Institut de Physique Nucléaire d'Orsay (IPNO) aims to provide new beams of exotic and neuton-rich nuclei, as intense as possible. At ALTO, neutron-rich nuclei are produced by photofission in thick uranium carbide targets. An efficient way to improve the intensities of the radioactive beams, in particular those consisting of short-lived isotopes, would be to develop dense and porous targets. These two properties are antagonistic but essential to increase the fission fragment quantity produced and diffuse them out of the target respectively. Much research work has been done to improve release efficiencies by studying the influence of several parameters. Numerous studies have pointed out the impact of the uranium precursors In this context, we have undertaken to determine the impact of the physicochemical characteristics of a target on its release properties. As a first step, seven samples ranging from a dense UC sample to a highly porous UCx one elaborated with carbon nanotubes were studied. Open porosity appears to play the most significant role and the use of carbon nanotubes proves very promising provided the microstructure remains stable when the sample is heated at high temperature for a long time Two uranium (uranium dioxide and uranium oxalate) and three carbon (graphite, carbon nanotube-CNT), graphene) sources were used to produce 14 batches of samples according to 3 different mixing protocols labelled conventional protocol (CP), developing protocol (DP) and graphene protocol (GP). 0.4 g and 1 g were taken from the powder mixtures containing the CNT and graphite (or graphene) respectively. Each powder sample was pressed 6 seconds at 220 MPa to form a green pellet with about 13 mm diameter and 1.7 mm thickness. All the pellets were carburized at 1800 °C for 2 hours and pellets No. 9, 10, 11 and 12 underwent an additional heat treatment at 1800 °C for 12 days. Despite the care taken during the preparation, after heating, the samples show significant differences in diameter and thickness (Table Table The released fractions were determined from the amount of fission products remaining in the samples after heating. Fission products were obtained from the uranium (99.75 wt% of 238 U and 0.25 wt% of 235 U) fission induced by the neutron flux generated by stopping a 26 MeV deuteron beam in a graphite converter. The measurements were performed following the procedure developed by Hy et al. and Tusseau-Nenez et al. Among all the pellets synthesized for each sample type, two, called P1 and P2 whose the dimensions are given in Table The second step consists in placing each pellet in front of a Ge(HP) detector in order to perform a first γ-measurement aiming to compare the amount of fission products created in the two pellets. In the third step, the pellet P1 was heated to 1768 °C for 30 minutes. The temperature of 1768 °C corresponds to the temperature used in our previous R&D experiments at ALTO. Using this temperature, we can check the reproducibility of the experiments and validate the protocol used for the study of the fission-product release. The pellet was placed between two tantalum crucibles as shown in Figure The waiting time between the end of the irradiation and the start of the first -spectroscopy measurement was 47 ± 8 min. The time of this first measurement was 10 min and the delay between the end of this first counting and the beginning of the second one was 62 ± 3 min. The very low dispersion (value that can be compared to the 18 min obtained in the previous experiment All the γ-spectra were analysed with the Fityk software The temperature accuracy and reliability were difficult to control in the previous experiment. To overcome this drawback the heating procedure was controlled by a programmable device. To validate this hypothesis, the sample No. 8 was synthesized applying the same protocol as the one used for sample No. 7. Figure Figure Figure Figure As in the case of the physicochemical analysis of samples As for Sn and Sb, they are very well released by all the samples, therefore these five elements cannot be used to differentiate the samples. The result of this analysis is presented in Figure Figure Figure The samples defined by a positive coordinate on Dim 1 lie on the right side of Fig. In ref. In conclusion, the PCA allowed us to demonstrate that the sample release ability, whatever the considered element, is highly correlated, through the first principal component, to some physicochemical properties of the samples. The samples that best release fission products consist of grains and aggregates with small size and they display a high porosity distributed on small diameter pores. By projecting the samples on Dim 1, a hierarchical ranking is obtained (figure In ISOL facilities, the intensity of radioactive beams produced depends on several parameters, including production in the target and its release efficiency. In this part, the expected fission number is calculated via the FLUKA code for two targets in the context of the ALTO facility The first step consists in modelling the target as well as the oven that contains it. The oven is modelled by a tantalum tube of 20 mm diameter, 200 mm length and 1 mm thickness into which a graphite tube is inserted with 18 mm diameter, 198 mm length and 2.5 mm thickness. The uranium carbide target (UCx + carbon) is simulated by a cylinder 13 mm in diameter and 193 mm in length placed inside the graphite tube. The target configuration in pellets was not taken into account because it does not affect the production of the fission products but only their release. In the simulation, the electron beam moves along the z axis and its origin is set arbitrarily 10 mm upstream of the uranium carbide target. Its diameter is 1 cm and its angular distribution is a Gaussian function with 0.3915 cm full width at half maximum, in both x and y directions Two sets of calculations were performed by simulating the interaction of 2.45×10 9 electrons (E = 50 MeV) with uranium carbide targets of 3.82 and 1.27 g.cm -3 densities. The first one corresponds to a PARRNe type target (sample No. 8) and the second one to a No. 14 target. Figure Normalizing the results to a 10 μA electron beam at 50 MeV, i.e. 6.25×10 13 electrons per second (maximal intensity delivered at ALTO), the number of fissions obtained in the whole target is 2.22×10 10 for the target No. 8 and 8.71×10 9 for No 14. The ratio, 2.55, is lower than the value obtained from the densities of the two targets, which is 3: the best penetration of the beam and the greatest spread of the fissions in the target No. 14 lead to a slight compensation of the deficit expected from the difference in densities. However, in order to compare the performance of both targets, it is important to combine two phenomena: production in the target and release of the fission products. The diffusion coefficients are extracted from the comparison of the released fractions measured during this work and the values calculated using the formula describing the diffusion process in a cylinder. This formula was obtained by extending the calculations made by Fujioka and Arai in the case of foils, fibers and particles Assuming isotropic and homogeneous diffusion, the motions along and perpendicular to the cylinder axis are independent then the isotope fraction still remaining in the cylinder, labelled f(t), can be expressed by equation where f(t)disk and f(t)Length are the isotope fraction still remaining in a disk of radius R (cm) and in an interval of length L (cm) (in other words the radius and thickness of the pellets). D (cm 2 .s -1 ) is the diffusion coefficient, th (s) the heating time and J0,k the kth positive root of the zeroth order Bessel function of the first kind. From equation ( The release efficiency (εRF) of a given isotope of an element with D, R, L, J0,k as defined above and λ (s -1 ) the radioactive decay constant of the isotope. Finally, the production rates extracted from the target are related to the number of fissions generated in the target and given by the FLUKA simulation (Nfission), the fission yield for the given isotope (Y) and the release efficiency for this isotope εRF, according to equation ( Figure Some improvements have been implemented in our release-fraction measurement protocol in order to control the reproducibility of the experiments, in particular in the heat treatment step using a programmable logic controller. To compare the fission-product release efficiency of different samples from different raw precursors, standardization according to the thickness of the pellet is necessary. In these conditions, the released fractions of 11 elements were determined, instead of 13 in our previous works since we demonstrated that the 91m Y and 135m Xe should not be considered. The release from 14 different types of UCx microstructures was measured. These samples differ by their synthesis parameters: the nature of the carbon precursor (graphite, graphene or CNT), the nature of the uranium precursor (uranium oxide or oxalate) and its grinding, the molar C/U ratio, the mixing protocol (CP, GP, DP) and the longterm heating (12 days, 1800°C). The developed mixing protocol (DP) leads to homogeneous UCx samples with a porous nanostructure. The nanometric UCx grains and the micrometric pores, well distributed all together, reduce the diffusion path in the grains and favor the effusion through the porosity, two factors leading to the improvement of the fission-product release. In order to highlight the correlations between the obtained microstructure and the release efficiency without any experimenter bias; a statistical approach via the principal component analysis (PCA) was performed. For the PCA, the 14 samples synthesized were described by 17 quantitative and active variables (11 physicochemical variables collected in ref. The first principal component expressing 55 % of the total dataset inertia, a ranking was done by sorting the samples according to their coordinate along this dimension. The best samples are made with carbon nanotubes following the DP protocol where they were better than those made with graphite or graphene. It can be noted that the PARRNe type samples appear ranked among the last ones. A study on OXA-based samples is still needed to understand their particular behaviour. A modelling of the on-line ALTO conditions was performed using the FLUKA code on the best target (No. 14) and on a PARRNe one for comparison. The results showed that the less dense target (No. 14) allows deeper penetration of the beam and therefore a larger distribution of fissions. Nevertheless, this new target has a production rate three times lower than a conventional one. However, a better release for all elements was measured experimentally, leading to a significant production gain for short-lived isotopes (T < 100 s) of Cs and Sr. This study shows that there is no universal target material microstructure for the release of isotopes and that the microstructure of the target must be adapted according to the elements to be released. 2, 5, 6, 11, 13 and 14, the samples No. 1 and 10 exhibit small RF values for Sr and Ba and a high proportion of large pores ("