Colloidal quantum nanostructures constitute outstanding model systems for investigating size and dimensionality effects. Their nanoscale dimensions lead to quantum confinement effects that enable tuning of their optical and electronic properties. This Review presents current and potential applications of semiconductor nanocrystals as sophisticated materials for display technologies. Display devices that enable the input and output of information are central to the digital information era. We use displays everywhere and a lot of the time -at home, in the workplace, and on the go. Each of us has at least one in our pockets. Over the past 100 years, revolutions and evolution of display device technologies have been closely dependent upon the generation of innovative materials for displays enabled by clever chemistry. The focus of this Review is colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (SCNCs), also termed colloidal quantum nanostructures herein, which constitute an emerging family of materials for display applications. SCNCs are made up of tens to tens of thousands of atoms arranged in the ordered structure of the bulk semiconductor from which they are derived. Colloidal SC quantum dots (CQDs), the first type of SCNCs, were conceived in the early 1980s and have been developed and perfected over the past 25 years, both in terms of synthetic control over the materials characteristics and the understanding of their optoelectronic properties. A well-known property of CQDs is that the emission color of the nanocrystals can be tuned merely by changing their size, which has become a hallmark of nanoscience (Figure The images in a display are made up of a large number of small pixels with individually controlled light output. Adjacent pixels of typically three base colors, red, green, and blue (RGB), are used to generate color images. Figure Increasing the purity of the colors in the corners thus results in larger coverage of the CIE chart by the triangles, which is termed the color gamut. Sunlight spreads the entire color gamut, while the RGB spectra in most commercially available displays today spread only the black triangle (s-RGB standard). SCNCs are characterized by a narrow emission spectrum (Figure SCNC synthesis has evolved into an important field of materials, inorganic, and solidstate chemistry. Numerous reviews address this topic in great detail and herein we only briefly describe the key principles. Although early synthetic approaches for II-VI SCs employed water-based synthesis, Other approaches have also been developed that may be even better suited to the batch synthesis of industrial amounts of NCs. One such approach is the "heating-up" method, in which a "one-pot mixture" of the solvent and the reactive precursors is stirred at low temperatures and then heated-up to induce the crystallization reaction. These methods can be applied to a variety of semiconductor materials to form wellcontrolled NCs. The best-developed systems are those of cadmium chalcogenides, in particular, CdSe, which span the visible range for displays. The synthesis of shape-controlled SCNCs is also highly advanced in the II-VI semiconductor materials. The energy levels of SC bulk materials are composed of two continuous bands separated by an energy gap (Eg): a fully occupied lower valence band (VB) and a higher empty conduction band (CB). Excitation of an electron from the VB to the CB leaves behind a hole with a positive charge in the VB. The electron-hole pair thus formed interacts through Coulomb attraction to form an exciton with a characteristic binding energy and an exciton Bohr radius of a0, derived in analogy to the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom. As a consequence of the typically light effective masses of electrons and holes within the SC, and because of the dielectric screening, the binding energies of excitons in typical SCs of relevance for display applications are on the order of or smaller than the thermal energy, which leads typically to dissociation of the exciton in the bulk phase. When one or more dimensions of the SC nanostructure is reduced and become comparable or lower than the Bohr radius, strong quantum confinement effects govern the electronic level structure and lead to the discretization of the levels and to an increase in the band gap as the size decreases. Figure Direct characterization of the energy levels within the bands was convincingly demonstrated by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements of single CQDs on a conducting substrate. Following imaging to locate the CQD, the tip is held at a fixed height above the particle and the scanning tunneling spectrum is obtained by measuring the currentvoltage (I-V) characteristics, as shown in Figure Examination of the STS spectra of a series of different size InAs CQDs (Figure The most common pathways for the generation of excitons in SCNCs, which are highly relevant for display applications, are either by optical excitation, which is used in photoluminescence applications, or excitation by electrical charge injection, which is used in EL applications. In optical excitation, the absorption of an energetic photon by the NC leads to the creation of an exciton (Figure Auger-type recombination (Figure For display applications, the radiative channel is exclusively preferred, since high QYs are essential. Moreover, when the excess energy of an exciton is transferred to a nonradiative recombination channel, apart from losing a potentially emitted photon, the NC can enter an "off" state, in which the NC is optically inactive. This phenomenon, termed "blinking", will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.5. To exclude all nonradiative processes, which quench the fluorescence of the NC, we need to understand the origin of each of the nonradiative routes. Atoms not fully coordinated in the SCNC (either on the outer surface or inside the NC) can act as traps for the trap-assisted nonradiative recombination process. Different types of NCs promote different trap states. For example, core-only SCNCs, which are passivated solely by organic molecules, quite often demonstrate low QY values, because of traps on the surface. The organic molecules are considered "poor" passivators, as they cannot fully passivate all the dangling bonds at the surface as a result of steric hindrance and chemical binding considerations, since the ligand will have affinity to either the positive or negative sites. Therefore, in an effort to improve the passivation and maximize the PL QY, core-shell heterostructures of SCNCs were developed, as discussed in the following section. Heterostructure SCNCs composed of two (or more) separate areas of SC materials, such as core-shell structures, are essential for tailoring SCNCs for display applications. In core-shell particles the SC core is surrounded by a passivating shell of a second SC, thus allowing the potential energy profile for the charge carriers to be shaped. The optical and electronic properties of the SCNC can be controlled by the band alignments of the core and shell SCs (Figure Systems in which the band gap of the core and the band gap of the shell are staggered, such as CdSe/ZnSe, are denoted as type II systems (Figure An example of such a system is the well-studied CdSe/CdS system, in which the hole is confined to the CdSe core, but the electron wave function can also delocalize into the shell. In such a case, the first exciton transition is also red-shifted upon growth of the shell. However, the core and shell materials have different lattice parameters; hence, structural defects can occur at the interface which serve as traps and provide a nonradiative decay channel, which again reduces the QY of the NC. Therefore, apart from considerations of band alignment, the appropriate shell must be tailored for a minimal lattice mismatch between the core and the shell to avoid structural defects. An interesting solution for the lattice-mismatch problem is the use of an alloy or graded shell as a mediating layer. In this structure, an interfacial alloy layer, which gradually changes from one material to another, is used to ease the strain arising from lattice mismatch. The concept was first introduced in 2005 on a system of highly luminescent CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S/ZnS multishell NCs. Besides the development of the zero-dimensional CQDs and spherical core/shell nanocrystals, elongated quasi-1D CdSe rods were discovered, which paved the way towards shape control of SCNCs, offering further selection of important properties for display applications. A first property important for display applications is illustrated in the CdSe/CdS seeded rod, where the rod component has a significantly larger volume than the seed, and as a result, the overall absorption is dominated by this component. Figure The direct consequence of the difference in the dimensions of the parts constituting the particle is that the large-volume component of the rod acts as an efficient antenna for absorption because of its significant extinction coefficient, while the emission is related to the seed, which can be engineered to emit in a desirable wavelength. This characteristic is important for display applications and specifically for LCD displays using a film containing SCNCs which downconvert blue light into red and green colors (see Section 5). The large absorption cross-section of the SCNCs in the blue region of the spectrum, which is attributed to the large rod component of the particle, efficiently absorbs the blue light of the LED and converts the light into the desired specific green or red color point. Another manifestation of the importance of the separation between the absorption and emission of SCNCs that is particularly demonstrated by the CdS/CdS dot-in-rod structure was reported for ink-jet printing fluorescent layers containing SCNCs. In the close-packed SCNC layers required for thin light-converting structures, or in LEDs, an additional possible loss mechanism is related to Förster-type fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), in which an excited NC serves as an exciting donor through nonradiative dipole-dipole interactions to a neighboring NC that serves as an acceptor. The FRET process will also lead to an undesired red-shift of the PL and a reduced QY. Dot-in-rod structures exhibit significant improvement over spherical ones in such close-packed fluorescent layers, since their geometry leads to a reduced proximity between the emission centers and hence to near-elimination of the FRET processes (Figure types from different regions. One kind of such structure is a dumbbell-shaped NC. Unlike coreshell NCs, where at least one of the charge carriers is in an inaccessible region (irrelevant if it is a type I or type II NC), in a dumbbell-shaped NC, both of the charge carriers can be found in directly accessible regions. DHNR (double heterojunction nanorod) dumbbells comprised of CdSe tips at the end of a CdS rod and over-coated with a ZnSe shell, The SCNC shape also has major implications on the polarization properties of the SCNCs emission, which is also applicable to display applications. Since the early studies on CdSe nanorods The nanoplatelets provide the highest color purity as a result of the possibility to control their thickness down to the atomic level, SCNCs often exhibit intermittency in their emission, which is called PL "blinking". Until single nanocrystal measurements were conducted, the blinking nature of the SCNCs was hidden in the stable PL of the ensemble. This effect was first noted by Nirmal et al. in studies on isolated CdSe NCs. A typical time-dependent PL intensity trace from single SCNCs (Figure However, upon charging of the SCNC core, the PL intensity switches from "on" to "off". Charging can happen by several mechanisms, Interestingly, the charging/discharging model predicts a shorter lifetime during the "off" state because of the typically much faster Auger process; however, experiments on CdSe/CdS core-shell NCs revealed stable PL lifetimes during the intermittency. The stable lifetime was attributed to hot electrons that were trapped in surface states and then underwent fast nonradiative recombination with the hole before decaying to the band edge. As a result, the radiative recombination dynamics of the band edge continues on their normal fluorescence timescale, but with a much-reduced QY. To explain the PL flickering in this second type of blinking (known as type B), activation and deactivation of some surface trap states were suggested, and were tested by spectro-electrochemistry on single NCs. Another important approach for suppressing Auger recombination was proposed in the theoretical study by Cragg and Efros. There is a need in various display applications to pattern a set of red-green-blue-emitting QDs into defined pixels at high resolution. For example, for the 4K ultrahigh-definition standard and a display size of 22.2 inches, the pixel dimensions are on the scale of 100 micrometers, and for smartphone displays the dimensions can be as small as tens of micrometers. The chemical processability inherent to the solution-based SCNCs opens various possibilities for scalable patterning approaches that are applicable to display manufacturing. In transfer (contact) printing, patterns are replicated by an elastomeric stamp produced through lithographic means (Figure The stamp is then brought into contact with a receiving surface and slowly peeled back, to allow for complete transfer of the CQDs to the receiving substrate. This process is sequentially repeated for the remaining two colors to yield a compact pattern of three separate colors. This was used for the fabrication of a 4-inch full-color active-matrix CQD display with a resolution of 320×240 pixels by using CdSe/CdS/ZnS red-emitting CQDs, and CdSe/CdS green-and blueemitting CQDs. Another technique is the ink-jet printing method. This is a relatively simple and material-conserving technique, with the ability to program mask-free arbitrary patterns. It is also compatible with multiple "ink" materials. Ink-jet printing employs a nozzle head, which is electrically controlled to drop a fixed volume of ink on-demand. Once the drops hit the surface, they spread and dry to form a thin film. The ink-jet technique is well-established to provide precision along with the ability to generate almost any pattern. Electrohydrodynamic jet (e-jet) printing was used (Figure Immersing the substrate in acetone (lift-off process) then affords a CQD patterned substrate. Since the previously patterned CQDs are robust against additional photolithographic processes, the procedure described above can be repeated for the remaining subpixels. By using this method, a CQD-LED-based display was fabricated. The polarization and light-output characteristics of SCNCs are also highly relevant for displays. For example, in LCD devices within a backlighting panel, an aligned nanorod array can absorb unpolarized light while re-emitting polarized light. The linearly polarized luminescence along with the directional emission from individual nanostructures can result in enhancement of the brightness, compared to the emitter layers with randomly oriented nanostructures. Harnessing the property of polarized emission from an ensemble of particles requires the development of assembly techniques which provide unidirectional alignment of the NCs. The use of mechanical force to align anisotropic NCs embedded in SCNC-polymer composite films has also been reported. For example, the alignment of both CdSe/CdS dot-inrod and rod-in-rod heterostructures, as well as colloidal CdSe nanoplatelets dispersed in a polymer film, has been achieved by mechanically stretching the film to 200-300% of its original size. Another approach for inducing the directed alignment of NCs is to utilize templates with either topographical and/or chemical patterns. Such templates, which most often exhibit submicrometer patterns, are available by lithographic means or by exploiting an inherent pattern of a material (such as carbon nanotubes, highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrates, or block copolymers) as a platform onto which the NCs can be ordered into aligned arrays. Block copolymers (BCPs) are of particular interest for the alignment of anisotropic SCNCs. As a consequence of the chemical immiscibility of the different blocks, BCPs tend to undergo microphase separation into periodic nanopatterns. When the BCPs are prepared as a thin film, the pattern can be extended to an area on the cm 2 scale. By relying on different intermolecular forces between the NRs and each of the blocks, mixing NRs with BCPs in the solution phase, followed by film preparation and an annealing process can lead to not only the selective placement of the rods in only one phase (i.e. block) but also to the alignment of the rods along the patterns exhibited by the BCP. The alignment of CdSe NRs was achieved by using this method (Figure Alignment along an interface is another option for aligning NCs. The first commercial application of CQDs in displays was for color enrichment as part of the display back-light unit (BLU). Since 2013, LCD tablets, monitors, and televisions using CQD-based BLU technology are at the technological forefront for display manufacturers. This type of application of CQDs does not require patterning and has been a good in-road for their implementation in displays, as they can be integrated as a drop-in solution that is fully compatible with the highly complex and advanced technologies for LCD fabrication. The emission efficiency and color quality of SCNCs, which are critical characteristics for their application in displays, have made them an alternative for current down-converting materials in BLUs. Much is being made to develop the next-generation of emitting materials that can cover the full-color gamut according to the standard requirements. Essentially all imaging-based applications need a specific well-defined color gamut to accurately reproduce the colors in the image content. What makes a color gamut an obligatory standard is the growing content created specifically for that color gamut, and thus display manufacturers strive to include that standard in their products. Over the years this has given rise to many different color gamut standards, based on what the existing displays at that specific time could produce. Both the displays and content have evolved together over time. Looking ahead, Rec. 2020 is an International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Recommendation, first introduced in 2012, that sets out the standards for UHDTV (ultrahighdefinition television). Figure Today, white light is typically generated in LCD displays from YAG-rare-earth-based white LEDs (i.e. an yttrium-aluminum-garnet with rare-earth phosphor pumped by a blue GaN LED source). These sources produce a narrow peak in the blue region but with a broad spectrum throughout the yellow and red regions (Figure Unlike phosphor technologies such as YAG, which emit with a fixed spectrum, SCNCs can be synthesized to convert light into a vast color range in the visible spectrum. Pumped with a blue source, such as the GaN LED, they can be engineered to emit at any desired wavelength with very high efficiency (quantum yield near unity) and with a very narrow spectral width (Figure Several studies have addressed the required FWHM of the NC emission to be able to meet different color standards. Erdem and Demir concluded that the emission FWHM of the QDs should be at most 50 nm to cover 100% of the NTSC (National Television System Committee) color gamut, Additionally, the blue emission should be generated with a source having an FWHM of no more than 70 nm. Zhu et al. showed that the FWHM of the QD emission can affect the display performance. SCNCs have another inherent potential advantage particularly for LCD display technology. As discussed in Section 3.4, precise control over the dimensionality and shape of the SCNCs makes it possible to synthesize SCNCs with anisotropic shapes such as rods, dotin-rods, To realize and employ the great optical performance of SCNCs in displays, they have to be integrated into the optimal position in the BLU to demonstrate a stable operation that meets the stringent stability standards of state-of-the-art displays. Three typical packing structures to incorporate SCNCs into BLU are on-chip, on-edge, and on-surface types. However, the SCNC material must withstand extreme conditions, as typical LEDs operate at junction temperatures of 85-120°C. Moreover, the SCNC material is exposed to a high flux of blue light, and this also leads to an increased temperature as a result of energy loss through down-conversion that translates into heat. Thus, an SCNC material on-chip might need to operate at about 150°C. In the on-edge solutions, the SCNCs are placed adjacent to the blue LEDs on the edge of the waveguide. The coating area is much larger than that found in the on-chip scenario, but the operating conditions are also less harsh. This approach was realized by embedding the SCNCs into glass tubes. From a practical viewpoint, it is a rather complex task to integrate the glass tubes into the display, and since they are fragile components, their utilization for mobile devices is challenging. In the on-surface (film) solutions, LCD displays with SCNC films are, therefore, a rising power in state-of-the-art displays. They lead to displays with a vast color range, color purity, efficiency, and stability (Figure EL-driven displays incorporating colloidal SCNCs (EL QD-LEDs) have also attracted significant attention. The advantage over the color-enrichment applications of SCNCs materials is the fact that electroluminescent devices may remove the need for color filters and polarizers if pixelated LEDs are to be utilized. Therefore, they may offer overall high efficiencies if stability issues are addressed and extraction efficiencies are increased. Additionally, EL displays can offer the highest contrast by providing true black (off) pixels. EL is the phenomenon of light emission from a material excited by electric current. EL in displays of SCNCs is the result of radiative recombination of charge carriers (electrons and holes) that are injected into an emissive layer from contact electrodes, often through charge transport layers (CTLs) having a suitable band alignment. Similar to conventional light-emitting diodes (LEDs), EL QD-LEDs typically have a pi-n structure, which consists an anode, an HTL, a QD emissive layer (EML), an ETL, and a cathode (Figure Over the years, EL QD-LEDs have been developed extensively and tested with various architectures. These architectures can be categorized in general by the CTLs embedded within them. The first device was comprised only of an organic QD bilayer structure, where the QD layer served both as the ETL and EML, and the PPV polymer served as an HTL. To resolve these issues, the next generation of devices used architectures in which the CQDs serve only as light emitters. In this architecture, a single monolayer of CQDs is sandwiched between an organic ETL and an organic HTL. However, even after embedding the ETL between the EML and the cathode, the allorganic CTL architecture still has an inherent shortcoming. The LUMO energy level of traditionally used organic layers is higher than the conduction band of Cd-based CQDs, while the holes experience an energy barrier between the HTL and the EML. This leads to excess electron injection into the EML, thereby resulting in nonradiative Auger recombination. In addition to the efforts on the all-organic architecture, new all-inorganic architectures have been developed, motivated by their long-term stability and their preferred electric conductivity. Inorganic layers can sustain a current density of up to 4000 mA·cm -2 , whereas allorganic layers so far have a maximum current density of about 1000 mA·cm -2 . Several other all-inorganic CTLs were tested. These efforts mainly focused on metal oxides serving as both the ETLs (ZnO, SnO2, ZnO:SnO2, and ZnS) Aside from efficient transport layers, the SCNC surface ligands should also be engineered to improve the charge transport in electroluminescent displays. The general strategy to improve the transport is to exchange the ligands with shorter and often conjugated ligands. SCNCs can today reach near unity QY in solution. However, SCNCs serving as the EML of EL CQD-LED devices operate under conditions which make it hard to emit. The difference between the electron and hole injection efficiencies is likely to create charge imbalance and, hence, a very efficient Auger process. Furthermore, the EML experiences an electric field on the order of 1 MV·cm -1 , which can lead to a spatial separation between the electron and hole wave functions that reduces the radiative rate of the SCNCs. Based on these considerations, it seems that SCNCs with an alloy composition, such as ZnxCd1-xS, ZnxCd1-xSe, or CdSexS1-x/ZnxCd1-xS dot-in-rod structures, The use of elongated-shape SCNCs can improve the out-coupling problem. Despite the present low efficiencies, stability challenges, and manufacturing issues of electroluminescent QD-LEDs, this type of display has an inherent benefit: the per-pixel control, which leads to improved contrast. Per-pixel control can help to reach the next level of picture quality, with lifelike contrast ratios. This is the main reason for the on-going research into the optimization of QD-LEDs that eventually may emerge as important players in the display market. The discussion above on the challenges associated with designing SCNCs that exhibit high QY in the presence of both charge and an electric field highlights the interest in new systems that shift away from charge injection into the NCs, towards device architectures that are not p-n junctions and that operate through electrically controlled SCNC emission in new ways. Since the early studies of Rothenberg et al. on the optical properties of single nanorods under electric field bias, on CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod heterostructures with quasi type II band alignment showed that the wave function distributions of the electrons and holes were modified greatly from a configuration with a large overlap to a spatial separation where the holes were localized in the core and the electrons forced to the opposite tip by the electric field. Besides new modes of operation, new functionalities are becoming apparent in QD-LED displays containing SCNCs. Recently, a novel study by Oh et al. presented DHNRs comprised of CdSe tips at the end of a CdS rod, with the CdSe tips coated with a ZnSe shell. These DHNRs acted as both charge-separation and recombination centers. One of the major drawbacks in QD-LED technology incorporating SCNCs is the toxicity problem. Cd-based II-VI NCs are currently the most well-developed and optimized system; they offer highly monodisperse NCs with near unity QY and well-developed shape control that can cover the entire visible spectrum. However, regulations by governments and organizations restricting the amount of heavy metals form an obstacle to Cd-based devices. One alternative in the II-VI group is the Zn-chalcogenide-based SC (Zn/S, Se, Te) NCs. Monodisperse core-shell ZnSe/ZnS QDs with narrow emission peaks (FWHM 15-18 nm) and tunable blue emission have, for example, been developed. Another promising heavy-metal free NC is InP. It is a III-V SC (Eg=1.35 eV) with an exciton Bohr radius of about 10 nm (compared to ca. 5 nm for CdSe) that provides large quantum confinement effects that can be used to span the visible spectrum through size control. Despite being part of the III-V group, which in general need high-temperature synthesis because of their more covalent-type bonding, InP/ZnSeS QD-LEDs that emit between 500 and 520 nm through direct charge carrier injection have also been demonstrated that show an EQE of 3.5 % and a maximum brightness of 3900 cd·m -2 . However, efficient blue or red QD-LEDs containing InP NCs have not yet been reported. Multinary compounds, such as ternary I-III-VI2 chalcogenides, are other candidates for heavy-metal-free NCS. Among these ternary I-III-VI2 compounds, CuIn(S,Se)2 is a candidate for emission in the visible spectrum. It can be synthesized by using a route similar to the cation-exchange approach used to produce III-V NCs starting from Cu2S. Despite the above drawbacks, the performance of QLEDs based on heavy-metal-free emitters is improving. The current limitation is largely due to the undeveloped synthetic chemistry of the heavy-metal-free NCs. However, future developments in SCNC synthesis are expected to close the current gap and lead to the further development of heavy-metal-free SCNC-based displays. The above-told story of the emergence of SCNCs as new materials for current and nextgeneration displays is a tour-de-force demonstration of the importance of basic research into new nanomaterials to yield important advantages in the highly advanced and demanding field of displays. A combination of innovative well-controlled synthesis, development of suitable chemical processing methods, accompanied by achieving a deep understanding of the effects of the SCNC characteristics on their optoelectronic performance were imperative to reach this point. The ability to upscale the complex synthesis in an economically viable manner has been realized, and the SCNCs can meet the stringent stability requirements of commercial displays. The development of nontoxic SCNCs for next-generation displays is on its way. We foresee more elaborate display technologies based on SCNCs also emerging. This provides an optimistic perspective for the potential utilization of SCNCs in additional areas, including biomedical applications, sensing, solar energy conversion, and printed electronics. control at the single-pixel level in response to an approaching white LED bulb or an approaching finger that blocks ambient light, thus paving the way towards interactive displays. 