The Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states, characterized by Cooper pairs condensed at finitemomentum are, at the same time, exotic and elusive. It is partially due to the fact that the FFLO states allow superconductivity to survive even in strong magnetic fields at the mean-field level. The effects of induced interactions at zero temperature are calculated in both clean and dirty cases, and it is found that the critical field at which the quantum phase transition to an FFLO state occurs at the mean-field level is strongly suppressed in imbalanced Fermi gases. This strongly shrinks the phase space region where the FFLO state is unstable and more exotic ground state is to be found. In the presence of high level impurities, this shrinkage may destroy the FFLO state completely. Fermionic particles with two different spins occupying states of momenta with equal size but in opposite directions close to their common Fermi surface form Cooper pairs, when subject to a pairing interaction. This is successfully explained by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity The difficulty of BCS pairing caused by spin imbalance led to the proposal of possible energetically more favorable Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states At the mean-field (MF) level, for small asymmetries between the two spin species, and at zero temperature T , the system persists as a BCS superfluid of zero momentum. However, when the imbalance between the two Fermi surfaces is too large, superfluid pairing is broken apart so that the system undergoes a quantum phase transition to the normal state. Therefore, for a given imbalance, there exists a lower threshold of pairing strength for the BCS pairing solution to exist. On the other hand, for a given interaction strength, there exists an upper bound for the imbalance before pairing is broken. The existence of such a transition at a critical value of the polarization was first realized by Clogston Stability analysis based on energetic considerations reveals that the mean-field BCS solution at T = 0 is not stable in the presence of imbalance until the system enters the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) regime where the gap and hence the condensation energy become large Theoretical investigations with ultracold imbalanced Fermi gases, where the numbers of atoms in the two spin states are different, have predicted that the first order transition between the superfluid at equal spin population and the imbalanced normal mixture brings about a phase separation between coexisting normal and superfluid phases The FFLO superfluid state was proposed independently by Fulde and Ferrell So far, the true stable solution is still unknown, where the above mean-field FFLO solution is stable against phase separation but unstable due to pairing fluctuations. As a first step, in the present paper, we consider the contributions of particlehole fluctuations and study their effect on the relevant phases. It has been known that particle-hole fluctuations may have a strong effect in the solution of the superfluid transition temperature T c in the BCS-BEC crossover The effect of induced interactions was first considered by Gor'kov and Melik-Barkhudarov, who found that in a dilute 3D balanced spin-1/2 Fermi gas the (overestimated) MF transition temperature is suppressed by a factor (4e) 1/3 ≈ 2.2 Quite generally, the calculation of the GMB correction has been restricted to the balanced case, with the Zeeman field h = (μ ↑ -μ ↓ )/2 = 0, where μ ↑ and μ ↓ are the chemical potential of the spin-up and spin-down fermions, respectively. Previous investigations with h = 0 were focused on the effects of the induced interactions on the tricritical point (p t , T t /T F ) of imbalanced Fermi gases in 3D ). More sophisticated calculations involving self-consistent feedback effect from both particleparticle and particle-hole channels can be found in Ref. Another important factor that has a strong impact on the superfluid phase is disorder and impurity scattering. The effects of disorder on an FFLO state have been investigated in s- In this paper, we investigate at the mean-field level the effects of the GMB correction on the FFLO transition that may occur in Fermi gases with imbalanced spin populations, in the clean limit and in the presence of nonmagnetic impurities. We study the continuous phase transition that is triggered by an increase in the chemical potential imbalance h, in homogeneous 3D systems. We find the GMB correction to the critical chemical potential imbalance h s responsible for the phase transitions from the partially polarized (PP) FFLO phase to a fully polarized (FP) normal state. In the presence of high level impurities, we show that short lifetimes necessarily further decrease h s and, consequently, reduce or even completely destroy the predicted FFLO region of existence. To our knowledge, this is the first time that the GMB correction is considered in the context of FFLO physics. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we first calculate the generalized pair susceptibility in the clean case, associated with the onset of the instability of the PP normal phase. In Sec. III we obtain the induced interactions and find its effects on the critical chemical potential imbalance h s which sets the transition to the FFLO phase. In Sec. IV we show how the GMB correction further reduces the FFLO window in the presence of nonmagnetic impurities. Finally, we conclude in Sec. VI. We consider a generic system of fermions characterized by an effective, short range pairing interaction -g, (where g > 0), with grand canonical Hamiltonian in momentum space where the bare dispersion ξ kσ = k -μ σ = k 2 /2m -μ σ , and σ =↑, ↓ is the spin index. Here c † (c) is the fermion creation (annihilation) operator, and we have set the system volume to unity. We shall also take the natural units, = k B = 1. The average chemical potential μ = (μ ↑ + μ ↓ )/2. The population imbalance is defined as the relative spin density difference, p = (n ↑ -n ↓ )/(n ↑ + n ↓ ). At the mean-field level, the reduced Hamiltonian for one-plane-wave FFLO state with pairing between k and -k + q states is given by Here the order parameter carries momentum q, with the selfconsistency condition ∆ q = g k c k↓ c -k+ q↑ . As usual, the constant term related to the condensation energy has been dropped from the reduced Hamiltonian Eq. ( As mentioned in Ref. where α(| q|, Ω) = 1/g -χ( q, Ω), with ( q, Ω) being the four momentum of pairs, and χ( q, Ω) is the bare pair susceptibility without feedback effect, where f (x) = 1/(e βx + 1) is the Fermi distribution function with β ≡ 1/k B T . Here χ( q, Ω) can be obtained from analytical continuation of the thermal pair susceptibility, χ(Q) ≡ χ( q, iΩ l ), where G σ 0 (K) = (iω l -ξ kσ ) -1 is the bare thermal Green's function. Here the four-vector K ≡ ( k, iω l ) and Q ≡ ( q, iΩ l ), where ω l = (2l + 1)π/β and Ω l = 2lπ/β are the fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequencies, respectively. Apparently, for an isotropic system, χ( q, Ω) does not depend on the direction of q. Evaluation of the equation above is straightforward. At zero temperature we find that χ( q, Ω) at zero frequency is given by where ω c is an energy cutoff, N (0) = mk F 2π 2 is the density of states at the Fermi level for a single spin component, q ≡ v F q 2h is the dimensionless "measure" of the pair momentum, with q ≡ | q| and v F is the Fermi velocity. The Thouless criterion for pairing instability, which corresponds to the divergence of the T matrix t( q, Ω), yields, where ∆ 0 = 2ω c exp(-1/N (0)g) is the zero temperature BCS gap. For a contact potential in 3D, which is relevant for Fermi gases, one needs to replace the interaction strength g with the dimensionless parameter 1/k F a via the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, m/4πa = -1/g + k 1/2 k , where a is the two-body scattering length. Then the zero temperature gap is given by ∆ 0 = 8 e 2 e π/2kFa . Note that the exact expression for ∆ 0 is not crucial here, although these specific expressions are appropriate only for the weak coupling BCS regime. At the same time, it has been known that a possible FFLO phase mainly exists on the BCS side of unitarity. As shown in the inset of Fig. We determine the critical reduced momentum qc by imposing an extremal condition on the pair susceptibility. Thus, extremizing χ(q) ≡ χ( q, 0) with respect to q yields A numerical solution of the equation above gives qc = 0, and qc 1.2. However, the locus of continuous transitions may be determined from the value of qc at which α(q c ) is both minimized and passes through zero, and this happens only for qc 1.2 The q = qc limit of χ(q c ) gives N (0) 1 -0.59 + ln 2ωc 2h , so that α(q = q c , 0) = 0 is -1/g + χ(q = qc ) = -1/g + N (0) 0.41 + ln 2ωc 2h = 0, which leads to h s 0.75∆ 0 , for the location of the FFLO transition, agreeing with the findings of Shimahara The critical h s in turn yields the magnitude of the wavevector q c 1.8∆ 0 /v F . These results also agree with the ones obtained in Ref. 1. Gap ∆0 (red, as labeled) and h along different lines, all in units of EF, as well as their ratio h(T MF c = 0)/∆0 (blue dashed line), as a function of 1/kFa for a 3D homogeneous Fermi gas. The calculation was done at the mean-field level without the particle-hole channel, which does not affect the ratio. Shown in the inset is the phase diagram of the stable FFLO phase. The upper boundary (green curve) is given by T * FFLO = T FFLO c (∆ = 0), and the lower boundary (magenta curve) is given by the instability condition against phase separation. The Sarma T MF c = 0 line (black dashed) lies within the FFLO phase. The h value along these lines are shown in the main figure with the same color coding and line shapes. order, and that at h s 0.75∆ 0 is of second order. The same results and conclusions are obtained when the calculations are performed with the interaction g replaced by 1/k F a which is appropriate for a short range interaction It should be mentioned that the original Clogston derivation equates the free energy of the superfluid state at zerofield (i.e., h = 0) with that of a polarized normal state at the threshold h c , both at T = 0. This approach is expected to be valid for the small ∆ 0 case in the perturbative sense. However, we argue that the balanced and the imbalanced cases are really distinct and cannot connect to each other continuously. This can be told from the fact that in the BCS regime, an arbitrarily small but nonzero population imbalance is sufficient to destroy superfluidity at precisely T = 0 in the 3D homogeneous case (when stability is taken into account) In the inset of Fig. The induced interaction was obtained originally by GMB in the BCS limit by the second-order perturbation where p i = ( k i , ω li ) is a four vector. Including the induced interaction, the effective pairing interaction between atoms with different spins is given by The polarization function χ ph (p ) is given by where f σ k ≡ f (ξ k,σ ), and p = ( q, Ω l ). This means that U eff is a function of momentum and frequency. The static polarization function is then, where q ≡ | q|. The above expression is usually computed in the zero temperature limit, with , where Θ(x) is the step function, such that the induced correction to the coupling g is a (temperature independent) constant. Equation The equations above can be put in a more convenient form, χσ ph (x, y) ≡ χ σ ph (q, h), where = -N (0)L ↓ (x, y), and = -N (0)L ↑ (x, y), where x ≡ q 2kF , and y ≡ h μ . This allows us to write the polarization function of an imbalanced Fermi gas as where L(x, y) ≡ L ↓ (x, y) + L ↑ (x, y) is the generalized Lindhard function. Notice that in the y → 0 limit, k ↓ F = k ↑ F = k F , such that χ↓ ph (x, 0) = χ↑ ph (x, 0) ≡ χph (x)/2 and we obtain the well-known (balanced) result where L(x) ≡ L(x, 0) is the standard Lindhard function, In the scattering process the conservation of total momentum implies that where φ is the angle between k 1 and k 3 . Since both particles are at the Fermi surface, , and consequently x = 2(1 + cos φ)/2, which sets 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. The s-wave part of the effective interaction is approximated by averaging the polarization function χ ph (q) over the Fermi sphere, which means an average of the angle φ where we have made use of Eq. ( Taking into account the GMB correction, the divergence of the T matrix in Eq. ( which can be obtained by replacing g in Eq. ( where y s = h s /μ, and hs ∆0 MF 0.75 is the MF result without the GMB corrections. It is well known that the zero temperature BCS pairing gap (at y = 0) is modified due to the particle-hole channel effect (or GMB correction) as Note here that in the expression for ∆ 0 , the chemical potential μ plays the role of E F . This can be readily obtained following the standard derivation in the BCS framework, but allowing the Fermi level to evolve continuously as one does for the BCS-BEC crossover In order to find the appropriate y for consistently evaluating Eq. ( for y = 0. Note that this is very close to the more complete solution of ∆ GMB 0 = 0.42E F = 0.50μ with μ = 0.837E F , calculated with the full particle-hole T matrix included at the G 0 G 0 level which, with Eq. ( Alternatively, one can take which agrees with Eq. ( Combining Eq. ( The above calculations in Section III have been done assuming the system is clean. However, this is not always true, especially for a superconductor, for which impurities and dislocations are easy to find. Impurities may cause a finite lifetime for the quasiparticles. In quasi-one-dimensional organic superconductors, for instance, the issue of lifetime effects arise from nonmagnetic impurities or defects In this section we show that, indeed, the FFLO window may be strongly affected by impurity effects clean limit i.e., γ = 0 (red curve), and the dirty case with γ ≡ γ/2h = 1 (blue dashed line), where γ = τ -1 is the inverse of the lifetime of a quasiparticle in the normal phase. The clean case has a maximum value at q = qc 1.2, which gives h/∆ 0 = h s /∆ 0 0.75, as obtained by the analytical calculations in Section II. In the dirty case, the maximum has shifted toward lower q, and the maximum ratio h s /∆ 0 has decreased significantly. This inevitably narrows the FFLO window. When this ratio drops below 1/ √ 2, the FFLO window will be gone and thus the FFLO phase will disappear at the mean-field level. Impurities in principle have an effect on the GMB correction, mainly via changing the chemical potential μ. However, we point out this is only a minor secondary effect, since the change in μ due to impurities is often very small, especially for Born impurities, which cannot induce an impurity band outside the Fermi sphere Considering the finite lifetime of the quasi-particle states in the momentum representation, the pair susceptibility χ is found, via Eqs. ( After somewhat lengthy but straightforward derivations (as shown in Appendix A), the real part of the particle-particle dynamic pair susceptibility can be written as, which is the counterpart of Eq. ( With Re χ(q) from Eq. ( 1-q 4q (1 + q) 2 + γ2 -1+q 4q . (32) Notice that in the limit γ → 0 in Eqs. ( = ln (1 + qc ) 2 + γ2 (1 -qc ) 2 + γ2 . For γ = 1, for instance, the numerical solution of the equation above yields qc 1.01, besides the trivial solution qc = 0. This leads to h s 0.61∆ 0 for the location of the FFLO transition, (which transforms to h GMB s ≈ 0.28∆ 0 ), in agreement with Fig. It should be noted that we have in fact considered only the FF case. This is justified in that there is no self-consistent way to calculate the LO and higher order crystalline LOFF phases when the pairing gap is large. In the original LO paper In the presence of inhomogeneity, the Bogoliubov -de Gennes (BdG) treatment is often used It should be pointed out that, for population imbalanced Fermi gases in a trap, the local population imbalance p varies as a function of the radius. While an inverted density distribution is possible Our impurity treatment has been restricted to nonmagnetic impurities in the Born limit, following the approach of Anderson Beside treating random impurities in an averaged fashion, some studies treat impurities locally It should be noted that, BdG calculations are usually done in a discretized lattice, which necessarily needs to be much larger than the coherence length ξ 0 of the superfluid, of the order of v F /∆. In the BCS regime, the gap is small so that ξ 0 is huge. For a d-wave superconductor, due to the nonlocal effect While we consider the ground state only, the treatment in principle can be extended to finite temperatures at the meanfield level. Without considering the FFLO state, the GMB effect acts essentially as a reduction of the pairing interaction strength (with a small temperature dependence) Finally, it is known that in the H-T phase diagram of a superconductor, the existence of the mean-field FFLO phase extends the H c,2 line at low T towards the high field side of its BCS counterpart, leading to a kink-like feature at the tricritical point which signals the onset of the FFLO state. Since the field strength H is proportionally related to the population imbalance p, a counterpart T -p phase diagram can often be found in the atomic Fermi gas literature, e.g., Refs. In summary, we have investigated in homogeneous 3D systems the GMB correction to the chemical potential difference h/∆ 0 , which is responsible for the transition to the FFLO phase. We find at the mean-field level that the window for the FFLO phase to exist has been reduced by a factor of (4e) -1/3 . Therefore, the region in the phase space that otherwise possesses an FFLO order will take alternative solutions, such as phase separation and polaronic normal state. This shall thus further confine the phase space where the true stable solution is yet to be determined. We have also considered the GMB effect on the FFLO window in the presence of weak (nonmagnetic) impurities or defects, in terms of a finite lifetime τ = 1/γ of the quasi-particle excitations. We find that a high impurity level leads to a reduction in the critical field h s of the continuous phase transition between the FFLO and the normal phase. This will shrink or completely destroy the FFLO window. which can be rewritten as χ( q, Ω) = 1 2 k tanh(βξ k,↑ ) ξ k,↑ + ξ k+ q,↓ -Ω + tanh(βξ k,↓ ) ξ k-q,↑ + ξ k,↓ -Ω . (A2) The denominators can be approximated as ξ k,↑ + ξ k+ q,↓ -Ω 2(ξ k,↑ + h + a cos θ -Ω/2) and ξ k-q,↑ + ξ k,↓ -Ω 2(ξ k,↓ -h -a cos θ -Ω/2), where a ≡ kq/2m, and and θ is the angle between k and q. Terms of order q 2 and higher have been neglected. Then we obtain χ( q, Ω) = where a → v F q/2, and v F = k F /m is the Fermi velocity. Taking now the zero temperature limit, and integrating over ω we obtain Eq. ( 