In the present study the stress transfer mechanism in graphene-polymer systems under tension is examined experimentally using the technique of laser Raman microscopy. We discuss in detail the effect of graphene edge geometry, lateral size and thickness which need to be taken under consideration when using graphene as a protective layer. The systems examined comprised of graphene flakes with large length (over ~50 microns) and thickness of one to three layers simplydeposited onto PMMA substrates which were then loaded to tension up to ~1.60% strain. The stress transfer profiles were found to be linear while the results show that large lateral sizes of over twenty microns are needed in order to provide effective reinforcement at levels of strain higher than 1%. Moreover, the stress-built up has been found to be quite sensitive to both edge shape and geometry of the loaded flake. Finally, the transfer lengths were found to increase with the increase of graphene layers. The outcomes of the present study provide crucial insight on the issue of stress transfer from polymer to nano-inclusions as a function of edge geometry, lateral size and thickness in a number of applications. Please note that technical editing may introduce minor changes to the text and/or graphics, which may alter content. The journal's standard Terms & Conditions and the Ethical guidelines still apply. In no event shall the Royal Society of Chemistry be held responsible for any errors or omissions in this Accepted Manuscript or any consequences arising from the use of any information it contains. Graphitic materials in various forms such as carbon fibres (CFs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene (Gr) exhibit remarkable mechanical properties, such as high moduli up to ~1 TPa For producing graphene/ polymer composites even at low volume fractions, methods for scalable synthesis of graphene, such as shear liquid exfoliation The effective use and design of graphene as reinforcing agent lies on the understanding of the interfacial behaviour of the graphene/matrix system. The mechanical load is transferred from the polymer to the graphitic inclusion by the interfacial shear, which is described by the well-known shear-lag mechanism in composite materials The stress transfer mechanism of single layer graphene simply supported on polymers like PMMA Figure In order to estimate the values of ISS, the strain profile and build-up from the edges of the graphene towards the inner part needs to be captured as seen in figure Despite the recent extensive efforts to exploit graphene as a reinforcing filler in polymers, the stress transfer characteristics have been studied in a handful of studies only on monolayer graphene/ polymer systems whereas studies of few-layer graphene deposited or embedded in polymers are scarce Graphene flakes prepared in a clean room by mechanical exfoliation of highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) using the scotch tape method In figure 2a an optical image of the examined single layer graphene is presented. The flake is relatively large with a length of ~60 microns and has a micro-ribbon geometry. It is important to note that the right edge is almost perfectly vertically and normal to the tensile direction while the left edge is tapered at an angle of ~32 degrees with respect to the horizontal axis (figure (1) where ω 2D and ω 2D,0 are the frequency of the 2D peak at every measured strain level and at rest, respectively, and k 2D is the shift rate for the 785 nm laser line with value ~55 cm -1 /% as confirmed previously (2) 298 298 Where ε is the applied strain, τ t is the ISS, E is the Young's modulus of monolayer graphene (~1 TPa), n is the number of layers of the graphene and t g is the thickness of a single layer graphene (0.34 nm). The slopes dε/dx can be extracted from the Raman data and therefore the values of the interfacial shear stress per strain level are easily obtained (figures 3-5). of the formation of the triangle corresponds to the maximum strain that the graphene can reach before slipping from the substrate occurs. It is interesting to note that no fracture is observed up to 1.6% strain which was the upper limit of strain imparted to graphene by the experimental setup. We can observe that the strain build-up is not the same for both edges, which indicates that the edge shape affects the ISS values. This is a significant point which has not received significant attention in previous works. The build-up from the square edge normal to applied stress follows the shearing mechanism and can be approximated with very good accuracy with linear fits, which indicates that friction like mechanism is prevalent in the as-supported graphene/ PMMA composite. It is interesting to note that very similar strain transfer profiles have been obtained in composite systems, such as in fibre/ metal composites, for which the fibres are weakly bonded to the matrix Furthermore, the clear build-up from the very edges indicates no interface slippage between graphene and polymer, since the Raman peak positions shift with the applied strain. The strain built up profiles from the angular edge also shows a quite complex behaviour. For small strains a build-up from the edge toward the middle of the flake is observed but for higher strains it seems that there is an axial transmission of stress (strain) rather than a shear generated stress (strain) transfer (figure GPa acting on the normal face of graphene. We must note that this is a rough estimation since the distribution of the normal stress is not constant throughout the edge area and changes with the applied strain as seen in figure 3b. This effect has been shown and examined elsewhere in detail by FEM simulations in similar system In figure MPa for the angular edge, respectively. The average ISS and the shift rate obtained herein are somewhat lower than the previous reported values of 0.45 MPa 20 and ~-55 cm -1 /% 27 for the same polymer substrate and for same preparation procedure. This small deviation is within the experimental error and thus acceptable, and stems from slight differences in the experimental conditions such as sample preparation and mechanical experiments. As is therefore evident the shape of the graphene inclusions needs to be taken into consideration for the best exploitation of graphene as a reinforcing agent in composites. In the middle of the graphene, a remarkably constant strain distribution occurs. Due to the large length of the flake this can be clearly observed even for high level of the applied tension. Moreover, as presented elsewhere Another crucial point when using graphitic fillers in polymers is the length of the inclusion required for efficient reinforcement of the polymer Before we move forward to further discussion of the results of the few-layer flakes, we need to thoroughly consider the validity of equation 2 for this case. The derivation of equation 2 assumes a material of thickness t and Young's modulus E and a particular Raman shift rate. When interlayer slippage occurs equation 2 which is based on load transfer through shear at the graphene/ polymer interface cannot be applied. As the onset of interlayer slippage is hard to detect equation 2 cannot be safely employed in this work to deduct the values of interfacial shear stress. Moreover, it has been found that the adhesion energy of a graphene-substrate interface decreases with the increase in graphene thickness The average shift rate of the 2D peak is ~-43.7±2 cm -1 /% and ~-44±2 cm -1 /% for the bi and trilayer flakes, respectively. As pointed out for the case of single layer, the area for the extraction of the shift rate plays a pivotal role. For the bilayer, again the shift is obtained from the central area that exhibits a constant strain profile up to ~1.50%. For the trilayer, we can obtain the shift from the plateau area up to ~1%, but for higher strains the critical length is larger than the lateral flake length so the measurements are inaccurate. These values are slightly smaller than the shift of the single layer but they are in broad agreement with earlier findings Moreover, the good alignment to the loading direction also contributes to this large shift as discussed below. In figure 5b,e representative strain profiles for selected levels of tension are introduced in order to present the behavior for the whole examined tensile regime. For both flakes, the results appear similar to those obtained in the case of monolayer graphene albeit at much higher transfer lengths. We observe for the bilayer a convex shape at the right edge which we attribute to its angular shape (figure The stress transfer behaviour of the tri-layer is very similar to the bi-layer. Again, we observe problematic build-up for the right edge where axial transmittance occurs (figure The bilayer of ~70 microns in length can reach critical strain for slippage of ~1.90%, while for the trilayer (see above) that critical point has already been reached at ~1.30% and the interface cannot support any higher stresses/ strains (figure In figure 6b the slopes dε/dx are plotted versus the number of layers of the graphene for all the examined tensile strain levels. We note that in figure 6b the values obtained from both edges for the case of the monolayer are plotted, which show a small decrease for the angular edge compared to the square edge as discussed above. We observe from figure 6b that the slopes for the few-layers are strain dependent and increase almost linearly with the tensile strain until a maximum value is reached. However, the actual values for both bilayer and trilayer are markedly lower than the corresponding shifts of the monolayer for the same strain. This is a direct consequence of the stress transfer process as expressed by the balance-of-forces argument (eq. 2), since for the same interfacial shear stress a thicker material of same stiffness cannot be stressed by the same amount. The increase of slopes with strain was not expected in view of the onset of interlayer slippage but it may be due to the gradual offset of the compressive residual stresses of the as-prepared specimens. Over approximately 0.5-0.6% of strain the slopes form a plateau but still and in spite of the expected interlayer slippage the system can take up considerable stresses (strains). Overall, the results obtained here suggest that while the graphene thickness increases much larger lateral sizes are required for efficient reinforcement in the case of commercially produced flakes which exhibit a quite broad distribution of lateral sizes typically of smaller sized than those measured here. In summary, we examined the stress transfer mechanism in simply supported graphene polymersystems with thicknesses of one-to-three layers. The results clearly show that the single layer graphene is more effective as reinforcement agent in polymers in terms of dimensions, since much smaller length is required compared to few-layers for effective reinforcement. We redefined the graphene length required for efficient reinforcement based on the stress transfer through constant ISS which is found to be strain dependent, and estimated that much higher values are actually needed in order to fully exploit the potential of graphene. Graphene flakes with lengths of tens of microns are required for ensuring reinforcing capacity from a polymer substrate to as-supported graphenes at large deformations and the lateral size increases with the increase of graphene thickness. The results also reveal, that squared edges with the applied load are more efficient and lead to higher ISS compared to angular and random shape graphene flakes. The present study provides an in-depth investigation and design guidance when using graphene of random shape and thickness, which are commonly produced by large scale production methods. View Article Online DOI: 10.1039/C9NA00323A