There are diverse interdisciplinary applications for nanoscale resolution electrometry of elementary charges under ambient conditions. These include characterization of 2D electronics, charge transfer in biological systems, and measurement of fundamental physical phenomena. The nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond is uniquely capable of such measurements, however electrometry thus far has been limited to charges within the same diamond lattice. It has been hypothesized that the failure to detect charges external to diamond is due to quenching and surface screening, but no proof, model, or design to overcome this has yet been proposed. In this work we affirm this hypothesis through a comprehensive theoretical model of screening and quenching within a diamond electrometer and propose a solution using controlled nitrogen doping and a fluorine-terminated surface. We conclude that successful implementation requires further work to engineer diamond surfaces with lower surface defect concentrations. Nanoscale charge imaging has been employed for diverse purposes including high-sensitivity biological and chemical sensors The nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center The NV center's proficiency for quantum sensing is due to a unique combination of capabilities. Firstly, the NV exhibits bright optical fluorescence allowing for identification of single defects that can be employed for measurements with nanoscale resolution. Secondly, the NV possesses a mechanism for optical spin initialization and readout which permits spin resonances of individual defects to be measured with high fidelity While the NV center can exist in several charge states, including neutral (NV 0 ) and negative (NV -), only the latter possesses the aforementioned properties needed for electrometry. In particular the spin resonances of the NV -triplet ground state are susceptible to electric field induced changes in its electron spin-spin interactions. The resulting Stark shifts can be detected using optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) and used to determine the field magnitude. Furthermore, vector components of the electric field can be measured through rotation of a bias transverse magnetic field Although single NV centers possess sufficiently high sensitivities, elementary charges external to diamond have not been detected with nanoscale resolution. We hypothesize that this is because of electric field screening and charge-state quenching of NV centers. For the former, recent experimental works have identified multiple screening sources inherent to diamond systems. These include Debye screening from bulk defects The first aim of this paper is to develop a physical model of screening due to the external environment, internal diamond, and diamond surface. This is performed in Section I where we identify that screening due to charge rearrangement amongst sp 2 surface defects is the greatest impediment to electrometry. We propose a solution by saturating the charge traps through a sacrificial δ-doped layer of N S . The effectiveness of this idea is explored in Section II in which an analytical toy model is developed for a simplified electrometer. Finally, in Section III this toy model is adapted into a more sophisticated device compatible with NV quantum sensing. The electrostatic properties of the device are modeled computationally, and the physical parameters optimized for charge detection. We conclude that this design successfully mitigates screening for concentrations of sp 2 surface defects below approximately 10 16 m -2 , two orders of magnitude lower than that currently demonstrated on fluorine-passivated diamond Screening and quenching effects within diamond can be decomposed into three coupled systems; the external atmosphere, the surface and the internal diamond. These three environments and their associated screening/quenching sources are depicted in Figure We first address screening due to the external atmosphere at ambient temperature and pressure. As air possesses a relative permittivity of approximately unity it causes negligible electrical screening. In contrast, the physisorption of water vapor on the diamond surface may be a detrimental source of screening given water's high relative permittivity. This subsection reviews the current understanding of wetting on diamond surfaces and applies these results to form a cohesive theory of screening due to water adsorption. Considering the most common diamond surface terminations, oxygen is known to be strongly hydrophilic and therefore not suitable for precision electrometry While hydrogen terminated surfaces exhibit polar hydrophobicity Regardless, it can be expected that surface coverage is much lower than a monolayer. Simple analysis with the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller isotherm indicates negligible coverage as the condensation energy of water far exceeds that of physisorption (neglecting entropic and enthalpic contributions) We now investigate whether adsorbed water produces a major or minor screening effect. Given the ambiguity of the nature and extent of wetting on hydrophobic diamond surfaces, we will model the dielectric permittivity as a function of adsorbed water adlayers. This is denoted by θ, the fractional amount of water monolayers adsorbed on the surface between 0 and 1. While surfaceadsorbed vapor likely possesses a high rate of diffusion at room temperature, here we only consider the timeaveraged response of the induced permittivity. As the electrical properties of the F-C(111) surface have been well-characterized theoretically where μ = 1.85 D is the dipole moment of water, FIG. , E s is the electric field generated by the diamond surface and for N the number density of water molecules and L(x) the Langevin function given by A value for N may be estimated by treating each F as a single adsorption site. This is justified as ab-initio calculations indicate that the energy of a physisorbed H 2 O molecule is minimized when aligned laterally with a terminating F atom The polarization of the water layer due to E p can be characterized through a first order Taylor expansion of equation ( where ← → χ is the linear electric susceptibility tensor given by Consequently, ← → χ may be written as the sum of an isotropic (χ 0 ) and anisotropic (χ 1 ) component as where Therefore the change in polarization of the adlayer induced by E p is given by Taking E s ∼ 0.1 V/ Å derived from ab-initio calculations Debye screening due to internal defects presents a major impediment to diamond electrometry. This form of screening occurs when charges are free to rearrange within a spatial continuum of donors and acceptors Ignoring presently the impact of surface defects, the magnitude of screening due to the adsorbed water layer and pure diamond can be determined analytically. As depicted in the inset of Figure tion by introducing an infinite series of fictitious 'image' charges which reproduce the boundary conditions of the dielectric stack. In Figure Uncontrolled, diamond surface defects present a detrimental source of screening and charge quenching for NVbased electrometers. Recent work has identified a family of primal sp 2 defects universal to all diamond surface terminations Uncontrolled, diamond surface defects present a detrimental source of screening and charge quenching for NVbased electrometers. Recent work has identified a family of primal sp 2 defects universal to all diamond surface terminations A solution to both surface-induced screening and charge instability is to saturate the surface traps using sacrificial donors within the diamond. We propose fabricating a δ-doped layer of N S which introduces a donor level 3.8 eV above the valence band. In the limit that the concentration of N S exceeds that of the sp 2 defects, the Fermi-level will be pinned to the donor level and prevent quenching of the NV -. This is possible as present doping techniques allow for precision control of the δ-layer height and defect concentrations up to 1000 ppm Consider the schematic for a simplified electrometer presented in Figure where C is the device capacitance, q is the electron charge, σ T is the density of surface traps, f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution, E N = 3.8 eV is the energy of N S and E T ≈ 2.2 eV is the energy of an sp 2 surface defect The two layers -surface and δ-doping -effectively form a parallel plate capacitor and hence C = D /D where D = 5.7 0 is the dielectric permittivity of diamond. This induces a linear potential between the capacitor plates such that the potential at the NV center is given by The magnitude of the potential induced at the surface has major ramifications for NV -charge stability. Figure must be maintained. Inserting equation ( The surface potential also has major implications for screening. Note that V S (0) is ultimately limited above by 0 ≤ qV S (0) ≤ E N -E T ≈ 1.6 eV. When qV S (0) ≈ E N -E T the defect energy is pinned to that of the N S donors and screening effects dominate; equation ( for under such conditions f (E T + qV S (0) -E N ) ≈ 1 (the linear regime) and the surface charge cannot reorganize in response to an external electric field. Fortunately, the inequality (10) can be determined precisely and the robustness of the linear regime to charge screening can be demonstrated quantitatively. Consider the screening field induced by a perturbing potential at the diamond surface, δV . Within the linear regime we have that where we have denoted ∆ ≡ (E T + qV S (0) -E N ) and expanded to first order in δV . Suppose that the perturbing potential is due to a point charge Q positioned a height h above the electrometer surface and aligned with the NV center. Then equation 11 indicates that the induced charge density is given by as a function of radial distance from the point charge r. This produces a screening field at the NV center given by Considering that the field generated by the point charge at a depth d in the absence of screening is the magnitude of the screening ratio is given by Equation 15 demonstrates a further bound on the maximum surface potential compatible with electrometry. Taking (d + h) = 200 nm and σ T = 10 18 m -2 we obtain a screening ratio of R ≈ 10 -22 e βqV S (0) . Screening effects will therefore dominate if the surface potential is not sufficiently deep within the linear regime. In this specific example, a ratio R ≤ 1% only occurs for qV S (0) ≤ E N -E T -15k B T = 1.2 eV at room temperature. To summarize, our toy model has identified the fundamental limitations to precision electrometry. The potential of the surface must be controlled such that all charge traps are saturated while the NV energy is maintained below the Fermi level. In general, one should aim to reduce V S (0) to avoid the detrimental effects of screening and quenching. Equation The performance of a diamond electrometer is strongly dependent on the surface trap density. This relationship is demonstrated in Figure Consequently, the presence of a N S δ-doped layer can simultaneously maintain NV -stability and prevent surface screening within the linear regime. However, the capabilities of the device are fundamentally limited by the density of surface traps. As capacitance is a geometric property, equation The simple electrometer presented in the previous section has several deficiencies which make it impractical for quantum sensing. Fortunately, these can be overcome with a simple modification to the electrometer design. In this section we discuss the shortcomings of the toy-model electrometer and their solutions, culminating in the presentation of an effective and physically realizable device. Initialization and readout of the NV center requires optical control using a 532 nm green laser One possible solution to these issues is to spatially separate the N S layer and the NV center. The optical focus can then be maintained on the NV while the δ-doping is subject to a negligible laser intensity. We estimate this would require a separation distance of approximately 0.5 μm. However, this severely limits the sensitivity of the spin-probe to external charges as equation ( The capabilities of this realistic electrometer design for elementary charge detection were investigated using COMSOL Multiphysics software. The potential at the NV center and surface as well as the occupation of charge traps were simulated as a function of the device parameters; the NV depth d, N S layer depth D and hole radius r. This was achieved by solving Poisson's equation self-consistently for a surface charge density given by equation 6 and assuming a grounded δdoped layer. The device parameters were then optimized to identify the greatest possible trap density compatible with precision electrometry. As discussed in Section II, these criterion are charge stability of the NV (qV S (d) E N -E N V = 0.9 eV) and a surface potential which leads to less than 1% surface screening as per equation Sub-nanometer resolution electrometry of elementary charges under ambient conditions would allow for investigation of diverse electrical phenomenon ranging from biological systems to fundamental physics. The NV center is the only known system capable of such a feat, however measurements are currently limited to charges internal to diamond. In this paper we have applied theoretical modeling to conclusively demonstrate that external charge detection is not yet feasible due to field screening. While screening due to the atmosphere and internal defects can be mitigated using fluorine-passivated and ultra-pure diamond, electrometry is ultimately frustrated by charge rearrangement amongst surface defects. We have proposed a solution to surface screening through introduction of a sacrificial N S δ-doped layer. Fabrication of a N S deficit hole surrounding the NV cen-ter allows for optical access to the spin probe while minimizing the read-out of erroneous NV centers and ionization of free charges. This electrometry device is technologically feasible and computational simulations have demonstrated that it can successfully mitigate screening effects for surface trap densities up to ≈ 10 16 m -2 . Although this is two orders of magnitude below currently observed sp 2 defect densities on fluorine-terminated diamond, the outcome of this work is a clear pathway towards nanoscale imaging of external charges at ambient conditions. Electrometry cannot be achieved until surface passivation technologies realize lower defect concentrations on fluorine-terminated diamond.