Sensors and actuators based on resonant micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), such as scanning micro mirrors, are well-established in automotive and consumer products. As the areas of application broaden towards highlyautomated driving and augmented reality, the performance requirements for the MEMS are also increasing. Devices outside of the performance specifications have to be rejected which is costly due to the high processing times of MEMS technologies. In particular, nonlinear system behavior is often found to cause unexpected device failure or performance issues. Thus, accurate simulation or rather system models which account for nonlinear sensor dynamics can not only increase process yield, but more importantly, lead to a comprehensive understanding of the underlying physics and consequently to improved MEMS design. In a recent work [1], we have studied the possibility of a rather drastic device failure induced by nonlinearities on the example of a resonant scanning MEMS micro mirror. On the level of a few selected chips, we have carefully measured the complex nonlinear system behavior and modelled it by a nonlinear mode-coupling phenomenon known as spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC). The most intriguing feature of SPDC is the sudden change from a rather linear to a highly nonlinear system behavior at the threshold or rather critical oscillation amplitude of the mirror. However, the threshold only lies within the range of the mirror's operational amplitude, if certain frequency resonance conditions regarding the modes of the mechanical structure are met. As a direct consequence, the critical amplitude strongly depends on the frequency spectrum of the MEMS design which in turn is largely influenced by fabrication imperfections. In this work, we validate the dependence of the critical amplitude on the resonance condition by measuring it for over 600 micro mirrors on wafer-level. Our work does not only validate the theory of SPDC with measurements on such a large scale, but also demonstrates modeling strategies which are essential for MEMS product design. Scanning micro mirrors constitute key devices for applications in the automotive as well as the consumer electronics sector. Designed as resonant micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), they enable laser distance measurements as well as image projection for augmented reality applications where miniaturization is crucial Mechanical mode coupling phenomena in scanning micro mirrors are known been observed Here, in accordance with SPDC, we can observe resonant actuation of two parasitic modes, denoted by the indices 1 and 2, in some devices, whenever the linear mode frequencies f 0,1 and f 0,2 fulfil the condition f 0,0 ≈ f 0,1 + f 0,2 (with the drive mode linear frequency denoted by f 0,0 ). Fig. and dominates the critical point over all chips on the wafer. In Section III, we measure both the resonance conditions, which are a simple combination of linear mode frequency, as well as the critical point for 631 chips on wafer-level to prove the accuracy of the critical point model. We provide an overview of the mathematical model derived in our previous work Table The tilde operator is used to simplify the notations . In The critical amplitude a crit 0 can be derived from the steady-state solutions of equations ( To improve readability, the damping terms 2Q2 and the short notation for the sum of the two damping terms are used: 2Q2 . The critical deflection angle is independent of the nonlinear damping and the Duffing terms of the parasitic modes, since the two parasitic modes only gain amplitude above the threshold, thus rendering their nonlinear damping and Duffing term irrelevant. Between devices of the same design, δ is the only parameter that varies significantly. For the special case of small Duffing coefficients in the drive mode, as observed in the tested micro mirror, the simplified form of equation ( Let us now comment on the most important insight that can be drawn from equation ( Scanning micro mirrors are designed to reach an application-specific deflection angle φ ∝ a 0 up to a maximum of φ = φ limit , for which an approximate value of 9 • in each direction is specified in In contrast to the high measurement effort needed to extract the Fig. Parameters. Black: relevant to critical point model; grey: only relevant to full system model. coefficient α and the Duffing coefficient β 0 , all relevant parameters for the critical point model (shown in black in Table Once the frequency and Duffing parameter of the drive mode in addition to the quality factors and frequencies of the parasitic modes are measured for the single chip the three-wave coupling α can be deduced from the measurement of the critical point and equation ( For the large-scale evaluation of the critical point, we have measured a set of 631 devices. Under a PLL-controlled actuation we have increased the actuation force step by step. Each level is held for 5 s in order to allow for a long enough waiting period until the onset of SPDC. The actuation force is increased, as long as no disturbance in the electrical signal is detected. As soon as disturbances occur (e.g. due to a beating in the time signal originating from the actuation of the two parasitic modes oscillating at different frequencies), the current deflection angle is documented as the critical deflection angle φ. In addition, we have measured the resonance frequencies of the mode triplet and thus the parameter δ for each mirror. Fig. The results show that our prediction agrees very well with the vast majority of measurements within the evaluated parameter range. A few outliers occur that exhibit signs of mode coupling already at a lower deflection angle than predicted. Yet, no instance is recorded, where mode coupling was predicted for a certain angle, but occurs much later or not at all. This validates our hypothesis that SPDC occurs in these devices and that the critical point model can be used Fig. to forecast the threshold deflection angle of all chips after extraction of the system parameters from a single chip measurement only. The threshold angle is sensitive even to small changes in the linear mode spectrum of a mirror device which shifts slightly due to geometric differences induced by MEMS fabrication imperfections. Thus, it is not only design-specific, but highly device-specific for devices of the same design. The comparison of measurements with simulations confirms our model and reveals that even only a few Hz change in the resonance criterion (given by the design parameter δ) can decide about the occurrence of mode coupling. By performing critical point measurements on 631 parts of the same design, we showed the validity of our model for the relevant operational state of a scanning micro mirror. Since the design parameter δ provides a handle for tuning the mode coupling behaviour of a design, the relevance of the critical deflection angle model to MEMS design in the product development phase is also highlighted: Changing the frequency of one or more of the parasitic modes by a few hundred Hz strongly influences the design parameter δ and can thus alleviate SPDC entirely. This provides an efficient and reliable way of identifying unwanted nonlinear mode coupling effects. If applied early on in the MEMS development process, it can contribute significantly towards reducing the number of design iterations needed by providing a means of checking a given design layout for possible couplings and re-iterating the simulated design if necessary. Our model for the critical amplitude given in equation ( 