Superconducting materials find applications in a rapidly growing number of technological areas, and searching for novel superconductors continues to be a major scientific task. However, the steady increase in the complexity of candidate materials presents a big challenge to the researchers in the field. In particular, conventional experimental methods are not well suited to efficiently search for candidates in compositional space exponentially growing with the number of elements; neither do they permit quick extraction of reliable multidimensional phase diagrams delineating the physical parameters that control superconductivity. New research paradigms that can boost the speed and the efficiency of superconducting materials research are urgently needed. High-throughput methods for rapid screening and optimization of materials have demonstrated their utility for accelerating research in bioinformatics and pharmaceutical industry, yet remain rare in quantum materials research. In this paper, we will briefly review the history of high-throughput research paradigm and then focus on some recent applications of this paradigm in superconductivity research. We consider the role these methods can play in all stages of materials development, including high-throughput computation, synthesis, characterization, and the emerging field of machine learning for materials. The high-throughput paradigm will undoubtedly become an indispensable tool of superconductivity research in the near future. Ever since Kammerlingh-Onnes in Leiden observed the disappearance of electrical resistance of mercury at very low temperatures in 1911, the phenomenon of superconductivity has been intensely studied. Yet, the exact nature of this effect remained unclear until the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory was developed in 1957 In 1986, the ceramic compound Ba-La-Cu-O was found to become superconducting at 35 K by Bednorz and Müller in Zurich In general, there are two main challenges in the experimental study of superconductivity: i) searching for novel superconductors in the enormous space of candidate compounds comprised of more and more elements; ii) delineating the key physical parameters that control the superconductivity, by means of establishing a reliable multidimensional phase diagram. Conventional experimental methods are not well suited to address these problems, and new paradigms and tools are required to boost the efficiency of superconductivity research In bioinformatics and the pharmaceutical industry, similar challenges arose before the discovery of HTSCs. There is a huge number of possible gene combinations and drug formulas, and it is not realistic to synthesize and test them one by one. The idea of doing many tests at the same time -the so-called high-throughput strategy -was rapidly developed and put into practice. Ever since, high-throughput methods have been a key driving force behind the development of modern biology and medicine. This methodology was also gradually adopted in condensed matter physics and materials science. The general high-throughput materials research procedure has the following steps -sample synthesis, characterization, analysis of the data. Significant increase of the efficiency necessitates the acceleration of every step, as well as substantial coordination among them. The high-throughput approach for materials development is sketched in figure Thus, high-throughput paradigm provides an extremely promising approach to meet the challenges in superconductivity research outlined above. In one early pioneering work demonstrating the potential of these methods, Xiang et al. reported the rapid synthesis of high-Tc superconductors, with a 128-member library of copper oxide superconducting thin films deposited on a single substrate in one batch Indications of a superconducting region were found from the resistance measurement by a home-made probe with an array of 64 pogo-pins (figure As seen from these examples, the high-throughput paradigm is already starting to permeate superconductivity research. In this review, we outline the advances in all parts of high-throughput superconductivity research: high-throughput synthesis (Section 2), high-throughput characterizations (Section 3), high-throughput ab-initio calculations (Section 4), and machine learning (Section 5). We also discuss the need to develop a next generation of facilities, techniques, and platforms in order to fully utilize the power of high-throughput methods (discussed in Section 6) High-throughput synthesis is one of the foundations of the recent acceleration of the rate of materials exploration. However, that does not mean the synthesis cost has suddenly become irrelevant; efficiency is a key point -the speed of synthesis should grow faster than the resources it demands. To achieve this, common components and procedures used in different experimental steps, like evacuation, heating and conditioning atmosphere, should be combined as much as possible. This is the basis of the so-called combinatorial approach, which is the most efficient high-throughput synthesis method. Koinuma et al. gave the basic concept of combinatorial chemistry for solid state materials in Ref. CLMBE is easy to operate, and benefits from a wide chemical composition range in one batch of deposition. This makes it perfect for obtaining a precise phase diagrams of materials like cuprate superconductors As explained above, three generations of distinct combinatorial-film preparation techniques have been developed. It has to be noted that each generation has its own unique merits, and is suitable for different kinds of materials. Sometime, a customized combinatorial approach is required, for example for compounds that only show superconductivity in a very narrow range of chemical doping. A typical ironbased superconductor, FeSe1-δ only displays superconductivity within a finite δ Figure In addition to generating composition-spread material libraries, combinatorial approaches can also be used to rapidly ascertain the optimal growth condition for superconducting materials. For example, the conventional way to find the best deposition temperature of a superconducting material is to try different temperatures one by one. However, a much more efficient method is to create a thermal gradient on the substrate during film deposition As another step in the high throughput methodology, rapid characterization of combinatorial films is indispensable in the drive to accelerate superconductivity research. Because to the nature of combinatorial synthesis, characterization have to be conducted by probes with spatial resolution capabilities. Several commercially available probes satisfy this requirement: atomic force microscope, scanning tunneling microscope (STM), optical microscope, scanning electron microscope are just a few examples. These tools with auto scan functionality can have high spatial resolution, and are equipped with tips or aggregated beams. There are also diverse homemade probes designed to study various properties of high-throughput samples. In this section, we focus on techniques relevant to superconductivity research, briefly summarized in the following order. Common probes used for composition and structure analyses are: x-ray diffraction; scanning electron microscopy (SEM); transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Because the electron beam can be focused, methods using it naturally provide the required spatial resolution and can be used for high-throughput characterizations Great efforts have been dedicated to developing spatially resolved x-ray-based characterization methods. Since x-rays have much higher frequency and photon energy than visible light, they tend to penetrate or get absorbed in most materials. Unfortunately, most of the techniques used to redirect x-rays are unable to produce well focused beams. Initially, pinholes or slits made of anti-radiation materials were used to shrink the profile size of x-ray beams. Figure In this technique the analysis sensitivity and accuracy are unavoidably low, due to the limited incident x-ray throughput, which necessitates time-consuming repetitive angularscanning measurements. To address this, techniques using a zone plate as an x-ray focusing component or a 2D detector were developed in order to enhance the intensity of the x-ray beam Since synchrotron facilities can offer high spatial resolution while simultaneously providing adequate photon flux, several high-throughput screening techniques were developed specifically for such sources. In 1998, Isaacs et al. used synchrotron x-ray micro-beam techniques to verify the feasibility of high-throughput characterization in combinatorial libraries Although synchrotron x-ray facilities are powerful characterization tools, they remain a scarce resource, which impedes their use in high-throughput characterization. Developing more accessible rapid screening systems remains a grand challenge in the field. Measuring transport properties such as resistivity, magnetoresistance and Hall effect is extremely important in uncovering the nature of superconductivity in various materials. In 2005, Hewitt et al. developed a 196-pin device to measure the dc resistance versus temperature (shown in Figure The group of I. Bozovic performed multiple-channel measurements of the Hall signal and the resistivity by a highthroughput system in order to characterize highly conductive oxides with Hall coefficients as small as 10 -10 m 3 /C. The receptacles of this device are shown in figure Since common probes with beams focused by optical lenses are commercially available, here we skip the description of magnetic-optical methods for high-throughput characterization. Scanning magnetic microscopes, e.g. magnetic force microscope (MFM) MFM, with spatial resolution of about tens of nm, is generally based on measuring the force between a magnetized tip and the scanned surface. This method shows potential for high-throughput mapping in both static and dynamic magnetic fields Wei et al. used a sharpened solid metal (instead of an aperture or a gap) as a point-like evanescent field emitter. Based on this design, they set up a near-field rf/microwave microscope that is capable of imaging surface resistance profiles with a spatial resolution of ~5 μm Shen group designed a near-field scanning microwave microscope in a different way. They separated the sensing probe from the excitation electrode to suppress the commonmode signal and used co-planar waveguides to transmit microwave signal (shown in figure For example, Otani et al. set up an integrated scanningspring-probe system for high-throughput thermoelectric power-factor screening In combinatorial materials studies, the space of possible combinations is so enormous that even high-throughput experiments can rarely or never cover it completely. So, in order to achieve acceptable scale and rate of screening and optimizing, the number of candidate systems has to be restricted with the help of some heuristic or theoretical reasoning High-throughput computations have already been employed in some research fields, such as solar water splitters [116, 117], solar photovoltaics There have been several notable successful examples of discovery of superconductors with the help of high-throughput computations. Kolmogorov et al undertook an intensive study of the Fe-B system via ab-initio high-throughput evolutionary calculations In the case of conventional superconductors, the mechanism of superconductivity is well understood, so their superconducting properties can be calculated from first principles, at least in theory. However, the specific mechanisms behind most examples of unconventional superconductivity are still not clear, and the electrons in these materials are often strongly correlated. Thus, attempts to predict new unconventional superconductors through deductive calculations are impossible even in principle. Nevertheless, high-throughput computations can at least provide some rough guidance in the search for new superconductors. High-throughput computations also speed up the construction of database containing basic properties of new materials, which can be combined with machine learning methods to predict new superconductors (see next section), thus providing a new pathway for superconductivity research High throughput experiments often result in large data sets. Since it can be slow and impractical to analyse this data manually, the analysis step has become a common bottleneck for the entire process. Recent developments, however, allow a different approach to data analysis and, even more generally, to exploration of superconductors and the factors that determine the critical temperatures of various materials. Machine learning and statistical methods can use the information amassed in databases covering various measured and calculated materials properties in order to predict macroscopic variables, circumventing to need for theoretical models and complicated ab-initio tools (for more details see, for example, Seko et al. The difficulties of modelling strongly correlated materials such as HTSCs provided an early impetus to the search for novel approaches. Application of statistical methods in the context of superconductivity began with simple clustering methods These studies remained isolated early attempts to use datadriven approaches for study of superconductivity. However, the recent significant increase of available data made possible the widespread use of machine learning algorithms to address a multitude of research questions. An investigation by Isayev et al. in 2015 again found a clustering property of HTSC materials using structural and electronic properties data as predictors A work by Stanev et al. in 2018 built upon many of the lessons from the earlier studies Figure From SuperCon, a list of approximately 16,400 compounds was extracted, of which 4,000 have no Tc reported. Of these, roughly 5,700 compounds are cuprates and 1,500 are ironbased (about 35% and 9%, respectively), reflecting the significant research efforts invested in these two HTSC families. To analyse the data, first a classification model designed to separate materials into two distinct groups depending on whether Tc is above or below some predetermined value was developed. The temperature that separates the two groups -Tsep -was treated as an adjustable parameter of the model. For Tsep = 10 K, the proportion of above-Tsep materials is approximately 38%, while model accuracy is about 92%, i.e., the model can correctly classify nine out of ten materials, which is much better than random guessing. Several regression models designed to predict the actual Tc values were presented, focused on materials with Tc > 10 K (see figure Finally, the classification and regression models were integrated in a pipeline and employed for a high-throughput screening of the entire ICSD database for candidate superconductors. First, a classification model was applied on this dataset to create a list of materials with predicted Tc above 10 K. The list of candidates contained about 3,000 materials. Next in the pipeline, the list was fed into a regression model trained on the entire SuperCon database to predict Tc. Filtering for the materials with Tc > 20 K, the list was reduced to about 2,000 compounds. The vast majority of the compounds identified as candidate superconductors were cuprate HTSC materials. There are also some materials clearly related to the iron-based superconductors. The remaining set has 35 members, and is composed of materials that are not obviously connected to any known superconducting family. The list comprises of several distinct groups; especially interesting are the compounds containing heavy metals (such as Au, Ir, Ru), metalloids (Se, Te), and heavier post-transition metals (Bi, Tl), which are or could be pushed into interesting/unstable oxidation states. Although at the moment it is not clear if any of the predicted compounds are superconducting, the presence of one highly unusual electronic structure feature in many of the candidates is encouraging; almost all of them exhibit one or several flat (or nearly flat) bands just below the energy of the highest occupied electronic state. Such bands lead to a large peak in the density of states and can cause a significant enhancement in Tc. Attempts to synthesize several of these compounds are already underway. In another very recent work, Xie at al. utilized machine learning to obtain a closed-form approximation for Tc of phonon-driven superconductors, using an automatic algorithm to test a number of different functional forms In this short review, some recent developments in superconductivity-related high-throughput techniques are summarized. Revealing the mechanisms of high-temperature superconductivity and discovering new unconventional superconductors have always been important topics in condensed matter physics. As materials under study become more and more complex, the advantages of high-throughput methodology become more pronounced. Although these advantages have proven to be significant, some limitations should also be pointed out. Currently, most high-throughput experiments are based on film techniques. This brings some specific constrains. Effects like lattice mismatch and surface aging have to be considered. The number of possible combinations are limited, and the use of in-situ measurements is often required. Moreover, in view of the reduced dimensions and surface reconstruction effects, the experimental results obtained from film samples may not reflect the intrinsic properties of bulk samples While many combinatorial film preparation techniques have been developed, there is a great demand for highprecision characterization instruments, especially ones that can perform advanced spectroscopy measurements such as STM and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). This requires combinatorial material libraries in the form of films to be measured in-situ. Accordingly, combined systems such as combinatorial-film-STM and combinatorialfilm-ARPES tools will be optimal. These will be especially beneficial for the study of superconducting combinatorial libraries. Characterization methods taking advantage of synchrotron sources should become widespread; these techniques allow the study of not only composition and structure of materials, but also their elementary excitations. For instance, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) technique can be used to measure spin excitation The high-throughput materials research paradigm is quite different from the traditional approaches, which sometimes can be compared to a "needle-in-a-haystack" search. Hanak proposed an integrated materials development workflow about 40 years ago Figure High-throughput methods with their enormous potential to accelerate materials research have already attracted significant attention. Some countries have started projects and programs in order to support the development of high-throughput computational tools. The US Department of Energy created Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) in 2001 to develop new computational methods for tackling some of the most challenging scientific problems. In 2008, The US National Academies created a new discipline, Integrated Computational Materials Engineering, aimed to design materials using a variety of software tools either simultaneously or consecutively. In 2011, the US launched the Materials Project, a core program of the Materials Genome Initiative, that uses high-throughput computing to uncover the properties of all known inorganic materials. "Advanced Concepts in ab-initio Simulations of Materials" project, proposed by European Science Foundation, is aimed to develop rapid ab-initio calculations, which allow parameterfree calculations of real materials at the atomic level and are applicable to condensed matter systems. However, in order to maximize the efficiency and impact of high-throughput methodology, it is necessary to closely coordinate the theoretical and experimental stages and combine computations with experiments and analysis of materials databases . One possible way of doing this is to integrate all the facilities in a big platform and organize them as nodes in an assembly line. The collected data can be standardized to establish a sharable databank. Techniques such as STM, neutron scattering and ARPES can contribute to the data collection according to their limitations and characteristics. Since the MGI project was first announced in the US in 2011 