In February 2014 Time magazine announced to the world that the first quantum computer had been put in use. One key component of this computer is the 'Josephson-junction', a superconducting device, based on completely different scientific and technological principles with respect to semiconductors. The origin of superconductors dates back to the 1960s, to a large-scale 20-year long IBM project aimed at building ultrafast computers. We present a detailed study of the relationship between Science and Technology making use of the theoretical tools of presumptive anomaly and technological paradigms: superconductors were developed whilst the semiconductors revolution was in full swing. We adopt a historiographical approach -using a snowballing technique to sift through the relevant literature from various epistemological domains and technical publications -to extract theoretically robust insights from a narrative which concerns great scientific advancements, technological leaps forward and business-driven innovation. The study we present shows how technological advancements, business dynamics and policy intertwine. In February 2014 the quantum computer revolution was announced to the world through the cover of Time magazine which referred to the "infinity machine" produced by the company D-Wave. Scientists, technologists, policy makers and the society at large were particularly impressed by the word 'quantum' associated to 'computing', while some observers reacted to the news with some scepticism (e.g. Whether quantum or not, this is a new type of computer whose speed depends on the use of 'Josephson junctions', whichit must be stressedare not based on semiconducting processors, but on a completely different technology which makes use of the property of 'superconductivity'. The latter is a property of certain materials which become superconductors when they are cooled to near-absolute-zero temperatures, i.e. -273 °C. Early attempts at using superconductors in computers date back to the 1960s, and for a while, superconductors emerged as a credible alternative to semiconductors. Superconductors disappeared from the computer industry horizon in the early 1980s (before re-emerging, as an exception, in the 2010s). In this work we study the emergence and eclipse of the potentially revolutionary technological superconductors' paradigm, which developed along the incumbent semiconductors' paradigm for nearly twenty years. We believe that this is an important case in which the forces of innovation are at work: the relationships between science and technology, the importance of a Schumpeterian giant firm -IBM -, the role played by technological expectations, governments' attention to a strategic technology, and more. Our analysis is carried out in an evolutionary theoretical setting, and, specifically, we make use of the concepts of technological paradigms and presumptive anomaly. We investigate whether a presumptive anomaly gave rise to the search of a new technological paradigm, and whether that search led to a failed innovation. The answer to the first question is "yes", while the answer to the second question is not so clear-cut, and an apt phrase to word the answer is that this is a false-failed innovation Often scholars focus on cases which can clearly be classified as successful innovations, while only occasionally attention is given to cases of failures We propose an interpretation of what happened. Whilst the history of computing is characterised by systematic announcements of revolutionary breakthroughs and new disruptive technologies that rarely materialise or have little impact, the case of superconducting computers deserves explicit attention. IBM was at the centre of the early struggle and invested massive human and financial resources on a long-term project spanning from 1964 to 1983. The explicit aim was that of developing a new technology capable of multiplying up to 100 times computing rates; the financial and human resources invested were consistent with such an ambition, i.e. efforts were not limited to a 'small' laboratory or pilot study. After forty years in obscurity the superconductors' technology shows tangible signs of life in the computer industry. In 2013 the company D-Wave delivered its first 'infinity machine', which makes use of superconducting Josephson junctions, and in December 2014 the American Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) announced that it "has embarked on a multi-year research effort to develop a superconducting computer" (ODNI, 2014: 1). In July 2015, Hypresa high-tech companydisclosed that it was developing Josephson-junction-based superconducting circuits In section 5 we see the principle of presumptive anomaly at work: superconductors were technically superior to semiconductors, but the latter were far from unfolding their full potentiality. Section 6 illustrates the change of attitude towards superconductors while clarifying why, despite the demise of the superconducting computer project, the long run large-scale IBM investment was justifiable. Sections 7 and 8 provide further economic and non-economic reasons which justify such a massive investment. In the final section we discuss our findings and draw our conclusions 2 . 2 We wish to point out that when we wrote the firstconferenceversion of this paper in 2014, we could write that this was the first analysis at all of the Josephson computer case: we had gone through many books belonging to different vintages on the birth and evolution of computers (e.g. The context of this study is that of science, technology and innovation, and the interrelation amongst these domains. In particular, central to the analysis are two fundamental concepts: technological paradigm and presumptive anomaly. The concept of technological paradigm is widely known The presumptive anomaly concept is due to The technological paradigms with which we deal are those of the (incumbent) semiconductors technology and of (attempted alternative) superconductors technology. Following Dosi's definition: "we shall define a 'technological paradigm' as 'model' and a 'pattern' of solution of selected technological problems, based on selected principles derived from natural sciences and on selected material technologies. [...] We will define a technological trajectory as the pattern of 'normal' problem solving activity (i.e. of 'progress') on the ground of a technological paradigm." Once established, a paradigm becomes an accepted mode of technical operations as defined and accepted by the community of practitioners. Thus, following The semiconductors technological paradigm established itself as dominant since the late 1950s as it synthesised the answers to the three aspects indicated in the quote from Dosi above. About progress along a trajectory, virtually everybody knows the 'Moore's law', i.e. the empirical law according to which the number of transistors squeezed in a given volume doubles every 18-24 months 4 . However, the law is far from occurring automatically: in fact, cramming more and more transistors in the same volume requires better materials, better doping techniques, constantly renewed miniaturization technologies and many more improvements. The overlapping between the scientific paradigm of solid-state physics and the technological paradigm of semiconductors can be synthesised by the fact that at the very origin of modern electronics is the discovery of a new solidstate electronic component for which W. B. Shockley, J. The search for an alternative paradigm implies dealing with a complex mix of dimensions which range from the relationship between science and technology to the question of how technological expectations form, from market considerations to non-market strategic government interventionand this is not an exhaustive list. A key question is thus the following: why was the superconducting paradigm actively pursued by IBM during the 1960s, when the semiconductors revolution was in full swing? The basic answer lies in the presumptive anomaly principle. Paradigm shifts in technology may occur for different reasons. For instance, a technology generated in one field may be applied, with revolutionary consequences, to other fields: steam-engines were at first created to pump up water from coalmines, then they became the prime mover of the machinery of the Industrial Revolution in England, then they were applied to provide motion to ships so that steam-ships supplanted sail-ships. Steam technology was adopted by different sectors and thus adapted to many different uses. The mechanism we are here interested in, however, is a specific one, that is the mechanism whereby a new paradigm is actively sought when the existing one perfectly satisfies the desired needs and ends. One such mechanism is that which has been named presumptive anomaly The original idea was developed with reference to the birth of the turbojet paradigm as opposed to the propeller-piston paradigm for aircraft propulsion. The successes of the 'old' propeller-piston technology were impressive in the period which ranges from the mid-1920 to the mid-1940: power of the engine increased ten times, from 350 hp to 3,500 hp, while speed doubled from 200 mph to 400 mph. In the early days of aviation, aircraft performance and its improvement were based on empirical means. In the 1920s, however, aerodynamics became a scientific field characterised by mathematical rigour and communitywide acceptance. Soon after aerodynamicists started wondering what would happen to aircrafts at supersonic speeds, and concluded that the conditions of flight would change violently -and thus the propeller would not work 'normally'as the velocity neared the speed of sound. This was a rather awkward thing to do: supersonic speed means flying at about 770mph It is interesting at this point to recall an 'opposite' mechanism with respect to the presumptive anomaly, namely the sailing-ship effect (De A question might be: the spectacular advances observed in the semiconductor industry can have been engendered by the emergence of the superconductors paradigm? This is not a redundant question. IBM was a major world player and when it announced worldwide in specialised journals as well as in the widely-read magazine Scientific Americanits Josephson computer project, it was sending a somehow threatening signal to the semiconductor industry: should IBM mass-produce in-house superconducting Josephson junctions, the world biggest computer producer would dispense with semiconductors. The semiconductors and superconductors sectors are two big-science, big-technology, highly innovative sectors. The way in which the scientific and technological principles according to which these sectors emerged and evolved provides a very good example to appreciate the complex relationships existing amongst the three dimensions of science, technology and innovation. Transistors and Josephson junctions are science-based devices, but the meaning of this phrase implies that science and technology are fully 'dependent' from one another. Science, technology, and innovation are often portrayed as a sequence of interrelated stages constituting the engine of progress Further contributions on the link between science and technology tend to present a dynamics where the boundaries between the two is blurring, especially in those emerging science-related technological sectors where artefacts and processes are substantially based on scientific discoveries and applications The relationships between the two domains are undoubtedly complex. Yet we can see how they originate from one common source: a 'problem' that inspires the search for a 'solution' which translates into scientific discovery in one domain and in new artefacts and processes in the other The blending of the two domains has been studied by The case of superconductivity is challenging as at first it represents a case of technology ahead of science: the 'supercold' technological paradigm was being developed since the liquefaction of helium in 1908, and led to the creation of the first superconducting device, the cryotron, in 1955, without relying on a theory of superconductivity. A fundamental impulse to the technology, though, came after the theoretical physicist Brian Josephson published his paper on superconductive tunnelling A further fundamental challenge due to the study of superconductivity lies in the blurring of the distinction between science and technology: technology is more and more science-based, but science is more and more technology-dependent. This evolution in the relationship between science and technology is witnessed by the ubiquitous presence of physicists, in both the scientific and technological realm: they may be more theoretical or applied in kind, but their education and research activity necessarily synthesise scientific and technological paradigms. The objective of this work is to get theoretically sound insights from a case study which subsumes great scientific advancements, technological leaps forward and business-driven innovation spanning several decades and unfolding across diverse epistemological domains. During the phase of planning of the study and scoping of the literature we found that our research objective could not be neatly analysed through the sequence consisting in basic scientific research followed by technological change and finally innovation (or business dynamics). These three domains, though playing an important role in our reconstruction, cannot be considered in progression from science through to technology and finally innovation as advocated at first by We proceeded, therefore, by keeping the three areas of interest distinct without imposing any a priori relationships between them so that a historiographical narrative can be eventually reconstructed Progressing along these lines we sought to identify the leading epistemological domains involved in the story, the key actors, their roles and relationships. In so doing, we could trace the milestones in each domain and their interdependencies including the idiosyncrasies which emerged. These are then put into context/perspective avoiding falling in the 'trap of hindsight' The primary sources of our reconstruction are traced back in the literature pertaining to superconductivity with applications to computers and constituent technologies. Following an established methodology on literature audit, snowballing, we proceeded by identifying the primary sources in the domains of interest 11 Comparisons between snowballing literature research and systematic literature review have been carried out in several occasions, and in different domains. For examples in medical research see Particular attention was given to physics journals, the IBM Journal of Research and Development and history of science and technology publications. After the research team identified primary sourcese.g. Finally, we looked at the interrelation between the three main domains, that of scientific discovery, technological development and business dynamics. These phases were carried out accordingly to The superconducting, or To understand the meaning of 'superconductivity' we have to begin with electrical resistance. All materials, including good electrical conductors such as copper, show some resistance to the passage of an electric current evidenced by energy loss. This general law does not hold for certain materials when refrigerated to temperatures close to the absolute zero (-273.15 °Celsius or 0 Kelvin). In these conditions, resistance drops to zero. Getting close to absolute zero is, however, a difficult task. The technique relies on the liquefaction of gases, and in particular of helium. This process was the result of highly specialised laboratories using the most advanced technologies: there was no room for small scale experimenting nor for serendipity 13 . Kamerlingh Onnes liquefied helium in 1908 reaching a record-low temperature of -269° (4K), holding the monopoly on helium liquefaction until 1923. Once he had liquefied this rare gas, he started to investigate systematically the properties of materials at cryogenic temperatures. In 1911 Holst, a technician working in Kamerlingh Onnes laboratory, observed the sudden disappearance of mercury's resistivity at 4.2 K: superconductivity had been discovered A first proper framework attempting a theoretical explanation of this phenomenon emerged only forty-six years after Holst's measurement. The path-breaking results were due to Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer who published an article entitled theory of superconductivity in 1957 Bardeen was awarded a second Nobel Prize in 1972 and, this time, for his work on superconductivity. Despite this success, today we still do not have a fully satisfactory theory of superconductivity IBM's interest on superconductors dates back to the mid-1950s, while heavy investments took place from the mid-1960s, which led to the 1980 announcement. The first applications of superconductivity were related to memory systems. This happened in a period in which there existed at least seven technological solutions for memory, yet no dominant design. In fact, in the early 1950s, memory systems could be based on magnetic tapes, magnetic drums, mercury delay lines, vacuum tube flip-flops, selectrons, William tubes and magnetic cores; a further possibility had emerged and was based on superconducting films Journal of Research and Development in which one can find two articles The early application of superconductors to computers' memory was based on the cryotron, a device that had been first proposed by D. A. Buck in 1955 exploiting the sharp transition from the normal to the superconducting state IBM was working keenly on this early superconducting technology, devoting massive resources to it, supported by funding from the US Air Force: fast computing has always been of interest for the Department of Defence (NRC, 1999). Gallagher and co-authors speak of 100 staff employed, at various levels, on the project in the second half of the 1950s; however, the slow progresses led to a loss of interest, even though effort on superconducting continued In the 1960s a few scientific and technological results were achieved. These granted superconductive electronics a new wave of interest. In 1962 Brian Josephson, a physics PhD student in Cambridge, England, published a theoretical key article on what was going to be later defined as the Josephson effect (see Table Josephson was able to predict that pairs can cross a non-superconductive barrier and a "supercurrent", in appropriate conditions, can flow between two superconductorsa Josephson junction. While Josephson's was a theoretical result, the feasibility of a "Josephson junction" was demonstrated in 1963 by Anderson and Rowellboth working at Murray Hill Bell Telephone Laboratories. Further encouraging results had been obtained within IBM where a Josephson junction was produced, which performed much faster than the original cryotron: "The combination of high speed, sharp threshold, and strong magnetic field dependence makes Josephson junctions attractive as logical elements" These results prompted renewed interest, meaning heavy R&D expenditure in superconducting computers. Despite semiconductors progresses, at the beginning of the 1980s it looked like superconductors could eventually win the market: "Josephson tunnelling devices ... could indeed be switched very fast and could be competitive with projected semiconductor integrated circuits" One question has been voluntarily omitted up to now: why was there such an interest in this 'strange' technology which implied the creation of a new paradigm? Was there anything wrong in the semiconductor technology, or was it evolving so slowly that it could no longer meet increasing calculation needs? The answer to the latter question is "no". Yet the struggle continued. In order to build a 'Josephson computer' new principles and radically new technologies needed to be developed. Many technical difficulties had to be overcome, and many sources of cost considered. By 1980 the semiconductors industry had long identified silicon as the "right" material, while in superconductors such a material had just been identified: not all metals become superconductors at near-absolute-zero temperatures, and the selection of niobium instead of lead required a lot of experimenting. A fundamentally obvious aspect consists in keeping the temperature close to absolute zero. The use of liquid helium to maintain the ultra-low temperature, wasand still isvery expensive. It adds very heavily to the costs not only to test and mass-produce the devices, but also to simply keep the computer running. The materials must withstand temperatures which range from -270 °C to +40 °C or more, that is more than 300 degrees thermal cycle. Given that the Josephson junction is made of two superconductors separated by a non-conducting barrier, the latter material can be characterised by a different thermal expansion/contraction. Working on a nano-scale this differential expansion or contraction can jeopardize the functioning of the junctions However, the new technology had quite a few strengths, while it could also benefit from some of the techniques used for producing semiconductors devices There were a number of reasons to believe that superconducting electronics was superior to semiconducting devices. Josephson junctions were considered promising elements for 'artificial thinking'or 'neural networks', as they were called in the 1960s It was by no means obvious that neural networks could work on semiconducting devices, so it looked more promising to build special-purpose devices, named neuristors, which would be the man-made technological version of neurons, based on Josephson junctions 16 . The program to build such special-purpose devices continued for all the 1960s It is interesting to notice that in 1967 power dissipation was clearly seen as a limit for semiconductors, and it still is an important concern nowadays. It is perhaps even more interesting to notice that the economic analysis was based on the expectation that the cost of semiconductors would become higher than the cost of superconductors. In fact, semiconducting devices are made of 'doped' 17 silicon (or germanium). In contrast, Josephson junctions were at first made of inexpensive lead. Nobody in the 1960s could predict that a transistor (three differently doped pieces of silicon glued together) could cost 0.004 US$ by the mid-1970s. It was reasonable to believe that a few billions one-millimetre Josephson junctions, made of lead or aluminium, could be much cheaper. Therefore, the expectation devoid of the hindsight effect, was that cheap superconducting components would more than offset refrigeration costs. From the early 1960s semiconducting transistors were the dominant technology, and technical progress took place at an accelerated pace. The market for transistors was expanding dramatically also because transistors found applications in the telephone industry techniques allowing greater miniaturization and concentration of junctions in the same volume. One main difference between the super and semiconductors was thus in terms of resources available to carry out R&D: semiconductors had a strong advantage. At the very beginning of the 1980s, photolithography was available for semiconducting and superconducting devices, with the same spatial resolution. Together with other significant improvements of superconducting technology (such as the tri-layer all Niobium fabrication method), it was realistic to think that superconductors and semiconductors were competing upon equal terms. Superconducting computers, though, were expected to have specific technological and economic advantages. IBM, through the works of Reasoning in terms of comparative trends characterised by continuous increase in performance, squeezing more and more transistors in the same volume would necessarily lead to a stage in which overheating would constitute a problem for the incumbent technology. The estimates proposed by In other words, even considering a tenfold gain in efficiency of heat dissipation, the temperature would be so high as to compromise the working of the standard semiconductor-based machine. Therefore, expensive cooling technology would be needed to keep the mainframe running. On the other hand, the proposed ultrahigh-performance of a superconducting mainframe was estimated to dissipate less than 10 W. "It appears, therefore, that Josephson technology may, at present, be the only one with potential for construction of mainframes of the ultrahigh performance" This means that refrigeration costs would not be crucial for they would emerge in any case also for the semiconductor-based mainframes. Furthermore, the new technology would be systemic in that the materials and the overall architecture would be based on these new principles operating at low temperature making "overhead for refrigeration" not a disadvantage for large-and medium-scale mainframes. Two more advantages of superconducting computers would be reliability and longevity of components. In fact, the materials used are selected from the very beginning to cope with supercold temperatures, so they would not have to adapt ex post to refrigerationa problem specific of semiconductors. Longevity would be guaranteed by the low temperature. Given the intrinsic superiority of superconductors, fewer circuits might be required, thus reducing the manufacture of chips and testing costs A further technical aspect which adds to the superiority of Josephson circuits consists of the fact that these devices are indifferent to the direction in which the current flows through them, while the same is not true for semiconductors Last but not least, all the contributors to the development of the superconducting computer pointed out that R&D-cum-learning-by-doing would give rise to forms of similar to those experienced in the semiconductor industry. Summing up: since the 1960s semiconductor-based computers were developing at an impressive rate, and yet the expectations in the late 1970s were that a functional failure would 'soon' be reachedanother way to say that there existed a presumptive anomaly. In hindsight we know that 'soon' was not so close in timebut we are all capable ex post to say that the expectations were wrong. "On 23 September Within three years we have a complete change of attitude on superconductivity in the computer industry. In hindsight it may be easy to classify the investments made by IBM in the new technology as a waste of money. However, the company's bet on superconducting computers was justifiable on both technological and economic ground. Any investment is based on the expectations formed at the time when the commitment is made. Expectations concern the inextricable mix of technological and economic future conditions as well as strategic considerations: how do we prioritize emerging technologies The semiconductor-based computer industry was undoubtedly one of the most progressive ones at least since the 1960s, so that IBM had to shoot at three fast-moving targets, that is: (i) the evolution of the performances, (ii) the costs structure, and (iii) the size of the market for computers. R&D and mass-production would determine performance and cost structure, and thus market-size, while the latter would feed back into the former dimensions; this dynamics for IBM was extremely important. In fact, from the early 1960s IBM had been a dominant player in this industry. Such was its importance that it was accused of abusing its dominant position in this market, and from 1969 to 1982 was subject to one of the most important antitrust cases ever. The case was dropped by the US Government because the company demonstrated that its near-monopoly had been obtained and maintained through "superior skill, foresight and industry" Was this an absurd strategy? Let us consider as a starting point the so-called 'Moore's law' formulated by Gordon Moore in an article published in 1965, whose title "cramming more components onto integrated circuits" is quite telling There was no estimate of the upper performance limit of semiconductors, though all agreed that a limit does indeed exist, and it is fixed by the laws of physics. What has happened is that this limit has been shifting upwards through time, as technology showed that the supposed limits imposed by physics had to be revised. Provocative research has shown that the upper bound could be placed almost as high as one wishes Was all of this predictable? Moore's law was bound to saturate, and timing was central. Ex post it is easy to say that IBM miscalculated the time scale of the duration of the validity of Moore's law and that it made its bet on the new technology thirty-five years too soon. However, when IBM was actually working on superconductors the hypothesis of the "law" no longer holding for many years was not unreasonable. In the overall emergence of expectations, one must also consider the fact that steady improvements could be expected to occur in mass-production of Josephson junctions since their production shared the same lithographic technology as semiconductors and some specific design characteristics might be "easier in some ways than the manufacture of semiconductor components" One more reason to invest in superconductors lies in the possibility of a type of cost reduction that would have been superconductor-specific. In fact, so-called high-temperature superconductors were actively sought. These would use cheap liquid nitrogen, as opposed to expensive liquid helium 19 . The use of nitrogen would have substantially reduced the cooling costs 20 . Despite the fact that IBM officially abandoned the Josephson computer project in 1983, its laboratories were still devoting some efforts to superconductivity. In particular, "[Alex Müller] had worked on strontium titanate and related perovskite compounds. ... But not until a twenty-month sabbatical spent at the IBM Yorktown Heights Laboratory did Müller become familiar with the intricacy of superconducting research. He was particularly fascinated by the IBM Josephson computer project, a $ 300 million effort to build a fast computer based on superconducting switches. The computer project was later abandoned, but knowledge that several complex oxides were superconducting led Müller to believe it might be possible to find new compounds with unprecedented critical temperatures" One crucial question emerges here: which market are we talking about when we talk about computers in the early 1980s? IBM had been working on superconductivity since the mid-1960s, and when it formally announced the Josephson technology project in 1980, mainframe computers were still at centre stage. By then the personal computer revolution had already started, but the fact 19 The importance of active research in high-temperature superconductors should not be underestimated: it is not a simple coincidence that in 1987 two IBM researchers, Georg Bednorz and Alex Müller, were awarded the Nobel Prize for physics for having found materials at comparatively 'high temperatures'. The passage from 4 K to 23 K took 75 years, while the passage from 23 K to 92 K happened suddenly between April 1986 and February 1987 that computers would become as widely diffused as washing machines was not to be taken for granted. Once more expectations play a key role. The market, was expected, will be segmented into two asymmetric halves. The rich half: that of mainframes for public administrations (from central ministries and departments to local councils), universities, banks, insurance companies, airlines, publishing houses, newspapers, hospitals and any business which needs handling of large databases, which as a minimum means the accounting division of any firm. The list above is already quite long and, one notices, comprises businesses or activities belonging to the service sector. The list has to be enlarged to take into account many manufacturing processes needing large computing facilities to run the overall production process such as flexible manufacturing systems in which numerically controlled machines perform the whole manufacturing process. Numerical control, i.e. mainframe computerised work processes, already was a dominant technology in the 1970s If we can expect a rate of progress in superconductors as in semiconductors, mainframes will become more and more affordable so that smaller and smaller firms may afford one. The second half of the market is a poorer one. Made of small users and giving rise to little profits. Was it such a bizarre thing to hold this expectation in the 1970s? Our answer is simply no. In hindsight, we know how the situation evolved after 1980, with the explosion of the semiconductorbased personal computer market. A further (and unexpected) change occurred in the 1990s with the advent and diffusion of the internet. Personal computers, laptops and hand-held devices have spread in offices, gradually into homes and now are personal items. In the 1960s and 1970s, many people were just laughing at the idea that everybody could use a personal computer However, this is only part of the story of the semiconductors permanent revolution and continuous improvements. In fact, through time the semiconductor microchip has emerged as a general purpose technology (a phrase made popular by Convergence between various ICTs sectorsjust think of the entertainment industry, from television to cinema, music, videogames, smartphones etc.has amplified the need for semiconductors, and has given rise to knowledge, technological and application convergence which coevolve and generate innovations In the previous sections we have emphasised technological and market considerations. However, the history of computing is driven by other factors with repercussions on the whole industry. These include military hubris, the ostentation of technological superiority and the willingness to become part of the technologically advanced societies. In other words, non-economic factors have heavily affected this sector since its very beginning. It is difficult to quantify the involvement of the American government and its many Agenciesfrom the Department of Defense to NASAin direct and indirect funding of R&D aimed at improving computing even for insiders However, some studies provide analyses and sectoral data which make clear the fundamental importance of the American Federal support to computer science research. Funding has concerned systematically basic research, human resources and research equipment, in both computer scienceas 'strictly' defined: theory of computing, design, data storage and manipulation, systems analysis, programming languagesand electrical engineeringwhich includes communication technologies, semiconductors, superconductors, electronic circuits as well as in electric power Through time observers have systematically emphasised that the American information technology industry thrives to a large extent on the basis of an extraordinary track record of public research funded by the Federal government since the 1940s IBM has systematically co-operated with many of the American governmental agencies interested in faster and faster computing, and superconductors were part of the game. By the second half of the 1970s, when the IBM Josephson project was running, roughly one-third of total computerrelated research funding came from Federal funding Supercomputerswhatever technology they are based onare important for many reasons, from driving missiles to predicting a hurricane's path and optimization of encryption/decryption operations. Given their strategic importance, economic considerations may have been sometimes set aside. Another player which did invest heavily in superconducting supercomputers was Japan. Fundamental was the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or MITI -METI since 2001 - The results achieved were defined "substantial, sustained and highly productive" in a report written by an American panel which was visiting Japan to investigate progresses in electronic applications of superconductivity Japan's efforts also involved the university system in order to develop basic knowledge of superconductivity as well as to search for materials which would become superconductors at relatively high temperatures. By the late 1980s two different roads were thus open: low-temperature and high-temperature superconductivity Interest in superconductivity went thus on without interruptions: Japan, in fact, heavily financed two more consortia. The first was the Superconducting Sensor Laboratory (SSL) the second started immediately afterwards, in 1997, the International Superconductivity Technology Centre (ISTeC). The latterwhich despite its name was fully Japanesewas at the time the largest consortium devoted to the development of superconductivity in the world Further efforts are being carried out by METI since 2006 in order to produce and apply superconducting quantum interference devices, or SQUIDs, and single flux quantum devices, or SFQ Also the Soviet Unionuninterested in market aspects by definitionwas interested in the In 1986 these groups created the world fastest circuit, operating at up to 30GHz, and predicted the possibility to increase the clock frequency to a few hundred GHz As one can see, the efforts had been financed for over twenty years, and further resources had been granted just before the breaking up of the Soviet Union. Summing up, in the computer sector, we have a situation which has occurred rather often in technologies held strategic, that is the fundamental role of governments in favouring R&D and early development andin market economiesthe subsequent further development promoted by firms. The role of companies competing in open markets has been important in the development of semiconductors. In fact, this technology moved from the infant to the take-off stage, new Schumpeterian firms entered the market and, by 1957, 64% of the total semiconductor market had been captured by these new firms Superconductors did not reach the critical mass in the early 1980s as IBM had expected and, despite the improvements obtained by IBM, the Japanese and Russian players, interest in superconducting computers lost momentum. Nonetheless, this is not the end of the story of superconducting for three reasons. First, the Japanese took over and produced a working superconducting microchip in 1989, while some successful work had taken place in the last years of the Soviet Union. Second, the IBM Josephson computer project may actually have never been completely abandoned, but just reduced in scale 23 . Third, despite the fact that binary superconducting supercomputers were never produced beyond the superconducting microchip prototypes, thirty years after the closing of the IBM project, superconductivity emerges as a key component of the quantum computers of D-Wave Moreover, further technological achievements based on superconductor technologies have been attained during the last thirty years: magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic levitating trains, highly sensitive measurement instrumentation and other devices would not exist without superconductors 23 Dorojevets and colleagues write explicitly that superconductor technology and processor design continued behind the scenes. They refer to a hybrid technology reaching a processing capability of one petaflop, or 10 15 operations per second. This speed was deemed necessary "in the national interest" -the authors explicitly acknowledge "support by the US Department of Defense" Furthermore, scientific achievements have emerged. Through the study of supercold materials the Bose-Einstein condensatea state of matter predicted in the 1920s by the two scientists which was thought to be impossible to observecould finally be produced for the first time. To conclude we consider three major points. The first concerns the question whether superconductors can be considered as a failed innovation. The second concerns the way in which presumptive anomaly works. The third concerns the relationship between science and technology. Presumptive anomaly is the theoretical tool which helps us to explain the creation and development per year during that period However, despite IBM 1980 public announcements and research efforts, doubts were present; there was competition within IBM between the Josephson and the semiconductor departments; furthermore, there existed competition within the Josephson IBM community between the American and the Swiss laboratories In The last quote is crucial: the superconductors-based paradigm did not reach the point of revolution, which comes when a significant minority of the relevant community switches to the new paradigm, thus making its development self-supporting Thus, given that Josephson computers never became a widespread reality, should we conclude that this is a failed innovation? Not necessarily. The right classification might be that of a "false-failed innovation" which is defined as "a technology that is examined and discarded but that gets a second chance under other conditions and succeeds" In fact, the new generation of (quantum?) computers launched in the 2010s makes use of Josephson junctions, and more agencies (ODNI, 2014) and high-tech companies Incidentally, in the overall evaluation of the superconductors' paradigm until today, one should not forget the other applications of superconductors, and in particular magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI: these machines definitely constitute a widespread reality, as they are present in every hospital and in many other medical facilities. The second point we want to raise, concerns the working of the presumptive anomaly principle. In the original idea by Constant, the principle depends crucially on scientific insights which indicate that under some future conditions the incumbent system will fail or function badly. In the case of semiconductors, the indications need not come from scientists: it was clear also to technologists that a problem of heat would emerge by squeezing more and more transistors in a given volume as it was clear that miniaturization to a nano-scale would create serious manufacturing problems. The step from the identification of these two basic problemswhich will 'soon' invalidate Moore's law, and will become insurmountable at a later stageto the search for a new radical alternative is somehow 'natural'. Thus, presumptive anomaly does not need to have its roots exclusively in science. Furthermore, in our story, the drivers of change can be only partially explained by scientific, technological and business ambitions. Though, forming the underlying reasons to the sequence of events that we reconstructed, these cannot be unequivocally subdivided and classified. Factors external to these domains can be brought about to justify the enormous commitment to superconducting development. In particular, the interest of governments and their active intervention in computer technology is a constant feature of the technology itself. The very birth of the computers field was characterised by heavy public investments: the history and realisation of the first monster computer built in the 1940s, ENIAC, under the very generous American government aegis, is widely known The third point we focus on, concerns the relationships between science and technology. This relationship changes through time, and varies from field to field. It is not possible to identify an invariant universal pattern. Also, the relationship is sometimes 'intermediated' by governments, in the sense that the latter can steer the overall system, through massive investments and involvement of private companies, towards specific technologies and scientific areas. The field of superconductivity is big technology and big science from the very beginning. Kamerlingh Onnes cryogenic laboratory, in which superconductivity was first observed, was the realization of a technological project of unprecedented scale. Liquefaction of helium in 1908, which made possible the observation of superconductivity in 1911, was a major technological success. The first cryogenic devices aimed at building computer memory circuits were built in the mid-1950s without much theoretical guidance: we have a case in which technology is ahead of scienceand we have to note that this story disproves the idea that it was only in a distant past that through ingenuity and dexterity one could 'make a steam engine without knowing the principles of thermodynamics'. What we have here is a situation in which science chases technology, trying to provide the explanation of the principles underpinning certain phenomena. Technology and science are still sometimes satisfied by answering different questions. Technology asks: Does it work? Is it reliable? Can we make it smaller and faster? Science asks: Why does it work? What does explain the behaviour of the phenomenon under investigation? Which is the predictive power of my theory? The understanding of scientific principles, though, is sometimes a necessary condition for technological improvement: it was only after Josephson's 1962 theoretical paper that predicted the properties of superconducting junctions, that through new experimental research junctions themselves could be fabricated in ways that could match and overtake, in terms of technical performance, semiconductor devices. To conclude, we wish to make two remarks, one general and one specific. The general one concerns the fact that our work points once more to the complex, nonlinear, characteristics of the innovative process: scientific endeavour, technological advancements, government's 'interference' and Corresponding author: nicola.deliso@unisalento.it The use of these words is due to These words are used byConstant (1980: 12) and, as he recalls, are taken from See section 6 for more details on Moore's law. The history of transistors is not the remit of this work; a useful reference is The speed of sound is not a constant value as is affected by altitude and temperature; the figure above refers to sea level at 20 °C (or 68 °F) temperature. The Concorde and the Soviet-times Tupolev TU 144 were exceptions and never became a widespread reality; the latter was in use only two years, while the former entered in service in 1976 and was dismissed in 2003. See alsoConstant (1973: 555). See Anderson and Tushman, 1990; For example, it was believed that photolithography was ultimately limited by the wavelength of light, but the advent of electron microscopy demolished the limit through using electrons whose wavelength is much shorter. Nevertheless, some limit or unbeatable difficulty will occur. For a complete technical explanation see US Patents #4,164,030 and #4,178,602. 