The programmable assembly of DNA strands is a promising tool for building tailored bottom-up nanostructures. Here, we present a plasmonic nanosystem obtained by the base-pairing mediated aggregation of gold nanoparticles (NPs) which are separately functionalized with two different single-stranded DNA chains. Their controlled assembly is mediated by a complementary DNA "bridge" sequence. We monitor the formation of DNA assembled NP aggregates in solution, and we study their Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) response by comparison with the single NP constituents. We interpret the revealed SERS signatures in terms of the molecular and NP organization at the nanoscale, demonstrating that the action of the DNA bridge molecule yields regular NP aggregates with controlled interparticle distance and reproducible SERS response. This demonstrates the potential of the present system as a stable, biocompatible, and recyclable SERS sensor. In recent years, considerable efforts have brought to the development of novel strategies for realizing targeted nanostructures by bottom-up selfassembly processes A plasmonic NP, when illuminated by light in resonance conditions with the collective oscillation of the electron gas of the metal, acts as a nanoantenna, focusing intense electromagnetic fields at the NP surface, far beyond the diffraction limit In some cases, the DNA-based SERS sensing schemes are aimed at revealing or investigating the DNA molecules themselves: recent works have demonstrated the ability to determine the compo-sition of DNA strands In order to promote the localization of single/double strands of DNA on the metal NP surface, overcoming the electrostatic repulsion between the negative charges of DNA and NPs, salts as MgSO 4 are commonly employed The covalent conjugation can be preferred in a series of applications, particularly those benefiting from a more stable linkage between the components of the nanosystem upon variations of temperature and pH of the environment. A stable conjugation is to prefer also in the perspective of designing a recyclable SERS substrate, where the analytes are typically released by chemical or physical methods after being trapped and revealed within the hotspots of the structure Here, we report the study of gold (Au) NPs functionalized with two single-stranded DNA sequences. The SERS signature was characterized for the two chains by comparison with their Raman spectra to identify the spectral markers of the DNA scaffold. The self-assembly of these two hybrid DNA-NP systems within aggregates was then achieved by the action of a "bridge" molecule, in halves complementary to each of the sequences attached to the NPs. The DNA bridge acts therefore as a molecular glue. The temperature dependent UV-Visible spectra acquired on the NP aggregates during their formation demonstrate that the aggregation is specific and DNA mediated. Although a specific spectroscopic marker of the DNA pairing (e.g. a band ascribed to hygrogen-bonding) was not detected, a change in the system spectroscopic signature arising from the bridge molecules could be identified in the aggregated state. Notably, our study is conducted with gold NPs, while the vast majority of SERS studies on DNA rely on silver substrates The SERS study of DNA here reported is sequence-specific, reflecting the nucleotide composition of the DNA strands used, and allows monitoring the occurrence of the NP aggregation, driven at controlled interparticle distance by the self-assembly of DNA. The comparison between SERS spectroscopy and electron microscopy measurements demonstrates the negative correlation between the SERS signal-to-noise ratio and the interparticle distance, suggesting a path for SERS signal optimization. Conveniently, the SERS bands of DNA are outside the fingerprint region of common analytes detected by SERS spectroscopy Materials and characterization. Stock solutions of 60 nm diameter AuNPs stabilized by citrate capping were purchased from Ted Pella, inc. (Redding, CA). Synthetic monophosphate DNA sequences with DUAL HPLC purification were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, USA). For the experimental realization of DNA-linked NP assemblies we used three different and purposely-programmed single-stranded DNA chains, selected according to the seminal work of J.J. Storhoff and coworkers Nanoparticle functionalization. The three DNA sequences were separately diluted in deionized Milli-Q water. The actual strand concentration in these solutions was determined using a NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). To deprotect the thiolated sequences (chain-A and chain-B) from the disulfide bonds, we dissolved 5 nmol of each strand in a 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT) solution, allowing the reaction to continue for 2 hours. The procedure was followed by the purification through NAP-5 column (GE Healthcare UK). AuNP functionalization with the thiol-ending nucleotides was carried out according to the well-defined assay procedure reported in Ref. DNA-NP controlled aggregation. The bridge sequence mediated aggregation of the DNA-NP complexes was induced in solution and monitored by UV-Visible spectroscopy. We prepared two equimolar solutions of AuNPs functionalized with chain-A and chain-B respectively. They were mixed in the presence of an excess of complementary bridge molecules (the bridge concentration exceeded by four orders of magnitude the NP concentration, to guarantee the formation of large aggregates). The final solution was incubated for 20 minutes in a pre-heated Memmert oven at 75 • C, then slowly cooled down to room temperature overnight. To remove the fraction of unbound bridges the solution was centrifuged at 4400 rpm for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the supernatant was removed and the sample re-dispersed in a 0.3 M NaCl solution. The purification step was repeated three times. For SERS and FESEM measurements, the aggregated NP purified dispersion was deposited on the substrate and dried at room temperature. UV-Visible spectroscopy and DNA aggregation measurements. UV-Visible absorption measurements were carried out from Jasco v-570 double ray spectrophotometer equipped with a Jasco ETC-505T Peltier thermostat which allowed to perform measurements at controlled temperature. To monitor the DNA aggregation as a function of temperature, a volume of ∼ 250 μl of the mixed functionalized NPs and bridge solution was sealed in a quartz cuvette (optical path 1 mm). The system was heated up to 75 • C, well above the melting temperature of the DNA strands, calculated to be ∼ 54 • C using NUPACK Oligo-simulator Raman/SERS spectroscopy. Raman and SERS measurements were carried out using a Horiba HR-Evolution microspectrometer in backscattering geometry, equipped with a He-Ne laser, λ = 632.8 nm and 25 mW output power (∼ 10 mW at the sample). Raman spectra were acquired by illuminating the molecular depositions with full laser power. Using proper optical filters, SERS spectra were collected keeping the laser power below 0.25 mW to avoid laser heating and sample degradation, induced by the enhanced field intensity occurring in presence of the plasmonic NPs. The detector was a Peltier-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) and the resolution was better than 3 cm -1 thanks to a 600 grooves/mm grating with 800 mm focal length. The spectrometer was coupled with a confocal microscope. A 100× (N.A. = 0.9) Olympus objective lens was used for the experimental acquisitions. Further details on the experimental apparatus can be found in Ref. Electron microscopy. Samples for FESEM imaging were prepared as described above. Images were recorded using a Zeiss Auriga 405 microscope at Sapienza Nanoscience & Nanotechnology Laboratories (SNN-Lab) of the Research Center on Nanotechnology Applied to Engineering (CNIS) of Sapienza University. The acquired frames were analyzed by Gwyddion software Raman study of the DNA strands. Preliminary Raman measurements allowed to identify the spectral fingerprint of the selected DNA sequences. In Figure DNA-AuNPs conjugation and SERS features. The DNA anchoring on the NP surface can be monitored by UV-Visible absorption measurements. In the UV-Visible spectrum of the pristine plasmonic NP dispersion, a well-defined peak ascribed to the NP surface plasmon resonance can be recognized. Its position depends on the size, shape and dielectric environment around the NP. In the case of spherical AuNPs, 60 nm diameter, dispersed in solution, the peak is centered at λ = 535 nm. When the NPs are functionalized with a ligand molecule, as DNA, the dielectric environment changes and a redshift of the plasmonic peak is observed The SERS features of DNA-AuNPs were investigated by carrying out direct spectroscopic measurements. The good agreement between the Raman and SERS spectra of chain-A and chain-B functionalized NPs is evident from their comparison in Figure The SERS response is characterized by a good reproducibility of the spectral shape. However, a marked variability (∼ 100%) of the overall SERS intensity was retrieved during repeated acquisitions. It is known that most of the SERS signal revealed on NP-based SERS substrates originates from the hot-spots between aggregated NPs The Raman cross-section and typical SERS enhancement factors revealed for DNA are than other com-monly adopted SERS analytes DNA-AuNp aggregates. Once the main components of our SERS nanosystems were characterized, we produced DNA-NP aggregates in which the bridge sequence acts as a selective linker between the functionalized NPs. The adopted experimental procedure adopted is described in the Experimental section, and it is sketched in Figure In Figure grants the NP assembly at controlled interparticle distance. As described, the SERS characterization of the aggregates was performed measuring a microvolume of the annealed DNA-NP solution dropcasted and dried on a glass slide. The SERS spectrum of the doublestranded DNA was measured, and in Figure The first information derived by the spectra in Figure Nevertheless, a remarkable spectral weight redistribution between the various components of the SERS signature can be observed in the spectrum of the bridgeconjugated system, which appears quite different from those of chain-A and chain-B functionalized NPs. These spectral modifications can be related to a partially different orientation of the chains with respect to the NP surface in the case of the conjugated system. Indeed, in the presence of the bridge molecule, we expect the DNA strands to stand upright onto the NP surface, because of the occurred interchain pairing. In the single-chain functionalized NPs, on the other hand, the molecules on the NP surface can move in a relatively more flexible manner, thus their orientation is not strictly determined. The orientation of the DNA molecules is known to critically affect the SERS spectral shape, mostly in the 1200-1600 cm -1 region (high-frequency side of Figure As discussed above, a certain variability is expected to affect the high-frequency side of the spectra in Figure An aspect to be addressed is the less favorable signalto-noise ratio that characterizes the spectrum of the A+B+bridge conjugated system compared to the spectra of the single-chain samples. This is clearly visible in Figure Support to the hypothesis of a controlled molecular arrangement, orthogonal to the NP surface, in the bridge mediated aggregates is given by the observation that a more pronounced reproducibility in the spectral intensity is retrieved on the bridge-conjugated system. As a representative example, we show in Figure Representative results of FESEM microscopy are shown in Figure For quantitatively clarifying the role of the nanoarchitecture in the originated SERS intensity and spectral quality, we analyzed the FESEM images in terms of radial autocorrelation function to extrapolate the average interparticle distance, as described in Section H of the Supplementary Material. The analyzed data, reported in Table In conclusion, we proposed a stable, biocompatible SERS active system based on gold NPs covalently functionalized with specific DNA strands. The advantage of covalent DNA anchoring on the NP surface is twofold: on one hand, we demonstrated that this allows obtaining SERS spectra with reproducible and controlled spectral shapes, proving that the covalent functionalization prevents the accidental physisorption of different, random molecules on the NP surface The main features revealed by the DNA-SERS spectra cover a spectral window that is not superimposed to the usual fingerprint region of most of the analytes revealed in SERS biosensors The spectral shapes in all the systems are very well-defined, as confirmed by repeated measurements, whereas the same consideration does not hold for the SERS intensity. We revealed a higher but less reproducible intensity in the single-chain functionalized systems, while the bridge-conjugated aggregated system features a more pronounced reproducibility. This is ascribed to the NP aggregation process, which is spontaneous and uncontrolled in the single-chain cases, leading to rare and more efficient hot-spots, while is well predictable and reproducible when the NP aggregation is driven by the specific pairing induced by the bridge molecule. The lower signal-to-noise ratio in the spectra of the bridge-conjugated system is due to the NPs being kept 5.2 nm far apart by the bridge linking. The results suggest that selecting shorter sequences for such a system can increase the intensity of the DNA-SERS spectra. The spectral shapes have been interpreted in terms of both molecular orientation and DNA strand base composition. We envision the application of the present system as a stable, versatile biosensor. The advantages of such a system can be numerous, among which, we recall the possibility to induce the (reversible) DNA mediated aggregation in presence of analytes by monitoring the temperature of the NP solution. Furthermore, by selecting the proper DNA strands, one can tune the interparticle distance, not only controlling the SERS enhancement but also favoring the trapping and sensing of smaller or bigger molecules. Finally, the base-pairing specificity can also be exploited for specific, targeted gene detection. facilities for FESEM measurements.