Spin-mediated charge-to-heat current conversion phenomena, i.e., the anomalous Ettingshausen effect (AEE) and the anisotropic magneto-Peltier effect (AMPE), have been investigated in various ferromagnetic Ni-Fe, Ni-Pt, Ni-Pd, and Fe-Pt binary alloys at room temperature. When a charge current is applied to a ferromagnetic conductor, the AMPE modulates the Peltier coefficient depending on the angle between the directions of the charge current and magnetization, while the AEE generates a heat current in the direction perpendicular to both the charge current and magnetization. We observed the strong material dependence of the thermoelectric conversion coefficients and figures of merit of these phenomena. Among the ferromagnetic alloys used in this study, Ni 95 Pt 5 exhibits the largest AMPE of which the anisotropy of the Peltier coefficient is ~12%. In contrast, the magnitude of the AEE signals is moderate in Ni 95 Pt 5 but largest in Ni 75 Pt 25 and Ni 50 Fe 50 . We discuss these behaviors by exploring the relations between these charge-to-heat current conversion phenomena and other transport as well as magnetic properties. This systematic study will provide a clue for clarifying the mechanisms of the AMPE and AEE and for enhancing the thermoelectric conversion efficiency of these phenomena. The thermoelectric effect refers to the conversion of electricity into heat and vice versa. The conversion of a heat (charge) current into a charge (heat) current in a conductor is called the Seebeck (Peltier) effect In magnetic materials, in addition to the conventional thermoelectric effects, a variety of magnetothermoelectric and thermo-spin phenomena appear owing to the spin degree of freedom, which have been intensively investigated in the field of spin caloritronics The AMPE is the phenomenon that the Peltier coefficient in a ferromagnetic conductor depends on the angle  between the directions of the charge current J c and magnetization M. The  dependence of the Peltier coefficient  in an isotropic ferromagnet is expressed by where  || and   are the Peltier coefficients for the configurations where J c is parallel and perpendicular to M, respectively The AEE refers to the generation of a transverse heat current from a charge current applied to a ferromagnetic conductor and has the following symmetry where j q,AEE ,  AEE , m, and j c denote the heat current density generated by the AEE, anomalous Ettingshausen coefficient, unit vector of M, and charge current density, respectively. Equation (2) means that a heat current is generated through the AEE in the direction perpendicular to both the charge current and magnetization Although the AEE has also been known for a long time In this work, we report the observation of the AMPE and the AEE in various ferromagnetic materials including Ni-Fe, Ni-Pt, Ni-Pd, and Fe-Pt binary alloys at room temperature. To confirm and quantify the behaviors obtained in the AMPE measurements, we also measured the AMSE in these ferromagnets as well as the electrical and thermal conductivities. These measurements allow us to estimate not only the thermoelectric conversion coefficients but also the power factor and figure of merit of these phenomena. Furthermore, the obtained material dependences of the AMPE and the AEE are compared with those of the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) and the anomalous Hall effect (AHE), respectively. This comprehensive study will provide a guideline for clarifying the mechanisms of the AMPE and the AEE and for enhancing thermoelectric conversion efficiency of these phenomena. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we explain the details of the experimental procedure and configuration for the measurements of the AMPE and the AEE using the LIT method. In Sec. III, we report the observation of the AMPE/AMSE and the AEE in various ferromagnets and the quantitative estimation of their thermoelectric conversion properties. In Sec. III, we also compare the material dependence of the AMPE/AMSE (AEE) with that of AMR (AHE). The last Sec. IV is devoted to the conclusion of the present study. In this study, we used the polycrystalline Chemical Laboratory Co.,Ltd., Japan. From the structural characterization using the x-ray diffraction, it was confirmed that all the alloys are disordered. For the measurements of the AMPE and the AEE, the slabs were cut into a U-shaped structure using fully automatic wire electric discharge machining, where the cutting accuracy is ~3 m. The length along the x direction, total width along the z direction, width of the leg parts along the z direction, and thickness of the U-shaped slabs along the y direction are 12.0 mm, 1.0 mm, 0.2 mm, and 0.5 mm, respectively [Fig. We measured the temperature modulation induced by the AMPE and the AEE by means of the LIT method We also found that the tilt angles of the samples and the electromagnet are smaller than 1° for all the LIT measurements, confirming that the variations of the AMPE and AEE signals due to the deviation of the angle between the magnetic field and charge current is negligibly small. Since the AMPE (AEE) exhibits the even (odd) dependence on the H sign [Eqs. ( We also investigated the AMSE of the ferromagnetic metal slabs at room temperature. A temperature gradient T was applied between the ends of the bar-shaped slab by attaching one end of the slab to a chip heater and the other end to a heat bath. We measured the voltage difference V between the ends of the slab with applying H along the temperature gradient; from the H dependence of the thermoelectric voltage, the AMSE contribution can be extracted. Here, the Seebeck coefficient of the slabs at H = 0 kOe was calibrated by using the Seebeck Coefficient/Electric Resistance Measurement System (ZEM-3, ADVANCE RIKO, Inc.), where the electrical conductivity was also measured simultaneously. In addition to the aforementioned magneto-thermoelectric effects, we measured the static magnetic properties and transport coefficients of the ferromagnetic metal slabs systematically. For estimating the AHE (AMR), the transverse (longitudinal) resistivity of the bar-shaped slabs was measured by a four-probe method; the voltage difference along the 0.5 mm (12.0 mm) direction of the slabs was measured with sweeping H from 10 kOe (6 kOe) to 10 kOe (6 kOe) in the 1.0 mm (12.0 mm) direction. the magnetization curve, as shown in the previous work the AMPE (AEE) shows the even (odd) dependence on the direction of the magnetization To separate these two contributions, we extracted the H-odd (H-even) component of the LIT images, which is obtained by subtracting (adding) the raw LIT images at H = 12 kOe from (to) those at H = 12 kOe and dividing the subtracted (added) images by 2. As shown in Fig. These features are consistent with the symmetry of the AEE [Eq. ( Therefore, we obtained the pure AMPE contribution by subtracting the raw LIT images at H = 0 kOe from the The amplitude of the temperature modulation monotonically increases with decreasing f as observed in the previous work where  xx denotes the longitudinal electrical conductivity. As a natural consequence of the relation and the strong material dependence of S, the material dependence of Z AMSE T is further pronounced [Fig. The maximum Z AMSE T value is obtained for Ni 95 Pt 5 ; the estimated value at T = 300 K is 1.0 × 10 -4 . This value is one order of magnitude greater than that of Ni but two orders of magnitude smaller than the figure of merit of the conventional Seebeck effect (Appendix B). Figure However, excess Pt and Pd contents decrease the magnitude of S (Fig. To provide a clue for understanding the origin of the observed material dependence, we examined the relation between the AMSE and the AMR in the ferromagnets. Here, let us remind you that the Seebeck coefficient in a simple metal is given by the Mott relation where k B is the Boltzmann constant, e (> 0) the elementary charge,  xx (ε) the energy ()-dependent electrical conductivity, and ε F the Fermi energy. Based on Eq. ( when S << S  , S  and |     | <<   ,   with  || (  ) being the electrical conductivity for the M || T (M  T) configuration. The first term of Eq. ( Although we performed the systematic measurements on the AMPE/AMSE and related transport properties, it is still difficult to obtain clear strategies to enhance the anisotropy of the Pelteir/Seebeck coefficient and predict its material dependence. Nevertheless, our experiments clearly show the essential role of the anisotropy of the  derivative of the electrical conductivity at  =  F in the AMPE/AMSE. We also found that doping of heavy elements with strong spin-orbit interaction to ferromagnetic metals is effective but the doping amount should not be too much, which was confirmed by the fact that the AMPE/AMSE in our Ni 95 Pt 5 and Ni 95 Pd 5 (Ni 75 Pt 25 and Ni 70 Pd 30 ) samples is greater (smaller) than that in Ni (Fig. where C is the specific heat capacity,  the density, and q,AEE j  the first-harmonic sinusoidal amplitude of the heat current density generated by the AEE 7(b) and 7(c). From the experimental and calculation results, we then estimated the AEE coefficient by using the following equation based on Eq. ( where T = 2A AEE cos AEE and (4/)j c is the sinusoidal amplitude of the charge current density applied to the ferromagnet. In Fig. Among the ferromagnets used in this study, Ni 50 Fe 50 exhibits the largest figure of merit of Z AEE T = 2.8 × 10 -5 at T = 300 K, which is two orders of magnitude greater than that of Ni but comparable to that of Ni 75 Pt 25 . Here, we also note that even the maximum Z AEE T value for the ferromagnetic binary alloys used in this study is one order of magnitude smaller than the record-high values Now we move to discuss the origin of the strong material dependence of the AEE. The AEE coefficient of a ferromagnet can be divided into the following two terms where In contrast, the  II term is expressed as These results suggest that the improvement of  xy is not only the way to enhance the AEE, and that the effective use of the Seebeck effect and the AHE in ferromagnetic metals is also important Finally, we discuss the correlation between the transport coefficients determining the AEE. Since  xy can be dependent on  xy through Eq. ( 11 as shown in Fig. In summary, we systematically investigated the magneto-thermoelectric effects and related transport properties in various ferromagnetic metals including Ni-Fe, Ni-Pt, Ni-Pd, and Fe-Pt binary alloys at room temperature. Based on the experimental results, we estimated the thermoelectric conversion coefficients as well as the figures of merit of the AMPE/AMSE and the AEE quantitatively. The figures of merit of the AMPE/AMSE and the AEE at room temperature are more than two orders of magnitude smaller than those of the conventional Seebeck effect, indicating that one order of magnitude improvement in the thermoelectric conversion coefficients is at least necessary for thermoelectric applications. We observed clear AMPE/AMSE signals in most of the ferromagnetic metals and found that not only the AMR contribution but also the anisotropy of the energy derivative of the electrical conductivity at the Fermi energy is important for the AMPE/AMSE, which provides a clue for obtaining materials with a large AMPE/AMSE coefficient. By measuring the material dependence of the AEE using the ferromagnetic binary alloys, we found a correlation between the anomalous Hall conductivity and the transverse thermoelectric conductivity. Our experimental results also show that the AEE can be enhanced not only by improving the transverse thermoelectric conductivity but also by utilizing the large Seebeck coefficient and the anomalous Hall conductivity. To clarify the microscopic mechanism of the transport coefficients and to determine an appropriate temperature range for the use of the magneto-thermoelectric effects, the temperature dependence of the AMPE/AMSE and the AEE needs to be investigated, while this work focuses only on the room-temperature measurements. Comprehensive material dependence measurements are also important to further improve the thermoelectric performance of the magneto-thermoelectric effects, where combinatorial materials science will be useful System (ZEM-3, ADVANCE RIKO, Inc.). We found that the obtained composition dependence of S xx for the Ni-Fe alloys is consistent with the results shown in Ref. Figures 