We present a theory of superconducting p-n junctions. To this end, we consider a two band model of doped bulk semiconductors with attractive interactions between the charge carriers and derive the superconducting order parameter, the quasiparticle density of states and the chemical potential as a function of the semiconductor gap ∆0 and the doping level ε. We verify previous results for the quantum phase diagram for a system with constant density of states in the conduction and valence band, which show BCS-Superconductor to Bose-Einstein-Condensation (BEC) and BEC to Insulator transitions as function of doping level and the size of the band gap. Then, we extend this formalism to a density of states which is more realistic for 3D systems and derive the corresponding quantum phase diagram, where we find that a BEC phase can only exist for small band gaps ∆0 < ∆ * 0 . For larger band gaps, we find rather a direct transition from an insulator to a BCS phase. Next, we apply this theory to study the properties of superconducting p-n junctions. We derive the spatial variation of the superconducting order parameter along the p-n junction. As the potential difference across the junction leads to energy band bending, we find a spatial crossover between a BCS and BEC condensate, as the density of charge carriers changes across the p-n junction. For the 2D system, we find two possible regimes, when the bulk is in a BCS phase, a BCS-BEC-BCS junction with a single BEC layer in the space charge region, and a BCS-BEC-I-BEC-BCS junction with two layers of BEC condensates separated by an insulating layer. In 3D we find that there can also be a conventional BCS-I-BCS junction for semiconductors with band gaps exceeding ∆ * 0 . Thus, we find that there can be BEC layers in the well controlled setting of doped semiconductors, where the doping level can be varied to change and control the thickness of BEC and insulator layers, making Bose Einstein Condensates thereby possibly accessible to experimental transport and optical studies in solid state materials. The existence of a superconducting state below a critical temperature T c is not restricted to materials which are typical metals at higher temperatures, but can also occur in materials that are known to be semiconductors. The BCS theory of superconductivity, Junctions between p-and n-doped semiconductors form the basic element of semiconductor devices whose rectifying behavior is based on the energy band bending and on the different majority charge carriers, holes and electrons, respectively on either side of the junction. As superconductivity has been observed both in p-and n-doped semiconductors, intriguing questions arise about the physical properties of superconducting p-n junctions Here, we study superconducting p-n junctions within a twoband model, based on a self-consistent solution of the BCS equations, the Poisson equation and the particle number conservation. In the next section, we first review the two-band theory of superconductivity for a constant density of states. Then, we generalize it to a more realistic three-dimensional density of states. We derive the pairing amplitude, the chemical potential, the quasiparticle density of states and the coherence length ξ as functions of the semiconductor band gap ∆ 0 and the doping level ε. We identify the crossover between superconductivity (SC) and Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) and derive the corresponding phase diagram in the ε-∆ 0 parameter space. Based on this model, in section III we derive the properties of a superconducting p-n-junction homojunction (with same parent material on both sides of the junction), in particular the spatial dependence of the order parameter, the quasiparticle excitation energy and the pairing coherence length across the p-n junction. In order to derive the superconducting order parameter ∆ and the chemical potential μ, we need to solve the BCS selfconsistency equation along with the equation for the conservation of particle number N . The particle number conservation at T = 0 gives 12 : where ρ(ξ k ) is the density of states, is the quasiparticle energy. ε F is the Fermi energy at T = 0K. At T = 0, there are no thermally excited charge carriers. Doping introduces additional electrons or holes. However, in the dilute doping limit, electrons and holes are trapped at low temperature by the donor and acceptor atoms, respectively. As the concentration of donor atoms N D or acceptor atoms N A increases, their eigenstates hybridize and eventually delocalize into impurity bands, which at larger doping concentrations merge with the conduction or valence band, respectively. Here, we model the doping in a simplified way by a continuous variation of the Fermi energy, for donor doping by ε F = E C + ε n and for acceptor doping by ε F = E V -ε p (see Fig. p . The BCS weak coupling theory gives for T = 0K the selfconsistency equation for the order parameter ∆, where U is the attractive interaction strength, and 2ω D is the size of the typical energy window around the chemical potential μ where the effective interaction is attractive. Quasiparticle density of states. The quasiparticle density of states is defined by where E is the quasiparticle excitation energy relative to the chemical potential μ, and ĜE is the quasiparticle propagator. Noting that in the presence of the pairing gap ∆, the propagator is given by When the chemical potential is within a band, e.g. in the conduction band, ∆ 0 < μ < D, the quasiparticle density of states N (E) diverges at E = ±∆, the coherence peak, and is zero for smaller energies, so that ∆ is the quasiparticle gap (see Fig. There is a crossover from BCS superconductivity to Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) as the concentration of charges carriers is lowered by decreasing the doping level ε. ( Here, g(r) is the pair correlation function in the ground state, defined by where |ψ is the BCS trial ground state given by Here c + kα are the fermion creation operators in a state with momentum k and spin α = ±. |0 is the vacuum state, and The electron field operators are given by ψ + α (r) = k e ıkr c + kα . Thereby we find We will calculate ξ below for the two-band model explicitly. Let us first review the theory for the two-band model with a constant density of states ρ in both the valence and the conduction band, separated by an energy gap 2∆ 0 as shown in Fig. which gives For the limiting case of a gapless, metallic system, i.e., ∆ 0 = 0, we can express the interaction factor ρU in terms of the superconducting order parameter ∆ m via and rewrite Eq. ( FIG. Particle conservation in the doped semiconductor implies that the number of particles does not change as superconductivity sets in. Therefore, we need to ensure the equality between the number of particles in the normal and in the superconducting state: For an n-doped semiconductor, electrons are released into the conduction band by donor atoms. We model this by adding an extra number of electrons δN , which for a constant density of states in the conduction band can be written as δN = 2ρε. Here, ε = ε F -∆ 0 is the Fermi energy measured from the conduction band edge ∆ 0 . Here, 2D represents the total bandwidth of the semiconductor. For large D + μ ∆ and D -μ ∆, integration gives Eqs. ( As mentioned above, there is a crossover to BEC at low concentration of charge carriers. This can be seen by the fact that as the paring sets in, the chemical potential μ drops below the conduction band edge even when it has been in the conduction band before, see Fig. where ) . For μ > ∆ 0 we recover the BCS coherence length ξ given by ξ 2 = μ-∆0 4m∆ 2 . . We note that while this defines the smallest size of the bound pair in this simple twoband model with band gap 2∆ 0 , the actual size of the bound FIG. Thereby, the quantum phase diagram in the parameter space of doping ε versus ∆ 0 , see Fig. , where m c/v is the effective mass in the conduction/valence band, respectively. We assume m c = m v in the following. As outlined in the Appendix the BCS equation yields then, assuming that ω D is a large energy scale, Eq. A4 and the particle conservation yields Eqs. A3. This defines the set of equations that model the three-dimensional BCS superconducting semiconductors yielding the order parameter ∆ and the chemical potential μ. We solve these equations numerically to obtain the superconducting order parameter ∆, Fig. Having derived the superconducting order parameter ∆ and chemical potential μ as functions of the semiconductor gap ∆ 0 and the doping level ε, we can study the effect of pairing on the properties of p-n junctions in the presence of an attractive interaction U . For doping levels ε n,p the potential drop across a conventional p-n junction is given by The charge density drops in the depletion region which has on the n-side a width d n and on the p-side the depletion width d p . Using Poisson's equation, d 2 φ dx 2 = (x)/ , where (x) is the charge density and is the dielectric constant, one finds in the depletion approximation, which assumes, when solving the Poisson equation, that there are no charge carriers in the depletion region, Here, the depletion lengths in the n, p regions are respectively given by d n/p = (N A/D /N D/A ∆φ/(2πe(N D + N A ))) 1/2 , where is the bulk dielectric constant of the semiconductor. For a given energy gap of the semiconductor ∆ 0 , we thus obtain the spatial variation of the conduction and valence band edges across the p-n junction, as plotted in Fig. As we consider the p-n junction without an external bias, the chemical potential μ remains independent of the position x across the junction, μ = 0 (blue line in Fig. Turning on superconductivity takes charge carriers into the condensate, changing the electrochemical energy on both sides of the junction by an amount which equals the superconducting binding energy. Thereby, the potential energy drops across the p-n junction in the presence of superconductivity by an amount given by e ∆φ S = eφ S (x where the parameters ∆ 0 , ε, ∆ m are the semiconductor band gap, the doping level and the superconducting order parameter in the metallic limit, as defined above. This change of the potential drop changes the spatial dependence of the potential φ S (x), accordingly, resulting in the new spatial variation of the band edges, In depletion approximation this yields with the depletion width reduced to The spatial variation of ∆(x) at junctions can be derived from the Gorkov equations, Therefore, to get the spatial variation of ∆(x) on length scale d along the length of the p-n junction for different values of ∆ 0 and ε, we can in a first, local density approximation, insert μ em (x) as given by Eq. ( 1. BCS-BEC-BCS junction: For ∆ 0 < ∆ m /2 the order parameter ∆(x) decreases in the space charge region, but remains finite with a minimum in the middle of the pn-junction, as shown in Fig. 2. BCS-BEC-I-BEC-BCS junction: For ∆ 0 > ∆ m /2 the order parameter ∆(x) is found to decrease in the space charge region to 0 , as shown in Fig. ), separated by an insulating layer, where ∆ = 0. The quasiparticle excitation gap ∆(x) remains finite throughout the pnjunction, decreasing first as the order parameter ∆(x) decreases, reaching a minimum at the boundary between the BEC and the insulator phase and increasing again in the insulator layer, as the chemical potential moves in the middle of the semiconductor band gap. Interestingly, the coherence length, as approximated with Eq. ( p-n junction of 3D systems. In the 3D systems we find, when the bulk is in the BCS phase, a BEC layer at the pnjunction occurs only for sufficiently small semiconductor gaps ∆ 0 < ∆ * 0 . Thus, we find in 3D three different kinds of superconducting p-n junctions, when the bulk is in the BCS phase: 1. BCS-BEC-BCS junction: For small semiconductor gaps ∆ 0 < ∆ 0c == 0.29∆ m the order parameter ∆(x) decreases in the space charge region, but remains finite with a minimum in the middle of the pn-junction, as shown in Fig. 2. BCS-BEC-I-BEC-BCS junction: For large semiconductor band gaps ∆ 0 > ∆ 0c == 0.29∆ m the order parameter ∆(x) decreases in the space charge region to 0 , as shown in Fig. 3. BCS-I-BCS junction: For still larger semiconductor band gaps, ∆ 0 > ∆ * 0 == 0.5∆ m , there is no BEC layer anymore, the order parameter ∆(x) decreases to zero as the chemical potential reaches the band edge, as shown in Fig. Thus, we have shown that in superconducting pn-junctions there can appear layers of BEC condensates even when the bulk is in the BCS state. This opens the possibility to create layers of BEC and study their properties in the well controlled setting of doped semiconductors, where the doping level can be varied to change and control the thickness of BEC and insulator layers. The BEC condensate can be detected by scanning tunneling microscopy, where instead of the sharp coherence peaks in the BCS phase, a maximum in the tunneling density of states in the band which is closest to the chemical potential, is expected, as plotted in Fig. Moreover, attaching sufficiently small leads in lateral direction, the superconducting pn-junction may enable one to study the transport properties of the BEC layers directly. As qualitatively outlined in Ref. 23, the superconductor critical current I c is expected to be still dominated by the bulk superconducting order parameter ∆ and the normal small voltage resistance of the pn-junction R n , as in a conventional Josephson contact, yielding for identical ∆ on both sides of the junction I c R n = π∆/(2e). The presence of a BEC layer might modify that product due to the spatial variation of the order parameter, and the quasiparticle exciation gap, see Figs. For a conventional semiconductor with = 10, ∆Φ = 1V and N D = N A = 10 18 cm -3 , the depletion width is d ≈ 50nm, The theory can be extended to hetero-junctions with two different host materials with different band gaps on the n-and p-doped side of the junctions, resulting in band discontinuities at the junction to study what effect this has on the existence of a BEC layer. The I(V ) characteristics of superconducting pn junctions has been discussed qualitatively in Ref. 23. We leave it for future work to extend our theory to include a potential difference and thereby allow a quantitative derivation of current voltage characteristics, and to study what consequence BEClayers have for the I(V)-characteristics. Recently, Josephson junctions in the BCS-BEC crossover range have been reviewed in Ref.33 by solving the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes equations for this problem. These authors did not discuss the appearance of a BEC layer at the junction when the bulk is in the BCS phase. However, we expect, that, since the carrier concentration is reduced in the vicinity of an oxide layer, a BEC layer may also appear at such BCS-Josephson junctions with an oxide layer, a question we leave for future research. An extension of the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes equations, 3233 to the 2-band model and its application to the superconducting p-n junctions will lead also further insights into the spatial variation of the order parameter, when solved self consistently with the Poisson equation. This calculation, where the condensation amplitude as well as the charge redistribution are self-consistently computed can be performed within the tight binding framework. In our study we have assumed zero temperature T = 0K, and it remains to be extended to finite temperatures T . Furthermore, while our study employs the mean field approximation of the many body physics, the effect of fluctuations of the order parameter amplitude and phase need to be included to get a better understanding of the stability of the long range order at finite temperature and in the thin film, 2D limit, We follow the approach by Pistolesi 26 to rewrite Eqs. A1 and A2 in terms of elliptical integrals and obtain for the equation ensuring particle conservation where σ 1 = 1, σ 2 = -1 and Here, F (φ, k) are E(φ, k) the incomplete elliptic integral of the first and second kind, respectively. The pairing equation becomes We denote the metallic limit by ∆(∆ 0 = 0) = ∆ m , as defined by Eq. (A4), when substituting there ∆ 0 = 0, ∆ by ∆ m and λ i by λ 1 = λ i | ∆0=0,∆=∆m and Since we assume that the local attraction U between the fermions does not depend on ∆ 0 , we can equate the right hand side of Eq. A4 with finite ∆ 0 to the one obtained in the metallic limit. This equation gives together with Eqs. A3 the new set of equations that model the three-dimensional BCS superconducting semiconductors.