We calculate the lattice-driven in-plane (κ ) and out-of-plane (κ ⊥ ) thermal conductivities of Bi2Se3 bulk, and of films of different thicknesses, using the Boltzmann equation with phonon scattering times obtained from anharmonic third order density functional perturbation theory. We compare our results for the lattice component of the thermal conductivity with published data for κ on bulk samples and with our room-temperature thermoreflectance measurements of κ ⊥ on films of thickness (L) ranging from 18 nm to 191 nm, where the lattice component has been extracted via the Wiedemann-Franz law. Ab-initio theoretical calculations on bulk samples, including an effective model to account for finite sample thickness and defect scattering, compare favorably both for the bulk case (from literature) and thin films (new measurements). In the low-T limit the theoretical in-plane lattice thermal conductivity of bulk Bi2Se3 agrees with previous measurements by assuming the occurrence of intercalated Bi2 layer defects. The measured thermal conductivity monotonically decreases by reducing L, its value is κ ⊥ ≈ 0.39 ± 0.08 W/m•K for L = 18 nm and κ ⊥ = 0.68 ± 0.14 W/m•K for L = 191 nm. We show that the decrease of room-temperature κ ⊥ in Bi2Se3 thin films as a function of sample thickness can be explained by the incoherent scattering of out-of-plane momentum phonons with the film surface. Our work outlines the crucial role of sample thinning in reducing the out-of-plane thermal conductivity. While the thermoelectric properties of Bi 2 Te 3 have been widely studied both for bulk and thin films Bi 2 Se 3 , similarly to Bi 2 Te 3 , has a lamellar structure, consisting of sheets of covalently bonded Se-Bi-Se-Bi-Se atoms that are held together by weak interlayer van-der-Waals bonds. This highly anisotropic crystal struc-ture is reflected in anisotropic thermal and electrical conductivity. Thermal conductivity of bulk Bi 2 Se 3 has been measured by several authors. Navratil and coworkers There is a certain variance in experimental values of κ: in Ref. 5 and for p-doped samples, the in-plane conductivity was found to be of the order of 1.25 (W/m•K), however the lattice contribution was not extracted. The room-temperature total lattice and electronic conductivity were also estimated in Ref. 6 and found to be 2.83 W/m•K and 1.48 W/m•K, respectively. More recently, the total in-plane thermal conductivity was estimated to be 3.5 W/m•K. In Sec. III we review and extend the theory of phonon-driven thermal transport in finite crystals. We report in Sec. IV A the computational details, in Sec. IV B the crystal geometry, and in Sec. IV C we compute the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity via the Franz-Wiedemann law. In Sec. V we present our results on electronic structure (Sec. V A), phonon dispersion (Sec. V B), bulk thermal conductivity (Sec. V C) and thin films (Sec. V D). Thermal properties of thin films may be obtained at room temperature using modulated thermoreflectance microscopy Surface temperature is then affected by heat diffusion carried by thermal waves where d is the sample density and C its specific heat The growth of Bi 2 Se 3 thin films were conducted by Molecular Beam Epitaxy by following the procedure given in Ref. 16. Flat (111)-B GaAs buffer surfaces were prepared in the III-V chamber and subsequently transferred to a second chamber where Bi 2 Se 3 thin films were growen with thicknesses ranging quen om 18 nm up to 190 nm. The crystalline quality, epitaxial in-plane orientation, lattice parameter, crystalline structure of Bi 2 Se 3 films were verified by reflection high-energy electron diffraction and x-ray diffraction. Surfaces are very flat ( ∼ 5 nm rms roughness) and mirrorlike facilitating the reflectivity measurements. Possible scattering mechanisms in a slabshaped crystal. 1) Normal momentum-conserving scattering (does not limit thermal transport). 2) Umklapp scattering. Absorption by: 3) point defects or isotopic disorder, or 4) rough "black" surface, with black-body emission to maintain thermal equilibrium. 5) Reflection by a rough "white" surface. 6) Reflection by a smooth surface. 7) Transmission through an intercalated surface. The behaviour of lattice-driven thermal conductivity as a function of temperature has a typical shape which is mostly independent of the material : at high temperature it decreases as 1/T , at lower temperature it has a maximum, then going towards zero temperature it decreases sharply to a finite value. The behavior of the lattice thermal conductivity at high temperature is determined by the anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions With the arrival of more powerful numerical techniques, it has become more effective to model the surface at the phonon level, as a scattering probability. The probability of scattering from the boundaries can be combined with the probability of scattering due to phonon-phonon interaction in accordance with Matthiessen's rule. In Fig. In order to describe the interface, we introduce three dimensionless parameters: the absorption fraction f a , the reflection fraction f r and the transmission f t , these are the probabilities that a phonon will undergo process ( In the single mode approximation (SMA) the thermal conductivity matrix is: Where j is a composite index running over the phonon wavevectors q in reciprocal space and the phonon bands ν; N 0 are the number of q-points used to sample the Brillouin zone, Ω is the unit-cell volume, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is temperature. Inside the sum, the composite index j stands for the band index ν and the wavevector q; then ω j = ω ν (q) is the phonon frequency, v j = ∇ q ω ν (q) is the phonon group velocity; α and β are cartesian directions (x, y, z) n j = n(ω ν (q)) is the Bose-Einstein distribution and τ j is the phonon relaxation time, or inverse full-width half-maximum The SMA is accurate when umklapp or dissipative scattering is dominant over "normal" and elastic scattering, we have checked that this is always the case in Bi 2 Se 3 above 1 K: above this temperature the exact solution of the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) In order to progress further we have to take into account the real geometry of our sample. In this paper we will consider two cases: (i) a thin film of Bi 2 Se 3 of thickness L along direction z and virtually infinite in the other two directions with two very rough opposing surfaces; (ii) bulk Bi 2 Se 3 intercalated with partial planes of Bi 2 , which is a common kind of crystal defect, In case (i) we consider a phonon emitted from a surface that moves toward the opposite surface with a z component of its group velocity v z . After a time L/v z , the phonon will reach the other surface and be absorbed with probability f a , giving the first phonon scattering rate γ (1) a and the relaxation time (τ , the phonon will be reflected back toward the initial surface with identical speed and it will undergo a second absorption/reflection process. The probability of a third reflection is f 2 r , for the nth reflection is is f . After summing the geometric series, the total effective lifetime is: For boundary scattering, f a = 1 -f r conveniently cancels out giving τ a = L vz , but we prefer to leave eq. 3 in a general form to consider more general cases. Furthermore, if a phonon is reflected, its velocity component that is orthogonal to the surface will be inverted. We can account for this possibility in eq. 2 renormalizing v z in the following way: a fraction f r of the phonons will change the sign of v z , a fraction of them will hit the opposite boundary, be reflected a second time and change sign again, and so on. The material is traversed in a "flying" time τ f = L/v z . During this time phonons are scattered at a rate P x = τ /τ f , resetting the process. With τ being its total (intrinsic and extrinsic) relaxation time. This can be expressed as: Again, we do not replace τ f with 1-τ a because we want to keep this equation as general as possible. In case (ii), a bulk material intercalated with planes, the reasoning is very similar, with the caveat that 1 -f a = f r + f t , although for an atom-thin intercalated layer we can safely assume that f r is almost zero. The final formula for κ becomes: With ṽ from eq. 4, and τ comprises all the scattering terms, summed with the Matthiessen's rule: where additional scattering terms like pointdefect scattering, can be added. In the case of Bi 2 Se 3 we will see in Sec. V D the impact that internally reflected phonon have on the conductivity. We also underline that while our samples are not free-standing in the experiment, we assume that, on the time-scale of the measurements, the transmission of heat from Bi 2 Se 3 to the GaAs substrate can be ignored. A. Computational method All calculations have been performed using the Quantum-ESPRESSO suite of codes We used the generalized gradient approximation with the PBE 37 parametrization. We employed norm-conserving pseudopotentials from the SG15-ONCV library We used a kinetic energy cutoff of 40 Ry for the plane wave basis set, and we integrated the electronic states of the Brillouin zone (BZ) using a regular Monkhorst-Pack grid of 8×8×8 k-points, except when computing the effective charges and static dielectric constant via linear response, which only converged with a much finer grid of 32 × 32 × 32 points. The phonon-phonon interaction was integrated using a very fine grid of 31 × 31 × 31 q-points, when computing the linewidth along high-symmetry direction or the phonon spectral weight. A coarser grid of 19 × 19 × 19 points was used when computing the thermal conductivity. The SMA thermal Boltzmann equation was itself integrated over a grid 19 × 19 × 19 q-points. All the grids in this paragraph were shifted by a random amount in order to improve convergence avoiding symmetry-equivalent points. The finite size effects of section III C where included in the calculation of κ using an in-house Octave 42 code available upon request. Bi 2 Se 3 belongs to the tetradymite-type crystal with a rhombohedral structure (point group R 3m, Wyckoff number 166). In the rhombohedral unit cell there are three Se and two Bi atoms. One Se atom is at the (1a) site (0, 0, 0), the remaining Se and Bi atoms are at the two-fold (2c) sites of coordinates (u, u, u) and (-u, -u, -u), with one free parameter for each species, which we indicate as u Se and u Bi respectively. Structural parameters obtained from experimental measurement and from abinitio simulations are shown in Tab. I. Both the scalar relativistic and the fully relativistic PBE calculations give substantially expanded structures, both in a and c, as is customary in this approximation. As the electronic band gap is quite sensitive to the geometry, we also calculated the bandgap for the experimental volume. In all fully relativistic calculations the gap is substantially overestimated, in agreement with previous theoretical calculations. Bi 2 Se 3 thin films measured here had thicknesses between 18 nm and 191 nm. The stack of 2 Bi and 3 Se atoms (one Q-layer) is 0.984 nm thick, which means that even for the thinnest slab we have 18 or 19 Q-layers. Commercially available bulk Bi 2 Se 3 samples, and our epitaxial Bi 2 Se 3 thin film samples, are always doped to a certain extent by the presence of vacancies and imperfect stoichiometry. For this reason, even if the perfect material is a small gap insulator, we expect to measure a certain amount of electron/hole driven thermal and electric transport. Although there is no simple way to isolate the electronic contribution to thermal transport (k e ), we can estimate it from electric conductivity. Mobility (μ), doping and electrical resistivity (ρ ) of most of the thin films have been measured by conventional Hall bar measurements performed in the plane perpendicular to the trigonal axis, c, of Bi 2 Se 3 thin films. It turns out that, at 300 K our thin films are n-doped and present a metallic behavior with a carrier concentration between 1 -2 • 10 19 cm -3 , μ ∼ 300 -400 cm 2 /V•s and ρ ∼ 1-1.5 mΩ•cm. A coarse evaluation of the electronic contribution to the in-plane thermal conductivity, k e, , can be given by using the Wiedemann-Franz law k e, = LT /ρ , with L ranging between 2 and 2.2 • 10 -8 V 2 K -2 . Concerning the out-of-plane resistivity term, ρ ⊥ , a rough estimation can be given by ρ ⊥ ∼ 3.5ρ since such a ratio is found in bulk Bi 2 Se 3 47 leading to k e,⊥ between 0.1 -0.2 W/m•K. It is worthwhile to underline that ρ measurements performed in very thin Bi 2 Se 3 samples (9 QL) give a slight lowering of the resistivity (0.7 m 2 •cm), which may be caused by k e,⊥ slightly increasing at very low thickness. A. Electronic structure Before delving in the calculation of the vibrational properties, we have taken care to verify that the approximations used to deal with the ab-initio problem are valid. A few potential difficulties have to be accounted for: the first is that Bi 2 Se 3 is a small gap semiconductor, special care is needed in order to prevent the gap from closing. The gap magnitude depends both on the kind of local-or semi-localexchange and correlation kernels and on the 2. Calculated electronic band structure of bulk Bi2Se3. In the first row: using each method's respective calculated theoretical lattice parameter; second row: experimental lattice parameter. First column: scalar relativistic (SR), second column: fully relativistic (SOC), third column: comparison SR/SOC close to the Fermi energy. lattice geometry used. In any case, the Kohn-Sham single particle gap is not guaranteed to be correct, as it is not a ground-state property. However, if its character is different from the experimental one it can indicate that the employed approximation is non appropriate. The optical gap has been measured experimentally as being direct and 200 ± 5 meV wide Another difficulty is treating the inter-layer Van der Waals bond; the inter-layer distances are usually over-estimated by standard local density approaches. However it is possible to improve the agreement with experiment of vibrational frequencies using the experimental lattice parameters. For this reason, we have simulated the electronic structure using both the experimentally measured lattice parameter and the theoretically calculated values. In both cases we optimize the internal degrees of freedom to avoid unstable phonons. In Fig. The phonon dispersion does not change dramatically with the different choices of SOC treatment, however we do observe a global, relatively constant, rescaling of the frequencies which can be associated with the difference in the unit cell volume. When not including SOC, if the theoretical lattice parameter is used, the phonon dispersion exhibits negative frequencies. However, when using the experimental lattice parameters, which correspond to a 5% smaller unit cell volume, this insta- , showing how the effect of the lattice parameter. We plot four cases: at experimental lattice parameter without SOC (black solid) and with SOC (blue dash); at the relaxed theoretical lattice parameter: without SOC (green dot) and with SOC (orange dash-dot) bility is removed. Furthermore, if SOC is included, both theoretical and experimental lattice parameters yield stable phonons, as long as the internal degrees of freedom are properly relaxed. Because inter-planes binding is mediated by Van der Waals forces, which usually leads to an over-estimation of the bond length in the PBE approximation, we expect that the modes changing the inter-layer dis-tance will be too soft. For this reason, we show in Fig. We have compared the phonon frequencies at the Γ point with available data from infrared and Raman spectroscopy, in order to establish which method gives a closer match to the phonon frequencies. These comparisons are summarized in table II. We note that using the experimental lattice parameter gives a consistently better match for the Raman active modes than using the theoretical one, hence we will focus on the former. The SR calculations slightly under-estimate the phonon frequencies, while with the inclusion of SOC the theoretical frequencies tend to over-estimate the measured ones. SOC is more accurate for the highest optical bands, but less so for the low-energy bands; as the latter are more important for thermal transport, due to the Bose-Einstein factor of eq. 2, we expect that not including SOC may give a better match for the value of κ. We verified that our calculations at the theoretical lattice parameter agree with those of Ref. 48. Even high-quality Bi 2 Se 3 single crystals are doped by a relatively large amount (10 18 -10 19 e/cm 3 ) of lattice defects. Below we will see that this doping has no significant effect on the electronic structure nor on the geometry of the crystal, but it is sufficient to effectively screen long-range/small-wavevector splitting of longitudinal and transverse optical modes (LO-TO splitting). In figure jumps to 130 cm -1 when long-range effects are included. When coming from the [111] direction itself, along the Γ-T line, the two modes remain degenerate, because the q wavevector is parallel to the polarisation. Ref. Wonlinee have initially studied the phonon-driven thermal conductivity in the bulk phase as experimental data are available with good precision over a wide range of tem- In plane (i.e. orthogonal to c axis) κ measured by Navratil 3 (rounds) compared to simulations including the effect of Se vacancies (left) and Bi2 layers intercalations (right) defects on κ, excess Bi2 is expressed as average inter-plane distance and as ppm. The behavior at very low temperature (i.e. below 2 K) is not shown as it could suffer from the finite k-point mesh used in the calculations, due to the difficulty of converging the conductivity in the zero temperature limit . perature. In particular we have taken as reference the data of Navratil and coworkers In Fig. On the other hand, if we assume the presence of Bi 2 partial layers, we can include it in the simulation using Sparavigna-Casimir scattering theory, i.e. using an effective model that includes a scattering time which is proportional to the ratio between the phonon mean free path and the sample size. We tuned the average inter-defect distance to fit the temperature of maximum κ, around 10 K. The theoretical position of the maximum is a better fitting parameter than its absolute value, as the latter is very difficult to converge at low temperature in simulations. Notwithstanding that, the calculation reproduces the absolute value quite well, which strengthens the validity of our assumption. In Fig We note that the effect of Selenium vacancies and Bismuth partial layer intercalation is qualitatively different: a increasing concentration of Selenium vacancies causes a global reduction of κ, on the other hand increasing the frequency of Bismuth partial layer intercalation moves the maximum of κ toward higher temperatures, without changing its high-T value. If we combine the two types of defects, we observe that Selenium vacancies have virtually no effect until their concentration is greater than 100ppm, after which scattering from vacancies lead to a considerable reduction in κ at higher T. As a consequence, the best match remains a concentration of around 100 ppm Bismuth partial layer intercalation with 100 ppm or less Selenium vacancy. This is compatible with the high n-type concentration ( 10 19 cm -3 ) of the bulk material measured. Thermoreflectance measurements provide the total out-of-plane (κ ⊥ ) thermal conductivity which is the sum of the electronic and lattice contributions. As described in section IV C, we estimate the lattice contribution after measuring the in-plane electronic conductivity in thin films and estimating the outof-plane electronic conductivity from the measured conductance anisotropy of bulk Bi 2 Se 3 . Transport measurements performed attest that our thin films are n doped and present a metallic behavior with a carrier's concentration bracketed by 1 -2 × 10 19 cm -3 , μ ∼ 300 -400 cm 2 /V•s and ρ ∼ 1 -1.15 mΩ•cm at room temperature. Thus a coarse evaluation of the electronic contribution to the in-plane conductivity k el, can be given using the Wiedmann-Franz law k el, = LT/ρ with L the Lorentz number, ranging between 2 and 2.2 × 10 -8 V 2 K -2 . Consequently k el, is bracketed between 0.4 -0.7 W/m•K. In table III we report the measured values for the total and lattice thermal conduc-tivity, obtained by subtraction the estimated electronic contribution. In Fig. We have also tested the approach of Ref. 51 (red lines of Fig. We calculate the phonon-component inplane (κ ) and out-of-plane (κ ⊥ ) thermal conductivity of Bi 2 Se 3 bulk and films with different thicknesses by using the Boltzmann equation with phonon scattering times obtained from anharmonic third order density functional perturbation theory. Our results agree with existing measurements on bulk samples The calculated thermal conductivity of bulk Bi 2 Se 3 is in excellent agreement with the experimental data of Ref.3 at all temperatures. While the high temperature limit (e. g. room temperature) is essentially determined by the intrinsic thermal conductivity, the low temperature regime, in the past attributed to Se vacancy, can be very well accounted for by assuming ≈ 100 ppm Bismuth insertion and ≈ 100 ppm of Se vacancies. In contrast, Se vacancies alone do not explain the low-T behaviour of the conductivity. In thin films, we find that the thermal conductivity measured at room temperature, monotonically decreases with reducing film thickness L. We can attribute this reduction to incoherent scattering of out-of-plane momentum phonons with the film upper and lower surfaces. Our work outlines the crucial role of sample thinning in reducing the out-of-plane thermal conductivity. MC acknowledges support from the European Graphene Flagship Core 2 grant number 785219. Computer facilities were provided by CINES, CCRT and IDRIS (projects 907320 and 901202). MM and DF thank Haneen Sameer Abushammala and Heba Hamdan for assistance at the very beginning of thermoreflectance experiments. b Indirect/direct gap.