ZrNiSn and related half Heusler compounds are candidate materials for efficient thermoelectric energy conversion with a reported thermoelectric figure-of-merit of n-type ZrNiSn exceeding unity. Progress on p-type materials has been more limited, which has been attributed to the presence of an impurity band, possibly related to the presence of Ni interstitials in nominally vacant 4d position. The specific energetic position of this band, however, has not been resolved. Here, we report results of a concerted theory-experiment investigation for a nominally undoped ZrNiSn, based on measurements of electrical resistivity, Hall coefficient, Seebeck coefficient and Nernst coefficient, measured in a temperature range from 80 to 420 K. The results are analyzed with a semi-analytical model combining a density functional theory (DFT) description for ideal ZrNiSn, with a simple analytical correction for the impurity band. The model provides a good quantitative agreement with experiment, describing all salient features in the full temperature span for the Hall, conductivity, and Seebeck measurements, while also reproducing key trends in the Nernst results. This comparison pinpoints the impurity band edge to 40 meV below the conduction band edge, which agrees well with a separate DFT study of a supercell containing Ni interstitials. Moreover, we corroborate our result with a separate study of ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 sample showing similar agreement with an impurity band edge shifted to 32 meV below the conduction band. Materials which combine environmental abundance and low toxicity with good thermoelectric properties are as rare as they are sought after. Notable exceptions are the half Heusler compounds XNiSn and XCoSb with (X = Hf, Zr, Ti), which combine good thermoelectric performance for n-doped samples with chemical stability in the mid to high temperature range from 400 to 900 K. Instead of Ni interstitials, there are other possible scenarios for the formation of in-gap states and -if the density is high enough -their hybridization into an impurity band: Structural defects like dislocations or other types of atomic disorder, as for example anti-site defects between the Zr and Sn sublattice, all break the periodicity of the crystal and can modify the band structure. Indeed, an early study on ZrNiSn reported a high concentration of Zr/Sn anti-site defects of 30 %, In this paper, we investigated the electronic transport properties of ZrNiSn and the closely related ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 by measuring the resistivity, the Seebeck coefficient, Hall coefficient and Nernst coefficient. Substituting Sn by Pb was recently proposed as an efficient way to reduce the thermal conductivity, avoiding expensive Hf. Two samples with nominal composition, ZrNiSn and ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 , were prepared via an arc-melting, crushing, annealing, and sintering routine, as described in Ref. 26: Stoichiometric amounts of metallic pieces of Zr, Ni, and Sn (purity 99.9 wt.% or higher) were arcmelted in a Ti-gettered Argon-atmosphere. Samples were turned and remelted several times to increase homogeneity. Resulting samples were crushed and ball-milled in an argon atmosphere. For the ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 sample, pieces of Pb were then added to the powder. The two mixtures were then annealed in vacuum-closed silica ampoules for 40 days at 1123 K. The resulting samples were ballmilled a second time and then sintered at 1273 K for 10 min under an uniaxial pressure of 60 MPa using an in-house made hot-press. Phase composition and microstructural properties were screened during synthesis using X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. For ZrNiSn, we obtained a homogeneous, single phase pellet with an almost stoichiometric composition, as characterized with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). The ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 sample phase separated into two main phases, both with a half Heusler symmetry and a chemical composition of ZrNiSn 0.88 Pb 0.12 and ZrNiSn 0.94 Pb 0.06 by EDS, Figs. S1-S4. Additional annealing did not significantly modify sample homogeniety. The electrical resistivity and the Hall and Seebeck coefficient of the polycrystalline samples were measured from 80 to 420 K using a steady-state four point heaterand-sink method. The DFT calculations made use of the VASP The electronic properties of ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 was modeled with an expanded lattice parameter of 6.0786 Å, linearly interpolating the relaxed unit cells of ZrNiSn (a = 6.0702 Å) and ZrNiPb (a = 6.1514 Å), adapting the same procedure as Bhattacharya et al.. Fig. The experimental data shows the following salient features: Vanishing α at low temperature (1b): This is consistent with Fermi level pinning within the impurity band, i.e. a characteristic of a partly occupied impurity band. A broad miminum in α (1b): The absolute value of the Seebeck coefficient increases with increasing temperature until it reaches a broad maximum around 400 K. Such results are usually associated with the onset of bipolar conduction, but could also arise from increased carrier concentrations in the conduction band. A minimum in R H (1c): An unusual decrease of |R H | with decreasing temperature has also been observed earlier for XNiSn compounds. where n 1(2) and μ 1(2) are, respectively, the concentration and mobility of charge carriers in band 1 (2). The plus sign is used if the conduction in both bands is of the same type (electrons or holes) and the mignus sign for the opposite case. Assuming μ 1 >> μ 2 -which would generally be the case for an impurity bands -R H has a minimum at In the following, we describe the model used to analyze our experimental results. Our model combines a DFT description of the valence and conduction band of ZrNiSn with a rougher analytical description of the impurity band. The reason for using DFT for the these bands is that it automatically includes band degeneracies and non-parabolicity without the need for additional empirical parameters, such as an effective conduction band mass. The transport properties are calculated in the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE). where σ, α, R H are the electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, and Hall coefficient. The contributions to the density of states g 0 (ǫ) and transport spectral function Σ 0 (E) for valence and conduction band states were computed using the BoltzTraP package. In our model, we neglect broadening of the impurity band, so that the full DOS is approximated by g(E) = g 0 (E)+N p δ(E -E p ), where N p is the impurity band density and E p is the energetic position of the impurity band, and correspondingly for the full transport spectral function, Σ(ǫ) = Σ 0 (ǫ) + eN p μ p δ(ǫ -E p ) . This expression can account for the possibility of transport in the impurity band channel, where μ p is the impurity band mobility. In terms of the description of valence and conduction bands In the full model, the conductivity is given by and the corresponding generalization of Eq. ( Finally, the full Hall coefficient is given by Key approximations in this model, is the use of i) a fixed temperature-independent relaxation time for the conduction and valcence band, ii) a fixed temperatureindependent mobility for the impurity band, iii) vanishing bandwidth for the impurity band. Clearly, these are coarse approximations, but that are chosen to keep the number of adjustable parameters to a minimum. The lack of bandwidth should also be viewed as only describing the upper part of the impurity band, which is the only part that is critical to include in the model: Once a sufficient number of the electrons originating in the impurity band has been excited to the conduction band, the transport is in any case dominated by conduction band transport, and the exact value of the impurity band mobility is less critical for the the overall transport properties. By the same reasoning, and as a numerical convenience to limit the number of adjustable parameters, we will assume that the conductive impurity band channel is half filled at T = 0 K. The lack of full occupancy is attributed to acceptor levels located deep in the band gap and not contributing to the transport properties. The essential mechanism of half-filling is to prevent a fully occupied impurity band even at the lowest temperatures. A shortcoming of the model, is that it can not describe additional band filling of the conduction band once the upper part of the conduction band is emptied. We therefore also explored models using a second electron reservoir with N res states located at E res . For ZrNiSn, we found no appreciable improvement of the fit with an extra reservoir band, so we set N res = 0, as one p-channel impurity band was sufficient to quantitatively describe the measured thermoelectric transport properties. In the case of the ZrNiSn 0.9 Pb 0.1 sample, on the other hand, which has less states in the p-conductive channel, for the temperature range beyond 300 K, introducing an extra reservoir level located 0.13 eV below the band edge, improved agreement with experimental data. Incidentally, this corresponds to the earlier reported optical gap of ZrNiSn. In addition to ρ, α and R H , we also measured the Nernst coefficient Q of ZrNiSn 1-x Pb x . The Nernst effect is the generation of a transverse electrical field by a longitudinal thermal gradient in the presence of a finite magnetic field B. The Nernst coefficient Q can be expressed by the Hall angle θ H : 47 The Nernst coefficient is sensitive to scattering processes of the electrons contributing to charge transport: For example, for a simple, single band conductor, tan θ H is proportional to the scattering time τ . expressed as: 49 Here, Q i , σ i , α i and R H,i are the Nernst coefficient, the conductivity, the Seebeck coefficient and Hall coefficient of electrons in the ith band. Often, the third, cross-term The band structure of a cubic 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of ZrNiSn (grey) compared to the same supercell with an extra Ni interstial (blue). Upon Ni addition, an impurity band appears close to the conduction band edge. in Eq. ( As discussed in Section I, it is widely accepted that the impurity band in XNiSn compounds is related to the presence of Ni interstitials. Therefore, we have calculated the band structure of a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with one extra Ni occupying the nominally vacant 4d site, corresponding to an average Ni interstitial concentration of ≈ 3 % with results shown in Fig. Previously, Aliev et al. reported a band gap value for ZrNiSn of 190 meV by analysing the high temperature, intrinsic regime of their experimental resistivity data, assuming ρ ∝ exp -E g /2k B T . From the fitted N p values of our model, we can estimate the concentration of Ni interstitials in our samples. If each interstitial Ni atom contributed with four in-gap states (the e g orbitals), the fitted N imp ≈ 20 • 10 19 cm -3 would correspond to a Ni interstitial concentration of ∼ 1 %. This rough estimate compares well with values reported in the literature. For example, the measured curve of the Seebeck coefficient and resistivity for our ZrNiSn sample lies between the data of samples with nominal composition of ZrNiSn and ZrNi 1.01 Sn reported by Romaka et al.. In conclusion, we have shown that the transport properties of nominally undoped ZrNiSn and related compounds show signatures of impurity band conduction. By analyzing experimental results for the electrical resistivity, the Seebeck, Hall and Nernst coefficient with a semianalytical model, we obtain excellent quantitative agreement with an impurity band located 40 meV below the conduction band edge. A possible origin of the impurity band are interstitial Ni atoms, commonly found in these compounds. Our study should motivate further attempts to resolve the discrepancy between optical and transport band gaps, both experimental and theoretical. For example, one possibility is that excitations from the impurity band into the conduction band are optically forbidden or faint. Another explanation could involve different band features in different samples, caused by Ni-interstitial to clustering. 