The magnetic flux periodicity of hc 2e is a well known manifestation of Cooper pairing in typical s-wave superconductors. In this paper we theoretically show that the flux periodicity of a twodimensional second-order topological superconductor, which features zero-energy Majorana modes localized at the corners of the sample, is hc e instead. We further show that the periodicity changes back to hc 2e at the transition to a topologically trivial superconductor, where the Majorana modes hybridize with the bulk states, demonstrating that the doubling of periodicity is a manifestation of the non-trivial topology of the state. Topological insulators and superconductors are examples of symmetry-protected topological phases (SPTs) which feature a gapped bulk spectrum with gapless modes localized at the boundaries Higher order topological insulators are best understood in the framework of the dipole moment theory of SPTs Second order topological superconductors, in analogy with higher order topological insulators, can be written in terms of a mean field Boguliobov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian describing the bulk gapped d dimensional superconductor with gapless d-2 edge states, instead of d-1 dimensional edge states as for usual topological superconductors. The standard one dimensional topological superconductors In this paper, we focus on a two-dimensional second order topological superconductor which hosts zero energy Majorana modes localized at the corners of the sample. We study the flux periodicity of the superconducting state after introducing a vortex in the center of the sample. The vortex makes the geometry multiply connected and thus the superconducting phase winds around the vortex in a non-trivial way. To take this into account, we compute the ground state of the mean-field BdG Hamiltonian self-consistently at each value of the flux. This self-consistent calculation shows us that the flux periodicity of the second order topological superconductor is hc e instead of hc 2e as expected for a superconductor. To probe the origin of this period doubling, we compute the flux periodicity while varying a parameter in the Hamiltonian which drives the system into a topologically trivial phase. Interestingly we find that the flux periodicity changes to hc 2e across this transition, proving that the change in flux periodicity is related to the topologically nontrivial nature of the state. The plan of the paper is as follows. In section II, we introduce the model, originally studied in Ref. A. Second order topological superconductor(T SC2) We start with the four band Boguliobov-de Gennes model introduced in Ref. and Here, σ(τ ) denote the operators acting on spin (Nambu) space respectively and 1 τ represents the identity in the Nambu space. λ denotes the hopping. This model can be shown x,y = H( mx,y k) with the two mirror symmetries anti-commuting with each other. More specifically, M x H(k x , k y )M -1 where (x, y) is the lattice site index, n(x, y) is the quasiparticle density at the site (x, y) and L x , L y are the lengths of the 2d system. By analogy, we can define a similar quadrupole moment for the two dimensional topological superconductor, which has been plotted in Fig. The quadrupole moment shows a sharp transition from Q = 0.5 to Q = 0 at the value of b x where the model transitions from a topological superconductor into a normal superconductor. This transition occurs close to b x /λ = 1. This is also consistent with the disappearance of the corner Majorana modes at b x = 1 as seen in Fig. The normal state of this Hamiltonian (when ∆ = 0) has four gapless mirror symmetric Dirac points, and it can be shown that at finite chemical potential, regions of the Fermi surface with opposite momenta always have the same spin texture. Hence, it is natural where the i, j denotes nearest neighbour sites. We will show in a later section that ∆ ij can be obtained selfconsistently for our model on a square lattice. The basic idea is that in a superconducting ring, the order parameter responds to a flux or vortex inserted through the ring. Just as current through a metallic ring is modulated by a hc/e periodicity due to the Aharanov-Bohm effect, the current through a superconducting ring is expected to be modulated as hc/2e Here we study the response in a p x + ip y higher order topological superconductor 'ring'. We imagine adding an infinitely long solenoid (of infinitesimal radius) at the origin of a 2d sample so that there is no magnetic field crossing any of the sites, but a closed loop around the origin encloses a flux -thereby mimicking an annulus with flux through the hole. More specifically, we have a square geometry and assume that the lattice sites are located at r = (m + 1/2, n + 1/2) where m, n are integers from -L to L -1. This ensures that the lattice sites are symmetrically located about the origin at r = (0, 0). This has been shown in Fig. In the absence of superconductivity, a vortex can be added to H through the standard Peierls substitution where φ 0 = hc/e , ψ † r = (c † r↑ , c † r↓ , c r↑ , c r↓ ) and δ is constrained only upto nearest neighbour in both x and ŷ direction. Every bond of the lattice will clearly pick up a different phase due to the θ |r | in the integral, but at φ = nφ 0 (where n is an integer), the total phase accumulated by an electron going through each plaquette around the origin is 2πn. Therefore the system behaves as if there is no magnetic field at all. For illustration, the lowest three positive and negative eigenvalues are shown as a function of the flux in Fig. We work with the Hamiltonian in Eq.1 in real space given by where H 0 ij = t h exp iφ ij ) + 2b x δ ij , with t x h = λ and t y h = -iλ, are the hopping matrix elements between the nearest neighbour sites. Also φ ij = ri rj e c A(r ) • d r is the Peierls phase factor coming from A(r), which is the vector potential due to flux through the origin. The order parameter of the superconducting state ∆ ij is defined on the links between neighbouring sites with the appropriate p-wave symmetry, i.e, we have which is symmetric under the exchange of spins and antisymmetric under the exchange of spatial indices. Here, V is the nearest-neighbour pairing interaction strength. Now following a Boguliobov rotation and in terms of the new fermionic operators (the Boguliobons) we find that the Hamiltonian in Eq.5 is given by where the coefficients (u n ) and (v n ) satisfy the equation Here (u n ) and (v n ) are 2N dimensional column vectors (N is the total number of lattice sites, and the 2N is because of spin) and both H 0 and ∆ are 2N × 2N matrices. The order parameter ∆ ij (φ, b x ) is then calculated self-consistently from the following equation and is used to compute the energy eigenvalues and the total energy. In Fig. The total self-consistent energy has been shown in Fig. Note that we have fixed the chemical potential at μ = 0 and have occupied two of the zero energy states -i.e., we are in the even parity state. As we change the flux, we keep the total number of particles fixed (the band has been precisely half-filled). So we are in the Coulomb blockaded regime where the parity of the state cannot change and continues to remain even. The lattice current density J ij from lattice site i to j is then obtained as using the continuity equation which is then used to compute the total circulating current in the system, which is shown in Fig. We have also calculated the site average of the pairing term as a function of b x /λ as illustrated in Fig. We also confirm the phase transition from a topological superconductor to a normal superconductor at b x /λ ∼ 0.6 by calculating the the quadrupole moment(Q/e) using the definition given in Eq.2 for the Hamiltonian in Eq.5 without any flux. As outlined in Ref. However, for b x > 0.6, where our results show that there is a phase transition from topological to nontopological superconductor, it is likely that the transition is to the strong pairing p-wave phase where the pairing can occur even between states that are slightly different in energy, as shown in Fig. In this work, we have focused on the magnetic flux periodicity of a second order topological superconductor in two dimensions with four Majorana modes at the corners. By implementing a ring geometry via a flux at the origin, we show that the flux periodicity changes from hc e to hc 2e when the topological superconductor transitions to an ordinary superconductor. This model hosts four Majorana modes at its corners, which is sufficient to exploit their non-abelian nature in braiding since they can be paired in different ways 