The spectacular success of silicon-based photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in the past decade naturally begs the question of whether similar fabrication procedures can be applied to other material platforms with more desirable optical properties. In this work, we demonstrate the individual passive components (grating couplers, waveguides, multi-mode interferometers and ring resonators) necessary for building large scale integrated circuits in suspended gallium arsenide (GaAs). Implementing PICs in suspended GaAs is a viable route towards achieving optimal system performance in areas with stringent device constraints like energy efficient transceivers for exascale systems, integrated electro-optic comb lasers, integrated quantum photonics, cryogenic photonics and electromechanical guided wave acousto-optics. The scale, complexity and performance of silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs) has revolutionized optical communications in the past decade 1 . Perhaps the most surprising aspect of this revolution is the fact that silicon does not possess many desirable optical properties (apart from a high refractive index) and the silicon photonics revolution was primarily driven by the availability of a foundry fabrication infrastructure, courtesy of the microelectronics industry, that could be applied to optics In this work, we show that a multi-step fabrication process, derived from a standard passive silicon photonics platform Figure A cross-section of a suspended GaAs rib waveguide fabricated in this platform is shown in Fig. To build scalable PICs, it is critical to have the ability to split and recombine light. Linear networks of waveguide splitters form a key building block for optical implementations of quantum information processing The final component of the passive devices toolkit for suspended GaAs photonics are microring resonators. High quality factor dispersion engineered microring resonators have served as the foundation of a variety of experimental advances in photonic sensing, frequency combs and on-chip generation of single photon pairs by spontaneous four wave mixing In summary, we have demonstrated that the complexity of the standard (passive) silicon photonics process can be read-ily transferred to more interesting optical materials, in particular GaAs. The similarity of the refractive indices of the two materials ensures that high device performance can be readily ensured without requiring extensive component redesign. Bringing the scale and complexity of silicon photonics to more interesting optical platforms will be revolutionary for device applications in wide-ranging areas from quantum photonics to cryogenic photonic circuits. Moving forward, we will extend this platform to demonstrate low-loss long spiral (L wvg ∼ cm) waveguides, and active electro-optic and acoustooptic devices. D. Thomson, A. Zilkie, J. E. Bowers, T. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed, L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini, E. Cassan, L. Virot, J.-M. Fédéli, et al., "Roadmap on silicon photonics," Journal of Optics 18, 073003 (2016). M. Hochberg and T. Baehr-Jones, "Towards fabless silicon photonics," Nature photonics 4, 492 (2010). 3 A. H. Atabaki, S. Moazeni, F. Pavanello, H. Gevorgyan, J. Notaros, L. Alloatti, M. T. Wade, C. Sun, S. A. Kruger, H. Meng, et al., "Integrating photonics with silicon nanoelectronics for the next generation of systems on a chip," Nature 556, 349 ( 2018). 4 K. Giewont, K. Nummy, F. A. Anderson, J. Ayala, T. Barwicz, Y. Bian, K. K. Dezfulian, D. M. Gill, T. Houghton, S. Hu, et al., "300-mm monolithic silicon photonics foundry technology," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 25, 1-11 (2019). 5 L. Chrostowski and M. Hochberg, Silicon photonics design: from devices to systems (Cambridge University Press, 2015). 6 Y. Shen, X. Meng, Q. Cheng, S. Rumley, N. Abrams, A. Gazman, E. Manzhosov, M. S. Glick, and K. Bergman, "Silicon photonics for