Controlling the strain level in nanowire heterostructures is critical for obtaining coherent interfaces of high crystalline quality and for the setting of functional properties such as photon emission, carrier mobility or piezoelectricity. In a nanowire axial heterostructure featuring a sharp interface, strain is set by the materials lattice mismatch and the nanowire radius. Here, we show that introducing a graded interface in nanowire heterostructures offers an additional parameter to control strain. For a given interface length and lattice mismatch, we first derive theoretically the maximum nanowire radius below which coherent growth is possible. We validate these findings by growing and characterizing various In(Ga)As/GaAs nanowire heterostructures with graded interfaces. Furthermore, we perform a complete chemical and structural characterization of the interface by combining energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy. In the case of coherent growth, we directly observe that the mismatch strain relaxes elastically on the side walls of the nanowire around the interface area, while the core of the nanowire remains partially strained. Moreover, our experimental data show good agreement with finite element calculations. This analysis confirms in particular that mechanical strain is largely reduced by interface grading. Overall, our work extends the parameter space for the design of nanowire heterostructures, thus opening new opportunities for nanowire optoelectronics. Semiconductor nanowires offer the unique opportunity to realize coherent axial heterostructures which associate materials having vastly different lattice parameters Today, numerous material combinations have been explored to realize axial nanowire heterostructures. In this Letter, we investigate both theoretically and experimentally graded interfaces in axial nanowire heterostructures. A theoretical model specifies the wire radii compatible with coherent growth for various interface lengths and lattice mismatches. While we specifically consider the representative case of interfaces whose chemical profile is described by an error function, these calculations could be easily extended to other profiles. We successfully confront these predictions to experiments realized with the highly mismatched InAs/GaAs material system. The nanowire heterostructures are grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), using a gold droplet as a catalyst. We perform a complete characterization of the interface: the chemical profile is obtained by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis, while the structural characterization is conducted through high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In the case of coherent growth, the maps of the mismatch strain obtained by geometrical phase analysis (GPA) are in excellent agreement with finite element simulations. This analysis confirms in particular that mechanical strain is largely reduced by interface grading. More generally, interface grading constitutes a novel tuning knob to adjust the physical properties of nanowire heterostructures. As schematized in Figure )8 with erf 9 where L measures the interface length (Figure Figure To investigate the crystalline quality of the nanowire heterostructure, we image different areas of NW1 by high resolution HAADF STEM followed by fast Fourier transform. Both GaAs and InGaAs segments have the wurtzite (WZ) crystal structure except for a small zinc blende (ZB) insertion in the interface region (Supporting Information S.1). Figure Across the interface, the lattice parameters a and c are modified both by compositional changes and by mechanical strain. To map a and c, we employ geometric phase analysis (GPA). Specifically, this technique allows to image the cand a-lattice strain , respectively. To get a complementary insight on strain relaxation, we visualize the arrangement of the crystal planes with a numerical moiré technique We now quantitatively compare the experimental GPA data to numerical simulations. We first calculate the mechanical strain tensor ε̿ around the nanowire interface using a finite element software (COMSOL Multiphysics) and using all the measured characteristics of NW1. We consider a cylindrical wire of radius R = 10.5 nm. To ensure that finite-length effects are negligible, the lengths of the GaAs and InGaAs sections are both much larger than R (200 nm and 60 nm, respectively). We also include the interface chemical profile as determined from the fit to the EDX measurement (Figure Figure Without any free parameter, we obtain for ∆c/c an excellent agreement between the two profiles (the discrepancy is lower than 0.5%). For ∆a/a, the agreement is good, but the theory predicts a slightly sharper transition than observed in the experimental data. We attribute this to the noise in the experimental GPA data (Figure We build on this understanding to discuss the distribution of mechanical strain around the InGaAs/GaAs interface. Figures Figure Next, we consider additional nanowire samples to further support the theoretical predictions of the coherent growth domains. The results are summarized in Figure We now comment on the spatial distribution of the dislocations in nanowires exhibiting plastic relaxation. In ref Our study is of particular significance when it comes to realize optoelectronic devices using semiconductor heterostructures. Material combinations such as, for example, InP/InSb (εm = 10%) and GaN/InN (εm = 11%) are important for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications but their structural quality and therefore their physical functions suffer from an extremely high lattice mismatch. As seen in previous works, reducing the diameter is not always possible or sufficient to prevent plastic relaxation In conclusion, we fully characterized high lattice mismatch axial In(Ga)As/GaAs heterostructure nanowires featuring graded interfaces. The heterostructure shows a preserved crystalline quality with a mismatch strain released elastically, via plane bending. Full elastic relaxation occurs at the nanowire sidewalls while the remaining strain is localized in the central area of the nanowire, larger than the interface length. Theoretical predictions confirmed by our experimental data show that the domains for coherent growth can be extended using compositional gradients of few nanometers. Beyond the realization of coherent heterointerfaces, interface grading offers an additional tuning knob to control residual strain in the nanowire, and thus to fine-tune its optoelectronic properties. The critical radius is defined as the maximum radius of a semi-infinite nanowire stem on top of which it is possible to coherently grow a semi-infinite deposit. We perform calculations in the framework of linear elasticity and consider a mechanically isotropic material. The nanowire chemical composition follows the error function profile shown in Eq.1. Assuming Vegard's law, the stress-free lattice mismatch thus varies according to ε(z) = / 0 ε $ [1 + erf(z/L)] with L quantifying the interface length and ε $ the lattice mismatch. For a series of misfits, nanowire radii, and interface lengths, we compare the energies of the system in two states, namely (1) with a purely elastic relaxation of the mechanical strain, and (2) with a single dislocation segment lying perpendicular to the nanowire axis. The critical radius is then defined as the radius above which state (2) has an energy lower than state (1). We first calculated the strain, stress fields and the elastic energy in state (1) using the COMSOL finite elements software. We then calculated the energy in state (2) by using the method of Spencer and Tersoff. Nanowire growth: The InGaAs/GaAs nanowire extensively studied in this Letter (NW1) originates from a sample grown via the Au-assisted vapor-liquid solid mechanism on GaAs (111)B substrates using a molecular beam epitaxy reactor. We dispersed 20 nm gold colloids on an epi-ready sample and immediately loaded the sample in the reactor. After a deoxidation step at 610°C, the GaAs segment was grown at the same temperature for 25 minutes (and during a cooling step for 5 minutes) with a V/III beam equivalent pressure ratio of 30 and a 2D equivalent Ga growth rate of 0.085 nm/s. The InGaAs growth proceeded at 540 °C for 25 minutes with a V/III beam equivalent pressure ratio of 50 and a 2D equivalent In growth rate of 0.05 nm/s. The presence of a ternary alloy in the upper segment is discussed in Ref TEM and GPA: We imaged the nanowires by transmission electron microscopy. The nanowires were mechanically removed from the substrate surface and deposited onto carbon grids. High resolution scanning TEM (HRSTEM) images were acquired on a probe-corrected JEOL ARM 200F, operated at 200 kV, equipped with a 100 mm 2 Centurio SDD EDs detector. For a probe corrected STEM at 200kV, the depth of focus is 11 nm.We then processed HRSTEM images by means of Geometrical Phase Analysis (GPA) using a home-built software to analyze the strain present in the nanowire. To analyze the a-lattice strain, we cannot map ∆a a ⁄ using the same [21 T 1 T 0] HAADF-STEM image as for the c-lattice because the crystalline phase of our nanowire heterostructure switches systematically from wurtzite to zinc blende at the InGaAs/GaAs interface. As the [21 T 1 T 0]WZ/[011]ZB projection of the atomic columns allows one to see the stacking of the different planes ABC for wurtzite and ABAB for zinc blende, Fourier filtering of (011 T 0) planes hides the zinc blende a-planes along the nanowire axis (Supporting Information S.1). To solve this issue, we rotate the sample holder to image the nanowire along the [011 T 0] zone axis where the two crystal structures are indistinguishable. We consider a finite InGaAs nanowire having the wurtzite structure and take into accound its mechanical anisotropy. The nanowire is modeled as a cylinder (R = 10.5 nm) with the z-axis oriented along the [0001] crystallographic direction and with both x-axis and y-axis defined along [2 T 110] and [011 T 0] directions, respectively. The elastic properties of the nanowire vary along the z-axis following the gradual transition in atomic composition observed in the experimental EDX profile from Figure In a wurtzite crystal structure, the elastic stiffness coefficients tensor is given as follows, 58 In order to account for a gradually increasing lattice mismatch, we introduce a pseudomorphic strain field where f R and f y are defined in each point z along the wire axis as follows: The strain is then computed by minimizing the total strain energy using the finite element method. The meshing of the finite wire is implemented using 3D tetrahedron elements. A typical mesh contains in total around 1.5 × 10 ‚ domain elements distributed in a wire, with three degrees of freedom per node. We use a nonuniform and adapted element mesh with small element size (0.18 nm) at the material transition region and larger elements (5 nm) everywhere else. Finally, in order to compare quantitatively the profiles of the aand c-lattice strain, we need to take into account (1) the depth of focus of the probe corrected STEM (11 nm) and ( 