Strains in superconductors due to moving vortices and vortex lattices are discussed. It is shown that the energy stored in elastic strains increases with vortex velocity. For moving vortex lattices, the elastic energy depends on velocity orientation relative to the lattice having minimum for the velocity directed along one of the unit cell vectors of the moving lattice. It is shown that for supersonic motion, the vortex induced stress field has a shape similar to supersonic shock waves. The subject of this work are vortex induced strains in superconductors which are related to the stress dependence of the critical temperature ∂T c /∂p. It turned out that this derivative in pnictides, and in Ca(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 in particular, 1 by one or two orders of magnitude exceeds values for conventional superconductors, making Fe-based pnictides favorable for observation of magneto-elastic effects. Still, experimental evidence for strains in the mixed state in the absence of pinning is scarce. In Ref. 2, the experimental disagreement with predicted by the London theory vortex lattice structure in NbSe 2 in tilted fields was attributed to extra magneto-elastic interactions of vortices. Such comparisons are difficult because complete sets of elastic moduli are usually unavailable. Besides, vortex lattices are extremely sensitive to multitude of factors such as electronic band structure, order parameter symmetry, etc. The stress due to vortices should affect the free energy of the system proportional to their number, i.e. to the magnetic induction B, and-along with energythe equilibrium magnetization M . Hence, as it stands today, existence of vortex induced strains and the magneto-elastic intervortex interactions are still to be confirmed. It is hard to expect progress in microscopic description of vortex induced strains at arbitrary temperatures, although near T c a progress has been made. Magneto-elastic interactions are long-range and, their weakness notwithstanding, should affect the mixed state in general, The vortex core of a size ξ, the coherence length, is not the only source of elastic strains. Super-currents round the core which extend to distances ∼ λ are argued to contribute even more to strains becauase usually λ ξ. Nucleation of the normal vortex core strains the host superconductor, since the normal phase has a larger specific volume as compared to superconductor. The relative volume change ζ is related to the pressure dependence of the condensation energy or of the critical field H c : The elastic energy density in isotropic solids reads: Here, u ij is the strain tensor and λ, μ are Lamé coefficients; summation over double indices is implied. For a single vortex along z at the origin, the displacement u = (u x , u y , 0) is radial in the plane xy, i.e., curl u = 0 or u = ∇χ, and u αβ = χ ,αβ where χ is a scalar and α, β acquire only x and y values. The equilibrium condition (3) reads (λ + 2μ)χ ,αββ = 0 with the first integral To fix this constant, one notes that χ ,ββ = u ββ describes compression and is related to the hydrostatic pressure within the system. For the problem of the strain caused by a single vortex in otherwise unrestrained crystal, the pressure is zero, and one has to solve ∇ 2 χ = 0 under the boundary condition u → 0 at large distances. Hence, arXiv:1912.01520v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Dec 2019 the problem is the same as that of a linear charge in electrostatics, where the potential satisfies where A is related to the linear charge density. From a simple core model as a normal cylinder of a size ξ follows: One, then, has χ = (A/2π) ln r + const and The elastic energy per unit length of a vortex is: According to Eq. ( Integrating over r in Eq. ( If the vortex moves, the elastic displacement at a particular material point depends on time and the local equation of motion is σ αβ,β = ρü α where ü ≡ ∂ 2 u/∂t 2 and ρ is the material density. For a point source of stress one has to add to the energy density a term η αβ u αβ δ(r -vt), so that the stress tensor has an addition ∂F/∂u αβ = η αβ δ(r). In isotropic case where the coefficient η is fixed by comparison with the static Eq. ( where v s = (λ + 2μ)/ρ is the longitudinal sound velocity. Transforming the RHS of Eq. ( one obtains: In real space If v = 0, the static solution is recovered (the integral for v = 0 is divergent, but the derivative ∂ r χ = A/2πr is the same as in the static case). For the velocity v = vx, one has at t = 0: where the reduced velocity V = v/v s < 1. This differs from the static solution by rescaling In other words, for V < 1, the circles of constant χ for the vortex at rest, become ellipses x 2 /(1-V 2 )+y 2 = const with the x semiaxis √ 1 -V 2 times shorter than that of y. Hence, the static potential χ(x, y) is contracted in the direction of motion by the factor 1 -v 2 /v 2 s and moves as a whole with the vortex velocity v. The energy stored in the elastic distortion of a vortex moving with a constant velocity is time independent. To evaluate this energy one can use the potential (17) for t = 0. This evaluation can be done in real space. Since the static potential χ = (A/4π) ln(x 2 + y 2 ), we have for the moving vortex (an irrelevant constant is omitted). Clearly, the lines of constant χ (the circles for the vortex at rest) are elliptic with a short semi-axis √ 1 -V 2 along the direction of motion; this ellipse is strongly squeezed when the velocity approaches that of the sound. The strains follow: The elastic energy (8) can now be evaluated as shown in Appendix A: This gives for low velocities V = v/v s 1: with correct limit (10) for V = 0. If the velocity approaches v s , the elastic energy diverges as The elastic potential χ(r, t) obtained solving linear Eq. ( Consider now a 2D periodic lattice of vortices at positions a in an infinite sample. As argued in Ref. 3, the elastic potential in this case is a solution of where B is the magnetic induction. In terms of electrostatic analogy, the source term of the Poisson equation (23) must have a negative background density B/φ 0 to make the system "quasi-neutral" for the equation to have periodic finite solutions on the whole plane. One looks for χ(r) as Fourier series (24) with G being the reciprocal lattice vectors. Transforming the RHS of Eq. ( where the symbol δ 0,0 = 1 and δ G,0 = 0 for G = 0. One then obtains: Being transformed to real space, the part of χ(G) containing δ G,0 generates an uncertain constant, which is coordinate independent and therefore irrelevant. If the lattice moves, the vortex positions are a + vt where a define the lattice at t = 0. The elastic potential obeys One now employs the Fourier transform see Appendix B, to obtain: Hence, only the frequencies ω = Gv are present in the Fourier transform over time. The quasi-static elastic energy density of the vortex lattice is: where the integration is extended over the unit cell. Being interested in a stationary state, one can calculate the energy at t = 0. Fourier component of the potential As in the static case, the last term here generates in real space a coordinate independent constant which can be disregarded because only gradients of χ have physical meaning. After straightforward algebra one obtains: The sum here is divergent due to long-range elastic perturbations. It can be evaluated numerically because, when treating vortex cores as δ-functions, the maximum G should be of the order of 1/ξ. One can now compare energies of hexagonal vortex lattices moving with velocities v oriented differently relative to the lattice. Let the hexagonal lattice have one of the unit cell vectors along the x axis: that correspond to the reciprocal lattice with integers n and m. The squared length of a lattice vector is ). The velocity orientation is fixed by the angle α with the x axis: v = v(x cos α + ŷ sin α). Hence, we have for the sum in Eq. ( 2 where V = v/v s . To ensure that the sum is not extended to G 1/ξ, we introduce in the numerator of the sum (38) a factor Figure The difference in elastic energies for the two orientations is where λ ∼ 10 12 egr/cm 3 is an estimate for the elastic constants. Taking γ ∼ ζ ∼ 10 -5 , one obtains ∆F ∼ 10 -3 erg/cm 3 for our example. Velocities of vortices up to ≈ 1.5 × 10 6 cm/s have been recently recorded in Pb films, If a vortex moves with a supersound velocity V > 1, Eq. ( The integration over k y is done in the complex plane of k y . The contour of integration for y > 0 is chosen as a half-circle of a large radius in the upper half-plane, the real axis of k y , and infinitesimal half-circles round the poles at k y = ±ηk x chosen as to leave the poles within the contour: Integration over k x then gives: the θ-function here is unity for a positive argument and zero otherwise. The potential χ(x, y) should be determined for x < 0, because no elastic perturbation can exist in front of a vortex moving with supersound velocity. In fact, the potential χ(x, y) = A/4η or zero, depending on what domain of x, y is chosen. These domains are separated by straight lines x + ηy = 0 and x -ηy = 0, as shown in Fig. It is shown that the rotational degeneracy of the hexagonal vortex lattice is removed by lattice motion due to vortex induced strains. Moreover, the orientation of the moving lattice with one of the unit cell vectors along the velocity corresponds to minimum elastic energy. It is worth noting here that the same orientational effect has been predicted by considering pinning, Experimentally, there are situations when the vortex velocities are very high. In flux avalanches in thin YBCO films, vortices are claimed to move with velocities up to 5 × 10 6 cm/s. As mentioned, the elastic potential χ(r) obtained solving Eq. ( The density difference between the normal core and the superconducting surrounding is not the only reason for vortex-induced elastic perturbations discussed above. The non-uniform distribution of supercurrents round the vortex may also cause elastic distortions in the underlying crystal. The source of these distortions is localized in a region of a size λ, the London penetration depth which is usually large relative to the core size ξ. 