Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with transparent electrodes can be integrated with existing solar panels in tandem configurations to increase the power conversion efficiency. A critical layer in semi-transparent PSCs is the inorganic buffer layer, which protects the PSC against damage when the transparent electrode is sputtered on top. The development of n-i-p structured semi-transparent PSCs has been hampered by the lack of suitable p-type buffer layers. In this work we develop a p-type CuOx buffer layer, which can be grown uniformly over the perovskite device without damaging the perovskite or organic charge transport layers, can be grown using industrially scalable techniques and has high hole mobility (4.3 ± 2 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), high transmittance (>95%), and a suitable ionisation potential for hole extraction (5.3 ± 0.2 eV). Semi-transparent PSCs with efficiencies up to 16.7% are achieved using the CuOx buffer layer. Our work demonstrates a new approach to integrate PSCs into tandem configurations, as well as enable the development of other devices that need high quality p-type layers. Over the past decade, lead-halide perovskites have gained significant attention for optoelectronic applications, such as photovoltaics A key component in semi-transparent perovskite devices is an inorganic buffer layer that mechanically protects the perovskite sub-cell from damage when the transparent electrode is deposited on top by sputtering However, there are currently no p-type oxide buffer layers demonstrated in n-i-p structured perovskite top-cells to protect the hole transport and perovskite layer from sputter damage. There are several reasons to integrate n-i-p structured perovskite solar cells in a semi-transparent architecture. Firstly, single junction n-i-p structured solar cells with evaporated opaque electrodes have consistently outperformed their pi-n counterparts (every entry on the NREL chart for the certified record efficiency perovskite solar cell to date is from a n-i-p structured device The difficulty in achieving p-type semiconductors with equivalent performance to ntype semiconductors comes from the fact that typically in oxides the formation energy of donor defects such as oxygen vacancies is low compared to acceptor defects such as cation vacancies, making them n-type. Due to the current lack of p-type oxide buffer layers, the majority of researchers utilise MoOx (a high work function n-type oxide) as a buffer layer Owing to the limitations of high work function n-type oxides, developing p-type oxide buffer layers is critical. Viable potential materials can be found by looking to the p-type oxides that have been used as hole transport layers beneath the perovskite in singlejunction devices. The most popular is NiOx In this work we report on using p-type CuOx grown at low temperatures as a buffer layer for n-i-p structured perovskite stacks for semi-transparent solar cells. We investigate the influence of the growth conditions on the structural, electrical and electronic properties of the films and their suitability for buffer layer applications. In particular, we use structural and spectroscopic characterisation to probe whether CuOx degrades the bulk or interfaces of the perovskite films. Finally, we test the CuOx layer in semi-transparent devices, and focus on understanding whether sputter damage to the perovskite and organic hole transport layers can be further reduced through thermalized deposition of the TCO, whilst not sacrificing the carrier and optical properties of the TCO. These semi-transparent devices are used as top-cells in fourterminal tandems with two types of silicon bottom cells that are industrially-relevant: p-type passivated emitter rear contact (PERC) and n-type silicon cells with polycrystalline silicon passivation CuOx layers were deposited by AP-CVD. Allyloxytrimethylsilyl Hexafluoroacetylacetonate Copper(I) (Cupraselect ® ) was used as the metal precursor and water vapour as the oxidant. The deposition temperatures were varied between 100 oC and 150 oC (refer to Methods). Based on prior work with n-type AP-CVD oxides grown over lead-halide perovskites, this is the temperature range that was expected to be compatible with the perovskites We investigated whether the growth of CuOx onto perovskite devices results in bulk structural damage. To test this we measured the XRD pattern, before and after CuOx deposition, of a triple cation lead-halide perovskite film To study the morphology of the AP-CVD CuOx film, we deposited onto O2 plasma treated glass at 100 °C. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) image shows the film to be devoid of pinholes (Fig. Hall measurements of 100 nm CuOx grown on glass at 100 o C confirmed the films to be p-type with an average measured Hall mobility of 4.3 ± 2 cm 2 V - We investigated whether CuOx grown at 100 °C has a suitable band alignment with perovskite devices. CuOx was grown onto silicon substrates coated with Au. Using Kelvin probe measurements, we found the work function to be a stable value of 4.9 ± 0.1 eV (Supplemental Fig. To determine whether depositing CuOx on perovskites and perovskite devices resulted in increased non-radiative recombination, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) decay. Notably, directly depositing CuOx on lead-halide perovskites at 100 °C results in similar PL decay kinetics to the pristine perovskite itself (Fig. Having found the CuOx layer to be of high quality and not damage the perovskite/PTAA stack, we investigated its effect on device performance and whether it can be used to protect against sputter damage. A cross-sectional SEM image of the semi-transparent devices with the corresponding band diagram is shown in Fig. We also made four-terminal tandems with n-type silicon bottom cells with passivating poly-silicon layers Sputter damage can occur to the perovskite device despite the presence of a buffer layer if the sputtering conditions are not carefully optimised In this work the sputter pressure and source to substrate distance were 2 Pa and 5 cm. As can be seen in Figure In summary, the current lack of p-type buffer layers hampers the development of semitransparent n-i-p structured perovskite devices. In this work we have developed thin high mobility p-type CuOx films, which can be grown at low temperatures. This enabled us to achieve n-i-p semi-transparent devices with state-of-the-art performance and high near-infrared transmittance, enabling high efficiency gains when used as top-cells in four-terminal tandems with silicon bottom cells. The p-type oxide we used is CuOx (x = 0.39±0.03 from ToF-ERDA measurements) grown by AP-CVD with a high deposition rate (1.3 nm min -1 ), without vacuum, and with high film uniformity (5% variation over >6 cm 2 deposition area) and hole mobility (4.3 ± 2 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) without requiring dopants. Thin 3 nm films were found to be pinhole-free with >95% transmittance to visible and near-infrared light. XRD and time-resolve photoluminescence showed that growing CuOx at 100 °C on perovskite devices resulted in no bulk structural damage or extra non-radiative recombination at the interface. The thin CuOx was found to be sufficient to protect the perovskite device from sputter damage. Our work opens up a new avenue to exploit the most efficient perovskite device architecture (n-i-p) in semi-transparent devices and in top-cells for tandem photovoltaics. This opens up their use in photoanodes for bias-free solar fuel generation, multi-junction white-light LEDs and other transparent devices and electronic circuits. (Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3), MA = CH3NH3 + , FA = CH(NH2)2 + . poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine]