Laser stimulated second and third harmonic generation effects in Fluorine doped tin oxide (F:SnO 2 ) nanostructures versus the fluorine content is presented. The F:SnO 2 nanostructures have been fabricated at various fluorine doping concentrations by spray pyrolysis technique. The films exhibit polycrystalline nature with a preferential growth orientation along (1 1 0) diffraction plane as evident from x-ray diffraction studies. The optical transmittance of the F:SnO 2 films has increased from 68% to 80%. Photoluminescence studies revealed that strong violet emission peak corresponds to ∼400 nm and relatively weak red emission peak at about ∼675 nm was observed for all the F:SnO 2 films. Increase in theβ eff value upon fluorine incorporation supports the applicability of the deposited films in passive optical limiting applications. The principal origin of second harmonic generation signals (SHG) for this type of nanostructures is played by the space charge density acen-tricity due to the F doping. The enhanced second and third harmonic generation signals observed on F:SnO 2 nanostructures endorses the credibility of these materials in various nonlinear optical trigger device applications. In recent days, there are wide variety applications of transparent conducting oxides that involve optical coatings for lenses or mirrors, sensors, military weapon systems, memories in computers, microelectronic and hybrid circuits etc. In the present work, we are synthesizing tin oxide which is a highly degenerate n-type semiconductor. This degeneracy can be achieved by the substitution of O 2-by Fluorine atom (F -) which acts as an electron donor. Choice of fluorine as a dopant is mainly on the account of the similarity in ionic radius which is of 0.133 nmcompared to oxygen that of 0.132 nm For the synthesis of F:SnO 2 thin films, tinchloride dihydrate (SnCl 2 •2H 2 O) were dissolved in double distilled water to get the homogeneous solution. Ammonium fluoride (NH 4 F) was added to the precursor solution at a ratio of 5%, 10% and 15% weight percentage in order to achieve the fluorine doping. Deposition parameters employed to prepare the film were described elsewhere The film thickness was measured using optical profilometer which is found to be around 300 nm. Structural and morphological detailswere studied by Rigaku MiniFlex600 X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα, λ = 1.54 Å) and atomic force microscope (AFM) in tapping mode configuration. Shimadzu 1800 UV-Visible spectrometer were used to study the optical properties of F:SnO 2 films. Room temperature Photoluminescence (RTPL) measurements of F:SnO 2 films were recorded at an excitation wavelength of 325 nm using JASCO FP-8300 spectrophotometer. The nonlinear absorption coefficient of the films was measured by implementing an open aperture Z-scan technique. It is a high sensitivity measurement technique based on spatial beam dis-tortionwhich measures absorptive and refractive nonlinearity of the films. He-Ne laser (Thorlabs HRP350-EC-1) was used as an excitation source at an input power of 19 mW and wavelength (λ) 633 nm for validating third-order nonlinear absorption properties of F:SnO 2 thin films. Laser-induced second and third harmonic generation measurements were taken before and after the laser treatment process. As a source of fundamental radiation an 8 ns Nd: YAG pulsed laser with a wavelength of 1064 nm and frequency recurrence of ∼10 Hz were used. Glan's polarizer was used to tune the power of the fundamental laser. Silicon detector detects the value of the fundamental laser signal whereas Hamamatsu photomultiplier gives its second/third harmonic value based on an interferometer filter which transmits electromagnetic radiation at wavelength 355 nm (for THG) and 532 nm (for SHG). polycrystalline orthorhombic crystal structure with a space group of Cmc21 ( It was observed that crystallite size for (1 1 0) peak has a progressive increment from 12.42 nm to 32.39 nm (for 0-15 wt% F conc.). H. Kim et al. reported a similar trend which shows crystallite size has increased from 24 nm to 30 nm (for 0 to 30 wt% F conc.) AFM was used to study the surface morphology of the deposited films. Using nanoscope analysis software AFM images of F doped SnO 2 thin films at various doping levels were recorded in a 5 × 5 μm scan area and shown in Fig. The transmission spectra of F:SnO 2 thin films were recorded at various doping concentrations (0-15 wt%) as depicted in Fig. The plot between (αhυ) 2 and photon energy (in eV) for direct allowed transitions is shown in Fig. RTPL emission is ascribed to the intrinsic defects in the F:SnO 2 film structure. Fig. Oxygen vacancies (Vo) are the major defects which form the donor levels near the conduction band edge 3.5. Nonlinear optical studies 3.5.1. Z-scan measurements Fig. Laser regime βeff × 10 -2 cm/W F: ZnO electrons experience absorption and get excited to the higher energy states before reaching the ground state The obtained values of the nonlinear absorption coefficient (β eff ) were compared with recently reported studies and given in Table The measurements of the laser stimulated second and third harmonic (SHG and THG) generation have been performed similarly to the described in the Ref. Fluorine doped Tin Oxide (F:SnO 2 ) films were grown. XRD results showed that deposited films possess polycrystalline orthorhombic structure and also increase in the crystallite size Enhancement in the nonlinear absorption of F:SnO 2 films accounts in optical device appli-cations such as optical limiters, frequency converters etc. The observed laser-stimulated NLO effects are principally different with respect to traditional nonlinear optical effects which deal with an interaction of the fundamental laser beam with the material possessing fixed non-linear optical constants. Here we deal with the mentioned effects after their treatment.