The demand of fast and power efficient spintronics devices with flexibility requires additional energy for magnetization manipulation. Stress/and strain have shown their potentials for tuning magnetic properties to the desired level. Here, we report a systematic study for the effect of both tensile and compressive stresses on the magnetic anisotropy (MA). Further the effect of stress on the domain structure and magnetization relaxation mechanism in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt film has been studied. It is observed that a minimal in-plane tensile strain has increased the coercivity of the film by 38% of its initial value, while a very small change of coercivity has been found under compressive strain. The size of ferromagnetic domains decreases under tensile strain, while no change is observed under the compressive strain. Magnetization relxation measured at sub-coercive fields yields longer relaxation time in the strained state. Miniaturization and flexibility with high speed and low power consumption are the key aspects for developing next generation spintronic devices We have prepared Pt/Co thin film upon 25 μm thick polyimide (PI) substrate by dc magnetron sputtering in a high vacuum chamber manufactured by Mantis Deposition Ltd, UK. Polyimide (PI) substrate was cleaned ultrasonically by isopropanol before deposition. The sample structure is the following: PI/Ta(7nm)/Pt(10nm)/Co(0.7nm)/Pt(3nm) as shown in fig. Magnetic properties of the sample have been recorded at both the flat as well as bend state. Different tensile (compressive) strain has been generated on the film by sticking it on convex (concave) mold made of aluminium with different radius of curvature. Schematic of both mold is shown in fig. We have measured magnetic hysteresis loops in the polar mode by bending the sample towards inward and outward direction. Such bending induced strain on the film can be determined as, where is the applied strain, '+' sign for the tensile strain, '-' sign is for the compressive one, r is the radius of the mold used and t is the total thickness of the film and substrate where λ is co-efficient of magnetostriction, σ is the applied stress, θ is the angle between the stress and magnetization axis Bubble domain has been observed at the initial flat state of the sample, as the anisotropy ratio, Q = K u /K d 1, where K u is the uniaxial anisotropy and K d is the stray field energy density, respectively where I(t) is the Kerr intensity measured at time t, I 1 + I 2 is the normalized Kerr intensity, β is an exponent varying within 1 (nucleation dominated) to 3 (DW motion dominated) and τ is the relaxation time constant. At the flat state the relaxation happens via both domain nucleation as well as DW motion (β = 1.46±0.01 and 1.19±0.01) and the relaxation time constant is found to be 10.90 ±0.04 and 6.86±0.07 s at 0.95 and 0.97 H C , respectively. However, a slower relaxation phenomenon occurs in presence of 0.13% tensile strain which started via domain nucleation and dominated further by DW motion (β= 2.23±0.04 and 1.95±0.04). Relaxation time constant at the bend state was 23.63±0.14 and 16.24±0.13 s at 0.95 and 0.97 H C , respectively. Nature of the relaxation curve also reflects a slower relaxation phenomenon as shown in fig. We presented the effect of tensile/compressive strain on the magnetization reversal, magnetic domains and relaxation mechanism of a Co/Pt flexible film. It is observed that tensile strain has largely modified the MA, domain nucleation and relaxation mechanism of our film, whereas the effect of compression is found to be less prominent. A substantial increase in MA, nucleation field and decrease in domain size attributed mainly to the magneto mechanical coupling effect. In spite of this high coupling effect, our flexible film exhibits excellent endurance for long term stress application. A longer field span required to complete the magnetization reversal at the strained state, reflects a increase in potential bar-rier for the DW movement which modifies the relaxation time of the film. Relaxation measurements indicates ∼13 sec of relaxation time difference between the unstrained and curved state which is further endorsed by comparing domain images taken at different interval of time. This study further demands to explore the effect of compression on the relaxation time (switching time) of a Co/Pt film prepared near to SRT region. It is expected that in such scenario the relaxation will be faster which has significant potential for faster device application. Authors would like to thank Mr. Brindaban Ojha and Dr. Tanmoy Chabri for their help during the relaxation measurements. We also thank the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) of the Govt. of India for providing the funding to carry out the research. BBS acknowledges DST for INSPIRE faculty fellowship. See supplementary material for Figure 