Photonic crystal (PhC) nanocavities with high quality (Q) factors have attracted much attention because of their strong spatial and temporal light confinement capability. The resulting enhanced light-matter interactions are beneficial for diverse photonic applications, ranging from on-chip optical communications to sensing. However, currently achievable Q factors for active PhC nanocavities, which embed active emitters inside, are much lower than those of the passive structures because of large optical loss, presumably originating from light scattering by structural imperfections and/or optical absorptions. Here, we demonstrate a significant improvement of Q factors up to ~160,000 in GaAs active PhC nanocavities using a sulfur-based surface passivation technique. This value is the highest ever reported for any active PhC nanocavities with semiconductor quantum dots. The surface-passivated cavities also exhibit reduced variation in both Q factors and cavity resonant wavelengths. We find that the improvement in the cavity performance presumably arises from suppressed light absorption at the surface of the PhC's host material by performing a set of PL measurements in spectral and time domains. With the surface passivation technique, we also demonstrate a strongly-coupled single quantum dot-cavity system based on a PhC nanocavity with a high Q factor of ~100,000. These results will pave the way for advanced quantum dot-based cavity quantum electrodynamics and for GaAs micro/nanophotonic applications containing active emitters. Semiconductor optical micro/nanocavities that can strongly confine photons in time and space are promising platforms for research on light-matter interactions and for developing various photonic devices, including lasers and quantum logic gates In general, an experimental Q factor (Qexp) is lower than the one in design because of structural imperfections and optical absorptions. It is known that design Q factors (Qdess) can be enormously large in several dedicated PhC structures, such as those with precise airhole shifts around cavity region In this study, we demonstrate a significant increase in Qexp of GaAs active PhC nanocavities using a surface passivation technique. We employed a sulfur-based solution to modify the surface of the PhCs, which strongly reduces surface absorption and improves average Qexp by three times than that in the case without passivation. The best Qexp reaches ~160,000, which is the highest value among any active PhC nanocavities with QDs ever reported. Importantly, we have achieved the high Q factors at around 900 nm, where the state-of-the-art In(Ga)As/GaAs QDs are available for coupling to the cavity mode. In addition, the surface passivation also enables large reduction of variations in Qexp and cavity resonance wavelength. We find that these improvements stem from the suppression of the surface nonradiative recombination process in GaAs after the treatment. We consistently observed enhanced PL emission and extended carrier lifetime of the GaAs bulk. The prolonged carrier lifetime was also confirmed as distinct behaviors in pump power dependences of Qexps and resonant wavelengths of cavities with and without passivation. We also demonstrate strong coupling with a single QD and passivated nanocavity with an exceedingly high Qexp of 100,000, paving the way for QD-based nanophotonic devices and PhC-based cavity QED systems operating with previously-inaccessible high Q factors. The nanocavity investigated in this work is formed in an airbridge PhC with a doubleheterostructure The designed PhC cavity was fabricated into a 130-nm-thick GaAs slab using electron beam (EB) lithography combined with both dry and wet etching. First, the PhC patterns were written into a resist layer by EB exposure and then transferred onto a GaAs slab using a dry etching process. The airbridge GaAs slab structure was finally formed by removing a 1-μm-thick Al0.7Ga0.3As sacrificial layer underneath the slab using hydrofluoric acid. The GaAs slab contains a single layer of InAs QDs at the middle. We chose a sufficiently low QD density (~10 8 cm -2 ) to prevent unnecessary optical absorption in the active layer. PL peaks of single QDs were mainly observed around 930 nm, which were used for strong coupling with a PhC cavity in later experiments. Figure From the SEM images of the cavity, we evaluated variations in airhole radii and positions in the fabricated cavities to quantify the influence of the structural disorders on Qexp. We fitted the airhole edges in the images with circles using ProSEM software (GenISys Corp.). The inset of Fig. The corresponding Qdiso still maintains a high value of ~400,000, exhibiting a discrepancy with Qexps, as discussed later. This suggests the need to consider the influence of optical absorptions on Qexp. In order to reduce the surface absorptions of the fabricated nanocavities, we performed sulfur-based surface passivation using a Na2S solution. Optical absorption at the surface of GaAs could be associated with surface defect states presumably induced by surface oxidation . After rinsing the samples, we kept them in pure water to prevent oxidation in air. Next, we dissolved Na2S•9H2O in isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 20 ml) at 170 °C and cooled it down to room temperature to make a supersaturated Na2S solution. For passivation, we immersed the samples into the Na2S solution for 10 minutes (Fig. In order to evaluate Qexps of the fabricated PhC cavities, we performed reflectance measurements using super luminescent diode (SLD) at 60 K (see supplementary material for details of the measurement setup). For extracting Qexp, the measured cavity spectra were fitted by a Voight function while fixing its Gaussian part to be our spectrometer response (the details of fitting procedure can be found in supplementary material). For the following analyses, we also employ the inverse of Q factor, 1/Q, which indicates optical loss. Figure where Qdes, Qstr, and Qabs are Q factors respectively associated with design, structural imperfections, and optical absorptions. Qdes (1/Qdes) is 5×10 5 (2×10 -6 ) according to the FDTD simulations, while Qstr (1/Qstr) is deduced to be 1.71×10 6 (5.85×10 -7 ) using simulation results for PhC cavities with measured structural fluctuations as stated above. We also assume that the values of Qdes and Qstr are common for the passivated and unpassivated samples. Under these assumptions, the measured three-fold increase in Qexp can be interpreted as a 67% reduction in the optical absorption loss: passivation reduced 1/Qabs from 2.73×10 -5 to 9.03×10 -6 . These results highlight the impact of the passivation process on increasing Q factor. We also found that the statistical variations of 1/Qexp values for the passivated samples are smaller than that for samples without passivation, as seen in Fig. Qexps among the samples with and without passivation. While the extracted Qexp for the unpassivated sample was ~47,000, we obtained a 3-times higher Qexp of ~160,000 for the sample with passivation, which is, to the best of our knowledge, the highest value ever reported for any active PhC nanocavities embedding semiconductor QDs. We note that the sulfur-based surface passivation prevents GaAs surface from being oxidized by air For investigating the cause of reduced absorption loss by the passivation, we performed photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the GaAs slab in the unpatterned region (details of the PL measurement can be found in supplementary material). Figure shows the PL spectrum of GaAs band edge measured for samples with (red) and without (black) passivation at room temperature. The peak of spectrum around 870 nm originates from the GaAs band edge. We observed a 1.5-fold increase in PL intensity after the passivation. Figure Next, we examined the behavior of Qexps under the presence of free carriers to further verify the extended carrier lifetime in passivated PhC cavities. In this experiment, we injected free carriers into the GaAs barrier via above-band-gap excitation using an 808 nm continuous wave laser diode, and measured Qexp through cavity reflectance measurements with varying power of the carrier injection laser. Marked influences of prolonged carrier lifetime were also observed in cavity resonant wavelength (λ), as shown in Fig. For higher excitation powers over 10 7 nW, we observed rapid redshifts for both samples because of heating Finally, we performed PL spectroscopy to demonstrate strong coupling between a single QD and a high-Q PhC nanocavity realized by the surface passivation. For this study, we used a slightly different PhC cavity design with lattice constants of a1 = 249 nm and a2 = 256.5 nm for coupling to QDs emitting around 930 nm. Figure We then investigated the properties of optical coupling between the cavity mode and a QD exciton emission line at 934.01 nm. For control of the QD-cavity spectral detuning, we tuned the cavity wavelength using a Xe gas condensation technique The additional center peak between two polariton peaks originates from a bare cavity emission The measured peak positions can be well reproduced by using a standard CQED model as plotted in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated large improvements in Q factors of GaAs active PhC nanocavities using sulfur-based surface passivation. The passivation technique largely reduced optical absorption, leading to a three-fold improvement of average Q factor than that without passivation. For the best cavity, we realized a high Q factor of ~160,000, the highest value for any active PhC nanocavities embedding QDs. In addition, we observed reduced variations in Q factors and cavity wavelengths after the passivation. We conclude that these improvements in the passivated cavities mainly originate from the reduction in surface recombination centers of GaAs, which was supported by observing the increase in PL intensity and carrier lifetime. The enhanced carrier lifetime was also confirmed by measuring excitation power dependences of Q factors and cavity wavelengths. Finally, we demonstrated strong coupling between a single QD and a passivated PhC cavity with a high Q factor of ~100,000. Our results show the importance of suppressing surface absorptions for achieving high experimental Q factors as well as for reducing variations in Q factors and cavity wavelengths among different samples. Our study will be a great help not only for further exploring advanced CQED experiments that are inaccessible with the current QD-cavity coupled systems For the extraction of cavity Q factor, we fitted the cavity spectrum using a Voigt function. For the PL measurement of strong coupling in the QD-cavity system, we evaluated a bare cavity Q factor from a spectrum taken under a far-detuned condition. For the fitting with linewidth with an accuracy far beyond the spectrometer response. In general, true linewidths can be extracted from convolved functions using an accurately-estimated instrumental response as long as they are well described with a mathematical model, as commonly used in, for example, high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy Here, we discuss the observed blueshift of cavity wavelength in Fig. The shift originates from the change of the refractive index Δn because of carrier plasma effect. Δn in carrier plasma effect is given by the following equation where, c, ε 0 , and e are light speed, permittivity of vacuum, and elementary charge, respectively; m e and m h are the effective masses of an electron and a hole, respectively. n GaAs is the refractive index of the GaAs slab (=3.46), and λ is the wavelength of cavity mode. Here, we assume the Δn is uniform across the whole cavity structure and the carrier density N of the electron and hole are equal (N e ~Nh ). For the calculation of N, we assumed typical physical properties of GaAs in its absorption coefficient In order to evaluate the rise of sample temperature caused by laser heating (shown in the pump power dependence of cavity wavelength (λ) in Fig. 