We present energy-resolved photoelectron momentum maps for orbital tomography that have been collected with a novel and efficient time-of-flight momentum microscopy setup. This setup is combined with a 0.5 MHz table-top femtosecond extremeultraviolet light source, which enables unprecedented speed in data collection and paves the way towards time-resolved orbital imaging experiments in the future. Moreover, we take a significant step forward in the data analysis procedure for orbital imaging, and present a sparsity-driven approach to the required phase retrieval problem, which uses only the number of non-zero pixels in the orbital. Here, no knowledge of the object support is required, and the sparsity number can easily be determined from the measured data. Used in the relaxed averaged alternating reflections algorithm, this sparsity constraint enables fast and reliable phase retrieval for our experimental as well as noise-free and noisy simulated photoelectron momentum map data. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful method to study the structure where A is the vector potential of the ionizing radiation and k is the photoelectron momentum. The δ function ensures energy conservation, taking into account the binding energy E b of the initial state, the final state kinetic energy E kin , the sample work function Φ and the photon energy hω. This Fourier-transform relationship between measurement and object occurs similarly in coherent diffractive imaging (CDI) For efficient orbital imaging, one first needs to be able to collect energy-and momentumresolved photoelectron data in an efficient manner. So far, using typical two-dimensional angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) detectors, which only have access to a single momentum direction, a measurement of the the full 2D photoelectron momentum map required tedious scanning of the azimuthal angle of the sample. Nowadays, this issue can be overcome by the usage of so-called momentum microscopes, which collect the full azimuthal angle of the photoemitted electrons in one measurement. Moreover, using timeof-flight-based momentum microscopy, scanning of the kinetic energy can be omitted, too. However, using a time-of-flight technique, a pulsed extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) light source is needed for such measurements, which has so far limited the usage of these microscopes to synchrotron radiation facilities. Here, in contrast, we present first orbital imaging data that has been collected with a time-of-flight momentum microscope and a high-repetitive 0.5 MHz femtosecond table-top EUV light source. We show that such a setup is ideally suited for efficient momentum microscopy and further opens the door towards time-resolved orbital imaging experiments in the future. In terms of data analysis, efficient phase retrieval algorithms are required, because, like CDI, photoemission measurements do not record the phase of the photoemission pattern, and the phase must be reconstructed in order to achieve an image. In the context of CDI, it has been established that this is possible for objects with a known finite support A schematic overview of the EUV beamline used for photoemission is shown in Fig. Generally, molecular orbitals are three-dimensional objects. Complete reconstruction therefore requires measurement of a three-dimensional photoemission spectrum and subsequent phase retrieval Initially the support of the measured orbital, i.e. the set of pixels for which its value is nonzero, is unknown in orbital imaging. Nevertheless, the rough size of the orbital can usually be estimated, for example from the intermolecular distance measured by low energy electron diffraction. This yields the number of non-zero pixels S in the orbital image without imposing a specific support. Furthermore, the molecular orbital can usually be described by a compact arrangement of positive and negative lobes. Based on these considerations, we propose a combined sparsity and realness projection P S,real operating on the current orbital guess ψ n . The projection P S,real (ψ n ) is calculated as follows: 1. Set the imaginary part of the guess to zero, leaving the real part. 2. Sort the guess by its amplitudes |ψ n | and find the amplitude a of the S th -most bright pixel. 3. Of the unsorted guess ψ n , set all pixels to zero where |ψ n |< a. In addition to P S,real , we use the measurement constraint P M . This means we calculate the predicted momentum map using a Fourier transform, set the amplitudes of the predicted field equal to the measured values and perform an inverse Fourier transform to calculate the updated orbital guess. A single step of the alternating projections (AP) algorithm is then defined as In order to monitor the progress of the reconstruction, we calculate the normalized root mean square (RMS) change between subsequent iterations ψ n and ψ n-1 . This provides a measure of how well the algorithm has converged to a local minimum. To quantify the quality of the given solution, we calculate the error with respect to the measurement constraint which is the RMS difference between a guess ψ and its projection onto the measurement P M (ψ), normalized to the RMS value of the measured data I. We use the same normalization for the RMS change of the guess. In order to investigate the efficiency and accuracy of various phase retrieval approaches, we have simulated photoelectron momentum map data for the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of a Coronene molecule in free space as calculated using the ORCA quantum chemistry package The results of a series of orbital reconstructions for the HOMO are shown in Fig. In order to select the accurate reconstructions from the individual converged reconstructions, we calculate the reconstruction error given by Eq. 3. It is necessary to fix the position and sign of the reconstructions before averaging, as these are not constrained by the phase retrieval procedure. The reconstruction with the lowest error is chosen as an example for this procedure. Reconstructions which have an RMS difference with the example larger than 0.3 are removed from the analysis. Finally, the reconstructions are averaged. For the result shown in Fig. In order to increase the reconstruction chance of the phase retrieval procedure, we have replaced AP with the relaxed averaged alternating reflections (RAAR) algorithm where the reflection operator R i is defined as 2P i -1 and β a damping parameter usually chosen between 0 and 1. This parameter controls the behaviour of the algorithm such that it searches for global minima when β is close to one, while smaller values enable local minimization Although the sparsity number of the to be reconstructed orbital can often be estimated based on prior information, this estimate may not be accurate. In order to investigate how the accuracy of the reconstruction depends on the exact sparsity constraint, we have performed phase retrieval for a wide range of sparsity constraints. These analyses were performed as described in section 3.1. Fig. We have performed an identical analysis for a high-quality simulated photoelectron momentum map of the HOMO-1 of isolated Coronene, shown in Fig. From Figures In the previous analyses, we have limited the reconstructed orbital to real values. This strong constraint is incorporated in step 1 of the sparsity projection. The realness constraint is however not necessary for phase retrieval. In an analysis similar to Fig. We have also considered the combination of sparsity with other constraints. A symmetry constraint is particularly attractive due to the high symmetry of the HOMO and HOMO-1 in Coronene. Such a constraint can be implemented by averaging the orbital guess with its mirror image before applying the sparsity constraint. Anti-symmetry can be accounted for by inverting the mirror image before averaging, and the procedure can be repeated for multiple symmetry axes. However, we have found that a combined sparsity and symmetry constraint causes the algorithm to converge to local minima in which the orbital consists of two separated parts. This behaviour can be corrected by also applying a support constraint. For the simulated photoelectron momentum map data, this combined support-symmetrysparsity constraint did not yield a significant improvement over a simple sparsity constraint. We have applied sparsity-driven orbital reconstruction to photoemission spectra of perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) adsorbed on the Ag(110) surface, prepared by sublimation from a Knudsen cell. We used low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) to confirm that PTCDA is deposited in a brick wall monolayer, where all molecules are aligned along the [001] direction Fig. Am plit ude Overview of the photoemission momentum microscopy measurement of PTCDA/Ag(110). a: Angle-integrated view of the photoelectron spectrum obtained after 2 hours of measurement. b: Typical photoemission transfer function |A • k| for our system with a 22°angle of incidence on the sample. c, d, e: Photoelectron momentum maps (by amplitude) of the occupied LUMO of the first monolayer, HOMO of the first monolayer and HOMO of the second monolayer respectively. These momentum maps were retrieved by fitting a Gaussian with fixed position and width to the photoemission spectrum measured at individual pixels. f: Simulated HOMO and LUMO orbital of PTCDA in free space as calculated using the ORCA quantum chemistry package where a strong molecular signal is seen. In total, we observe three signals that can be attributed to the PTCDA molecule, at binding energies of 0.85 eV, 2.0 eV and 2.3 eV. Of these, we attribute the first two to the LUMO and HOMO of the PTCDA brick wall monolayer, while the third signal is assumed to arise from the HOMO of a partial PTCDA bilayer in the herringbone structure For the analysis of measured photoelectron momentum map patterns, which are asymmetric due to the polarization term A • k (shown in Fig 6b ), we have implemented an accordingly modified measurement constraint in which α is a regularization parameter typically chosen between 0.01 and 10 to prevent division by zero when | A • k||ψ n | is zero. This approach avoids errors in the calculation of the momentum map from the measured data As input-data for the orbital reconstruction, we have used the data presented in Fig. For the HOMO photoelectron momentum map data as presented in Fig. In comparison to the simulated data for the coronene molecule, we observe significantly more variance in the retrieved orbital, as well as a stronger dependence on the settings of the reconstruction algorithm. For a given set of reconstruction parameters, we typically observe a small number of frequently-occurring orbital shapes. These can be ascribed to the local minima in the phase-retrieval landscape. To determine these local minima, we repeat the phase retrieval process with different random initialization while also considering several sparsity constraints. We then use the K-means clustering algorithm to collect and average similar reconstructions which belong to the same local minimum An overview of the results for the symmetry-free orbital reconstruction of the HOMO is shown in Fig. For the symmetry-constrained reconstructions, we observe two classes of reconstructions which occur roughly equally often: those with zeros on the diagonal in the momentum distribution, and those where those zeroes do not occur. Apart from the true orbital, there are a number of reasons which may cause a lack of zeroes along these diagonals, such as blurring due to aberration of the momentum microscope, a residual background, a residual contribution from the HOMO of the second monolayer or possibly a bad centering of the momentum map. It is therefore not trivial to indicate which of these orbitals best describes the PTCDA/Ag(110) orbital based only on the orbital imaging results. Here, we observe that the measurement suggests a more rectangular shape of the orbital and the individual lobes, and the more triangular shape suggested by DFT is only reproduced if the strong symmetry constraint is used. As mentioned before, a crucial advantage of the momentum microscope is that it enables the measurement of multiple molecular orbitals simultaneously. In order to demonstrate this capability, we have performed the same analysis to the momentum distribution acquired for the LUMO, the results of which are shown in Figures In summary, we present first orbital imaging data with our newly developed femtosecond momentum microscopy setup We have applied the developed sparsity-driven orbital reconstruction to experimental photoelectron momentum map data of a PTCDA monolayer on the silver (110) surface. The measurement data were acquired using time-of-flight-based momentum microscope, which enabled the simultaneous measurement of the HOMO and LUMO of PTCDA. As for the simulations, we find good reconstructions for a broad range of sparsity values. We note however, that the phase retrieval algorithm does not always result in the same orbital, and that the predicted momentum distribution also varies. It is therefore necessary to repeat the phase retrieval procedure, and to select the most likely orbital shape based on the the results of this procedure, possible prior knowledge of the orbital and a good understanding of the limitations of the measurement. Finally, we note that the sparsity-driven reconstruction procedure should also be applicable in the three-dimensional case. For future experiments, it is promising to apply sparsity-based methods to full three-dimensional orbital tomography The phase retrieval was performed using the python package ProxToolbox, which is available from http://num.math.uni-goettingen.de/proxtoolbox.