We theoretically study the low energy electromagnetic response of BCS type superconductors focusing on propagating collective modes that are observable with THz near field optics. The interesting frequency and momentum range is ω < 2∆ and q < 1/ξ where ∆ is the gap and ξ is the coherence length. We show that it is possible to observe the superfluid plasmons, amplitude (Higgs) modes, Bardasis-Schrieffer modes and Carlson-Goldman modes using THz near field technique, although none of these modes couple linearly to far field radiation. Coupling of THz near field radiation to the amplitude mode requires particle-hole symmetry breaking while coupling to the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode does not and is typically stronger. For parameters appropriate to layered superconductors of current interest, the Carlson-Goldman mode appears in the near field reflection coefficient as a weak feature in the sub-THz frequency range. In a system of two superconducting layers with nanometer scale separation, an acoustic phase mode appears as the antisymmetric density fluctuation mode of the system. This mode produces well defined resonance peaks in the near-field THz response and has strong anticrossings with the Bardasis-Schrieffer and amplitude modes, enhancing their response. In a slab consisting of many layers of quasi-two dimensional superconductors, realized for example in samples of high T c cuprate compounds, many branches of propagating Josephson plasmon modes are found to couple to the THz near field radiation. Electromagnetic (EM) response is a fundamental property of superconductors. The response to static electric and magnetic fields (infinite conductivity and the Meissner effect) are the defining properties of the superconducting state. The response to the time dependent, very long wavelength transverse fields produced by far field radiation has been extensively studied Recent progress in cryogenic near field nano optics Charge fluctuations are constrained by the continuity equation, the proper treatment of which requires a fluctuation calculation consistent with the relevant Ward Identities Fig. The phase (Anderson-Bogoliubov-Goldstone) mode (heavy blue dashed line in Fig. In the presence of abundant normal carriers as happens for example close to T c , the Coulomb potential of the superfluid density fluctuation can be screened and as a result, one finds two modes: a charge-neutral gapless mode (the socalled Carlson-Goldman (CG) mode The amplitude (Higgs) mode (green line in Fig. The Bardasis-Schrieffer (BaSh) mode The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II we present the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation of the BCS Hamiltonian to obtain the Ginzburg-Landau effective action which includes the collective modes. Section III derives the linear EM response functions and their simple forms in the low energy limit. With the longitudinal optical conductivity, we analyse the properties of the collective modes in sections IV, V, VI and VII with a focus on 2D. Section VIII discusses the acoustic plasmon mode in superconducting double layer which is promising to be observed in THz near field optics. We then discuss the cluster of hyperbolic Josephson plasmons in naturally layered superconductors in section IX and show that they are greatly affected by the nonlocal correction to the optical conductivity and the discrete nature across the layers. Section X is a summary and conclusion, with pointers to the relevant equations and figures, for readers uninterested in the details of the derivations. Appendix A contains the definition and explicit forms of the correlation functions. Appendix B has the derivation of the reflection coefficients. Appendix C has the derivation of the two fluid model. The starting point is the BCS Lagrangian of attracting electrons coupled to electromagnetic (EM) field: where is the electron annihilation operator, ξ(p) = ε(p) -μ, p = -i ∇, e is the electron charge and g > 0 is the attractive interaction. We will be interested in relatively low frequency longitudinal EM fluctuations where the magnetic field can be neglected. Thus d r 1 16π F μν F μν → d r 1 8π E 2 (r ) for 3D and → q 1 4π|q| E -q E q for a 2D plane embedded in 3D space. In the 2D formula E q is the Fourier component of the electric field on the 2D plane. Note that the EM field A has an UV cutoff which is much smaller than the fermi momentum such that it mediates only the smooth part of the Coulomb interaction between the electrons. Here, the high energy part of the photon has been integrated out; together with the phonons or other pairing modes this results in an effective interaction g . For simplicity, we don't explicitly notate the photons in what follows. Performing the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation of the path integral Z = D[ ψ, ψ]e -S in the pairing channel gives where the action describes coupled dynamics of the fermion field ψ, the EM field A and the gap ∆ l with l denoting the pairing angular momentum. Note that we have neglected detailed structure in g that is not important to our conclusions. The fermion propagator is where the index l labels different pairing channels and f l (p) describes the momentum dependence of the pairing function in each channel. For simplicity, we consider only spin singlet pairing with the Nambu spinors being In the BCS regime of two dimensional superconductors, we can choose f l = cos(l θ k ) or sin(l θ k ) and the corresponding pairing interaction is Note that for l = 0, the 1/2π factor should be changed to 1/4π. We assume that the l = 0 component of the interaction is the strongest and thus the ground state has s-wave pairing but with only minor variations our formalism can be rewritten to cover other cases. We successively integrate out the fermion field to obtain the Ginzburg Landau action for the gap and EM field, and then the gap to obtain the action for EM field which gives the information of the EM response functions. Expanding in the EM field, the Lagrangian density is where the Gor'kov Green's function for the Bogoliubov quasi particle is the paramagnetic contribution to the current is and the diamagnetic 'Drude' kernel is Note that we have assumed inversion symmetry of ε(p). After integrating out the fermions, the action becomes where the trace is over the frequency, momentum and spinor degrees of freedom of ψ. It is convenient to split the action into mean field and fluctuation parts: S(∆, A) = S mean field + S fluctuation (10) where in the mean field part the trace is evaluated with space and time independent order parameters and the fluctuation part is the difference between the mean field action and the full action, and will be expanded in powers of small fluctuations around a homogeneous solution. Assuming the ground state has s-wave pairing with ∆ independent of momentum, the mean field free energy is where is the quasi particle energy with gap ∆. Minimization of S mean field with respect to ∆ yields the gap equation where f is the fermi distribution function. At zero temperature, the integral in Eq. ( where ν is the density of state at the fermi level of the normal state. The gap at zero temperature is thus for g ν 1. Without loss of generality, we pick the mean field gap ∆ to be real. The coherence length is defined as ξ = v F /∆. Note that the free energy is non analytic around ∆ = 0, i.e., the expansion coefficients in small ∆ all diverge. The Ginzburg Landau expansion in powers of ∆ is only possible at finite temperature and accurate close to T c . The validity of this 'mean field plus fluctuation' approach is based on validity of the mean field theory. In other words, the quantum/thermal fluctuations of the order parameters have to be small. The latter is suppressed by the 1, the small parameter of the mean field theory The fluctuations include those of the EM field, the s-wave gap and the subdominant pairing order parameters. The s-wave gap fluctuation can be separated into amplitude and phase: ∆ = (∆ 0 + ∆(r, t ))e i 2θ(r,t ) . It is convenient to perform a local gauge transformation In the effection action, the EM field always comes together with the phase fluctuations in the above gauge invariant form and therefore couples directly to the phase mode. The appearance of the other modes in the EM response can be inferred simply from their coupling to the phase mode. The action of fluctuations ∆ q around the mean field gap can be decomposed as S fluctuation = S θ + S ∆ + S BaSh + S c + nonlinear terms (16) where is the phase action, is the amplitude action and is the action for the fluctuation of the sub dominant pairing channels, i.e., the Bardasis-Schrieffer modes. Note that the 'a' in G a means 'amplitude' and 'l ' in G l labels the angular momentum of the subdominant pairing channel. Finally, (20) is the coupling between phase and amplitude/BaSh mode fluctuations. Global U (1) symmetry under θ → θ +δ is manifest here since the action depends only on derivatives of the phase. This ensures charge conservation. The kernels K , G a,l , C and B will be defined and discussed in subsequent subsections. The quadratic kernel for the phase action is where χ (0) ρρ , χ (0) ρj and χ (0) jj are the density-density, densitycurrent and current-current correlation functions evaluated at the mean field saddle point. In the case of quadratic band, ε = p 2 /(2m), the system has Galilean invariance and D i j = n/mδ i j where n is the total carrier density. Low energy limit-At zero temperature, for ω ∆ and q 1/ξ, we have χ where ν is the normal state density of state at the fermi level and D is assumed to be rotationally invariant. Therefore, the effective low energy Lagrangian of the phase fluctuation is 43 which describes the Nambu-Goldstone mode with velocity v g = n/(mν) = v F / d if EM field were not present, also known as the Anderson-Bogoliubov mode The inverse propagator for amplitude fluctuation is At zero momentum q = 0 and rotated to real frequency, it has the analytical form where ∆ sc = ∆ and describes the quasi-particle effects. Specifically, F diverges as 1 as the frequency approaches 2∆ and has an imaginary part above 2∆ due to quasi-particle excitations, leading to power law decay in time of the amplitude mode Nevertheless, beyond weak coupling or in systems with additional physics, the behavior may be different. For example, in systems with superconductivity coexisting with charge density wave (CDW), the quasi particle absorption gap ∆ = ∆ 2 sc + ∆ 2 cd w is larger than the Higgs frequency 2∆ sc and the amplitude mode becomes a well defined collective mode where d is space dimension and the O(q 2 ) expansion can be found in Appendix A 1. Thus the Higgs mode frequency disperses roughly as ω 2 F q 2 as in Ref. The inverse propagators for the fluctuations of the higher angular momentum pairing channels are where the correlator is defined in Appendix A 2. Note that there are two directions for the fluctuations of the subdominant order parameters in the complex plane: perpendicular to the mean field gap (in the 'imaginary' direction) and parallel to it (in the 'real' direction). The BaSh modes In this paper we focus on the d -wave BaSh mode in an s-wave superconductor. In two dimensions, there are two d -wave BaSh modes corresponding to d x 2 -y 2 and d x y . We consider here the d x 2 -y 2 mode; considerations for the d x y mode are similar. Taking the momentum to be along x, one finds that to leading order in momentum the inverse propagator of the d x 2 -y 2 mode is For g d ∈ (0, 2g ), at zero momentum, it has a pole below 2∆ which gives the mode frequency 2 in the weak and strong BaSh fluctuation limits. As g d changes from 0 to 2g , ω BaSh goes from 2∆ to 0. For g d > 2g , the ground state is no longer an s-wave one In this section, we present the coupling matrix elements between light and the Higgs mode/BaSh mode, a main result of this paper. In the present formalism, the exact form of the coupling between phase and amplitude is The phase θ and BaSh mode ∆ l are odd under either time reversal or particle hole interchange because they are fluctuations in the 'imaginary' direction on the complex plane; the amplitude fluctuation ∆ is however even under these operations. Therefore, linear coupling between phase and amplitude fluctuations breaks particle hole symmetry while linear coupling between phase and Bash modes does not. Taking the requirements of time reversal and inversion symmetry into account we find that the coupling coefficient can be expanded as where C 0 ,C i = 0 in a particle hole symmetric situation. To study the linear EM response for q 1/ξ, it is sufficient to keep the leading terms. The simplest way to break the particle hole symmetry is to use an energy dependent electronic density of state (DOS), e.g., as in the parabolic band electron gas in three dimension. Assuming the DOS is and from χ (0) j∆ that see Appendix A 3 for detailed derivation. The factor λ∆/E F characterizes the strength of particle hole symmetry broken and is small in known superconductors. In two dimensions, from inversion, time reversal symmetry, and that the BaSh fluctuation is π/2 out of phase relative FIG. where B i = i π∆v 2 F F (ω) describes coupling between electric field and the BaSh mode, see Appendix A 3. Since the angular momentum change is δl = 2 in exciting an s bound state to a d state, an inhomogeneous electric field is required to overcome the selection rule and thus the B i terms exist only at finite momentum. It will be shown that in the optical conductivity, at leading (O(q 2 )) order the B 0 term does not contribute. Note that coupling to the BaSh mode does not require breaking particle hole symmetry and is not suppressed by the typically small parameter ∆/E F . Thus in general, the BaSh mode couples to EM more strongly than the Higgs mode. To obtain the linear EM response functions, one just needs to obtain the fluctuation action quadratic in the EM fields. Integrating out the amplitude and BaSh modes results in with the kernel modified to For longitudinal EM response, it is inappropriate to directly employ the 'free' optical conductivity χ (0) jj + 〈D i j 〉 or the density response χ (0) ρρ obtained from the BCS mean field Hamiltonian, because the static mean field approximation breaks global U (1) gauge invariance and thus does not satisfy charge conservation: K μν q ν = 0. The reason is that longitudinal EM fields excite order parameter phase fluctuations that are not captured by Bogoliubov quasi-particles. The solution is to take into account the phase fluctuations where is the EM response tensor satisfying J μ = Π μν A ν and the continuity equation Π μν q ν = 0. Specifically, Π 00 = χ ρρ is the irreducible (with respect to the Coulomb interaction) density-density response (polarization function) and i ω Π i j = σ i j is the optical conductivity. This formalism is equivalent to correcting the current vertex by electron electron interactions after which gauge invariance where σ n is the normal state conductivity and E (x), K (x) are the complete elliptic integrals. At low temperature compared to T c , in the low energy limit ω ∆ and q 1/ξ as shown in the blue region of Fig. Here n s is the superfluid density and n s /m is the superfluid stiffness which in 3D is related to the magnetic penetration depth as λ B = c 2 4π m n s e 2 . This form closely resembles that of a hydrodynamic electron fluid At non-zero temperature, one should add the contribution of the normal carriers which makes the conductivity into the 'two fluid' form derived in Appendix C: For ∆ T , an analytical formula for the normal fluid conductivity with non-zero scattering rate can be found from the Boltzmann equation where D n = πn n /m, n n ≈ n is the density of normal carriers, γ is the scattering rate, D f = v 2 F /(d γ) is the normal state diffusion constant, d is space dimension and ν n is close to ν at temperate close to T c . For simplicity, we neglect the coupling to the amplitude mode in this section. The plasmons are the charge density fluctuations and can be found by the zeros of the dielectric function where V q = 4π/q 2 for three dimension and V q = 2π/|q| for 2D. Together with Eq. ( In the low frequency limit ω ω c , the 2D plasmon dispersion ω p = 2D s q approaches the edge of the continuum of vacuum propagating photons ω = c q (recall that here q is a two dimensional momentum and light modes disperse as ω = c q 2 + k 2 z for any k z ). For lower frequencies the analysis given here requires modification, because the electric fields associated with the plasmons begin to extend far from the 2D sheet, so that the plasmon couples much less strongly to near field radiation. The critical frequency can be estimated as ω c = 2D s /c corresponding to the energy F where E * F is the fermi energy equivalent to a two dimensional superfluid stiffness n s /m. For a clean, weakly correlated material E * F is of eV-scale and the crossover frequency is of the order of 1 THz. However, many superconductors of current interest Assuming a doping level of n = 7×10 13 cm -2 (corresponding to the fermi momentum k F = 2π/(3 nm)) and the fermi velocity of v F = 2.5 × 10 5 m/s, one obtains a wavelength of λ ≈ 180 μm for the plasmon at 1 THz. This wavelength is close to that of the corresponding vacuum photon (300μm) although a substrate with large dielectric screening might make the plasmon wave length shorter. Nevertheless, in a dirty superconductor with a large normal state scattering rate γ T c , the sub-gap plasmon frequency is mainly determined by the superfluid density which is only a part of the total density even at zero temperature: n s ∼ nT c /γ. At the same THz frequency far below γ, the plasmon wavelength is smaller by the factor T c /γ and they become more confined to the 2D plane. Below the gap, weakly damped plasmons with dispersion ω = 2D s q couple strongly to near field probe as shown by the near field reflection coefficient in Fig. The Higgs mode couples to phase fluctuation as shown in Eq. ( Since the C 0 and C i terms contribute terms at the same order, we take C i = 0 to arrive at a simplified expression Thus the longitudinal optical conductivity is where is the dimensionless coupling constant of the Higgs mode to EM and d is the Higgs mode frequency. Since λ is order one and sinh -1 ω D ∆ is not a large number, this coupling is simply suppressed by the small number ∆ E F . Note that at q = 0, the optical conductivity reduces to the Drude form and there is no signature of Higgs mode showing why this mode cannot be observed in conventional far-field THz linear response. In contrast, near field optical imaging technique has access to non-zero q where the Higgs mode manifests itself through coupling to the plasmons. Specifically, for a monolayer superconductor, the coupled collective modes can be found as the poles of Eq. (44). The weight of the Higgs pole in R p scales as W hi g g s ∼ κ 2 v 2 g q 2 /∆ for ω h ω p , i.e., well before the Higgs mode crosses the plasmon. Nevertheless, the most prominent signature of the Higgs mode is its anti crossing with the plasmon mode which happens roughly at ω p (q) = ω hq . A detailed solution of Eq. ( where q is the momentum at the anti-crossing. Therefore, the splitting will be bigger if the anti-crossing happens at larger momentum. Optical excitation of the BaSh mode can be viewed as transition from an s bound state of the cooper pair to a d bound state. This is forbidden in far field optics for two reasons: first, unlike the Hydrogen atom case, uniform electric field exerts the same force on the two electrons and does not change the internal structure; second, both s-state and d-state have even parity which forbids the transition due to optical selection rule. Thus it is necessary to go to nonzero momentum for its nonzero coupling to EM field. Indeed, the coupling constant is proportional to ξq which is appreciable when the electric field becomes substantially nonuniform on the scale of a cooper pair size. Plugging Eq. ( where g ∼ 1 is the dimensionless coupling constant between BaSh mode and EM. The B 0 terms are higher order in q and are neglected. Note that if the momentum q is along x, the BaSh mode means the d x 2 -y 2 order parameter fluctuation. The BaSh mode couples to near field more strongly than the Higgs mode due to the absence of the ∆/E F factor in the coupling constant κ BaSh . Solving the pole equation, Eq. ( The CG mode is a superfluid density fluctuation accompanied by the counter flow of normal carriers such that the Coulomb potential from the superfluid fluctuation is almost completely screened The velocity v g of the CG mode depends on the ratio between the superfluid density n s and superfluid susceptibility χ s = π 4 ∆ T c ν and has different expressions in the clean where ζ(x) is the Riemann Zeta function and we have used the fact that n s = n π∆ 2 2γT c for dirty superconductors and n s = 2(1 -T /T c )n for clean superconductors close to T c . Its dispersion can be derived from the two fluid conductivity Eq. ( in the limit of D f q 2 ω γ. Note the plasma frequency ω s/n = 4D s/n in 2D and ω s/n = 2D s/n q in 3D. Solving Eq. ( At even lower frequency ω T in the dirty case and (1 -T /T c )γ in the clean case. Note that the CG mode can be understood as a sound with the standard sound velocity n s m /χ s and χ s being the superfluid compressibility. The latter is smaller than ν, the compressibility of the whole fluid in the low frequency thermal dynamic limit, because the super and normal fluids move out of phase in this relative high frequency regime. The local accumulation of superfluid causes the local chemical potential to shift up leading to a change of quasiparticle energy and charge. However, the quasiparticle occupation number relaxes too slowly and cannot adjust itself to this change In clean superconductors the CG mode can cross the diffusion line (Fig. ν n m in this regime but still remains close to v g since the second term is much smaller. The original experiment using Josephson tunneling junctions by Carlson and Goldman In this section we consider the system made of two superconducting layers separated by a small distance a, as shown in Fig. which leads to two plasmon branches ( The upper branch is the symmetric mode whose dispersion follow the ω + ∼ q law at small momentum. The lower (anti symmetric) branch is an acoustic mode which has the dispersion for q 1/a. This acoustic mode is charge fluctuations of the two layers which are out of phase such that the net charge fluctuation is near zero if looked at far away. In other words, the Coulomb interaction is mutually screened and is modified to the effective short range form V (q) = 2π(1e -aq )/q that makes the mode acoustic. A nonzero Josephson coupling between the layers would give this mode a small gap equal to the 'Josephson plasma frequency' ω J = 4πea j c /ħ where j c is the critical interlayer current density. An interlayer DC voltage that induces AC Josephson effect can parametrically generate these acoustic plasmons. This issue will be discussed in a future publication. In this section, we neglect the Josephson coupling between the layers which is weak for a substantially larger than atomic scale. Both modes correspond to non-zero momentum oscillations of the phase of the superconducting order parameter. This acoustic plasmon can be viewed as the Goldstone mode which recovers its acoustic nature because Coulomb interaction is greatly weakened. Its speed still has a large contribution 2D a ∼ αk F av F from the residual Coulomb interaction where α = e 2 /(ħv F ) is the 'fine structure constant'. In BSCCO 2212 at typical doping In order for the acoustic mode to be observable to near field experiments, it should have substantial spectral weight in the the near field reflection coefficient derived in Appendix B. Given the same amplitude of charge density oscillation in each layer, the electric field generated by the two layers tend to cancel each other since they are opposite in sign. The remaining field is weaker than the symmetric plasmon mode by a factor of q a/2 and the near field spectra weight is weaker by (q a/2) 3/2 . Nevertheless, the acoustic mode is still visible as shown by the R p plotted in Fig. In layered superconductors such as high T c cuprates, there is Josephson coupling between the layers and the low temperature and subgap collective modes are the Josephson plasmons where θ n (r ), φ n (r ) and A n (r ) are the phase, scalar and vector potentials on the nth layer and E c is the Josephson coupling energy per unit area and we have set e = 1. For longitudinal fields we are interested in, we can choose the gauge where A n (r ) = 0. Due to continuous translational symmetry in plane and discrete one in z direction, it is convenient to Fourier transform the fields into the 'Bloch' form where a is the layer spacing, q is the in plane momentum and k z ∈ (-π/a, π/a) is the lattice momentum in z direction. The Lagrangian Eq. ( Solving the Euler-Lagrange equation of the phase and making use of the expression of the charge density ρ = ν(∂ t θ+φ), we obtain the 'nonlocal' polarization function The Coulomb potential kernel is modified to q sinh(aq) cosh(aq)cos(ak z ) . ( The zeros of the dielectric function = 1 -V (k z , q)χ ρρ gives the dispersion of the collective modes In the long wave length limit q, k z 1/a, the Coulomb kernel reduces to that of the continuous limit and the mode dispersion simplifies to where ω J = 4πE c a 2 is the Josephson plasma frequency, ω p = 4πn s /m is the in plane plasma frequency, v g = v F / 2 is the in plane Goldstone mode speed in the clean limit and v z = ω J ω p v g is the z axis Goldstone mode speed. These are the hyperbolic Josephson plasmons (HJP) extensively studied in the literature which is defined as the external electrical potential divided by the total potential. Alternatively, the long wavelength response can be described by the anisotropic dielectric function and the collective mode dispersion is determined by q 2 x + k 2 z z = 0. This formalism is more convenient for calculating the reflection coefficient of a slab. To include the effect of Higgs and BaSh modes, one just needs to modify the in plane response x in similar fashions as Eqs. ( For a superconducting slab with thickness d in the continuous limit, the near field reflection coefficient is where R p is the reflection coefficient of an infinitely thick sample and k z is the z component of the EM wave momentum inside the slab. See Appendix B for the derivation. A typical reflection coefficient is shown in Fig. We studied the non local EM response properties of superconductors which are of great importance to the emerging field of THz near field experiments. With analytical formulas for the non local optical conductivity and plots of reflection coefficients, we have demonstrated that for monolayer or multilayer quasi two dimensional superconductors essentially all of the interesting collective modes (plasmons, hyperbolic interlayer or Josephson plasmons, the Carlson-Goldman mode, the amplitude (Higgs) mode and the Bardasis-Schrieffer mode) couple linearly to the THz EM fields produced by near field probes. As old arguments of Anderson show, the dispersion of the plasmon ( q) is essentially unaffected by superconductivity but the gap substantially suppresses the loss at low frequencies. Fig. In multilayer superconductors, a multiplicity of phase modes exist, coined the hyperbolic Josephson plasmons (Fig. On the experimental side, detection of the collective modes offers useful information about both the ground state and the low lying excited states. On the theory side, knowledge of how to excite the collective modes are often the first step towards understanding non equilibrium dynamics The formalism presented here is for s-wave superconductors. For d -wave superconductors, the qualitative features of the EM response such as the two fluid model Eq. ( where ξ/E means ξ(k)/E (k), ξ /E means ξ(k + q)/E (k + q) and f (E ) is the fermion occupation number at energy E . At zero temperature, rotating i Ω to ω, Eq. (A4) simplifies to The Higgs propagator involves the correlation in σ 1 channel: With the knowledge of the gap equation, the Higgs propagator is thus 26 where is shown in Fig. whose O(q 2 ) expansion gives (A11) The total order parameter can be written as ∆ k = ∆ + l ∆ l (r, t ) f l (k) where we have chosen the mean field gap ∆ to be real. The subdominant pairing order parameter fluctuations ∆ l can have two possible directions: 1, orthogonal to ∆ on the complex plane or in the 'imaginary' direction; 2, parallel to ∆ or in the 'real' direction. The 'imaginary' fluctuations are the BaSh modes while the 'real' ones don't have poles and are not collective modes. We first consider the BaSh mode correlator (A12) In two dimension with rotational symmetry, the d x 2 -y 2 BaSh mode correlator is in the cos(2θ k )σ 2 channel: The BaSh mode inverse propagator is which crosses zero at ω BaSh below the gap, as shown by Fig. in two dimension. In the case of ω BaSh 2∆, the propagator is simplified to where 2νg ). Thus the BaSh mode frequency disperses as ω BaSh (q) 2 = ω 2 BaSh + 1 2 v 2 F q 2 . We now consider the correlator of the 'real' fluctuations: which is different from the Higgs correlator Eq. (A7) only by the cos 2 (2θ k ) factor. The resulting propagator is which never crosses zero as shown by Fig. The coupling between phase fluctuation and the Higgs mode requires particle hole symmetry breaking which we model using an energy dependent DOS g (ξ) = ν(1 + λξ/E F ). The coupling constants are derived from the correlation functions in Eq. (31). From the general formula Eq. (A6) at zero temperature, the temporal part is which gives C 0 in Eq. (33). The spatial part is which gives C i in Eq. ( The coupling of phase to the 'real' d -wave order parameter fluctuations is similar to Eq. ( We now calculate the coupling of phase to the d -wave BaSh fluctuations which are in the σ 2 f d (k) channel. The temporal part is (A21) The expansion to O(q 2 ) is necessary because of the d -wave symmetry of f d (k). It proves the temporal term in Eq. ( where M = σ 3 . The density density correlation is in the σ 3 channel: At zero momentum it becomes In the limit of ω ∆, q ξ -1 , we have χ σ 3 σ 3 = -ν. where φ i ↑ /φ i ↓ are the amplitude of up going/down going fields in the ith vacuum medium. We have explicitly noted that the z direction momentum is ±i q due to the Laplace equation satisfied by φ in vacuum, i.e., the electric potentials are evanescent waves. The reflection problem is described by the boundary conditions of E ∥ being continuous across the 2D layer and E ⊥ satisfying Gauss's law, or equivalently φ 1↑ + φ 1↓ = φ 2↑ + φ 2↓ , (qφ 1↑qφ 1↓ ) -(qφ 2↑qφ 2↓ ) = 4πρ 2D = 4π q ω j 2D = 4π q ω σ(ω, q)(-i q)(φ 1↑ + φ 1↓ ) . Written in matrix form, Eq. (B2) becomes whose solution gives the linear relation between the fields each side of the 2D layer where M is the transfer matrix. Setting φ 2↑ = 0, one obtains the near field reflection coefficient for a 2D layer ω σ is the dielectric function in 2D. As shown in Fig. = M e -q a 0 0 e q a M φ 3↑ φ 3↓ . Setting φ 3↑ = 0 yields the reflection coefficient Eq. ( If the polarization function is nonlocal, more unfortunately, if it depends also on the z direction momentum k z such as that of the layered superconductor Eq. ( where q is the in-plane momentum which is a conserved quantity and k z is that in the nonlocal medium determined by the condition (ω, q, k z ) = 0. Eq. (B7) can be derived in a similar fashion to Appendix B 1. For a slab with finite thickness a, as shown in Fig. 1e 2i k z d R 2 p (B8) where R p is from Eq. (B7). In principle, the two fluid formula Eq. ( ρρ -ωχ (0) ρρ + qχ (0) ρj 2 ω 2 χ (0) ρρ + q i q j χ (0) j i j j + n m q 2 + 2ωqχ (0) ρj . Close to T c , we have where χ (0) come from the 'intra band' process among thermally excited quasiparticles while χ s is the 'interband' contribution from exciting quasi particle pairs which has the interpretation of superfluid susceptibility (compressibility). Close to T c , the χ (0) should resemble the polarization function of a normal fermi liquid, i.e., the Lindhard function where σ n is the 'intraband' part and is the superfluid density of a clean superconductor. Moreover, close to T c , the intraband contributions to the correlation functions should approximately satisfy the continuity equations ωχ (0) +qχ (0) ρj = 0 and q j σ ni j +ωχ (0) ρ j i = 0 since they