The combination of microstructures and mixed wettability for enhancing nucleate boiling has attracted much attention in recent years. However, in the existing experimental and numerical studies, the tops of microstructures are entirely subjected to wettability modification, which makes the influences of mixed wettability dependant on the characteristic length of microstructures. In order to disclose the joint effects of surface structure and mixed wettability on nucleate boiling, in this work we propose an improved type of pillar-textured surface with mixed wettability, in which the tops of square pillars are partially subjected to wettability modification. Numerical investigation of the boiling heat transfer performance on the improved mixed-wettability surface is carried out using a three-dimensional thermal multiphase lattice Boltzmann model. The numerical results show that the width of the wettability-modified region plays an important role in the boiling performance of the improved mixed-wettability surface and the best boiling performance is achieved in the situation that the width of the wettability-modified region is sufficiently large but the bubble nucleated on the pillar top still does not interfere with the coalescence-departure mechanism of the bubbles nucleated around the pillar, which optimizes the joint effects of surface structure and mixed wettability for enhancing nucleate boiling. The influences of the shape of the wettability-modified region are also studied. Among the investigated shapes, the square is found to perform better than the other two shapes. Nucleate boiling is recognized as a highly efficient mode of heat transfer [1] and has been widely utilized in various energy conversion and heat exchange systems, such as power generation, electronic cooling, propulsion, chemical processes, etc. [1-3]. In the past decades, many researchers have carried out either experimental or numerical studies to investigate the mechanism of nucleate boiling and explore how to improve the boiling heat transfer performance. Nevertheless, owing to the extreme complexity of the nucleate boiling process, the mechanism of enhancing nucleate boiling heat transfer has not been well understood. In recent years, two methods of surface modification have attracted much attention in the studies of enhancing nucleate boiling heat transfer: one is to regulate and control the wettability of the heating surface In some early studies of boiling heat transfer, the importance of surface wettability was not recognized because the wettability effect was included in the effects of surface characteristics such as roughness Betz et al. They found that the number of hydrophobic dots and the pitch distance between dots have important influences on the boiling performance. Subsequently, Jo et al. Recently, Zhang et al. Besides the aforementioned experimental studies, some numerical studies of boiling heat transfer on heterogeneous wetting surfaces have been performed using the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method, which is a mesoscopic method built on the kinetic Boltzmann equation Inspired by the experimental study of Betz et al. Although significant progress has been achieved in applying the combination of microstructures and mixed wettability for boiling heat transfer, an important limitation of current studies should be pointed out, i.e., in the existing experimental and numerical studies, the tops of microstructures are entirely subjected to surface modification, which means that in these studies the effect of mixed wettability is non-independent and related to the characteristic length of the microstructures (e.g., the width of the microstructures). In order to disclose the joint effects of surface structure and mixed wettability, in the present study we numerically investigate the boiling heat transfer performance on an improved type of pillar-textured surface with mixed wettability, in which the tops of square pillars are partially subjected to wettability modification. To the best of the authors' knowledge, such an improved mixed-wettability surface has never been studied previously, neither experimentally nor numerically. Numerical simulations in the present work are performed using a three-dimensional (3D) thermal multiphase LB model with liquid-vapor phase change In this section, we briefly introduce the 3D thermal multiphase LB model with liquid-vapor phase change. In the LB method, the fluid flow is simulated by solving the discrete Boltzmann equation with certain collision operator, such as the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) where f  is the density distribution function, eq f  is the equilibrium distribution, x is the spatial position,  e is the discrete velocity, t is the time, t is the collision operator, in which M is a transformation matrix and  is a diagonal matrix, and G  is the forcing term in the discrete velocity space. The three-dimensional nineteen-velocity (D3Q19) lattice model is employed, which corresponds to the following lattice velocities Using the transformation matrix M, the right-hand side of Eq. (   where Mf , I is the unit matrix, and  S MG is the forcing term in the moment space. The details of the transformation matrix M , the equilibria eq m , the diagonal matrix  for relaxation times, and the forcing term S can be found in Ref. where M is the inverse matrix of the transformation matrix. The macroscopic density and velocity can be obtained by the following relationships: where F is the total force exerted on the system. For single-component multiphase flows, the intermolecular interaction force in the pseudopotential multiphase LB method is given by where    x is the pseudopotential, G is the interaction strength, and w  are the weights. For the D3Q19 lattice, the weights w  in Eq. ( , where ave  is the average density in the computational domain and is the gravitational acceleration. where is the acentric factor. When the viscous heat dissipation is neglected, the governing equation for the temperature field is given by where  is the thermal conductivity and V c is the specific heat at constant volume. Similar to the previous studies in Refs. The sketch of textured heating surfaces with micro-pillars is shown in Fig. , in which l.u. represents lattice units. Figure Initially, the computational domain is a liquid phase ( 0 150 l.u. z   ) below its saturated vapor phase (150 l.u. z z L   ) and the initial temperature of the computational domain is taken as 0.8 The surfaces of the square pillar and the bottom of the computational domain are the heating surfaces and the temperature is given by b s T T T   , while the temperature of the top boundary is maintained at s T . The periodic boundary condition is employed in the x and y directions (the numerical implementation can be found in Sec. 4.4.1 of Ref. where In this section, the boiling performance on the improved mixed-wettability surface is investigated. In , respectively. Numerical implementation of the contact angles can be found in Ref. , where x  is the grid spacing, c T is the critical temperature, and V  is the thermal conductivity of the vapor phase. Such a definition of the normalized heat flux is similar to that used in the study of Gong and Cheng . Such a trend is attributed to the fact that increasing the pillar width can promote the bubble nucleation at the four edges formed by the bottom substrate and the square pillar. However, when the pillar width is further increased, the boiling process may enter into the transition or film boiling, which results in a sharp decrease of the heat flux, as shown in Fig. In other words, the expansion of the bubble on the pillar top and its coalescence with the bubbles around the square pillar have been interrupted by the hydrophilic-hydrophobic boundary. However, when the width of the wettability-modified region is further increased, the size of the bubble on the pillar top would increase. Correspondingly, the bubble on the pillar top may coalesce with the bubbles nucleated around the pillar, and then the coalescence-departure mechanism of the bubbles on the bottom substrate may be affected. To illustrate the aforementioned point, some snapshots of the boiling process on the mixed-wettability surface (W mod = W = 80 l.u.) are shown in Fig. In this subsection, we numerically investigate the influences of the shape of wettability-modified region on the boiling performance of the improved mixed-wettability surface. Three different shapes are studied: square, circle, and 45°-rotating square, which are illustrated in Fig. discussed. Furthermore, it can be found that the peak of the heat flux is achieved at W mod = 50 l.u., 50 l.u., and 60 l.u. in the cases of square, circle, and 45°-rotating square, respectively. When mod 50 l.u. W  , the heat flux in the case of square is higher than that in the case of circle, which is in turn higher than the heat flux in the case of 45°-rotating square. Such a phenomenon is attributed to the fact that the area of wettability-modified region satisfies the relationship The variations of the normalized heat flux with the area of the wettability-modified region are depicted in Fig. To illustrate the phenomenon that the heat flux peaks at W mod = 50 l.u. in the cases of square and circle, but peaks at W mod = 60 l.u. in the case of 45°-rotating square, in Figs. , from which the bubble on the pillar top in the case of W mod = 60 l.u. starts to interfere with the coalescence-departure mechanism of the bubbles on the bottom substrate. To sum up, the numerical results presented in this subsection demonstrate that the shape of the wettability-modified region has an important influence on the boiling performance of the improved mixed-wettability surface and also further confirm the analysis in the previous subsection regarding the joint effects of surface structure and no coalescence mixed wettability for enhancing nucleate boiling heat transfer. Generally, it is observed that the square performs best among the three investigated shapes since it provides the highest value of the heat flux (see Fig. The combination of microstructures and mixed wettability has been applied to enhance nucleate boiling heat transfer in some recent experimental and numerical studies. However, in the existing studies, the tops of microstructures were entirely subjected to wettability modification, which makes the effect of mixed wettability dependant on the characteristic length of microstructures. In order to disclose the joint effects of surface structure and mixed wettability on nucleate boiling, in this paper we have designed an improved type of pillar-textured surface with mixed wettability, in which the tops of square pillars are partially subjected to wettability modification. Numerical investigation of the boiling heat transfer performance on the improved mixed-wettability surface has been performed using a 3D thermal multiphase LB model. The main findings and conclusions are summarized as follows. (i) For the improved mixed-wettability surface, bubbles are nucleated at two regions: one is the four edges formed by the square pillar and the bottom substrate, which is caused by the surface structure, and the other is the wettability-modified region on the top of the pillar, which is yielded by the wettability modification. (ii) It is found that the width of the wettability-modified region plays an important role in the boiling performance of the improved mixed-wettability surface and the best boiling performance is achieved in the situation that the width of the wettability-modified region is sufficiently large but the bubble nucleated on the pillar top still does not interfere with the coalescence-departure mechanism of the bubbles nucleated around the pillar, which takes the advantage of the multiple bubble-departure mode and optimizes the joint effects of surface structure and mixed wettability for enhancing nucleate boiling heat transfer. (iii) The influences of the shape of the wettability-modified region have also been studied. Three different shapes have been considered: square, circle, and 45°-rotating square. Numerical results show that the square performs best among the investigated shapes as it gives the highest value of the heat flux, but its heat flux is relatively sensitive to the width of the wettability-modified region in comparison with the other two shapes. buoyancy [1] V.K. Dhir, Boiling heat transfer, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 30 (1998) 365-401.