Most materials recently developed for room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) lack of practical relevance due to their inconvenient crystalline morphology. (ii) The programming of these systems is a rather slow process, RTP from organic molecules receives plenty of attention recently. With regard to the realization of high-contrast PLTs with readability under cw illumination (cw-PLTs), one can therefore formulate several desirable properties of the material system. On the one hand, the host material should be (I) amorphous and transparent, (II) capable of storing oxygen, (III) sensitive to oxidation, and, (IV) once oxygen is vanished, no fresh oxygen may diffuse into the emitting layer. On the other hand, the desired emitter (V) is showing RTP with high quantum yield (φP) in the absence of molecular oxygen, (VI) is sensitive to efficient quenching of RTP in the presence of molecular oxygen, and, as already mentioned, (VII) its fluorescence quantum yield (φF) should be very low compared to φP. While the host material requirements I to IV are already addressed adequately in our previous work using poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as host Emitters containing heavy atoms, like iridium or platinum, do on the one hand show high φP. Further, their fluorescence is vanished completely through high intersystem crossing caused by the increased spin-orbit coupling. Considering this number as a rough generalized value for oxygen quenching of any emitter embedded in PMMA, a lower phosphorescent lifetime limit for sufficient quenching of phosphorescence ( τ !" ! < 0.01 × τ '" ) can be denoted (see SI for derivation): Together with φP, this can be used as benchmark value for the requirements V and VI. For VII, the ratio of φP to φF is used, with higher values representing better contrast of the tags: Checking on three recent reviews Still, the utilization of CT states as intermediate level for populating local excited triplet states ( 3 LE), is a promising approach for increasing φP, since it is known that excited triplet state generation might be a favorable energetic pathway after CT state forming. Here we used thianthrene (TA) as donor units, which shows notable RTP both in crystalline state Despite a small decrease in peak energy, the spectral shape of the BP-2TA phosphorescence resembles the pure TA 3 LE emission (Figure A comparison of φP of pure TA (6%) and BP (~3%) (Figure Interestingly, excitation scans of BP-2TA show different maxima for CT fluorescence (λmax,exc = 340 nm) compared to 3 LE phosphorescence (λmax,exc = 320 nm), monitored at the same emission wavelength (λem = 470 nm, Figure Figure In total, with high φP and P2F, low φF, and an intensity-averaged phosphorescence lifetime of τ = 30 ms, BP-2TA fulfils all criteria for realizing high contrast cw-PLTs. To do so, tags were prepared as described in our previous publication, In this manner, any phosphorescent pattern can be printed into the layer via mask illumination. Since the printing time is inversely proportional to the UV intensity (Figure Reading the imprint is now, in contrast to prior publications, By heating the tag on a hotplate at 90°C for a few minutes, the phosphorescence is erased due to oxygen refilling. Subsequently, new patterns can be printed multiple times (Figure For consolidation of the presented design concept, in Figure In conclusion, we present a general approach to realize high-speed writeable and high-contrast cw-readable luminescent tags, which was successfully applied using a highly-efficient amorphous RTP emitter, showing cw-suitable PLTs for the first time. The cw-reading capabilities open up the possibilities to an easy data readout using the bare eye or a simple smartphone camera. The fast printing mechanism using high-intensity UV light guaranties a fluent processing. Further development of amorphous RTP materials fulfilling the PLT criteria is necessary. Materials: PMMA (average molecular weight 550,000) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. BP was purchased from Sigma Aldrich, TA from TCI Deutschland GmbH, NPB and Ir(MDQ)2(acac) from Lumtec Technology Corp. and PtOEP from Frontier Scientific. All these materials were used without further purification. The synthesis of BP-2TA has been described in detail before. Film fabrication: PMMA and the respective emitter both were dissolved in anisole to get a solution containing 95 wt% PMMA and 5 wt% of the emitter. The oxygen barrier material was dissolved in distilled water at 150°C. The layers were either spin coated at a speed of 2000 rpm using 150 μl of the solution, or drop casted using 500 μl on 1-inch quartz glass substrates. Emitting and oxygen-barrier layer were coated on top of each other with enough storing time to fully dry in-between. Lifetime measurements: Lifetimes in the ms-regime were determined using a 340 nm M340L4 LED or a 365 nm LED M365L2 (Thorlabs), a TGP3122 pulse generator (AIM-TTI Instruments), and a silicon photodetector PDA100A (Thorlabs). For the ns-and μs-regime, a Time Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) Setup was used, containing of a 375 nm laser LDHDC375, a PMA Hybrid Detector PMA Hybrid 40, a TimeHarp platine (all PicoQuant), and a Monochromator SpectraPro HRS-300 (Princeton Instruments). ns-Lifetimes were evaluated using reconvolution algorithms of FluoFit (PicoQuant). Spectral measurements: Prompt emission spectra were recorded using the LEDs mentioned above and a Spectrometer CAS 140CT-151 (Instrument Systems). For delayed phosphorescence spectra, the LED and the spectrometer were triggered, resulting in spectra acquired shortly after the LED turned off. To get the phosphorescence activation curves, spectra were recorded subsequently. The emission intensity then was integrated over the whole visible range and plotted against the illumination time. The activation time of the low-intensity measurements was derived from the activation curves, for the phosphorescence reaching half of the maximum measured phosphorescence. The derivation of the activation time of the highintensity measurement is described in details in Figure PLQY measurements: To determine the photoluminescent quantum yields of the different materials, an improved procedure Excitation scan measurements: Excitation scans were performed with a SPEX FluoroMax (Horiba). Mask illumination: Masks were printed with an office printer onto common overhead transparencies and then put in the UV beam path. Subsequently, the LED illuminated the sample through the mask, resulting in special resolved activation of phosphorescence. Before recording photos of the cw-PLTs, the masks were removed. emission consists mainly of fast phosphorescence Excited state diagram, calculated from emission peak energies, showing the BP triplet 3 LE (dark yellow), TA singlet 1 LE (dark red) and triplet 3 LE (red), as well as BP2-TA CT (blue) and 3 LE (green) state, referring to the respective ground state GS (black). is transparent in visible light, was erased twice by heating to 90°C for 3 minutes and 6 minutes, respectively. Consequently, new patterns were printed by mask illumination using a 365 nm LED as published before 