Atomic vapors offer many opportunities for manipulating electromagnetic signals across a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Here, a microwave signal with an audio-frequency modulation encodes information in an optical signal by exploiting an atomic microwave-to-optical double resonance, and magnetic-field coupling that is amplified by a resonant high-Q microwave cavity. Using this approach, audio signals are encoded as amplitude or frequency modulations in a GHz carrier, transmitted through a cable or over free space, demodulated through cavity-enhanced atom-microwave interactions, and finally, optically detected to extract the original information. This atom-cavity signal transduction technique provides a powerful means by which to transfer information between microwave and optical fields, all using a relatively simple experimental setup without active electronics. Manipulating and probing atoms with microwavefrequency radiation is a well-established technique. Despite the fact that the interactions between microwaves and atoms are weaker than optical interactions, microwaves play a leading role in applications ranging from atomic clock standards, In this work, we apply a model that shows how, in a three-level double-resonance scheme similar to those used for power standards, 34 ac magnetometry, The electronic structure of alkali atoms, like rubidium, includes readily accessible transitions in both the optical and microwave regime. Here, we make use of a "doubleresonance" scheme 37 that involves an electric-dipole optical transition (at 384 THz, or 780 nm) and a magneticdipole transition in the ground-state hyperfine splitting of the 87 Rb atom (6.8 GHz). In our experiment, the microwave field couples the two hyperfine ground state levels |g 1 ≡ |F = 1 and |g 2 ≡ |F = 2 , and an optical probe connects |g 2 to |e ≡ |F = 3 in the D 2 -manifold of 87 Rb [Fig. To understand the interplay between the optical and microwave signals, we first consider the case where the microwave field is absent. Here, the probe optically pumps the ground state atomic population to |g 1 (due to off-resonant excitation to the excited F = 2 level), and the probe's absorption is minimized [Fig. More formally, these double-resonance dynamics can be described in terms of a three-level system [Fig. where Ĥ0 is the atomic Hamiltonian, and d and μ are the electric and magnetic dipole operators, respectively. Due to the symmetries of the states involved, selection rules dictate that electric dipole transitions are allowed between states |g 1,2 and |e , but not between the ground states, and magnetic dipole transitions are allowed between |g 1 and |g 2 , but not from these levels to |e . When dissipation is included, the Lindblad equation more completely describes the system's dynamics, where ρ is the atomic density matrix, and L{ρ} is the Lindblad term, In the case of harmonic optical and microwave fields, where the optical electric field E(t) = E 0 cos(ω opt t+φ opt ) is nearly resonant with the |g 2 → |e transition and the microwave magnetic field B(t) = B 0 cos(ω μ t + φ μ ) is nearly resonant with the |g 1 → |g 2 transition, the rotating-wave Hamiltonian (expressed in the basis Here, ∆ opt = ω opt -ω eg2 and ∆ μ = ω μ -ω g2g1 are the optical and microwave detunings respectively, Ω opt = e| d • E 0 |g 2 / and Ω μ = g 1 | μ • B 0 |g 2 / are the optical and microwave Rabi frequencies, and is the reduced Planck's constant. After relaxation, the density matrix reaches a constant steady-state value that depends on the field parameters and decoherence rates. As described above, the transmission T of the probe (which is determined by the population in level |g 2 ) will likewise reach its steady-state value. If any parameter (generically, "X") is subject to a time-dependent variation, such that X → X + δX(t), the time-dependent transmission is where we assume that the variation is sufficiently small such that a first-order approximation is justified, and that any time-dependence is slower than a typical optical pumping time, to allow for quasi-steady-state behavior. In the spirit of RoF applications, we consider how amplitude and frequency modulation of the microwave signal affects the optical transmission. The principal idea is similar to that of frequency-modulation spectroscopy In this case, the transmission varies in proportion to the modulation V (t), Similarly, for frequency modulation, the frequency of the microwave field varies as ω μ → ω μ,0 + m FM V (t), where m FM is the frequency-modulation sensitivity. This time, the lowest-order affected term in the Hamiltonian is ∆ μ , which is modulated as: Here, the transmission varies as the modulation V (t): The dependence of ∂T /∂Ω μ and ∂T /∂∆ μ on the parameters of the MW field is disccussed below. In our experiment, an audio source is connected to the modulation input of a 6.8 GHz frequency generator to effect amplitude or frequency modulation of a microwave carrier [Fig. The microwave cavity used in these experiments localizes the microwave field in the central volume of the cavity, with polarization along the axis of cylindrical symmetry, in the TE 011 mode. With the cross-body access holes, simultaneous optical-and microwave-field interactions are possible. Through double-resonance, the audio signal is mapped on to the transmitted optical probe power, which is then converted to a voltage by an amplified photodiode. To demonstrate the initial proof-of-concept, singlefrequency amplitude-and frequency-modulated microwave signals are applied, with modulation frequency ω m /2π = 500 Hz. Figures Next, we explore the system's dependence on various microwave parameters, including the detuning and power of the microwave carrier, and the frequency of harmonic modulation. Along with a measure of the quasi-static (unmodulated) transmission of the optical probe in the presence of the unmodulated microwave carrier [Fig. Square-wave modulation measurements, which show a typical response time of 1 ms [Fig. Next, we demonstrate audio signal transduction using both AM and. Using the principles discussed above, we encode an audio signal from a license-free song in the microwave field transmitted to the cavity input either directly (via cable) or over free-space between antennas. The MW parameters were chosen to maximize the signal clarity and signal-to-noise ratio. Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated a powerful method for microwave-to-optical transduction of an analog audio signal based on cavity-enhanced magneticdipole coupling in a room-temperature alkali vapor. As a proof-of-concept, we have shown that this method is practical for AM and FM radio-over-fiber applications. An advantage of the setup as compared to other "atomic radio" systems is that cavity makes it possible to realize a configuration where the atoms do not need to "receive" the microwaves directly: the cavity-enhanced signal is strong enough to permit indirect sensing via an antenna that is not rigidly attached to the cavity, which allows its arbitrary adjustment to optimize reception. Though our demonstrations are bandwidth-limited by the system's finite response time in adjusting to a new steady state, the agnosticism of this method with respect to the details of system parameters means that it will have broader applicability in other atom-and atomlike systems with faster responses. For rubidium-atom applications, we foresee opportunities for digital signal encoding 