Innovations in batteries take years to formulate and commercialize, requiring extensive experimentation during the design and optimization phases. We approached the design and selection of a battery electrolyte through a black-box optimization algorithm directly integrated into a robotic test-stand. We report here the discovery of a novel battery electrolyte by this experiment completely guided by the machine-learning software without human intervention. Motivated by the recent trend toward super-concentrated aqueous electrolytes [1][2] study, to our knowledge, this is the first attempt to apply this framework to the design of functional materials in electrochemistry. We have built a robotic platform for characterizing battery electrolytes The non-aqueous electrolytes commonly used in modern batteries are highly flammable, and present significant safety hazards and manufacturing costs relating to safety, storage, and management Improvements in stability for aqueous electrolytes that do not reduce into a passivating film are not fully explained from first principles We reformulate aqueous electrolyte design as a black box optimization problem, where the electrolyte formulation is given as input and measured properties are output as optimization objectives. Our robotic electrolyte test-stand, named Otto, mixes together aqueous electrolyte salts, pre-dissolved near saturation into feeder solutions, and measures two electrolyte objectives -ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability -along with temperature and pH. Electrochemical stability is tested with constant current holds at four current levels (111, 22, 5, then 1 mA/cm 2 , first testing OER onset potentials then HER onset potentials) on two platinum wires with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. As described previously It is prohibitively time-consuming to exhaustively search mixtures of these anions for optimal formulations as the complexity of mixed electrolyte design spaces exhibits "combinatorial explosion". For example, Otto utilizes a testing volume of 7 mL. Exhaustively searching a space of 3-salt mixtures in 0.1 mL increments would require 62,000 evaluations, and a space of 4-salt mixtures would require 1.15 million evaluations. To make optimiztion over this design space practical, we connected Otto to Dragonfly, a Bayesian optimization software package developed by our team. Dragonfly harnesses a suite of acquisition strategies and evolutionary algorithms for scalable and robust treatment of black-box functions Blend E and NaClO 4 were run for a longer, detailed evaluation of OER stability in Otto, illustrated in Figure KOH standard for OER posited in literature Full data figures and methods for this run are given in the SI and Extended Data Fig. It is not a priori intuitive why a blend of two common sodium salts would better suppress OER compared to its pure counterparts -these two salts together may form a novel passivating film A machine-learning-guided robotic test-stand has explored a design space of previously reported aqueous electrolyte components, and discovered previously unknown, non-intuitive, but higher performing aqueous electrolyte. We believe this result serves as proof-of-principle that autonomous battery design can generate materials that a human designer may miss. More complex mixtures, whether aqueous or non-aqueous, and co-optimizing electrode and electrolyte can be tested without changing the principle of our approach. Preparation of solutions All solutions were mixed in ambient atmosphere, beakers were sealed off with parafilm once all solid was added to the deionized water. Solutions were mixed with VWR brand magnetic stir bars for a minimum of 30 min past the dissolution of the last visible solid. Temperature was regulated by setting hot plates to maximum of 30 • C for endothermic solutions and through water baths at ambient temperature for exothermic solutions; all solutions were mixed for at least 30 minutes at ambient conditions before density measurements were performed. Experimental details Details on test-stand components for each measured property can be found in abundance in a previous publication The design space for testing the mixtures described in this paper is constrained by Otto's testing volume (7mL) and can be described in equation form The surface is preconditioned with 10seconds of 111 mA/cm 2 current on each side. The order of the test is positive (i.e. anodic, OER) currents at 111, 20, 5, then 1 mA/cm 2 , then the same currents as negative (i.e. cathodic, HER), with non-preconditioning steps held for 6-7 seconds. The slopeextrapolation method has consistent performance 1 across a range of electrolytes, and thus is used during grid survey and ML-guided optimization. Afterwards, the best blends were subjected to a detailed evaluation at many current steps (much lower than the lowest in this fast assessment). The electrolyte tested in this figure is 7mL of 16 molal NaClO4 dissolved in water, pH shifted to 0 and reported against SHE (converted from Ag/AgCl). 