We perform a theoretical study of the orbital effect of a magnetic field on a proximity-coupled islands array of px+ipy topological superconductors. To describe the system, we generalize the tightbinding model of the Hofstadter butterfly to include the effect of the superconducting islands. The quantum Hall topological phases, appearing in the absence of superconductivity, are characterized by integer fermionic Chern numbers corresponding to the number of occupied bulk Landau levels. As the strength of the superconducting pairing increases a series of transitions occurs, with one less chiral Majorana edge mode at each consecutive phase, leading to a reduction of the fermionic Chern number by a half. When the pairing potential exceeds the tight-binding model bandwidth, Cooper pairs are localized in the islands, the Chern number is zero, and there are no low-energy edge modes. We identify domains in the model's parameter space for which the system is topological and supports an odd number of chiral Majorana edge modes. While the precise shape of the domains depends on the details of the model, the general structure of the phase diagram is robust, and it is obtained numerically and in several simplified traceable analytical models. We discuss the relevance of this study to recent experimental research of two-dimensional superconductor arrays on semiconductor systems. Low-dimensional topological superconductors (SCs) have been the subject of vast interest recently A time-reversal symmetry breaking topological superconductor is realized when an odd number of energy bands, which are not spin degenerate, are unstable to the creation of Cooper pairs, while the other bands are gapped. This may be obtained by the proper combination of materials that have strong spin-orbit coupling, are proximity coupled to a superconductor, and break timereversal symmetry by internal magnetic phenomena Application of an external magnetic field affects electrons both through the orbital degrees of freedom and through the Zeeman term coupled to the spin. For systems with a large g factor the latter is more significant, especially when the magnetic field is parallel to the wire's axis in the one-dimensional case 12 or to the system's plane in the two-dimensional case. However, when the magnetic field is applied perpendicular to a twodimensional system, we expect an interesting interplay between the (quantum) Hall effect To access this interplay, we study a tight-binding model which gives rise to Hofstadter-butterfly physics The phase of the SC order parameter is assumed to be constant inside each island. This is a good approximation as long as the flux per plaquette Φ is much smaller than the flux quantum Φ 0 = h/e, since in this regime the SC phase does not wind inside an island. To establish the regime of validity of this approximation, we note that the flux piercing an island of size L × L when applying a perpendicular magnetic field B is Φ/Φ 0 = B[T]•(L[nm]) The system we investigate may be viewed as the superconducting generalization of Hofstadter's model. In addition to the known commensurability effects which are related to the magnetic unit cell, here the geometry of the superlattice plays a role. Namely, in addition to the unit plaquette there is also a SC unit plaquette (see Fig. Our model describes a p x +ip y SC, with an application of a non-zero perpendicular magnetic field. Besides being interesting on its own merit, this model has experimental relevance as the orbital effects are almost inevitable The magnetic field may induce vortices in the SC (or between the SC islands); since the p x +ip y SC can be tuned into a topologically non-trivial phase (i.e. one that supports chiral Majorana edge modes), a Majorana bound state is expected to reside at the core of each vortex. In the effective low-energy description of the system, the matrix elements between the Majorana bound states at close vortices are non-zero. The coupling between them may give rise to a chiral Majorana mode at the edge of the whole sample. In this manuscript, we show that Majorana edge modes indeed appear, and the system can be driven into a global topological phase, by the application of an external perpendicular field. This is formally shown in Sec. II by calculating the topological invariant of symmetry class D in two dimensions -the Chern number Our main result is the phase diagram shown in Fig. We then turn to examine the universal features of the phase diagram in Sec. III. We show that even though the system under study is very rich and complex, and depends on many parameters, its phase diagram shares many generic features with the phase diagrams of much simpler models. The fact that the SC pairing potential is staggered is found in Subsec. III A to be important to yield zero Chern number for large pairing potential. The universal properties are understood by considering the symmetries of such models, which depend (for a fixed external field) on two parameters, e.g., p 1 and p 2 , the analogs of ∆ and μ. When p 1 = 0, a sweep of p 2 induces transitions between even Chern numbers in steps of two. Relieving the constraint on p 1 splits the transitions, and exposes regions with odd Chern numbers. As p 1 increases the Chern number decreases in unit steps until it vanishes for large p 1 , making the system topologically trivial. To elucidate these features, we study a simplified version of the 2D model in Subsec. III B, and a generalization of Kitaev's chain model We conclude with a discussion of the main results of the paper. We comment on possible realizations of the effective p-wave pairing we have assumed here in systems Inside each island, the phase of the superconducting order parameter is approximately constant and its direction is illustrated by an arrow. The magnetic flux per plaquette is Φ, and the flux per SC plaquette is ΦSC, as illustrated by the gray squares. We define the parameters g = Φ h/e which is the flux per unit plaquette and f = Φ SC h/2e which is the flux per SC plaquette. In the geometry depicted here, f = 8g (see Appendix B). with spin-orbit coupling, and ways to detect the topological phase using heat transport. Details of the calculations are relegated to the following appendices. In Appendix A we provide additional details on the numerical approach used to find the groundstate phase configuration. In Appendix B we elaborate on the geometrical properties of the superlattice. In Appendix C we review the method used to calculate the Chern number in real space. In Appendix D we present several additional numerical results in the 2D system to support our main results. We introduce the following tight-binding Hamiltonian for single-species fermions on a two-dimensional square lattice, with superimposed p x + ip y SC islands: Here c † m,n , c m,n are creation and annihilation operators of fermions in the lattice site labelled by (m, n), whose location is a (mx + nŷ) where a is the lattice constant; μ is the chemical potential; t is the hopping amplitude between nearest-neighboring sites; Φ is the flux per unit plaquette, which enters the Hamiltonian via the Peierls substitution 26 using the Landau gauge A = Φxŷ/a 2 ; ∆ is the magnitude of the induced superconducting pairing potential; and θ j is the phase of the superconducting order parameter in the j th island, which is approximately constant inside the island. The Hamiltonian can be brought to the Bogoliuobvde-Gennes (BdG) form by defining the Nambu spinor (2) and writing where H 0 corresponds to the normal μ, t terms and H ∆ = -H T ∆ corresponds to the SC terms. H BdG has particlehole symmetry {H BdG , Λ} = 0 with Λ = τ x K, where τ x is a Pauli matrix acting in particle-hole space and K is complex conjugation. The magnetic field and the chiral p-wave pairing terms break time-reversal symmetry [H BdG , K] = 0, placing H BdG in symmetry class D with a Z topological invariant In the Hamiltonian Eq. ( Having established the ground state configuration, we shall henceforth treat the phases {θ j } in Eq. ( The Chern number may be calculated in momentum space Several important features appear in the phase diagram Fig. At large ∆ the Chern number tends to zero. The reason for this is the islands structure, namely that the SC covering is partial. For large ∆, such a structure gives rise to localized pairs which only realize a topologically trivial phase. This argument is further supported in Subsec. III A, where we study the effect of SC staggering analytically. In order to complement the Chern number phase diagram we examined the energy gap as a function of μ and ∆ (see Fig. We now turn to test the dependence of the above results on the magnetic flux threaded through the system. Up to this point the flux was f = 1 2 flux quantum per SC plaquette; we shall now examine two additional test cases, f = 2 5 and f = 1 3 (corresponding to g = 1 20 and g = These phase diagrams are similar to the one obtained for f = 1 2 (see Fig. Remarkably, it seems that regardless of f , substantial areas of odd Chern number are formed in the parameter space at intermediate values of ∆. We have shown this behavior for three values of f . The generic pattern we observed suggests that by tuning μ and ∆, a topological phase can be stabilized for various values of f . Having calculated the phase diagrams in the previous section, we next wish to understand their generic properties. Some details vary between different values of f , for example the shape of the boundary between different topological phases, the value of the gaps and the available Chern numbers of the phase diagram are not identical (see Sec. II and Figs. Motivated by these observations, we argue in this section that these features are universal and are shared also by other models with staggered ∆. To demonstrate this, we analyze simplified models in both one and two dimensions that can be treated semi-analytically. We first show that when turning off the magnetic flux in the islands model, the system becomes topologically trivial for large ∆. We attribute this feature to localization of the Cooper pairs in regions with large pairing potential. We show that in a simplified model of the 2D system that includes the magnetic flux, where the SC phase configuration can be approximately derived, the universal features appear in the phase diagram. The observation regarding localization of Cooper pairs applies also in one dimension, as we show analytically. This is demonstrated by analyzing a generalized onedimensional Kitaev model with staggered pairing potential. To obtain a system with large Chern numbers in 1D, we cascade several of these staggered Kitaev chains. The resulting system is still one dimensional, as the number of chains is kept finite. The system belongs to symmetry class BDI, which means it possesses a Z topological invariant We consider a generalization of Kitaev's chain model where c † j creates a single-species fermion at the j th site of the 1D lattice, μ is the chemical potential, t is the (real) nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude, and ∆ j is the SC pwave pairing potential between sites j and j + 1. When ∆ j is uniform, i.e. ∆ j = ∆ for all j, the model 25 supports a topological phase with Majorana end modes for |μ| < 2t for any ∆ = 0. Consider now a staggered SC version of this model, where the pairing potential takes the values ∆ j = ∆ for odd j and ∆ j = 0 for even j, as illustrated in Fig. with (we take the lattice constant to be unity). By analyzing the Pfaffian 25 of the Hamitlonian H st (k) at k = 0, π we find that the topological phase appears for μ 2 + ∆ 2 2 < (2t) 2 , see the ellipse in Fig. In order to further establish the effect of a staggered SC, we also studied a simple 2D model where a similar phenomenon occurs. Consider the p x + ip y model on a square lattice where the SC only exists in islands as illustrated in Fig. Having established the importance of a staggered ∆, we now introduce a 2D model with magnetic flux As in the 1D case (see Fig. which can be understood almost entirely from analytical considerations. We consider a system of coupled SC stripes, with a constant perpendicular magnetic field, see Fig. The Hamiltonian takes the form The j th stripe lies at m = 2j -1, 2j. The Peierls phase in the Landau gauge is θ P (m, n) = -2π Φ Φ0 m. In the ground state, the gauge-invariant phase difference between every two SC bonds is zero The θ x SC phases reside at half-integer x and integer y (they connect two adjacent sites along x), and vice versa for θ y SC . Therefore, in our gauge choice, a reasonable configuration is given by Unlike the more sophisticated model studied in Sec. II, here the SC phase configuration is known. It is indeed an approximation -each stripe is treated independently of the others -but at least in the limit t y t x it is sensible. Determining the phase configuration correctly is of paramount importance: The phase diagram, and in particular the topological regions, are extremely sensitive to the SC phases (this is also demonstrated in Appendix D for the full model). Armed with the phase configuration, we are in a position to analyze the Chern number, just as was done in Sec. II. The topological phase diagram for this model, as a function of the chemical potential μ and the pairing potential ∆, is shown in Fig. The stripes structure, chosen here for its simplicity, is not special. We tested two additional variants of this semi-analytical 2D model: one where the SC stripes are replaced by SC islands, and one where the flux is only threaded in the normal regions between the SC stripes. We have also corroborated the results by applying different magnetic fluxes. The phase diagrams in all of these variants are similar, and most importantly they all share the features we refer to as universal. Let us now turn our attention to 1D. Using the staggered Kitaev chain Eq. ( Next, we introduce normal (non-SC) coupling of strength w between neighboring chains. The role of this coupling is similar to that of ∆ in the 2D case: when turned on, it splits the two-fold Chern number transitions into single transitions, where the Chern number changes by ±1. At large μ or large w, the Chern number vanishes due to the SC staggering. Qualitatively, we infer that this construction reproduces the universal features we mentioned before. In order to make the phase diagram of this model even more similar to that of the original 2D system, we perform a slight modification to w. A single staggered chain with μ = ∆ undergoes a transition of the Chern number from -1 to 1 at μ = 0. Thus, our coupled system undergoes a transition from -2M to 2M at μ = 0 without passing at zero Chern number. Let us then choose w = w 0 / √ μ + μ 0 , where w 0 is the bare coupling strength and μ 0 is a small constant. This way, at μ → 0 the actual coupling w becomes strong, thus driving the Chern number to zero. This transformation, which can be seen as a redefinition of the axes, gives rise to the phase diagram shown in Fig. In this paper, we studied the orbital effects of a magnetic field on the topological properties of the p x + ip y SC. Motivated by relevant experiments, we focused on a model of SC islands arranged in a square lattice. After determining the ground state configuration of the SC, we derived the topological phase diagram for different values of the magnetic flux (see Figs. The tunable parameters in our model are the magnetic flux Φ, the chemical potential μ, and the strength of the induced SC pairing potential ∆. Our results suggest that for general values of the flux, it is possible to tune into a topological phase supporting Majorana edge modes by varying μ and ∆. The regions in μ, ∆ space supporting the topological phase are substantial, so the parameters do not have to be extremely fine-tuned. Experimental detection of the Majorana edge modes Topological phase diagram for the coupled staggered Kitaev chains, as a function of the chemical potential μ and the coupling strength w0. This specific system is composed of six coupled chains, with hopping parameters t = {1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3} and μ0 = 0.01. When the chains are decoupled, i.e. w0 = 0, the Chern number is even, since the hopping parameters were chosen to be pairwise equal. Finite w0 splits these transitions, much like ∆ does in the full 2D case (cf. Figs. can be done by interference Our model should be understood as an effective description of a more complicated physical system. We assumed the existence of an induced p-wave pairing potential and single-species fermions. One can take a more microscopic approach and study spinful electrons with spinorbit coupling, proximity coupled to an s-wave SC with an applied Zeeman field, which can give rise to induced p-wave pairing. It is also possible (at least numerically) to account for disorder, which is not expected to have a drastic effect on the results provided it is smaller than the energy gap. Likewise, our zero-temperature study may be generalized to finite temperatures, but as long as the SC gap is larger than the temperature, our results are expected to hold qualitatively. We also studied simplified, analytically solvable models in 1D and 2D which share common features with the original 2D model. We found that the islands structure (and more generally the staggering of the SC pairing potential) has a profound implication on the topological phase diagram: Pair localization at large ∆ drives the system away from the topological phase. We showed that a model consisting of coupled staggered 1D Kitaev-like chains exhibits a topological phase diagram which greatly resembles those of the original 2D model (see Fig. This notion of universality may also be viewed from a general mathematical perspective. Consider a model with two tunable parameters p 1 and p 2 , such that at p 1 = 0 the Chern number has to be even. Assume further that at large |p 1 | and |p 2 | the Chern number has to vanish, and that at p 1 = 0 the generic behavior is onefold Chern number transitions. Under such settings, it is almost impossible to construct a phase diagram which is topologically distinct from those shown in Figs. 2, 3, 7, 8. We conclude that the phase diagrams we found have universal features and may appear under very general settings. for {θ j }. We compared this numerical method and the known frustrated XY ground states for several fluxes, and found that the configurations are qualitatively similar. We note that the optimization is sensitive to the initial conditions, and many local minima exist, so multiple runs are necessary in order to get a good agreement with the results of the frustrated XY model. The numerical optimization shows that the ground-state configurations of the frustrated XY model are at least local minima of our model. 