The combination of spin-orbit coupling with interactions results in many exotic phases of matter. In this Letter, we investigate the superconducting pairing instability of the two-dimensional extended Hubbard model with both Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling within the mean-field level at both zero and finite temperature. We find that both first-and second-order time-reversal symmetry breaking topological gapped phases can be achieved under appropriate parameters and temperature regimes due to the presence of a favored even-parity s + id-wave pairing even in the absence of an external magnetic field or intrinsic magnetism. This results in two branches of chiral Majorana edge states on each edge or a single zero-energy Majorana corner state at each corner of the sample. Interestingly, we also find that not only does tuning the doping level lead to a direct topological phase transition between these two distinct topological gapped phases, but also using the temperature as a highly controllable and reversible tuning knob leads to different direct temperature-driven topological phase transitions between gapped and gapless topological superconducting phases. Our findings suggest new possibilities in interacting spin-orbit coupled systems by unifying both firstand higher-order topological superconductors in a simple but realistic microscopic model. Introduction.-Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is ubiquitous in condensed matter systems and responsible for many remarkable phenomena Very recently, a new class of topological phases, named higher-order TIs and TSCs, have emerged and attracted a great deal of attention because of the enrichment of boundary physics and the occurrence of new possibilities for topological phase transitions Because higher-order TSCs provide new platforms of Majorana modes, their potential application in topological quantum computation has triggered quite a few theoretical proposals on their experimental realizations . However, the superconducting pairings in previous works were mostly introduced phenomenologically, and realistic microscopic models for higher-order TSCs are still generally lacking. Over the past decade, the Hubbard model with SOC and on site interaction, as one of the simplest microscopic models for first-order TSCs, has been extensively studied in both condensed matter and in the cold atom communities Our study reveals that depending on the temperature and the parameters of the model, the leading pairing channel can be d-, s-, or s + id-wave Theoretical formalism.-The two-dimensional extended Hubbard model, which provides a simple descrip-arXiv:2001.08739v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Jul 2020 tion for short-ranged interacting systems where i, j denotes summation over nearest-neighbor sites, c † i,α (c i,α ) is the creation (annihilation) operator at site i with spin α = (↑, ↓) , ni,α = c † i,α c i,α , t is the nearestneighbor hopping amplitude, μ is the chemical potential, λ R (λ D ) is the Rashba (Dresselhaus) SOC amplitude, U is the on site repulsive (U > 0) interaction strength, and V is the nearest-neighbor attractive (V < 0) interaction strength. The unit vector along the x (y) direction is represented by x (ŷ), and s x,y are Pauli matrices in spin space. The abbreviation H.c. stands for Hermitian conjugation, and the symbol i in the beginning of both second and third lines (and elsewhere) is taken to denote the pure imaginary number and should not be confused with the site index which generally occurs as subscripts. Although in the presence of SOC, odd-and even-parity pairings can generally coexist, we restrict ourselves to even-parity pairing for the sake of clarity and simplicity. Accordingly, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian at the mean-field level in momentum space (see Supplemental Material ) and where τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in particle-hole space, and represents the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC, respectively. The superconducting order parameter is given by where ∆ c 0 , ∆ c s , and ∆ c d are momentum-independent complex numbers that represent on site s-, extended s-, and d-wave SC, respectively. The three pairing amplitudes satisfy the following self-consistent superconducting gap equations, where N denotes the number of sites, Here β is the inverse of temperature and are the two excitation spectra of the BdG Hamiltonian, where ε σ (k) = ξ(k) + σl(k) refers to the normal-state spectra with l(k) the magnitude of the l(k) vector. To capture the phases of the three pairings, we define ∆ c α = ∆ α e iφα for α ∈ {0, s, d}, with ∆ α and φ α being real numbers. Accordingly, the three complex self-consistent equations given by Eqs. ( and, accordingly, the six real self-consistent superconducting gap equations are reduced to It should be noted that, when s-and d-wave pairing coexist, the last term of the BdG Hamiltonian (2) should be rewritten as Throughout this Letter, we set the hopping amplitude t = 1 as the energy unit and {λ R , U, V } = {0.3, 2, -5}, unless we clearly mention otherwise. However, they are not unique, and different sets of parameters will yield a qualitatively similar phase diagram. Results.-We first perform the self-consistent calculations at zero temperature. For definiteness, we consider that only λ D and μ are tunable parameters. We restrict ourselves to the positive parameter regime and present the corresponding phase diagram in Fig. Let us now focus on the interesting regime with s + idwave pairing which consists of three TRS breaking topologically distinct phases, including first-and second-order TSC and topologically trivial SC, as shown in the blue color region of Fig. where It is apparent that ∆ ± (-k) = -∆ ± (k), confirming the odd-parity nature. As is known, the band topology of an odd-parity superconductor is determined by the relative configuration of the FSs and the pairing nodes, and there exists a simple relation between the Chern number (C) and the number of FSs (N F ) enclosing one time-reversal invariant point, which is (-1) C = (-1) N F Interestingly, we notice that H -(k) takes a form similar to the toy model realizing second-order TSC proposed in Ref. Based on the above analysis, we find that, within the s + id-wave pairing regime, the change of topology only takes place when the FSs cross the removable Dirac pairing nodes at which both ∆ 0 + ∆ s η s = 0 and ∆ d η d = 0 are simultaneously fulfilled. As for the parameters considered, we find ∆ 0 ∆ s , ∆ d ; these nodes are almost fixed at the four points Q ±,± = (±π/2, ±π/2). Therefore, the condition for topological phase transitions can be very accurately described by the normal-state condition |ξ Q±,± |l(Q ±,± ) = 0. It is straightforward to find that the solutions give two straight lines satisfying |μ|-2 √ 2|λ R ±λ D | = 0 (see Supplemental Material To support the above analysis, we further diagonalize the mean-field BdG Hamiltonian in real space (see Supplemental Material So far, we have restricted the results to the zerotemperature limit. By performing self-consistent calculations at finite temperature, we find that, for a given configuration of FSs, different pairing types exhibit different temperature dependence. As a result, the favored pairing can undergo a dramatic change at some critical temperature. To be specific, Fig. Conclusions.-In this Letter, we showed that both first-and second-order TRS breaking topological superconductivity as well as the topological phase transition between them can emerge in the extended Hubbard model with both Rashba and Dresselhaus SOC, even in the absence of an external magnetic field or magnetic order. Moreover, we demonstrated that, with appropriate FS structure, tuning only the temperature can result in interesting topological phase transitions in this system. Our findings are relevant to many systems where both SOCs and interactions are tunable, including InSb where θ k satisfies cos θ k = h z /Λ k with Λ k = h 2 z + l 2 x + l 2 y , and φ k satisfy e iφ k = (l x + il y )/ l 2 x + l 2 y . Substituting Eq. (S19) and Eq. (S20) into Eq. (S17), we have For the superconducting part, Below we go beyond Ref. [S1] and do a band-dependent gauge transformation, c k,+ = -c k,+ e iφ k , c k,-= ck,-, with . Accordingly, we have It is obvious that both H + and H -describe odd-parity superconductors. It is worthy pointing out the pairing forms in H + and H -are similar to that in the toy model for second-order topological odd-party superconductors proposed in Ref. [S2]. In the limit h z = 0, we obtain Eq. ( [S2] Zhongbo Yan, "Higher-order topological odd-parity superconductors," Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 177001 (2019).