We compare the characteristics of electrically transduced Damon-Eshbach (DESWs) and backward volume (BVSWs) configurations within the same, 30 nm thick, ferromagnetic, CoFeB waveguide. Submicron U-shaped antennas are used to deliver the necessary in-plane and out-of-plane RF fields. We measure the spin-wave transmission with respect to in-plane field orientation, frequency and propagation distance. Unlike DESW, BVSWs are reciprocally transduced and collected for either direction of propagation, but their ability to transport energy is lower than DESWs for two reasons. This arises first because BVSW are inductively transduced less efficiently than DESWs. Also, in the range of wavevectors (~5 rad. μm -1 ) typically excited by our antennas, the group velocity of BVSWs stays lower than that of DESW, which leads to reduced propagation ability that impact transmission signals in an exponential manner. In contrast, the group velocity of DESWs is maximum at low fields and decreases continuously with the applied field. The essential features of the measured SW characteristics are well reciprocated by a simple, 1-D analytical model which can be used to assess the potential of each configuration. Spin-waves (SWs) In a thin film ferromagnetic waveguide, with in-plane magnetization, two important SW configurations can be identified 5 : Damon-Eschbach SW (DESW) and backward volume SW (BVSW) corresponding respectively to SW propagation perpendicular and parallel to the external magnetic field In this work, we leverage recent improvements in Gilbert damping of the CoFeB stack Single wire antennas have been conventionally used for the study of spin-waves For the fabricated antenna geometry: width (w = 250 nm) and gap-spacing (g = 250 nm), the transduction is maximum around k ~6 rad. μm -1 (Supplementary Fig While the antenna dimensions determine the wavevector with maximum transduction efficiency, the mapping from wavevector to angular frequency (ω) is determined by the dispersion relationship. The anisotropy of SW dispersion necessitates the definition of the wavevector with respect to the orientation of the magnetic field. In our convention, we define k x as the component of the wavevector parallel, and k y as the component of wavevector transverse to the magnetic field orientation, respectively. In a SW waveguide, the wavevector along the length of the waveguide (k y for DESWs/ k x for BVSWs) can take on continuous values, but the wavevector along the width direction (k x for DESWs/ k y for BVSWs) can take only discrete values, corresponding to confined standing wave modes (k x or k y = @A ; , with n ≥1). The axial symmetry of the stripe ensures that only the fields from the odd modes (n=1, 3, 5,..) can excite and detect spin waves. In our calculations, we calculate the dispersion for only the first confined mode (k x or k y = A ; ), neglecting the finite contribution from the other higher order odd modes. The explicit relation between frequency and wavevector (k ) in a SW waveguide is written as where H incorporates the applied field and the contribution from the shape anisotropy. Writing H sat > 0, the field needed for hard axis saturation, we have H = H app + H sat for BV and H app -H sat for DE, γ D = γ ⨯ μ D is the gyromagnetic ratio (γ=2π⨯29.16 GHz/T), t is the thickness (30 nm), A is the exchange stiffness (18.6 pJ/m) and M G is the saturation magnetization of the CoFeB film (1.36 MA/m). The above equation at k x = 0 and k y = 0 reduces, respectively, to the DE and BV modes of a continuous film. BVSWs displays a negative V " for small k x and positive V " at larger k x . The crossover is determined by the interplay between magnetic field, exchange interactions, and dipolar contributions. On the other hand, the expression for ω YZ$[ can be simplified further by neglecting the exchange interaction and considering a first order expansion for the dipolar contribution The dispersion (solid line) and group velocity (dashed line), up to experimental realizable wavevectors (10 rad. μm -1 , see Fig. is weaker implying a smaller, negative V " . Around k x = 5 rad.μm Spin waves are efficiently transduced and propagated through the waveguide when the distribution of wavevectors generated by the RF currents are permitted by the dispersion relationship. SW propagation is studied in a two-port configuration, where SWs launched from one antenna travel a finite distance within the conduit before being detected at the second antenna. The reflection data at the individual ports (S 11 or S 22 ) provides an estimate of the spin-wave transduction efficiency and the FMR frequency. The transmission signal (S 21 or S 12 ) includes this information and supplements it with data about the propagation characteristics through the SW bus. The amplitude of the SW in the waveguide is exponentially attenuated in the waveguide depending on the time spent in the waveguide, the Gilbert damping (α~5⨯10 -3 ), and M G of the magnetic film. Analytically, the amplitude of SWs at a distance d from generation, can be estimated from the product of the exponential SW attenuation and phase dependent oscillation The complete frequency response is calculated by multiplying the amplitude at each frequency (Eq.3) by the square of the antenna transmission function (Eq.1) and the magnetic susceptibility at resonance. The spin precession induced by propagating SWs is detected as an oscillation of the magnetic flux experienced by the microwave antenna. Hence, measuring the frequency response at a fixed magnetic field captures the SW propagation characteristics, while sweeping through different magnetic fields provides information about the SW dispersion and the frequency dependence of the susceptibility. Thus, frequency-field (FF) maps offer a complete description of the SWs. The transmission signal of BVSW was found experimentally to be small and comparable to the electromagnetic crosstalk between the two antennas. To better reveal the spin wave signal in the BVSW configuration, the magnetic field derivative of the measured frequency response is used to retain only the SW signal 1) Damon-Eschbach spin waves A typical FF map of DESW for a propagation length of 6.75 μm is shown in Figure ;sy ] with magnetic field in the FF map (Fig (iii) In addition to the contrasting group velocities attested by the much more numerous phase rotations, the striking difference is the much weaker signal (hence weaker signal to noise ratio) of the BVSW compared to the DESW configuration. When measurable, the amplitude of BVSWs signal is ~15 (best case)-50 (sensitivity limit) times weaker than that of DESWs. This amplitude difference arises partly from a weaker excitation efficiency related to the direction of the pumping RF fields and the corresponding susceptibility terms, as already discussed. However, we believe that the most substantial part of this amplitude difference arises from a more severe attenuation of the BVSW upon propagation. Let's thus examine the spin wave attenuation lengths in the BVSW configuration. Unfortunately, the weak BVSW signal impedes a reliable extraction of the experimental attenuation length, such that we have to partly rely on theory. With the damping value of 0.005 and the measured group velocity of 0.8 km/s at the largest fields (250 mT), the spin-wave attenuation length is anticipated to be 1.3 μm. Thus, it is no surprise that the BVSW signals degrade substantially for the large propagation distances (see Fig. In summary, we have reported on the first electrical study on the excitation and propagation characteristics of both BVSW and DESW in the same ferromagnetic bus, and we have described their main properties using a simple, physically intuitive model. Thanks to a higher group velocity, DESWs have the clear advantage of a relatively stronger transduction efficiency, as well as longer propagation distances. BVSWs are damped at substantially faster spatial rates but display reciprocal transmission capability with potential implications for device reconfigurability and ease of operation. To circumvent the insufficient character of the excitation efficiency, inductive antennas should be replaced by spin-orbit torque antennas See supplementary material for the plot of the antenna efficiency function and for the measurement of BVSW and DESW characteristics for other propagation lengths. Figure 