A liquid-to-gel based Leclanché cell has been designed, constructed, and characterized for use in implantable medical devices and other applications where battery access is limited. This wellestablished chemistry will provide reliable electrochemical potential over a wide range of applications and the novel construction provides a solution for the re-charging of electrodes in hard to access areas such as an internal pacemaker. The traditional Leclanché cell comprised of zinc (anode) and manganese dioxide (cathode), conductive carbon powder (acetylene black or graphite), and aqueous electrolyte hydrogel (NH4Cl and ZnCl2) has been suspended in an agar hydrogel to simplify construction while maintaining electrochemical performance. Agar hydrogel, saturated with electrolyte, serves as the cell support and separator allowing for the discharged battery suspension to be easily replaced once exhausted. The first clinical cardiac pacemaker was implanted in 1958 by Ake Senning. However, the electrochemical power supply only lasted a few hours. This groundbreaking advancement inspired collaborative effort to overcome the challenge to produce a reliable power supply for medical implants In pursuit of this idea we have used the Leclanché type chemistry to demonstrate the proof of concept of our liquid battery because this well characterized chemistry boasts high energy density and reliability The first zinc carbon primary is known as the Leclanché cell and was developed over a century ago by a French telegraph engineer, Georges Leclanché In this research, the original Leclanché chemistry and battery construction has been simplified to be used in internal medical devices. The electrodes have been suspended in an agar hydrogel to simplify the construction and replacement/recharging procedure of spent batteries. While under electrochemical load the hydrogel provides mechanical support allowing the battery to sample many spatial confirmations to maintain energy density. Hydrogels are characterized by polymeric networks than can absorb a significant amount of water and become swollen granting new physical properties, such as physical stability and ionic conductivity The experimental setup has been designed to calculate the discharge rate of a given battery. The system can acquire analog data from a maximum of 16 data inputs in parallel and log it appropriately in a comma-separated values (.CSV) format (Figure To calculate the discharge rate, a given battery is connected to a 10 kΩ resistor and is discharged across it until empty. Voltage across the resistor is measured using an acquisition card (more details in next section) at 30-minute intervals. Plotting the voltage values of the battery at different points of time shows the required discharge trend line and helps compare different batteries. Once set, the experiment can simultaneously log data from a variety of batteries for weeks on end without intervention or supervision. The .CSV file generated by the system can then be used in a standard program like MS Excel or MATLAB to generate data plots. The data acquisition system consists of an acquisition card and a data logger. The acquisition card used here is an Arduino ATMega 2560, which is an electronic microcontroller that can be programmed to acquire analog data from a maximum of 16 channels at any given interval. Signal range is from 0-5 V, and resolution is 4.9 mV The data logger runs a Linux-based version of Arduino. The acquisition card conditions the signal into a series of comma-separated values, which can be logged on to the Arduino Serial Monitor screen. These can be saved directly as a .CSV file. An Agar-Leclanché-graphite cell is constructed in a 20 ml vial by mass or volume of components. The electrolyte hydrogel is used at various points in the method and consists of the following by weight: 26% NH4Cl (RPI, 99.5%), 8.8% ZnCl2 (Sigma, 98%), and 65.2% DI H2O. Anode hydrogel is constructed by heating 4 g Zn powder (Sigma, 10 μm, 98%), 2 g graphite powder (Sigma, 20 μm), and 6 ml electrolyte hydrogel until dissolved. The hydrogel is vortex mixed, and 3 g of the anode hydrogel is transferred to a new vial with 3 g of a warm 1% w/v agar (RPI) electrolyte hydrogel. The warm agar separator hydrogel (3 g) was layered on the anode hydrogel followed by 3 g of cathode hydrogel, which consists of MnO2 8 g (Sigma, 99%), graphite 4 g, and 15 ml electrolyte hydrogel. 5 mm carbon electrodes (Eisco) are coated in paraffin (Gulf Wax) to span the cathode hydrogel and are submerged in the fuel cell for characterization (Figure After the initial characteristics and experimental setup of the Zn agar cells were defined, the quantities of Zn and conductive additive were varied using a similar cell design. The anode hydrogel consists of 2 g saturated conductive additive electrolyte hydrogel (1.5 g acetylene black or graphite and 20 ml electrolyte hydrogel), 1 g agar electrolyte hydrogel (2.5% w/v) and 0.25 g, 0.5 g, or 0.75 g Zn powder. Warm agar electrolyte separator (3 g), as discussed previously, is layered on the anode and allowed to cool. The warm cathode hydrogel is layered on the separator and consists of 2 g of the following mixture: MnO2 3 g, 6 g acetylene black electrolyte hydrogel, and 3 g 2.5% w/v agar electrolyte hydrogel. 0.5 mm carbon electrodes coated in paraffin to span the cathode are used as current collectors (Figure The gel Leclanché cell is constructed in an 11 ml glass chamber equipped with purge/fill ports and current collection ports (Figure Initially, the standard Leclanché chemistry was suspended in an aqueous agar hydrogel to explore the feasibility of the cell design and characterize the overall cell electrochemistry. Discharge characteristics of three trials are shown in Figure The average open circuit voltage (OCV) of three electrochemical cells on construction (~1.4V) was larger than initial closed circuit voltage (CCV) (~0.75V) which is due to the electrochemical load imposed by the resistor. Typically the CCV approaches the OCV and can be optimized based on the electrolyte, cell construction, and separator which will be discussed later. The general discharge characteristics displayed by the Zn-graphite cells are similar to previous reports in the literature, however the timescales may differ depending on the load tested Zinc agar batteries constructed with acetylene black as the conducting additive display slightly enhanced characteristics under continuous discharge. Initial OCV's, irrespective of the zinc quantity, in each cell is greater in cells constructed with acetylene black than cells constructed with graphite (~1.15V vs. ~0.75V). Additionally, the acetylene black cell produces a nearly constant CCV (~1.05V) from time zero until about 500000 seconds in cells constructed with 0.5g and 0.75g zinc powder. Beyond 0.5g zinc powder there is not a significant difference in the cell lifetime however, increasing the MnO2 in combination with increasing zinc may deliver longer cell lifetimes. It has been previously reported that the specific sources of MnO2 can have a profound effect on the cell performance which will be further optimized Variable Zinc-GR cells are constructed in a similar manner to the variable Zn-AB cells and display similar discharge characteristics to the initial Zinc-GR primary cells. On construction OCV's are dependent on the quantity of Zinc. Above 0.5g Zn powder, it appears that the OCV is not affected when the MnO2 is held constant (0.5 g) and approach ~1.2V (Figure The conductive additive also influences the energy density (JL^-1, total mAh, and the coulombic capacity (Ah) of cells constructed with different conductive additives. Although the quantity of active material does not change and therefore, theoretically the energy density should remain the same regardless of the conductive additive. We observed differences in the energy density as a function of the conductive additive and quantity of zinc (Figure Total Ah were calculated for theoretical cells and compared to cells made with AB and GR at different quantities of Zn (Figure When comparing our battery to commercially available batteries and other reports in the literature we find that the OCV general discharge trends are similar and that notable differences are obvious. Differences displayed by our batteries include high internal resistance (Mohm range) as compared to other systems that boast ohm range. We expect to optimize our hydrogel as to decrease internal resistance and increase battery performance. Our energy density, and coulombic capacity is about (0.5-1%) of other reports, however we have not saturated our hydrogel with active material and believe this will be improved upon in the near future To demonstrate the applicability of this method a closed glass cell was constructed to record fill and purge voltage of gel Leclanché cell. Ethylene glycol was added to make the purge and refill process easier and the influence on electrochemical performance in under investigation. Discharge data for gel based Leclanché cell under 10kΩ continuous load (Figure Figure Figure 