We report a tunable optical filter based on phase change material Ge 2 Sb 2 T e 5 embedded in a silicon microring resonator. The high thermo-optic coefficient of Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 in amorphous phase enables tuning of resonance wavelength in broad range with a very small active volume. The low-loss indium-tin-oxide electrodes are employed to induce Joule heating in Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 -Si active waveguide region. The electrically induced heating in the active region alters the effective refractive index of hybrid microring resulting in a wavelength tuning of 1.04 nm for an applied voltage of only 3V. The device exhibits high extinction ratios in the range of 20-41 dB and a compact active footprint 0.96 μm 2 only and is suitable for the large scale reconfigurable integrated photonic circuits. Silicon photonics has emerged as a preferred platform for the integrated photonics due to its low loss light guidance, high component density and compatibility with CMOS manufacturing technology Here, we report on the proof-of-concept investigations through design and simulations of an integrated tunable optical filter using GST. The said tunable filter is based on combining GST in amorphous phase with silicon-on-insulator (SOI) microring resonator. This approach has advantage of having ultra low active volume while still having high extinction ratio and large span wavelength tuning. Our investigations revealed that the proposed filter can have extinction ratios in the range of 20-41 dB and the tuning of wavelength by more than 1000 pm. A tunable optical filter can be realized using all pass configuration of microring resonator, which consists of a bus and microring waveguide, and has one input and output (through) port. The light launched through the input port couples to the microring when the resonance condition, 2πRn ef f = mλ, is satisfied. In this relation R and n ef f denote radius and effective index of microring resonator respectively while m and λ are integer and wavelength of light respectively. The transmission spectrum of microring resonator is given by the equation: where l, a, α, t, and φ denote circumference of the microring, round trip loss, loss coefficient, straight coupling coefficient, and round trip phase shift inside the microring respectively. At resonance φ = 2mπ, accordingly the transmission spectrum of the microring becomes The thermo-optic effect has been widely used in microring based filters. In this approach, the effective refractive index of Si microring is changed by integrating heater on the platform Where λ res , n g , and dn/dT denote resonance wavelength, group index, and thermo-optic coefficient respectively. The shift in the resonance wavelength is directly proportional to the thermo-optic coefficient of the material. The Si thermo-optic coefficient is 1.8 × 10 -4 K -1 For designing the tunable optical filter the considered cross-section of ring and bus waveguides are shown in Fig. Both waveguides are placed on top of a 2 μm thick SiO 2 layer followed by an 80 nm thick Si layer. The ring has an inner radius of 5 μm, and separation between the bus and ring waveguides is denoted as g. As illustrated in Fig. In eq (1) and ( Figure In eq (3) and ( In the optical model, Maxwell's equations are solved to obtain 3D electrical field distribution and transmission through the device and same are as follows: The temperature dependent variation in the amorphous GST refractive index is included in the model via the thermo-optic coefficient given by For Silicon, the thermo-optic coefficient is taken as The various material parameters used for the simulations are listed in Table 1 The device is designed to be critically coupled when there is no voltage applied. At critical coupling, output transmission has an extinction ratio of ∼51 dB as shown by the red line in Fig. We proposed and investigated an ultra-compact and reconfigurable optical filter with high extinction ratio using microring resonator based on GST-Si hybrid platform. By using GST with microring resonator, and exploiting its high thermo-optic coefficient in amorphous phase, we successfully achieved the tuning of the resonance wavelength. A resonance wavelength shift of more than 1000 pm with extinction ratios in the range of 20-41 dB are obtained. The voltage required to tune the resonance wavelength by more than 1000 pm is 3 V only. This optical filter can be utilized in large scale complex reconfigurable systems such as reconfigurable optical add/drop multiplexer (ROADM). Also, optical switching can be performed in the proposed device by using the add-drop configuration of microring resonator. In such configuration, one may switch from the on resonance (amorphous GST) to the off-resonance (crystalline GST) and vice versa to achieve switching of the optical signal. 