Most measurement methods based on ultrasound, such as sound velocity, absorption or flow measurement systems, require that the acoustic wave propagation is linear. In many cases, linear wave propagation is assumed due to small signal amplitudes or verified, for example, by analysing the received signal spectra for the generation of harmonic frequency components. In this contribution, we present an approach to quantify occurrence of non-linear effects of acoustic wave propagation in ultrasonic measurement systems based on the evaluation of the acoustic Reynolds number. One parameter required for the determination of the acoustic Reynolds number is the particle velocity of the acoustic wave, which is not trivially obtained in most measurement systems. We thus present a model-based approach to estimate the particle velocity of an acoustic wave by identifying a Mason model from electrical impedance measurements of a given transducer. The Mason model is then used to determine the transducer's velocity output for a given electrical signal, allowing for an evaluation of the acoustic Reynolds number for different target media. Due to the character of the differential equations that describe the behaviour of fluids, such as the Navier-Stokes-Equation and the equation of state for the respective fluid, all acoustic wave propagation is non-linear. When deriving the differential equation for an acoustic wave, one assumes the amplitude of the acoustic wave to be sufficiently small, so that the non-linear terms that exist in constituting equations are negligible where c denotes the sound velocity and ρ denotes the density of the medium. ω is the angular frequency of the acoustic wave and μ are the combined linear thermal and viscous losses in the fluid: with the shear viscosity μ s and the volume viscosity μ v . c p and c v are the isobaric and isochoric specific heat capacities and ν is the thermal conductivity of the fluid. The acoustic Reynolds number N Re describes the relation of the accumulation of non-linear effects to the effects of linear absorption caused by the thermal and viscous losses μ. Thus, for N Re ≫ 1 non-linear effects are predominant, while for N Re ≪ 1, linear absorption dominates the properties of acoustic wave propagation In equation ( While the values of the sound velocity and the density of the medium, as well as the angular frequency ω of the acoustic wave, are usually available and the losses μ can be estimated, the particle velocity amplitude v 0 is not trivially obtainable. As the acoustic wave amplitude in a simplified acoustic measurement system usually has its maximum at the transmitting transducer's active surface, one can assume v 0 to be the normal velocity of said surface. While this velocity can be measured by means of laser vibrometry, the surface has to be loaded with the target medium during the measurement. Moreover, this requires the medium to be transparent and the transducer's active surface to be optically accessible. Thus, a more general approach to estimate the transducer's surface velocity is implemented by identifying a three-port Mason model using impedance measurements. To model the electromechanical behaviour of a transducer in the spectral range around its thickness resonance frequency, the established Mason model Here, Z m,t is the mechanical impedance of the transducer's mechanical port, defined by the product of density ρ t and sound velocity c t of the transducer's material and the area A t of the transducer. The parameter h t couples the electrical and the mechanical properties of the model and is determined using the piezoelectric coupling factor k t and the permittivity ε t . Finally, the electrical capacitance of the transducer is represented by C t , which depends on the thickness t of the transducer. For the identification of a given transducer, the mechanical ports of the models are terminated using the mechanical impedance of the adjacent medium (figure With the Mason model identified in the previous section, it is possible to model the electromechanical behaviour of the transducer. This allows to estimate the velocity of the faces of the transducer for a given voltage. Changing the terminating mechanical impedance also allows to estimate the velocity for changing target media. Assuming that the transducer is terminated with the same mechanical impedance (Z m = A t Z) at both mechanical ports as before, solving equation (4) for v/u yields the frequency response of the transducer in transmission mode: Note that γ also depends on the angular frequency ω (section 2). For continuous, monofrequent excitation of acoustic waves, one can apply equation ( The resulting transient velocity v(t) of the transducer's faces can then be evaluated for its maximum as an estimate for v 0 : Similar to the physical setup A means to assess whether acoustic wave propagation can be assumed as linear in a given medium is the acoustic Reynolds number. The evaluation of this parameter, however, requires quantitative information about the particle velocity. This velocity can be estimated using a Mason model for a given transducer, which can be identified by a measurement of the transducer's frequency-dependent electrical impedance. The procedure requires no direct measurement of the particle velocity or other acoustic quantities and is thus easy to realize experimentally for a variety of application scenarios. The approach may be further expanded by applying more in-depth models for the transducers, using e.g. chain matrices for the modelling of matching layers 