Edmond Becquerel's process of making photochromatic images, which are the first colours photographs, is still poorly understood. In particular, the origin of the colours of these images gave rise to a long-lasting debate, starting from the publication of Becquerel in 1848 until the end of the XIX th century. This photographic process was replicated in the laboratory, and the colouration of the sensitized plates was studied by means of visible spectroscopy. A comprehensive description of the sensitization routes that were adapted from Becquerel's writing is given. The study of the exposition step allowed us to gain insights in the colouration mechanisms of the sensitized plates, and to compare between the two sensitization routes developed by Becquerel in terms of spectral sensitivity and colour faithfulness. The so-called "electrochemically sensitized" samples were found to be more sensitive and to reach a larger chromatic space than the "immersion-sensitized" ones. Finally, a reproducible way of creating coloured samples is suggested. Since the invention and the wide spread of photography during the first half of the XIX th century, physicians and photographs struggled with what was often referred to as "the great problem" of colour in photography Previously, the daguerreotypist Mark Kereun successfully replicated a process that was adapted from Edmond Becquerel by Abel Niépce de Saint-Victor First, the replication in the laboratory of two sensitization routes described by Becquerel and the optical properties of the sensitized plates are presented. As details and parameters in the preparation of the images can be critical, a comprehensive description of the process is given in the Material and methods section. Then the monitoring of the exposition step to light of visible wavelengths by means of UV-Visible spectroscopy in reflectance configuration is developed. Investigating the changes in the reflection properties of the plates allowed to better understand the colours that were produced, and to compare the spectral sensitivity and the colour faithfulness of both sensitization routes. Finally, the results are commented against Becquerel's writings. Crucial details for the process replication essential to reproduce and understand the making of the photochromatic images are described hereby. Further information can be found in the experimental section. Immersion sensitization. The sensitization solution was prepared according to Electrochemical sensitization. The prepared silver plate and a platinum grid are connected respectively to the positive and the negative poles of a ISO-TECH IPS-1820D direct current generator (cf. figure S-5 in the SI section). The electrolyte in which the plate and the grid are soaking, 2 to 3 cm apart from each other, is a 1 mol L -1 HCl solution. The voltage is adapted between 0.3 and 0.5 V, rendering a 0.1 A current. The plates are sensitized during 50 s and then rinsed with distilled water. Making the assumption that the sensitization creates a pure AgCl layer at the top of the silver layer, a charge transfer calculation allows us to determine the volume thickness of the sensitized layer: 3.9 μm for a 17 × 20 mm2 sensitized surface (figure Heating of the sensitized plates. Both immersion-and electrochemically sensitized plates are heated up to with a heat gun (Ryobi EHG2020LCD) set at 130 °C and 500 L min -1 . Optical properties characterization and monitoring of the exposition step. The reflectance spectra of sensitized plates are first measured with a UV-visible spectrophotometer. The plates are then exposed to light of various wavelength (see the transmission spectra of the interferential filters that were used in figure Optical properties of the sensitized plates. The average reflectance spectra of immersion and electrochemically sensitized samples are displayed in figure The calculated L*a*b* coordinates averages of the immersion-and the electrochemically sensitized samples are respectively (50.2; 15.5; 2.8) and (50.7; 15.8; 2.7). The colour difference ΔE 76 between those two initial states is 1.4. More than the colour, inhomogeneities on the immersion-sensitized samples allow one to make the difference between both types of samples (figure  A decrease and a shift toward longer wavelength of the local maximum in the violet region, initially located at 378 nm for the immersion samples (black arrow on figure  An increase and a shift toward longer wavelength of the local minimum in the visible region, initially located at 500 nm (black arrow on figure  A decrease (figure These changes can also be appreciated when looking at the consecutive changes of reflectance spectra plotted in figures 4c and d. Indeed, a dip located bellow 400 nm and a peak located around 500 nm appear in the reflectance change spectra, and their long wavelength tails decrease. For the immersion-sensitized samples, the lightness L* remains constant or increases during the exposition to visible light with an increasing efficiency when the exposition wavelength is near to 550 nm (figure Replication of Edmond Becquerel's process of creating photochromatic images. At a 10 kJ m -2 radiant exposure, figure Colours of the photochromatic images. When exposed to light of visible wavelengths, the optical properties of the sensitive layer of the photochromatic images evolve depending on the exposition wavelength. In particular, the shoulder in the reflectance change spectra that is observed for all the wavelengths that are longer or equal to 502 nm accounts for the resemblance of the resulting hue with the incident light. In the case of samples exposed to wavelengths shorter than 469 nm, the appearance of this shoulder is probably overlaid by the decrease of the reflectance local maximum initially located bellow 400 nm and the increase of the reflectance local minimum initially located at 500 nm. The evolution of the reflectance spectra during the exposition being characteristic of the wavelength, so is the evolution of the L*a*b* values. In that respect, the resulting colours are all unique and express the changes in the reflectance spectrum of the exposed sample. Colour faithfulness. Table In the a*b* space (figures 6c and d), the direction of the colour change of exposed samples is constant in the first 8 to 15 kJ m -2 of exposition, depending on the wavelength, which is why 10 kJ m -2 was chosen as a common radiant exposure for all the wavelengths. This direction is wavelength dependant and express the colouration of the material toward the hue of the incident light. Note that the resulting colours all lie in small (a* ; b*) ranges. They include a strong component of the sensitized layers colour, upon which a wavelength dependant colour component appears during the exposition. Contrasts between colours thus play an important role in their distinctions, which questions the perception of colours in photochromatic images. During the second step of the exposition, the colours shift toward increasing b*, with a* remaining constant, for all the exposition wavelengths. This is the sign of overexposure. Becquerel mentioned this phenomenon in his second memoir: "in general we can say that Table Colour rendering of the immersion and the electrochemical sensitization routes. Figures The two sensitization routes described by Edmond Becquerel, namely the immersion and the electrochemical, were successfully replicated in the laboratory. On both types of samples, colours were obtained and resembled that of the exposition light. The UV-visible spectroscopy monitoring of the colouration step allowed us to compare our results with Becquerel's writings and to draw conclusions on the photochromatic images colours. The colouration is due to the lower decrease, or the higher increase, of reflectance at the exposition wavelength relatively to the initial sensitized sample. The colours of the photochromatic images are characteristic of the preparation of the sensitized layer, the exposition wavelength and the radiant exposure. At low radiant exposure, under 8 to 15 kJ m -2 , the colour change depends on the exposition wavelength; 10 kJ m -2 was chosen as a common radiant exposure for all wavelengths in order to produce well defined coloured samples for the microstructural and chemical study of the photochromatic images. The electrochemically sensitized samples were found to be more sensitive than the immersion sensitized samples, especially in the blue-violet region of the spectrum, and to reach a larger chromatic space. The latter is in agreement with Becquerel's writings. Preparation of the plates. The brass plates are silver-cladded polished with carbon black and England red by a silversmith (Orfèvrerie du Marais, 172-174 rue de Charonne -75011 Paris, no longer in business). The plates are re-used many times: the sensitized or coloured layer is dissolved in a saturated sodium thiosulfate solution, then the plate is polished using a 1⁄4 μm diamond suspension on a velvet polishing cloth. Before the sensitization, the plates are degreased in 96% ethanol in an ultrasonic bath for 5 minutes and then rinsed with distilled water and carefully dried on nonabrasive and lint-free lens tissue. The platinum grid used for the electrochemical sensitization is first degreased in 35 % HNO 3 for 2 minutes, heated with the heat gun set on 650 °C for 2 minutes and then carefully rinsed with distilled water. Exposition to light. The samples were exposed to light produced by a xenon arc lamp (Newport, Series Q, 75W 60056-75X-Q15) equipped with an IR and a UV filter; the condenser lens was removed in order to have a large intense and homogeneous light spot. Interferential filters centred around various wavelengths were used to produce narrow bandwidth light spots: 402 ± 5 nm, 444 ± 5 nm, 473 ± 8 nm, 592 ± 3 nm, 550 ± 5 nm, 584 ± 5 nm, 633 ± 5 nm, 677 ± 6 nm. The samples were located around 20 cm away from the light source in order to have a 5 cm diameter light spot, and to be able to measure the sample during the exposition step in in situ UV-visible experimental setup. The lamp was put on a camera tripod during the monitoring of the exposition step (figure Assessing the radiant exposure. Prior to light exposition, the irradiance was measured around the sample position with a JETI specbos 1211 spectroradiometer. 20 cm away from the light source, the usual value is around [80 -100] W m -2 without any interferential filter and [0.8 -2.5] W m -2 with the interferential filters (see figure The radiant exposure was calculated by multiplying the irradiance and the time of exposition; in order to monitor the exposition step, the sample were exposed at radiant exposures up to 300 kJ m -2 , depending on the exposition wavelength. The inherent ambient light irradiance of the room has been measured and is two orders of magnitude less than the light source irradiance. Spectroscopic measurements. The UV-Visible spectroscopic measurements were performed in the total reflectance mode on a CARY5000 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere (1 s nm -1 , 1 nm step). No changes in the UV region have been observed. In order to correct small variations due to slight changes in the position of the samples, all the spectra of a series are multiplied by a correcting factor so that all the reflectance values at 260 nm are equal. CIEL*a*b* calculation. The colorimetric coordinates were calculated in the CIE 1976 space from the reflectance spectra with the CIE formulas with a D65 illuminant and a standard photometric observer at 2° 