Physical systems with material properties modulated in time provide versatile routes for designing magnetless nonreciprocal devices. Traditionally, nonreciprocity in such systems is achieved exploiting both temporal and spatial modulations, which inevitably requires a series of time-modulated elements distributed in space. In this paper, we introduce a concept of bianisotropic time-modulated systems capable of nonreciprocal wave propagation at the fundamental frequency and based on uniform, solely temporal material modulations. In the absence of temporal modulations, the considered bianisotropic systems are reciprocal. We theoretically explain the nonreciprocal effect by analyzing wave propagation in an unbounded bianisotropic time-modulated medium. The effect stems from temporal modulation of spatial dispersion effects which to date were not taken into account in previous studies based on the local-permittivity description. We propose a circuit design of a bianisotropic metasurface that can provide phase-insensitive isolation and unidirectional amplification. Reciprocity is a fundamental principle of a physical system, requiring that the transmission between two ports does not change if the source and receiver are interchanged. Breaking reciprocity is necessary for unidirectional wave propagation, such as wave isolation and circulation In this paper, we introduce a concept of linear bianisotropic time-modulated systems capable of nonreciprocal wave propagation at the fundamental frequency and implying solely temporal and uniform modulation of material properties. This route for nonreciprocal timemodulated systems, originated from bianisotropy (weak spatial dispersion), strikingly differs from the previously known three approaches based on the local-permittivity material description. It should be mentioned that in nonlinear systems, nonreciprocal response under uniform temporal modulation is possible by creating an external angular-momentum bias First, we analyze wave propagation in unbounded materials whose effective material parameters are modulated in time according to the same symmetric profile and with the same phase at each point in space (uniform or so-called global modulation). It will be shown that wave propagation in arbitrary anisotropic materials with global time modulation is always reciprocal. On the other hand, it will be shown that under the same conditions, reciprocity can be broken in bianisotropic materials. The constitutive relations of a bulk bianisotropic material (reciprocal in the absence of temporal modulations) with antisymmetric magnetoelectric tensor (describing so-called omega magnetoelectric coupling) can be written in the form of where ε and μ are the anisotropic permittivity and permeability tensors, Ω is the amplitude of the bianisotropic omega coupling, and J = ẑ × I is the transverse vectorproduct dyadic. Here, for simplicity, we use the adiabatic model for temporal modulations, assuming that the operational frequency ω is very low compared to the lowest resonance frequency of the material. In this case, the uniformly modulated material tensors can be written as [59, and Ω(ω, t, r) = M Ω (r) cos(ω m t+φ), where ε st and μ st denote static (in the absence of time modulation) permittivity and permeability, M ε , M μ , and M Ω are the modulation strength functions, ω m is the modulation frequency, and φ is an arbitrary global phase. Note that this model can be used for arbitrary modulation frequency ω m (see [59, § 1] for details). In the general non-adiabatic case, the following derivations could still be performed, writing the material parameters using integrals over past time. Due to the periodical modulation, the electric and magnetic fields are written in terms of the Fourier components at frequencies ω n = ω 0 + nω m , i.e. E n and H n . The external sources are characterized by the electric current harmonics J e,n , and time-harmonic oscillations in the form e +jωt are assumed. Analogously to derivations in Here, E and J e denote the column vectors with components E n and J e,n = J e,n /ω n , and ω is the diagonal matrix with frequencies ω n at the diagonal The above derivations demonstrate that a bulk material with temporally modulated bianisotropic response supports nonreciprocal wave propagation. Since in most practical situations implementation of bulk bianisotropic materials can be complicated in terms of fabrication, next we consider the same effect in a two-dimensional singlelayer array of bianisotropic elements (a metasurface). Analogously to bulk materials which can be modeled by volume-averaged material parameters, metasurfaces are conventionally characterized by surface-averaged material parameters, i.e. polarizabilities, susceptibilities, or surface impedances As a proof of concept, here we consider the simplest circuit configuration which provides nonzero bianisotropic coupling. We choose the right series circuit element as an inductor with time-invariant inductance L 0 , while the parallel element as a capacitor with temporally modulated capacitance The left series element is short-circuited [see Fig. where operator P (t) is given by Here, v f,b i are the incident voltage signals (equivalent to incident electric fields) for the forward and backward illuminations, L = L 0 /η 0 and C (t) = η 0 C(t) are the inductance and capacitance normalized by the free-space wave impedance η 0 with the dimensions of time. As is seen from ( It is easy to test under what conditions the metasurface described by (3) exhibits nonreciprocal propagation at frequency ω 0 . To do that, we choose modulation at ω m = 2ω 0 [59, § 5]. Such modulation frequency has been also applied, as examples, for wave amplification where Q = 4 -2C 0 L 0 ω 2 0 + 2jω 0 (L + C 0 η 0 ). It is obvious that T f and T b are not equal only if L 0 = 0, which means that this structure is nonreciprocal only when bianisotropic coupling is present. Interestingly, although the metasurface described by the circuit in Fig. The temporal modulation induces frequency mixing, and the reflected and transmitted signals contain infinite numbers of harmonics ω n = ω 0 + nω m , where n is an integer and refers to the harmonic order. In order to choose parameters L 0 and C(t) of the circuit providing the highest nonreciprocity at the fundamental frequency, we optimize the circuit values based on the time-Floquet analysis [59, § 7.1] for given incident voltages v f,b i (t) = cos(ω 0 t). In the numerical optimization using MATLAB, we define the cost function, and search for such set of circuit parameters {L, C 0 , A, φ} which ensures F → 0 [59, ε , M μ , and M Ω , respectively. They can be made symmetric by selecting global phase φ = 0 (the initial phase can be chosen arbitrarily by time translation t → t + ∆t). Equation (