In this work, density functional theory calculations were carried out to explore the mechanical response, dynamical/thermal stability, electronic/optical properties and photocatalytic features of monoclinic As2X3 (X=S, Se and Te) nanosheets. Acquired phonon dispersions and ab-initio molecular dynamics results confirm the stability of studied nanomembranes. Observation of relatively weak interlayer interactions suggests that the exfoliation techniques can be potentially employed to fabricate nanomembranes from their bulk counterparts. The studied nanosheets were found to show highly anisotropic mechanical properties. Notably, new As2Te3 2D lattice predicted by this study is found to exhibit unique superstretchability, which outperforms other 2D materials. In addition, our results on the basis of HSE06 functional reveal the indirect semiconducting electronic nature for the monolayer to few-layer and bulk structures of As2X3, in which a moderate decreasing trend in the band-gap by increasing the thickness can be established. The studied nanomaterials were found to show remarkably high and anisotropic carrier mobilities. Moreover, optical results show that these nanosheets can absorb the visible light. In particular, the valence and conduction band edge positions, high carrier mobilities and optical responses of As2Se3 nanosheets were found to be highly desirable for the solar water splitting. The comprehensive vision provided by this study not only confirm the stability and highly attractive electronic and optical characteristics of As2S3, As2Se3 and As2Te3 nanosheets, but also offer new possibilities to design superstretchable nanodevices. Among various classes of materials, two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials can be currently considered as the most vibrant family, in which new members are continuously being theoretically predicted and experimentally realized. Outstanding attentions to this group of materials originates from the wide range of application prospects and also the unique properties of its members, with exceptional abilities to exhibit diverse and contrasting properties. Graphene Graphene can be also considered as the representative member of 2D materials with highly symmetrical and isotropic lattices, which includes also other well-known compositions, like; hexagonal boron-nitride (h-BN) In recent years, arsenic based layered materials have gained remarkable attentions for the applications in electronic devices, sensors, and energy systems Geometry relaxations and electronic/optical structure calculations in this work were all performed via density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) In order to calculate the second order force constants, density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) simulations were performed over 2×5×1 super-cells. We then employed PHONOPY code Carrier mobility for the considered 2D systems were calculated from the deformation potential approximation Energy minimized As2S3, As2Se3 and As2Te3 monolayers with rectangular primitive unit-cells, monoclinic lattices and Pmn21 space group are illustrated in Fig. While the predicted lattice constants along the elongated direction (x direction) are very close to that of the bulk structure with and without vdW dispersion correction, it is apparent that the incorporation of dispersion correction yields more accurate estimation for the lattice length along the other in-plane direction (y direction). By increasing the weight of chalcogen atoms in the considered monolayers, the lattice constant along the elongated direction (x direction in this work) increases, whereas the lattice length along the perpendicular direction (y direction in this work) remains almost unaffected. To facilitate the future studies, the energy minimized single-and double-layer lattices in the VASP native format are included in the supporting information document. In Fig, We remind that ELF is a three-dimensional function with a value ranging between 0 and 1. Generally ELF values close to 1 indicate strong covalent bonding or lone pair electrons, while smaller ELF values (≤ 0.5) correspond to metallic or ionic bonds, and low electron density localization. It can be clearly seen that electron localization is happening around the center of arsenic and chalcogen atoms, which can be assigned to their lone pair electrons. Rather smaller, but still large electron localization is observed in between arsenic and chalcogen atoms along the As-X bonds, implying the dominance of covalent interactions in the considered nanosheets. As it is clear from the side views shown in Fig. According to AIMD results illustrated in Fig. Notably, the cleavage energies for As2S3 and As2Se3 nanosheets are smaller than the experimentally calculated cleavage energy for graphene (0.37 J/m2) This anisotropic deformation mechanism in the considered nanosheets can be also explained by considering the atomic structures at different strain levels, as compared in Fig. This highly attractive observation can be attributed not only to the nanoporosity in the atomic lattice and the possibility of the As2X3 structures to contract considerably during the loading, but also to the pivot like behavior of chalcogen atoms in these systems. As the interests toward the stretchable and wearable electronics are continuously increasing, our findings may serve as useful guides to guide the design of other superstretchable 2D semiconductors. We next examine the electronic properties of arsenic trichalcogenide nanosheets by calculating their HSE06 electronic band structures. Fig. for the electronic band structures within the PBE functional (shown in Fig. VBMs are made of antibonding interaction between the VBMs of the two layers, while the CBMs come from bonding interaction between the CBMs of the two layers. Consequently, the VBM energetically shifts upward and CBM moves downward resulting in smaller band gaps than their monolayer counterparts. In the future studies, the effects of mechanical straining, defects and impurities It is well-known that hydrogen fuel can yield exceptionally high energy density among all types of fuels, which highlights the promising application prospect of producing this fuel via the solar water splitting methods. Because of the semiconducting electronic nature of studied nanosheets, we next examine their application prospect for the overall solar water splitting, which involves two redox half reactions: Reduction: 2H + (aq.) + 2e -→H2(g) ( At pH equal to zero, the H + /H2 reduction potential and the O2/H2O oxidation potential are -4.44 and -5.67 eV, respectively Nevertheless, for the successful water splitting the exact positions of CBM and VBM should be also taken into account. In another word, a semiconductor can be suitable for the water splitting only if it yields a VBM less negative than the H + /H2 reduction potential and a CBM edge more negative than the O2/H2O oxidation potential. To explore the satisfaction of aforementioned aspects, the CBM and VBM positions for the monolayer and bilayer As2S3, As2Se3 and As2Te3 nanpsheets with respect to the vacuum level (set at 0 eV) along with the H + /H2 reduction and O2/H2O oxidation energy levels for the water splitting at pH=0 and 7 are compared in Fig. According to the results included in table 1, the huge difference between the mobilities of the electrons and holes originates mainly from difference in their calculated deformation potential energies. This can be simply understood by considering the point that for the three monolayers, VBM represents anti-bonding (A-X)in-plane σ* states, while CBM is made of bonding (As-X)in-plane π and antibonding (As-X)vertical σ* states. It is apparent that in-plane σ*(VBM) state is much more sensitive towards the in-plane lattice dilation than in-plane π states(CBM), resulting in much larger deformation potential energies for holes along the two directions. ), and mobility (e,h) of electrons and holes along x and y directions for As2X3 monolayers. All parameters presented in the Table In this work, we explored the mechanical properties, stability, electronic/optical features and photocatalytic characteristics of monoclinic As2X3 (X=S, Se and Te) nanosheets via DFT calculations. While As2S3 and As2Se3 in the bulk form are already available in the nature, we predicted a novel stable As2Te3 2D lattice, with the similar atomic lattice as that of the monoclinic As2S3 or As2Se3. Desirable thermal and dynamical stability of all studied nanosheets were confirmed by the phonon dispersions and ab-initio molecular dynamics results. In addition, relatively weak interlayer interactions in the multi-layered As2S3 and As2Se3 nanosheets confirm that the exfoliation methods can be employed to fabricate these nanomembranes from their bulk counterparts. Uniaxial tensile simulation results reveal highly anisotropic mechanical properties of As2X3 nanosheets. Notably, our results confirm that stretchability of As2S3 and As2Te3 are by more than two and three folds larger than graphene, respectively. Particularly, As2Te3 nanosheet was found to outperform other known 2D materials with respect to the stretchability. This observation can be used to guide the design and synthesize of other superstretchable 2D materials. HSE06 functional results confirm the semiconducting electronic nature for the monolayer to few-layer and bulk As2X3 lattices. Moreover, our electronic structure results reveal the indirect band-gap in the studied 2D systems, in which decreasing trends in the band-gap values by increasing the thickness exist. Notably, HSE06 estimations confirm that As2S3 and As2Se3 nanosheets can exhibit suitable valence and conduction band edge positions for the overall solar water splitting under various environments with different pHs. Therewith, the studied nanosheets were found to yield remarkably high and anisotropic carrier mobilities. It was found that electron mobilities are considerably larger than those for holes. In addition, optical results show that these nanosheets can absorb the visible light. In particular, As2Se3 nanosheets were found to yield highly promising electronic structure, electron and hole mobilities and optical features for the application in hydrogen fuel production via solar water splitting. Our extensive firstprinciples results provide a comprehensive vision concerning the stability, mechanical, electronic and optical characteristics of As2S3, As2Se3 and As2Te3 nanosheets. Our results not only suggest these novel 2D semiconductors for the applications in energy storage/conversion, nanooptics and nanoelectronics systems, but may also be used to design novel superstretchable devices. 1. Atomic structures in VASP POSCAR format. 3-PBE results for the electronic band structures of monolayers with and without SOC. 4-HSE06 results for the electronic band structures of bulk systems. a 