The origin of high-temperature superconductivity has been widely debated since its discovery. Here, a model based on the interaction between carrier and local potential is proposed to reveal the mechanism. In this model, the potential that is analogous to the lattice point is composed of localized charges, whose vibration mediates the coupling of mobile carriers. A Hamiltonian that describes the vibration, coupling, and various interactions among the ordered potentials and carriers is established. By analyzing the Hamiltonian, it is found that the vibration of local potential and the interactions, which are dependent on the carrier density, control the transition temperature. We show that the transition temperature is high if the local potential is composed of electrons and the mobile carrier is hole because of the strong coupling between them. By replacing the local potential with lattice point, the proposed model is equivalent to that in the BCS theory. Therefore, our model may provide a general theoretical description on the superconductivity. Superconductivity is an amazing topic that has been attracting great interests from physicists and materials scientists over decades High-temperature (high-Tc) superconductivity (HTS) can be achieved by doping Mottinsulating copper oxides with electrons or holes It is now widely accepted that the collective charge dynamics should be responsible for the observed phenomena Analogous to the lattice vibrations in conventional superconductivity as provided in the BCS theory, in this work, we propose that the pulsation of ordered local-potentials mediates the paring of carriers, which results in superconductivity. Firstly, the potential is the localized charges in this model, which may be composed of a few of electrons or holes. For example, the potential may be dominated by two electrons with opposite spins. Different from the ions in crystal, all the potentials have the same charge state, positive or negative. Secondly, we consider that the potential is movable (local or dispersive) due to the interaction with carriers, such as carrier annihilation and creation. Therefore, the potential itself may be one kind of Cooper pairs in high-Tc superconductor. Finally, the charge state of potential is opposite to that of carrier, leading to the attraction interaction, and the annihilation and creation of potentials and carriers as induced by the coupling among them. At the same time, there have interactions among potentials. According to the above assumption on the interaction between potential and carrier, the Hamiltonian of the HTS system is obtained as below if we consider that the potential is composed of two electrons or holes with opposite spins: is for the creation of hole, and vise verse. The first two terms describe the total energy of potentials, where ε a and v ij a are the kinetic and interaction energies, respectively. The third and fourth terms are the total energy of carriers, where ε b and v kl b are the kinetic and interaction energies, respectively. The fifth term is the interaction between potential and carrier, where v ij ac is the interaction energy. The last two terms are used to describe the recombination between the potential and carrier, where t ab and t dc are the full and partial recombination energies between potential and carriers, respectively. The recombination also leads to the moving of potentials. When temperature is very close to absolute zero, all carriers are paired and each potential is occupied by a pair of charges. Therefore, there are no unpaired carriers in high-Tc system at T = 0 k. In this case, the above Hamiltonian can be simplified by removing the last term in Eq. ( Let us define following parameters: Then, W can be re-written as following: Differentiating Eq. ( where, ∆0 is defined as According to the principle of energy minimum, I consider Then, we have Then, When T>0 K, Fermi function (fk) has to be considered because there exist thermally excited particles in the system. In terms of Eq. ( The entropy of the system is defined as below: where kB is the Boltzmann constant. The free energy of the system is defined as F (=W+TS). When the system stays at a stable state, F must be minimal regarding to hk and fk. According to this principle, we come to following minimal F with respect to hk: where Δ0 is redefined as: We can obtain: By defining Similarly, we have zero F with respect to fk as following: Thus, we have: For simplicity, we define parts in Eq. ( Then, we have To get the expression of Tc, we define V = -ν c and Δ = Δ 0 -Δ 1 . Substituting Eq. ( The density of states at the Fermi level is given by where N(0) is the state density near the Fermi surface. When T ≤ Tc, it is considered that the total number of states keeps unchanged. Combining Eq. ( where ω c is the highest vibrational frequency of localized charges (potential). After resolving the Eq. ( A is a constant. Clearly, we see that the formula for Tc is similar to that in the BCS theory (Eq. 3.29 in Ref. 9). The difference is that the interactions here are induced by the localized charges (local potentials) and mobile carriers. In Eq. ( In above discussion, we focused on that the charge states of potential and carrier are opposite. If they are same, such as electron-doped cuprates, the last two items in Eq. ( need to be removed. Then, Eq. ( As the last two terms describe the recombination between the potential and carrier or the movement of potentials, their contribution to superconductivity also disappear, leading to relatively lower Tc. Therefore, the transition temperature for electron-doped system (Eq. ( As indicated by the electron phase diagram of the HTS system, there exists the HTS state only if the carrier's density keeps within a range. In summary, a carrier-potential interaction model is presented to describe the hightemperature superconducting behavior. We show that the potential is composed of localized charges, which vibrates and can be movable even. The Hamiltonian of the HTS state is obtained by analyzing various interactions. We find that the transition temperature is strongly correlated to the vibration of local potentials and the interactions among potentials and carriers, which result in high Tc under the optimal carrier density. We further demonstrate that the formula to express the transition temperature based on the carrierpotential interaction is similar to that based on phonon-mediation. By replacing the local-potential with lattice point, it is the BCS model. Therefore, the origin of superconductivity is attributed to the pairing of carriers mediated by the vibration of periodic local potentials: (1) for BCS theory, phonon-mediation (lattice vibration) is dominant for low-Tc superconductivity and (2) in our model, the carrier-potential interaction is responsible for high-Tc superconductivity. Furthermore, our model may explain the mysterious phenomena of HTS observed at certain temperature. where d i + and d i are the operators of creation and annihilation of charge (electron or hole) in potential,