The longitudinal current in a three-dimensional conductor is accompanied by transverse magnetic field in a specimen bulk. The absence of the transverse current in a sample bulk requires a nonzero Hall electric field in transverse cross-section which provides the Lorentz force cancelation. The longitudinal current itself can be viewed as a collective drift of carriers in crossed magnetic and electric(Hall) fields. At low temperatures the enhanced carrier viscosity leads to nonuniform current flow whose transverse profile is sensitive to presence of collinear diamagnetic currents at the sample inner walls. Former dissipative the longitudinal current becomes purely diamagnetic at certain critical temperature. The superconductivity sets on. The current and transverse magnetic field become pushed out from the sample bulk towards the inner wall. Magnetic properties of a sample resemble those expected for ideal diamagnet. The threshold of superconductivity is calculated for arbitrary temperature, disorder strength, sample size and current and(or) magnetic field strength. Sample-size and magnetic field driven transition from normal metal phase to superconductivity has been studied. The superconductivity phase is not discussed. Usually, the Hall measurements 1 imply a presence of external magnetic field affecting the carrier transport. The typical scheme of the Hall bar geometry sample is shown in Fig. The conventional Drude equation for electron gas in presence of arbitrary electric E and magnetic B fields yields where V is the electron flux velocity, e is the absolute value of the electronic charge. Then, Ω c = eB mc is a vector whose absolute value corresponds to local cyclotron frequency, m is the effective mass, τ is the momentum relaxation time due to collisions with impurities and(or) phonons. For steady state Eq.( where μ = eτ m is the carrier mobility. For arbitrary orientation of the electric and the magnetic fields the exact solution of Eq.( We further restrict ourself to a certain sample geometry, namely consider the bar sample of thickness d which is less than both the width w and the length L. Let a voltage source(not shown in Fig. Following the above reasoning we re-write Eq.( Eq.( We now intend to answer a question whether the current carrying state in a bar could be nonuniform in transverse direction, namely we presume V z (Y ). To resolve the problem, we will use Navier-Stokes equation valid for viscous electron fluid in presence of the magnetic field. Here, η is the viscosity tensor depend on magnetic field. Then, η = 1 5 V 2 F τ η is the kinematic viscosity of the carriers at zero magnetic field, V F is the Fermi velocity, τ η denotes viscosity relaxation time whose exact form will be specified further. Viscosity effects start to be important One may easily check that for present case of nonuniform flow the Euler term in a left part of Eq.( Our primary interest concerns Eq.( Introducing the dimensionless velocity v = V z /μE z and the reduced transverse co-ordinate y = Y /d, one may rewrite Eq.( where ν = d/λ is the dimensionless parameter. Then, λ = √ ητ denotes the typical length scale of velocity profile v z (y) sharpness. The condition ν ≪ 1( ν ≫ 1 ) determines the high(low)-viscous electron gas respectively. We argue that solving of Eq.( The actual geometry of the problem yields the symmetric condition v| y=±1/2 = v 0 for longitudinal velocity at the inner bar walls. Therefore, we obtain The Drude uniform flow follows from Eq.( A final note concerns Eq.( Let us first consider a simple case of wall adhesion condition v 0 = 0 6 followed from analysis of Poiseuille's viscous flow known in conventional hydrodynamics. In Fig. The special interest of the present paper concerns a possibility of unusual boundary condition v 0 > 1 whose physical background will be illustrated hereafter. FIG. At first, recall a scenario of a current carrying wire surrounded by diamagnetic media shown in Fig. We now provide a strong evidence of similar effect for current carrying bar sample(see Fig. and could, in principle, exceed the Drude current density j D . One may write down the dimensionless flux velocity v 0 at the inner rod surface as where j = I dw is the average current density. Then, we introduce the dimensionless parameter which depends on the sample size. Without diamagnetic currents, i.e. when κ = 0, we recover the Poiseille's flow when the wall-adhesion condition v 0 = 0 remains valid. Our major interest concerns the strong diamagnetic case when κ ≥ 1. In Fig. where is the universal function(see Fig. Remarkably, the all previous reasoning are valid for a wire whose radius plays the role of the sample thickness d in present notations. For wire the universal function β(ν) embedded into Eq.( Noticeably, Eq.( Here, ρ D = m ne 2 τ is the conventional Drude resistivity, μ D = (neρ D ) -1 is the mobility. Eq.( The most intriguing result followed from Eq.( Eq.( for which the superconductivity can be realized. We further demonstrate that superconductivity criteria κ = d/d m > 1 is even stronger for real systems. We emphasize that the superconductivity may appear for even finite momentum relaxation time. This result looks like mysterious at a first glance. Nevertheless, the experimental data The actual physics of superconductivity is rather transparent. The non-dissipative diamagnetic current is pinched within a narrow inner layer λ ∼ d m /2 of a slab and, hence shunts the dissipative Drude flow in the sample bulk. The total current in a sample becomes purely diamagnetic when Eq.( We now examine in greater details the critical condition given by Eq. (19). One can find, in principle, the critical dependence in a form ν cr (κ). The latter is, however, noninformative since both variables κ, ν depend on the sample size. To avoid this problem, let us introduce a size-free parameter z = ν 2κ = dm 2λ . With the help of the above notation the modified Eq.( and denotes the desired critical diagram in a compact form since z cr (κ) < 1. The latter is shown in Fig. We now find superconductivity threshold in terms of temperature by looking at parameter z ∼ 1/λ = 1/ √ ητ . Remind that for actual low-temperature case the transport is governed mostly by scattering on static defects, hence one may consider a constant momentum relaxation time τ = τ (T ). A point of interest is the scattering time τ η embedded into components of viscosity tensor specified by Eq.( dependent on the reduced temperature ξ = T /T F . Here, T F = ε F /k and ε F are the Fermi temperature and energy respectively. Then, where l 0 defines the residual value at T → 0. The hydrodynamic approach is valid when l η ≤ l. Further, we will use recent argumentation where z(0 l0l is the zero-temperature value, γ = l 0 /l 1 is the dimensionless ratio. Recall that threshold diagram in Fig. where μ min = 5 8 ed 2 m εF τ0 plays the role of the minimal mobility for which superconductivity is possible. Further, we will use obvious relationship as well. If z m < 1, the only upper part of the threshold diagram in Fig. We now attempt to find out threshold temperature for the most important case of massive sample κ ≫ 1 known to be a universal quantity For clarity, we will label hereafter the all quantities related to superconductivity threshold for bulky sample by index "c". According to Eq.( In Fig. Fig. -0,5 0,0 0,5 We now find both the current density and magnetic field spatial profiles for system closer to superconductivity threshold. Recall that the all previous discussion concerned the presence of a finite electric field E z . Aiming to account for superconductivity(i.e. when E z = 0) we inverse Eq.( Eq. (31) gives the correct values of the diamagnetic current density j M and the amplitude of the magnetic field B 0 = 2π c jd at the inner walls of the sample y = ±1/2. For κ = 1 one recovers the result for uniform current flow, namely j z (y) = j, B x = -2B 0 y . As an example, the dependencies given by Eqs. (31) are plotted in Fig. Note that Eq.( Recall that the current(field) penetration length λ = √ ητ = dm 2z(Θ) depends on the temperature. At high temperatures the fluid is non-viscous therefore the penetration length is small since z → ∞. At low temperatures the penetration length increases. For bulky specimen at threshold temperature T = T c the penetration length is given λ = dm 2 . To confirm this finding, we put in Fig. It is of considerable interest the case of a specimen placed into external magnetic field B parallel to the slab plane. Evidence shows that current distribution depicted in Fig. After subsequent integration one obtains the magnetic field distribution in the sample bulk where B = 4π c j M d ν tanh -1 (ν/2). For actual geometry Eq.( A. Sample-size driven normal state to superconductivity transition In Sec.III C we have demonstrated a possibility of the superconductivity phase for film thickness d ≥ d m κ m . For thinner samples the resistivity remains finite. One expect that the shape of the temperature dependence of the resistivity would be sensitive to variation of the sample thickness. This effect is known in literature Let us discuss first the properties of amorphous bismuth whose structure was analyzed in details in Ref. The careful analysis of the data in Fig. Recall that for bulky amorphous bismuth the critical temperature is known T c = 6.1K. Noticeably, at elevated temperatures the all resistance curves below separatrix in Fig. Combining the dependencies R (T cr ) and σ(κ) we obtain the temperature threshold either in terms of reduced size T cr (κ) or conductivity T cr (σ). Both dependencies are illustrated in Fig. where z m0 ,ρ 0 are constants deduced above for superconductor transition at T cr = 0. Note that the previous result for bulky sample specified by Eq.( valid for temperature range T < T c . The dependence specified by Eq.( Let us now reproduce films resistance data set The sets in both panels of Fig. It is instructive to estimate the Bi-samples parameters. We remind you that there was no study of carrier density in Ref. The all previous discussion concerned the zero-current mode of the galvanic measurements. We demonstrated that growth of temperature and(or) drop of the sample size destroys the superconductivity. In general, the enhancement of the applied currents and(or) magnetic fields is known Our previous findings confirmed the crucial role of diamagnetic currents regarding the origin of superconductivity. Usually, the diamagnetic currents are generally believed to be by cyclotron movement of electrons whose orbits are closed to (but contactless) the inner sample walls. Noticeably, one must distinguish the diamagnetic contribution to susceptibility with paramagnetic one caused by electron reflections from the sample walls, i.e so-called skipping trajectories. Within classical range of the magnetic fields Ω c τ ≪ 1 one may imagine an electron moved along the cyclotron orbit during the mean free time and, then experienced a collision with phonons and(or) impurities. Importantly, the curvature of cyclotron orbit trajectory counted for subsequent collisions increases with magnetic field. For cyclotron trajectories of an electron in the vicinity of the top(bottom) sample wall(see Fig. Here, we write down a phenomenological constant b. Finally, we introduce a modified sample-size parameter which depends on the transverse magnetic field B 0 . The superconductivity threshold transition criteria given by Eq.( For the most important case of the massive specimen κ → ∞, we find β(2zκ) ≃ 1/zκ. Using Eq.( where B c = (z -1 m -1)/b is the critical magnetic field at zero temperature. As an example, the magnetic field driven phase diagram specified by Eq.( usually reported to be a good approximation for the most of elementary superconductors. Note that in the vicinity of critical temperature T c -T ≪ T c Eq.( dΘ |= 2 provided by Eq.( We argue that the applied perpendicular field B ⊥ produces the tangential component of the magnetic field B y B ⊥ at the sample side faces shown by grey color in Fig. for derivative dρ dT change instead of previous one κ = 1 valid in absence of the perpendicular magnetic field. Here We argue that separatrix of the sheet resistance curves in Fig. Further analysis of the resistance data for sample N1 in Fig. In conclusion, we discover the self-consistent Hall Effect in a bar conductor taking into account both the diamagnetism and finite viscosity of 3D electron liquid. We demonstrate that under certain condition the resistivity of the sample vanishes exhibiting the transition to superconductivity. The current is pinched nearby the inner sample walls while the magnetic is pushed out from the sample bulk. Within low current limit the threshold temperature of superconductivity is calculated for arbitrary carrier dissipation and the sample size. For sample size and(or) carrier mobility being lower than a certain minimum values the superconductivity state cannot be realized. Sample-size and magnetic field driven transition from zero-resistance state to normal state is compared with experimental data. Phase diagram in terms of threshold temperature vs applied current and(or) magnetic field is calculated. The temperature dependence of the e-e scattering time for amorphous bismuth is extracted from the experimental data for the first time.