Oxygen exhibits structural phase transformation from non-metallic -O2 phase into metallic Unconventional superconductivity in -phase of oxygen compressed to megabar pressure I. Introduction Jörg Wittig Desgreniers et al Shimizu et al Primary demand to perform this classification is based on our recent findings that all NRT highly-compressed superconductors are, surprisingly enough, unconventional superconductors In result, we find that in all considered scenarios -O2 phase (P = 115 GPa) has Tc/TF ratio in the range of 0.008 ≲ T c T F ≲ 0.107, and, thus, this highly-compressed phase of gaseous element should be classified as unconventional superconductor. Shimizu et al 1. The first model was proposed by Baumgartner et al where φ 0 = 2.068 • 10 -15 Wb is magnetic flux quantum, and (0) is the ground state coherence length. We will designate this model as B-WHH model, because Eq.1 is analytical approximation of general model proposed by Werthamer, Helfand, and Hohenberg 2. The second used model was proposed by Gor'kov It should be noted, that both models (Eqs. 1,2) are in wide use at the moment to analyse experimental Bc2(T) data for whole variety of superconducting materials, ranging from atomically thin superconductors Results of fit of Bc2(T) data for -O2 phase (P = 115 GPa) to Eqs. 1,2 are shown in Fig. From known (0) and Tc values, the Fermi temperature, TF, can be calculated by an equation of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory where α = values for -O2 phase, to calculate TF for -O2 phase we chose a reasonable lower and upper bounds for these values. For lower bound of m eff * we use the value for ambient pressure hydrogen-rich superconductor, PdHx despite a fact that the closest (by Tc and by the atomic mass) ambient pressure superconductor to -O2 is the aluminium In this regard, in lower bound for m eff * (Eq. 4) is chosen as intendent underestimated value to cover some hypothetical case that m eff * might be reasonably low in -O2 phase. This lower bound for m eff * can be also supported by m eff * = (0.2 -0.5) • m e reported by Medvedeva For the upper bound of m eff * we use the highest value reported for highly compressed hydrides, m eff * = 3.0 • m e The lowest value for k B •T c is weak-coupling limit of 3.53 k B •T c ≲ 5.0 As the result, -O2 phase (P = 115 GPa) in all considered scenarios (Table which is about two orders of magnitude larger than hypothetical value for a conventional superconductor. In summary, in this paper we analyse experimental Bc2(T) data for superconducting -O2 phase of highly-compressed oxygen (P = 115 GPa), reported by Shimizu et al 