This paper is a report on Ohmic contacts on n-type and p-type type cubic silicon carbide (3C-SiC) layers grown on silicon substrates. In particular, the morphological, electrical and structural properties of annealed Ni and Ti/Al/Ni contacts has been studied employing several characterization techniques. Ni films annealed at 950°C form Ohmic contacts on moderately n-type doped 3C-SiC (ND ~ 1×10 17 cm -3 ), with a specific contact resistance of 3.7×10 -3 Ωcm 2 . The main phase formed upon annealing in this contact was nickel silicide (Ni2Si), with randomly dispersed carbon in the reacted layer. In the case of a p-type 3C-SiC with a high doping level (NA ~ 5×10 19 cm -3 ), Ti/Al/Ni contacts were preferable to Ni ones, as they gave much lower values of the specific contact resistance (1.8 ×10 -5 Ωcm 2 ). Here, an Al3Ni2 layer was formed in the uppermost part of the contact, while TiC was detected at the interface. For this system, a temperature dependent electrical characterization allowed to establish that the thermionic field emission rules the current transport at the interface. All these results can be useful for the further development of a devices technology based on the 3C-SiC polytype. Today, silicon carbide (SiC) devices research and development is mainly based on the hexagonal polytype (4H-SiC), due to the availability of large area wafers (up to 150mm) of good crystalline and electronic quality In spite of these potential advatages, the application of 3C-SiC in power devices technology remains still limited by the material quality, which in turn is strongly related to the growth techniques Ohmic contacts are fundamental bricks both for diodes and MOSFETs. In the past, Ohmic contacts formed using annealed Nickel-and Titanium-based metallic layers have been investigated on n-type heavily doped 3C-SiC layers, grown on different substrates This work reports on the fabrication and characterization of Ohmic contacts on moderately doped n-type and heavily doped p-type 3C-SiC layers grown on Si. The use of several morphological, structural and electrical analyses allowed to get information on the key factors for Ohmic contact formation based on annealed Ni and Ti/Al/Ni layers on 3C-SiC materials. The material used in this work consisted in 3C-SiC layers, grown in hot-wall chemical vapor deposition (CVD) reactors on 4-inches Si(100) substrates. Typically, Silane (SiH4) and ethylene (C2H4) or propane (C3H8) were used as supplier gases for Si and C, respectively First, Ohmic contacts were studied on the moderately doped n-type 3C-SiC material. Figs. Afterwards, Ohmic contacts were formed on the heavily doped p-type 3C-SiC layer. In particular, first the same Ni contact already used for the n-type material has been tested also for the heavily doped ptype samples. In this case, in spite of the high acceptor concentration level, the specific contact resistance obtained after Ni2Si formation was 4.9 ×10 -3 Ωcm 2 , i.e., in the same order of magnitude of that obtained in the moderately doped n-type material. This result confirms that the formation of a good Ohmic contact on a p-type wide band gap semiconductor represents a challenging issue -30 The structural analysis of the samples performed by XRD (Fig. The ternary phase Ti3SiC2, sometimes detected upon annealing of Ti/Al bilayers on 4H-SiC Finally, the temperature dependence of the specific contact resistance in Ti/Al/Ni contacts on the heavily doped p-type 3C-SiC was studied to get insights into the transport mechanism at the metal/semiconductor interface. In particular, as can be seen in Fig. In summary, this paper reported on the fabrication and characterization of Ohmic contacts on moderately doped n-type 3C-SiC and heavily doped p-type 3C-SiC, considering Ni and Ti/Al/Ni contacts. A Ohmic behavior could be observed after annealing at 950°C, with values of the specific contact resistance ρc varying in the range ~ 10 -3 -10 -5 Ωcm 2 , depending on the 3C-SiC layer and on the metal. In general, annealed Ni contacts exhibited a better surface morphology than Ti/A/Ni ones. However, these latter are more suitable to form Ohmic contacts on p-type doped material, owing to the lower work function. The results can be useful for the future development of the devices technology based on 3C-SiC in different applications fields.