Superconducting optoelectronic networks could achieve scales unmatched in hardware-based neuromorphic computing. After summarizing recent progress in this area, we report new results in cryogenic silicon photonic light sources, components central to these architectures. Artificial neural networks are capable of a wide variety of tasks in control, simulation, and recognition. Specialized CMOS hardware has been developed to vastly reduce the power consumption of neuromorphic computations as compared to conventional, centralized architectures. CMOS neuromorphic hardware can outperform in certain application areas, but they are then primarily limited by interconnect performance. Extending the application areas of hardware neuromorphics will require new physical platforms, such as those based on photonics, analog electronics, or Josephson junctions. Superconducting optoelectronic neural networks (SOENs) offer a route to hardware neuromorphic systems with the largest scales considered to date Fig. The low heat dissipation density promised by SOENs depends strongly on a mastery of silicon photonic light sources: increasing brightness, radiative efficiency, waveguide coupling, etc. The properties of silicon emissive defects in photonics-compatible SOI have not been studied or optimized until recently. Figure In this work, we demonstrate coupling of optimized W centers to a silicon photonic circuit. The circuit -consisting of a microdisk resonator, waveguide, and grating coupler -enables spatial differentiation of free-space and waveguide-coupled emission. We show that waveguide-coupled emission is significantly enhanced at wavelengths corresponding to the modes of the resonator. Substantial research has been devoted to SOI-compatible emitters using III-V semiconductors, germanium, and rare-earths; however these each complicate fabrication with, respectively, epitaxy or wafer bonding, quantum wells, and Al 2 O 3 optics. W centers are created simply by damaging the silicon crystal though silicon ion bombardment and then annealing -both of these steps are CMOS-compatible at the wafer scale. Embedding the emitters directly in the crystal presents a great simplification for applications below 40 K. W-center emission into a silicon-on-insulator waveguide has been observed before in an electrically injected LED The substrate used is a 76.2 mm SOI wafer with 220 nm silicon device layer on 2 μm buried oxide. The wafer is patterned and implanted with 28 Si + at an energy of 25 keV and fluence of 5×10 12 /cm 2 . The first mask is stripped. The wafer is patterned again and fully etched through the silicon device layer. Finally, the whole wafer is encapulated by a 1.5 μm PECVD oxide. More detail on fabrication can be found in A simplified experimental setup is shown in Fig. The demonstration of coupling W-center emission to a silicon photonic circuit represents progress in light sources for silicon photonics. Due to their ease of fabrication, they could play a significant role in large-scale photonic systems. Further work could also investigate Purcell enhancement, nonlinear phenomena, optical amplifiers, or electrical pumping. This is a contribution of NIST, an agency of the U.S. government, not subject to copyright.