p-type doping from the dielectric/semiconductor interface of a SnO 2 thin film transistor (TFT) has been utilized to develop high carrier mobility balanced ambipolar oxide-transistor. To introduce this interfacial-doping, bottom-gate top-contact TFTs have been fabricated by using two different ion-conducting oxide dielectrics which contain trivalent atoms. These ionconducting dielectrics are LilnO 2 and LiGaO 2 respectively, containing mobile Li + ion. During SnO 2 thin film fabrication on top of the ionic dielectric, those trivalent atoms allow p-doping to the interfacial SnO 2 layer to introduce the hole conduction in channel of TFT. To realize this interfacial doping phenomena, a reference TFT has been fabricated with Li 2 ZnO 2 dielectric under the same condition that contains divalent zinc (Zn) atom. Our comparative electrical data indicates that TFTs with LilnO 2 and LiGaO 2 dielectric are ambipolar in nature whereas, TFT with Li 2 ZnO 2 dielectric is a unipolar n-channel transistor which reveals the interfacial doping of SnO 2 . Most interestingly, by using LilnO 2 dielectric, we are capable to fabricated 1.0 V balanced ambipolar TFT with a high electron and hole mobility values of 7 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 8 cm 2 V -1 s -1 respectively with an on/off ratio >10 Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) is a technology for constructing different integrated and analog circuits that are used in microprocessors, microcontrollers, static RAM, image sensors, data converters, and highly integrated transceivers for many types of communication. Lowering the operating voltage of a TFT is a crucial issue for developing low operating voltage CMOS inverter which is required for portable optoelectronics devices. Till now many efforts have been given to developing low voltage TFT by using different high- oxide dielectric including Ta 2 O 5 [21] , Y 2 O 3 [22] , TiO 2 [23-24] , ZrO 2 [25-26] , HfO x [27] , HfLaO x [28] , LaAlO 3 [29] . In addition to oxide dielectric, polymer ion-gel and self-assembled monolayer (SAM) have been successfully utilized for low operating voltage organic TFT. However, such kind of iongel or SAM dielectric is not compatible with a higher temperature fabrication process, like solution-processed oxide semiconductor. In this situation, ion-conducting oxide dielectric shows the best performance for low operating voltage transparent TFT fabrication. Tin oxide is commonly found as an n-type semiconductor. Although, the hole carrier can be introduced to the valance band of SnO 2 mainly in two different ways. One of them is to create Sn vacancies which can introduce hole carrier to the valance band of SnO 2 which is commonly achieved by sputtering method deposition. The precursor solutions of LiInO 2 , LiGaO 2, and Li 2 ZnO 2, which were used as an ionic gate dielectric for metal oxide TFT was synthesized by low-cost solution-based synthesis. For the precursor solution of LiInO 2 dielectric, a 300 mM solution of lithium acetate has been prepared by dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol. Similarly, 300 mM precursor solution of indium chloride, gallium nitrate, and zinc chloride solution were prepared separately by using 2methoxyethanol as a solvent. All these solutions except indium chloride were stirred at room temperature for one hour to get the clear solutions of those respective salts. The indium chloride precursor solution took longer time to dissolve which required 24 hours of stirring and has been aged for one day at room temperature before deposition. For the preparation of LiInO 2 precursor, solutions of indium chloride and lithium acetate were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and stirred for one more hour at room temperature. Similarly, precursor solutions for LiGaO 2 and Li 2 ZnO 2 were prepared by mixing lithium acetate with gallium nitrate and zinc chloride solutions respectively. Finally, a transparent precursor solution of these three ion-conducting dielectrics was used to deposit gate dielectric of our TFTs. A separate 300 mM solution of tin chloride was prepared by dissolving in 2 methoxyethanol followed by continuous stirring for one hour at room temperature that forms a clear solution. This solution was used for the SnO 2 semiconducting layer deposition for this TFT. The thermal behavior LilnO 2 was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) study. For this experiment, the precursor powder sample was prepared by evaporating the solvent of a mixed solution of lithium acetate and indium chloride. These studies have been performed in a nitrogen (N 2 ) atmosphere at a flow rate of 20 o C /minute. Figure Grazing Incidence X-ray Diffraction (GIXRD) measurement was used to check the structural property of LiInO 2 thin film. For this measurement, the thin film sample was prepared on a glass substrate and annealed at 550 o C for 1 hr. For TFT, the dielectric/semiconductor interface plays a crucial role in device performance. Therefore, atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to study the surface morphology of dielectric thin film (p + -Si/ LiInO 2 ) annealed at 550 o C as shown in the Figure The optical transmittance spectra of sol-gel derived LiInO 2 thin film was recorded in the wavelength range 300-900 nm. which is the same as previously reported. Three different types of TFTs have been fabricated by using LiInO 2 , LiGaO 2, and Li 2 ZnO 2 dielectric thin film, respectively, with a bottom-gate top-electrode geometry which we called as TFT1, TFT2, and TFT3 respectively. All these devices have been fabricated on top of heavily doped p-type Si (p + -Si) substrates of dimension 15 mm x 15 mm. In the beginning, all these substrates were passes through routine cleaning in four different solutions as previously reported. Finally, aluminum metal has been deposited on the top of SnO 2 thin film by shadow mask process in a thermal evaporator that works as a source and drain electrodes of the devices. The width to length ratio of the TFT was 118 (W/L=23.6 mm/0.2 mm). To understand the electrical properties of the deposited dielectric thin films, current-voltage (I -V) measurements have been carried out using a metal-insulator-metal device architecture (p+-Si/dielectric/Al). The leakage current density of 550 0 C annealed LiInO 2 dielectric thin film at 2 V is only 2.4 x 10 -8 Amp/ cm 2 which is very low as compared to other previously reported dielectric (Figure The dielectric behavior of LiInO 2 was examined in detail with the same device structure (p + -Si/LiInO 2 /Al) by measuring frequency-dependent capacitance (C -f) within the range of 20 Hz to 1 MHz as shown in Figure for LiGaO 2 and Li 2 ZnO 2 thin films, those are shown in Figure The effective mobility of the carrier (μ) and sub-threshold voltages (SS) of this TFT is calculated from the following equations; Where I D , C, V G , V T are saturation drain current, capacitance per unit area, gate voltage and threshold voltage. Since the TFT operation was performed in direct voltage, the capacitance at a lower frequency (50 Hz) is taken into account for the calculation of mobility to avoid overestimation. The threshold voltage of the device can be calculated by fitting a straight line on I D 1/2 vs. V G plot of transfer characteristics. The extracted carrier mobility and threshold voltage for n-channel and p-channel operations of TFT1 are 7 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , 0.2V and 8 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , 0.3V respectively. To the best of our knowledge, as an ambipolar transistor, these are the highest achieved mobilities among all reported organic/polymer or oxide devices. Moreover, those above mobility suggests that there is a balance injection of both types of charge carriers (i.e., electron and hole) which is very necessary for CMOS electronics, are not commonly found in earlier organic/polymer or inorganic oxide-based ambipolar TFT. In addition to carrier mobility, two other parameters determine TFT device quality. One of them is the current on/off ratio and the other one is the device's sub-threshold swing (SS). The on/off ratio of the device with n-channel and p-channel operation is 60 and 1.5 x 10 2 , respectively. On the other hand, the subthreshold swing of the device is 1.31 V dec -1 (for n- ...................... ( shown in Figure 