In high temperature cuprate superconductors, the interlayer coupling between the CuO 2 planes plays an important role in dictating superconductivity, as indicated by the sensitive dependence of the critical temperature (T C ) on the number of CuO 2 planes in one structural unit The newly discovered superconductor, ACa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 (A=K, Rb and Cs, 12442), has attracted much attention because it provides a unique platform to study superconductivity mechanism of the iron based superconductors layers (right panel in Fig. 12442 provides an opportunity to investigate whether the interaction between the two FeAs layers within one bilayer FeAs block can produce a similar bilayer splitting and the effect of interlayer coupling on superconductivity in iron based superconductors. On the other hand, band structure calculations indicate that there are six hole-like pockets at the centre of Brillouin zone (BZ) and four electron-like pockets at the zone corner In this paper, we report the first high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission measurements on the band structure and superconducting gap of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 (K12442) superconductor. A complete Fermi surface topology is observed which consists of five hole-like pockets around the Brilliouin zone center Γ point and tiny electron-like pockets around the zone corner M point. No Fermi surface nesting condition is satisfied between the electron-like pockets around M point and the hole-like pockets around Γ point because of the apparent mismatch of their Fermi surface sizes. Band structure calculations indicate that these multiple bands around the zone center can be understood in terms of bilayer splitting where the interlayer interorbital interaction between the two FeAs layers within one bilayer FeAs block gives rise to band splitting. This is similar to the bilayer splitting observed in Bi2212 superconductor High-quality single crystals of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 were grown by the KAs flux method The samples were characterized by electrical resistivity (Fig. Figure In the superconducting state, the spectral weight at the Fermi level gets suppressed due to the gap opening; it is more obvious for the β band than that for the γ band (Fig. Bi2212 consists of two CuO 2 planes in one structural unit separated by calcium (Ca); the structural unit is separated by insulating block layers. It is highly two dimensional because it exhibits a very strong anisotropy between the out-of-plane and in-plane resistivities Within the structural unit, the interaction between the two structurally equivalent CuO 2 planes gives rise to two Fermi surface sheets: bonding and antibonding ones We carried out band structure calculations to further understand the interaction between the two adjacent FeAs layers and the microscopic origin of the bilayer splitting in K12442. In band shares similar orbital components and the interlayer interorbital interaction (Fig. K12442 has the largest number of observed Fermi surface sheets among all the iron based superconductors discovered so far. With such multiple Fermi surface sheets, together with the detailed momentum dependent superconducting gap measured on each sheet, K12442 provides an ideal system to examine on possible gap functions and explore on possible pairing mechanisms. Generally, there are two approaches to understand superconductivity of the iron based superconductors For the strong coupling approach where the intralayer pairing ∆ 0 originates from the intralayer next-nearest neighbor exchange coupling J 2 and the interlayer pairing ∆ z comes from interlayer exchange coupling J z (see inset in Fig. Only when we consider the interlayer pairing and band-dependent ∆ 0 and ∆ z can we fit the observed gap well, as shown in Fig. In summary, we carried on high resolution laser ARPES measurements on a newly discov- 