We present a perspective on recent observations of the photoinduced phase separation of halides in multicomponent lead-halide perovskites. The spontaneous phase separation of an initial homogeneous solid solution under steady-state illumination conditions is found experimentally to be reversible, stochastic, weakly dependent on morphology, yet strongly dependent on composition and thermodynamic state. Regions enriched in a specific halide species that form upon phase separation are self-limiting in size, pinned to specific compositions, and grow in number in proportion to the steady-state carrier concentration until saturation. These empirical observations of robustness rule out explanations based on specific defect structures and point to the local modulation of an existing miscibility phase transition in the presence of excess charge carriers. A model for rationalizing existing observations based on the coupling between composition, strain and charge density fluctuations through the formation of polarons is reviewed. Lead halide perovskites have emerged as a promising class of semiconducting materials for photovoltaic and light emitting devices. The existence of photoinduced phase separation reflects an unusual interplay between the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom in the lead halide perovskites that is distinct from traditional inorganic materials and organic semiconductors. Unlike traditional inorganic semiconductors, the lead halide octahedral crystal structure is held together by predominately isotropic ionic bonds, The reversible, nonlinear changes accompanying photoexcitation have been suggested previously to proceed through the formation of polarons, which can induce excessive strain energy, destabilizing solid solutions. The basic phenomenology of photoinduced phase separation in the lead halides is illustrated in Fig. Accompanying the formation of the low energy luminescent state are dramatic changes to the lattice. Studying thin films, Hoke et al 11 reported a splitting of x-ray diffraction peaks under light soaking, and suggested that halides separated into two distinct crystalline phases. Similar x-ray studies followed, confirming that initial observation and indicated the potential for coherency strain, the strain due to lattice mismatch, between regions of different composition. The direct imaging of phase separation demonstrated the facile means by which ions can typically move throughout the perovskite lattice. These observations are consistent with AC conductivity measurements that have long demonstrated that purely inorganic perovskites, like CsPbBr 3 or CsPbCl 3 , are efficient halide conductors. While photoinduced phase separation has been observed in a variety of different morphologies produced under disparate synthesis conditions, differing morphologies appear to change the rate of phase separation. The dependence of phase separation on composition has received significant attention as a potential route to mitigating its detrimental effects on device performance. For mixed halide perovskites with MA cations, mixtures of both Br/I and Cl/Br have been found to undergo photoinduced phase separation across broad ranges of compositions. The dependence of photoinduced phase separation on the thermodynamic state of the material is of specific interest, as such information provides insight into the underlying driving forces and universalities of the transition. The temperature dependence has been studied in both Cs and MA based materials. In MA based films, photoinduced phase separation has been found to occur throughout temperatures ranging between 200 K and 300 K. Provided a morphology and composition where phase separation can occur, its extent and characteristic time dependence depends on the illumination intensity and light soaking protocol. Under constant, continuous wave illumination, the steady state photoluminescence intensity has been shown to be proportional to the carrier concentration, at low power. Indications that it is the steady-state concentration of charge carriers that dictates phase separation are supported by varying exposure time studies and observations of phase separation from direct current injection. Specifically, Yang et al. manipulated the charge carrier concentration as a function of time by varying the repetition rate of illumination at constant average power in a pulsed laser experiment. This array of experimental observations points to the specific role of excess charge carriers, generated by light or injected directly, in altering the reversible miscibility of a mixed halide solid solution in the lead halide perovskites. Changes in initial temperature, pressure and composition, can have large effects on the extent and appearance of the photoinduced phase separation, while changes in morphology seemingly most affect its kinetics. It would seem that a natural framework for rationalizing the driving force for photoinduced phase separation would be to consider how excess charges can modulate an underlying miscibility phase transition. With such a mechanism, the dependence on thermodynamic conditions could be rationalized together with observation of aggregates that are self-limiting. Provided a consistent thermodynamic understanding of photoinduced phase separation, an understanding of the stochastic dynamics that form and dissolve aggregates could then follow. In the next two sections we lay out a specific mechanism for rationalizing the driving force for photoinduced phase separation and its subsequent implications for the associated phase separation kinetics. This framework was originally presented along with experimental observations in Ref. 37, was refined in Ref. 43, and is consolidated in detail in this perspective. In order to develop a microscopic understanding of photoinduced phase separation in lead halide perovskites, we must be able to distinguish the underlying thermodynamic driving forces that would result in phase separation stability, from dynamical effects associated with a hierarchy of disparate timescales in photo-active materials. We therefore first present a framework for considering the thermodynamics of photodinduced phase separation and then present the dynamical considerations afterwards. The thermodynamic perspective we present is based on a generalization of standard solid state solution phase transition theory, adding in a source of strain from photogenerated localized charge carriers. The dynamical perspective is simplified by assuming that halide motion is vacancy-mediated and is the rate limiting step to phase separation, as it occurs orders of magnitude slower than charge carrier and lattice relaxation. The multi-scale nature of this process requires that novel numerical tools be invented and used to test the simplifying assumptions of the theory. These we also discuss below. Given the preponderance of experimental observations pointing to the reversibility and robustness of the photoinduced phase separation transition, a description of this process based on modulating an underlying miscibility transition was proposed by Bischak et al. where the polynomial expansion of φ(r) follows from the expansion of the entropy of mixing and pair interactions for small φ(r), and the square gradient term accounts for interface formation, as needed for the conservative matter field considered here. In principle, all three parameters, a, u and g, depend on external conditions. The parameters are determined using a Flory-like model, Since there are large differences in the lattice constants between any two pure halide phases in cubic APbX 3 structures, the effects of coherency strains generated between two phase separated lattices cannot be ignored. Provided that there are no large scale morphological transitions accompanying phase separation and that the cubic symmetry of the perovskite lattice does not change upon changing composition, we can restrict the effects of strain to those derivable from linear elasticity. Moreover, we will employ isotropic elasticity theory for simplicity of notation, though our results are insensitive to those generalized to the cubic symmetry of the perovskite lattice with the correct average elastic constant. Under these simplifying assumptions, the contribution to the system from elastic deformations is given by the contribution to the Hamiltonian, where Σ(r) denotes the local strain field, K is the bulk modulus in the mixed phase and ν is Poisson's ratio. For variations in composition, and assuming the lattice is always in instantaneous equilibrium with local compositional fluctuations, the resultant strain due to the lattice mismatch is given to lowest order by where η = d ln /dφ is the change in the lattice constant with composition, evaluated in the mixed phase. Higher order effects, like the change of the bulk modulus with composition, or the violation of Vegard's law are neglected here. c . This temperature can be computed within mean field theory as, which follows from functional minimization of the combined Hamiltonians in Eqs. 1-3 with respect to the compositional field. While the enthalpy of mixing at constant volume has not been measured experimentally, calculations have been performed at various levels of accuracy. Typical values for APbX 3 for mixtures of Br and I are between 2-4 kcal/mol. where is the energetic bias of an excess charge to reside in different φ regions, α is the electron-phonon coupling constant, and m is the effective mass of the excess charge and is Planck's constant divided by 2π. Assuming that the charge is localized to a lengthscale, R p , we can integrate out its effect on the compositional fluctuations in the vicinity of that localized charge. Within a mean field approximation and working along the symmetry line where = 0, we can compute the critical miscibility temperature under illumination, T (l) c , due to the excess charge. The lowest order correction to Eq. 4 appears at the level of α 2 and is given by, which demonstrates that the miscibility temperature increases due to the formation of the polaron by an amount dependent on the electron phonon coupling, α, the size of the polaron, R p , and the lattice mismatch, η. Under these assumptions, the stabilization of the phase separated state is due to the strain generated by the charge-lattice coupling, which reverses the reduction of the miscibility temperature upon strain relaxation in the dark. Typical values of m = 0.15m e , 79 α = 4 eV, = 700 K for MA based perovskites, and 350 K for Cs based materials. This predicted stability of the demixed phase is consistent with experimental observations of phase separation at room temperature under illumination and also in observing that the stability increases with electron-phonon coupling. The above theory makes a number of simplifying assumptions to arrive at a compact expression for the modulation of the miscibility temperature by the formation of a polaron. To test these assumptions computationally and go beyond them, requires a way to represent an extended lattice, and a facile means to sample over different halide compositions and thermal fluctuations to compute the subsequent free energy for differing compositions. While simulations under these conditions are routine with molecular simulation, the photoinduced phase transition additionally requires a means to represent the effect of an excess charge on this free energy. While in principle ab initio based molecular dynamics simulations together with enhanced sampling methods could be used, such would be prohibitively computationally expensive for the system sizes required to not artificially localize the excess charge. An alternative method developed in Ref. 37 used an empirical forcefield for the MAPbX 3 lattice, During photoinduced phase separation, motions on vastly different timescales become coupled. The lead halide perovskites have low cohesive energies allowing for large scale motions of the lattice, in addition to the expected facile motion of photoexcitations and their dissociated charge carriers for a functioning photovoltaic. The basic processes, as well as their characteristic timescales that span 15 orders of magnitude at room temperature, are summarized in Fig. The fastest process relevant to photoinduced phase separation is the diffusion of photo-excited charge carriers throughout the lattice. Charge diffusion has been studied by a variety of techniques and for lead halide perovskites at ambient conditions, estimates typically place diffusion constants between 0.1-1 cm 2 /s. Halide diffusion and interdiffusion occurs on significantly longer timescales than charge or lattice motion. Halide diffusion is vacancy mediated, and thus depends on both the vacancy concentration and the activation energy to move a vacancy between two lattice sites. Vacancy concentrations, ρ v , depend strongly on material synthesis conditions. At room temperature, ρ v has been estimated to be as low are 10 -9 per unit cell in single crystals and as high as 10 -4 per unit cell in thin films. where , ρ v , and k v are the lattice spacing, the vacancy concentration per unit cell, and an effective hopping rate that all depend on the relative concentration of two different halide species. Using transition state theory, we can estimate the mean time to form an aggregate. The rate is given by the product of the probability to have a composition fluctuation large enough to trap a charge carrier and the characteristic timescale for halide interdiffusion. Specifically, we assume that a charge localizes in a halide compositional inhomogeneity that forms spontaneously and transiently. The probability to have a specific composition fluctuation in a volume V using the free energy model in the previous section is p(φ) = exp[-βaφ 2 V /2]. In the presence of the energetic bias towards a specific halide composition due to favorable band energies ( in Eq. 5), the equilibrium state of a localized charge is defined by φ = /a. Combining this composition-bias relationship with the characteristic attempt frequency for clustering from the halide interdiffusion constant (Eq. 7), the rate for a single aggregate to form is where κ = 2 V /2a is the free energy to form a cluster large enough to localize the charge. If we take = 0.44k B T , per charge of size R p , which follows from the difference in the band gap between a pure Br and pure I lattice Such a minimal description of the dynamics of photoinduced phase separation was nevertheless able to reproduce the rise in the emergence and stabilization of isolated I clusters in time-lapse cathodoluminescence imaging, the concomittant photoluminescence intensity versus time as the characteristic time to cluster 37 as well as the steady state spectra as given by the steady state overlap of the charge with the local composition. The photoinduced phase separation of multicomponent lead halide perovskites is well documented experimentally as a robust, reversible phenomena. Within the framework presented here, it emerges due to the confluence of unique material properties. The soft perovskite lattice admits high vacancy concentrations, and the ionic lead halide bonding couples to photoinduced charges, creating large polarons. When an initially homogeneous solid solution of different halides are present, the formation of a polaron generates sufficient strain to locally render phase separation thermodynamically favorable. High vacancy concentrations result in large interdiffusion coefficients, which renders phase separation observable on experimentally relevant timescales. While the framework expanded upon here includes a number of simplifying assumptions that preclude perfect agreement with experimental observations of quantities such as light/polaron-induced critical temperature shifts, these assumptions accommodate the challenging multiscale nature of the photo-induced phenomenon. The model already offers a way to rationalize the majority of the experimentally observed behavior consistently and also consistently describes how the behavior can be modulated by material composition, morphology and thermodynamic state. In the future, the model could be further refined to include corrections for fluctuations, surface tension from finite size aggregates, strain modulation, or high charge carrier concentrations. Yet, with the explicit relations provided above, light-stable perovskite based materials can already be rationally designed for a variety of photophysical applications. Strategies that have and will continue to be pursued will either manipulate the stability of the phase separated state by modulating the critical miscibility temperature under illumination, or reduce the rate at which it is formed, by pursuing materials with lower vacancy concentrations.