Here, the synthesis of Molybdenum Disulphide (MoS 2 ) flakes by means of anodic atmospheric arc discharge is reported for the first time. The vertical electrode configuration consisted of a compound anode (hollow graphite anode filled with MoS 2 powder) and a solid graphite cathode placed just above of the compound anode. Arc processes were operated in pulsed mode to preferentially evaporate the powder component from the anode and to minimize Carbon ablation. Pulsed anodic arc discharges were conducted at 2 Hz and 10% duty cycle in 300 Torr of Helium with a peak current of 250-300 A and peak voltage of 35 V. A probe made of Tungsten wire was placed in the vicinity of the arc column to collect the evaporated material. The measured thickness profile was correlated to the particle flux distribution and it was fitted by a simple model of plasma expansion. During pulse phase, electron density was estimated around 5×10 22 m -3 or higher, and ion current density was of the order of 10 A/mm 2 . Morphology, structure and composition of the samples were characterized by Raman spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and xray diffraction (XRD). The study shows that pulsed arc discharge of the compound anode leads to moderate C deposition combined with MoS 2 deposition in the form of fragmented nanocrystals and few atomic monolayers of MoS 2 . Such synthesis technique is promising to produce new 2D nanomaterials with tailored structure and functionality thanks to the flexibility of pulsed power. Nanomaterials are qualified for many applications in electronics, mechanics, energy, etc., thanks to their special physical properties. Their in-plane atoms are arranged by strong covalent bonds which yield weakly interacting adjacent sheets by van der Waals forces, namely: (1) Carbon nanostructures, whose allotropes graphene, carbon nanotube and Buckminster fullerene are recognized worldwide as versatile materials with unique properties; The design of such compound anodes with metallic inclusions, whose mission is to enhance arc current, has permitted the successful synthesis of h-BN nanotubes by reactive arc discharge in nitrogen atmosphere. Furthermore, the shortcoming of early Mo melting suggests the need for designing novel arc discharge recipes. A proposed solution might be energizing the anode through a periodic signal waveform, such as a square-wave modulated pulsed current. This approach has already shown positive results in carbon arc discharge research. The anodic arc discharges were performed using an experimental setup described in detail elsewhere. The arc discharge processes were characterized by studying the V-I characteristics of the discharge. The bonding structure of the samples was characterized by Raman spectroscopy using a Horiba LabRAM HR operated at a wavelength of 532 nm. The analyzed spot sizes were of the order of a few microns. Surface topography was explored by AFM using an Asylum Research instrument (MFP-3D) operating in tapping mode. Imaging was conducted in the attractive regime to avoid surface damage and contamination of the sample by the AFM probe. The sample was profiled with a Si cantilever (Asylum Research, AC200TS, with resonance frequency f ≈ 151 kHz and force constant k ≈ 6 nN/nm). The scan rates used for the images reported in Fig. Then, the ionized or neutral reaction products are transported through the plasma and gas phases until they impinge onto a deposition surface. This sketch constitutes the scenario of pulsed arc discharges on the powder-containing anode, whose electrical parameters are evaluated and discussed below. where r A is the anode radius, e is the elementary charge, n e is the electron density, κ is Boltzmann's constant, and M i is the ion mass. The ion beam area at the cathode surface has been taken as the full section area of the compound anode (r A =2.5 mm) because the deposited material onto the cathode shows a circular profile comparable to the anode circular section. With such assumption, and by taking an electron temperature of ≈ 1 eV, the ion current density has been calculated as function of the dominant ion in the arc discharge. The dominant ion is determined by the plasma chemical reactions, which have not been modelled in this article. For the sake of simplicity, here we consider two extreme cases in which dominant ions in plasma are C + ions (M i =12 u) and Mo + ions (M i =95.9 u). The obtained values range between 270 A and 100 A out of a total arc current of around 275 A, respectively. The respective ion current densities are 15 A/mm 2 (C + : 8.5×10 21 cm -2 s -1 ) and 5 A/mm 2 (Mo + : 3.0×10 21 cm -2 s -1 ). In arc experiments, He atoms are considered neutral since Helium shows the highest ionization potential (24.6 eV) of all species in the gas mixture. Exclusively atomic ions have been assumed to contribute to ion current since the Mo-S bond energy in MoS 2 is only 2.56 eV. In our study, the probe is at a fixed location and pulse duration is 50 ms as defined by the duty cycle (10% of 500 ms period). Since arc current saturation is not established for such a short pulse time, The particle flux distribution in each experiment has been calculated by measuring the layer thickness at different positions x of the probe (for MoS 2 : ≈ 25 μm at the middle and ≈ 5 μm at the extremes for a 8 s-process of MoS 2 evaporation) and by converting the deposition rate, R(x), into particle flux density projected in the X direction, J x (x). For this, the following equation was used: where ρ is the material mass density and M is the molecular mass of the impinging species from the plasma. Therefore, assuming a radial particle flux emerging punctually from the arc core, the particle flux at a distance r from the arc core can be calculated as J(r)=J x (x)/cosθ, being θ the angle subtended by the normal direction from probe to arc core and the segment comprised between arc core and position x at the probe (see inset in Fig. The dependencies displayed in the plots confirm the assumption of spherical propagation of particles from the arc core since the flux density obeys a law ~1/r 2 . The particle flux at the anode surface (far left data point), φ anode =E/(M•S), is calculated from the anode cross section (3 mm in diameter), S; the atomic masses of the evaporated elements, M; and the evaporation rate of each experiment, E. The parameter E was obtained by dividing the removed mass (measured with a microbalance) by the process duration. In the case of solid graphite arc discharge, the average ablation rate was 1 mg/s. In the case of arcing of the MoS 2 @graphite compound anode, the total evaporation rate was estimated to be around 75 mg/s, whose particle flux density is only assigned to MoS 2 species and is roughly a factor 5 higher than carbon flux density. The underestimation in the calculated central flux in MoS 2 evaporation is probably due to a low sticking coefficient of MoS 2 species onto the collecting probe and/or growing layer (see Fig. The layer deposited onto the W probe was analysed by Raman spectroscopy. Fig. and A 1g (≈ 410 cm -1 ), The AFM images in Fig. Figs. Analysis of the material composition and its implications in the experiment are discussed next. Fig. The crystallographic properties of the sample have been studied by powder XRD. Fig. Note that this conclusion is extracted from powder X-ray analysis that averages over a probing area of a few millimetres. Such probing size may neglect the contribution of eventual nanocrystals diluted within an amorphous matrix. In other words, such analysis is not suited for diagnosing samples containing highly diluted nanosized crystals, since their weak XRD signal could be overlapped with the spectrum background. The following paragraph discusses the localization and identification of nanocrystals by means of high-resolution TEM and SAED. Further study on sample crystallinity has been performed by TEM analysis (Fig. The polycrystalline phase present in the sample is manifested by the inset diffraction ring pattern, which reveals the presence of MoS 2 nanocrystals together with further material crystalline phases. In conclusion, we have observed that the material deposited onto the W probe is composed of nanosized MoS 2 crystallites embedded within a C-Mo amorphous matrix. is planned. Advanced optical diagnostics would provide the necessary information to monitor particle dynamics in the arc plasma process. Also, an increase in purity of the deposited material, i.e. lower carbon contamination, is desirable and could likely be achieved by fine-tuning the shape of the excitation waveform signal. This objective will be fulfilled by employing a new power supply equipped with rapid switching circuit, which should render possible the operation of well-defined pulse signals yet in shorter duty cycles. Nevertheless, this study demonstrates that the use of pulsed power to excite an anodic arc discharge is a versatile technique to synthesize new nanomaterials. Besides, arc discharge operation in pulsed mode provides a more stable discharge dynamics and better control of arc processes compared to traditional DC discharges. The outcome of this study is encouraging in terms of finding new pathways of nanosynthesis by means of pulsed anodic arc discharges held near atmospheric pressure.