There is a great desire to extend ultrasonic techniques to the imaging and characterization of nanoobjects. This can be achieved by picosecond ultrasonics, where by using ultrafast lasers it is possible to generate and detect acoustic waves with frequencies up to terahertz and wavelengths down to nanometers. In our work we present a picosecond ultrasonics setup based on miniaturized mode-locked semiconductor lasers, whose performance allows us to obtain the necessary power, pulse duration and repetition rate. Using such a laser, we measure the ultrasonic echo signal with picosecond resolution in a Al film deposited on a semiconductor substrate. We show that the obtained signal is as good as the signal obtained with a standard bulky mode-locked Ti-Sa laser. The experiments pave the way for designing integrated portable picosecond ultrasonic setups on the basis of miniaturized semiconductor lasers. Picosecond ultrasonics (PU) is an advanced research field which aims to extend traditional acoustic techniques to the gigahertz (GHz) and terahertz (THz) frequency ranges The main element of a PU setup is a pico-or femtosecond laser which output is split in two beams used for pumping and probing the system of interest. In most of PU experiments the pump beam is focused onto a thin metal film which acts as an optoelastic transducer. After being hit by the pump pulse, the film expands in a time of ~1 ps and, as a consequence,a coherent elastic wave packet with frequencies up to several hundreds of GHz is injected into the specimen or device. The critical parameters for PU is the energy density J in the focus spot of the laser pump pulse, the pulse duration Δt, which limits the temporal resolution and correspondingly the maximum frequency in the ultrasonic wave packet, and the laser repetition rate f, which determines the accumulation time. The values for J, Δt and f that can reliably be reached, cover a wide range (J=10 -6 -10 -2 J/cm 2 , Δt ≤1 ps and f=10-10 9 Hz) using different experimental schemes and can easily be achieved using commercial femtosecond lasers. However, all PU setups are mounted on optical tables and use bulky, not portable lasers which so far has limited the application potential of PU in geology, biology and medicine. Therefore, it is very attractive to develop a portable PU setup with the elements integrated on a single chip which would facilitate its flexible application to an object and perform PU in situ during a short exposure time. The main element of such a prospective device is the ultrafast pulsed laser providing pulses with a duration ≤1 ps and sufficiently high power, but most importantly this laser should have a compact size to be flexibly transportable. Only recently such miniaturized mode-locked lasers based on semiconductor strip devices reliably operational with parameters that are attractive for PU experiments were designed In the present paper we describe pump-probe PU experiments with mode-locked semiconductor strip lasers. As specimen for the PU studies we use an Al metal film which is widely used as photo-elastic transducer in PU experiments In the experiments we used a laser fabricated by a MOCVD-grown AlGaAs/GaAs epilayer structure with an InGaAs-based active quantum-well (QW) region consisting of two 4.4 nm-thick In0.18Ga0.82As QWs separated by a 9 nm-thick Al0.2Ga0.8As barrier. The parameters of the layers and the layer sequence are presented in Table In the PU experiments we used a bar which consists of 20 lasers with identical design and similar characteristics. An optical image of a fragment of the bar is shown in Fig. The schematic of the PU pump probe setup is shown in Fig. Substituting the values for Z into Eq. ( At t=0 the pump-probe signal is positive which means that the contribution from the hot electrons is several times larger than the expected negative contribution from the photoelastic effect. The PU signal in Fig. The measured pump-probe trace is shown in Fig. The measurement times in both experiments were the same, around 5 minutes, and the signal to noise ratios are almost the same. There is a difference in the temporal shapes around t=0 which is likely due to the 200- fold difference in repetition rates and the incomplete recovery of the Al film to lattice temperature in the experiment with the semiconductor laser. Our experiments show that miniaturized mode-locked semiconductor lasers are very well suitable for PU experiments. The typical property of these lasers is the high repetition rate which is given by the length of the laser cavity and typically is in the range of tens of GHz. The high repetition rate has the advantage of getting the required signal to noise ratio in a shorter time in comparison with conventional mode-locked lasers with repetition rates ~100 MHz, using the same pump fluence in a single pulse. However, the disadvantage of the high-repetition rate is that the system potentially has no time to recover to the initial state. As we see in our experiments this does not have a significant effect on the echo signal, but could become important when studying PU signals that last longer than hundreds of picoseconds. The challenge of getting short laser pulses in miniaturized lasers with durations below a few ps may not be met with every laser and requires careful selection, but our experiments show that a temporal resolution of Δt1 ps can be achieved. The duration of the optical pulses which limits the temporal resolution of the PU experiments limits also the highest frequency of the detected acoustic wave. With durations of ~1 ps for the pump and probe pulses, acoustic frequencies of several hundreds of GHz are achievable. PU experiments in this frequency range are high on demand in nondestructive material characterization and imaging of biological objects, including live cells. The miniaturized mode-locked semiconductor lasers for PU experiments may have even higher average power than the one used so far: While this device relies on a standard two-segment ridge waveguide utilizing quantum well gain, great promise is held by implementing quantum dots as active gain material into the laser. Quantum dots offer several advantages for mode-locked operation of lasers such as a broad gain spectrum, a low linewidth enhancement factor, and ultrafast dynamics with low saturation energies. A second crucial step is the implementation of tapered mode-locked lasers, which consist of three segments: a saturable absorber to enable mode-locked operation, a ridge waveguide and a taper with an opening angle of a few degrees. In gain guided tapered lasers, the mode defined by the ridge waveguide is allowed to diffract into the taper without any lateral index discontinuities, under an angle (typically a few degrees) defined by the mode profile of the ridge. The width of the taper at the facet is an order of magnitude larger than that of a standard ridge waveguide, leading to a reduction of the power density and therefore the facet load. In comparison to simple broad area lasers, which can provide only a moderate beam quality, tapered lasers offer a very reasonable beam quality with beam parameter products (M 2 ) below 2. This allows tight focusing of the output beam from a tapered laser. In addition to the advantages for mode locked operation, quantum dot active layers have also benefits for tapered lasers, in particular the small linewidth enhancement factor, which reduces beam filamentation in the taper and therefore increases the beam quality of the output. In order to test this, we utilized an MBE-grown laser structure based on AlGaInAs quantum dot laser material, emitting at ~920 nm. The QDs were embedded in a 250 nm thick AlGaAs graded index heterostructure (GRINSCH), and a symmetric AlGaAs cladding (see Table The peak of the RF frequency (see Fig. Another quite massive element in standard PU setups is the delay line. The best solution there will be using Asynchronous Optical Sampling (ASOPS) In conclusion, we have demonstrated picosecond ultrasonic setup on the basis of miniaturized mode-locked semiconductor laser. The measurement of a picosecond acoustic echo in Al film shows that the ultrasonic signal has the same shape and signal to noise ratio as in conventional setups with bulky modelocked lasers. The experiments show the prospective of designing and developing portable picosecond ultrasonic setups integrated on a chip for utilization in medicine, biology and geology. Michal Kobecki, Alexey V. Höfling: Fabrication of MBE lasers; editing manuscript. Andrey V. Akimov, Conceptualization, first draft of the manuscript. Manfred Bayer: Supervision, conceptualization, editing the manuscript