Confined glasses and their anomalous interfacial rheology raise important questions in fundamental research and numerous practical applications. In this Letter, we study the influence of interfacial air nanobubbles on the free surface of ultrathin high-molecular-weight glassy polystyrene films immersed in water, in ambient conditions. In particular, we reveal the counterintuitive fact that a soft nanobubble is able to deform the surface of a rigid glass, forming a nanocrater with a depth that increases with time. By combining in situ atomic-force-microscopy measurements and a modified lubrication model for the liquid-like layer at the free surface of the glass, we demonstrate that the capillary pressure in the nanobubble together with the liquid-like layer at the free surface of the glass determine the spatiotemporal growth of the nanocraters. Finally, from the excellent agreement between the experimental profiles and the numerical solutions of the governing glassy thin-film equation, we are able to precisely extract the surface mobility of the glass. In addition to revealing and quantifying how surface nanobubbles deform immersed glasses, until the latter eventually dewet from their substrates, our work provides a novel, precise, and simple measurement of the surface nanorheology of glasses. The glass transition has been being a major enigma in solid-state physics The quest for the latter observable, and its possible divergence, led to an alternative strategy: the study of glasses in confinement In this Letter, we study the influence of air nanobubbles As a consequence of these small sizes, and from the Young-Laplace equation, the pressure inside the bubble can reach up to ∼ 10 bar, which -despite being much smaller than the yield stress of the bulk glass -can lead to an external driving force for the flow of the liquid-like layer at the free surface of the glass. Consequently, a nanoscopic crater is formed underneath the bubble, and grows in size with time, as observed using an atomicforce microscope (AFM). The latter observations are discussed in the context of a modified lubrication model for the capillary-driven flow of the liquid-like layer at the free surface of the glassy film, under an external driving force. The excellent agreement between the experimental AFM profiles and the numerical solutions of the axisymmetric glassy thin-film equation yields a novel, precise, and simple measurement of the surface mobility of glasses. The value found for the latter is compared to values in the literature, and discussed in terms of polymer entanglements and anchoring effects in confinement. Finally, the model predicts a dewetting scenario for ultrathin polymer films, which might have important practical consequences. A schematic representation of the system is shown in Fig. Ultrathin PS films with three different thicknesses h 0 ∈ {2.8 ± 0.6, 4.9 ± 0.6, 7.1 ± 0.8} nm were prepared by spincoating a solution of PS (Sigma-Aldrich) in toluene onto a silicon wafer, at different toluene mass fractions {0.07, 0.10, 0.08} wt% , and with rotational speeds of {1200, 1200, 1000} rpm, respectively. The molecular weight of PS is about 350 kg/mol. After spincoating, the PS films were baked inside an oven at a temperature of 45 • C for 4 h, in order to evaporate the remaining toluene, and before measuring the thicknesses of the PS films in air, at room temperature, with an AFM (Resolve, Bruker, USA) in tapping mode and a scratching method After immersion in deionized (DI) water at room temperature, nanobubbles with diameters ranging from 30 to 100 nm spontaneously nucleated (Fig. The cross-sectional profiles for five different nanobubbles and their associated nanocraters (sorted by increasing nanobubble size) are shown in Figs. To rationalize these observations, we invoke a theoretical model that combines two ingredients; i) the existence of a liquid-like layer with viscosity η and thickness h m of a few nanometers at the free surface (i.e. exposed to any fluid) of the glassy PS film where the surface energy γ i (r) indicates γ SL (PS-water) for r ≥ L/2 and t < t b , as well as γ SV for either t > t b , or t < t b and r < L/2; while the external pressure p i (r) indicates p b for r ≤ L/2 and t < t b , as well as p am for either t > t b , or t < t b and r > L/2. Due to the constant liquid-like layer thickness h m , the equation is linear, and formally ressembles the capillary-driven thin-film equation for bulk flow under perturbative profile variations Just before the formation of the nanobubble (assumed to be instantaneous), the PS film has a uniform thickness h(r, t = 0) = h 0 , which we use as an initial condition. We now nondimensionalize Eq. ( where Θ is the Heaviside function, We solve Eq. ( The fields are discretized with linear elements, and the coupled equations are solved with a Newton solver from the FEniCS library In Fig. From the fitting procedure detailed above, we extract a single relevant free parameter: the surface mobility h 3 m /(3η) = 2.31 +1.73 -1.92 × 10 -10 nm 3 /(Pa.s) of 350 kg/mol PS. Regardless of the total PS film thickness, and the nanobubble geometry, the different experiments self-consistently exhibit the same value of surface mobility. Previous measurements on low-molecular-weight PS, at higher temperatures, exhibited an Arrhenius-like trend for the temperature dependence of the surface mobility, which is characteristic of a liquid-like behaviour Finally, we want to stress that the PS deformation profiles are transient, and that they in fact will continue to evolve with increasing time (see Fig. As a conclusion, we have shown that immersing ultrathin glassy polystyrene films in water, in ambient conditions, leads to the spontaneous nucleation of air nanobubbles, which then generate nanocraters into the free surface of the PS films. The mechanism of such a dynamical deformation process is found by combining experimental atomic-force microscopy with a mathematical model based on lubrication theory applied to the liquid-like layer present at the free surface of a glassy film. The liquid-like layer is driven to flow by the pressure jump at the contact line where the three phases intersect, between the nanobubble's inner Laplace pressure and the outer ambient pressure, and opposed by the capillary force due to the induced curvature at the PS-fluid interfaces. Since the Laplace pressure scales as the inverse of the bubble's radius of curvature, the size of the nanocraters can be finely controlled. From the excellent agreement between the experimental profiles and the numerical solutions of the modified glassy thin-film equation, we extract the surface mobility of the glassy films. Comparison of the surface mobility with extrapolated results from the literature points towards the possible saturation of surface mobility at low temperature, and/or the reduction of polymeric entanglement density (and thus viscosity) in confinement. Our work thus provides a novel, precise, and simple measurement of the surface nanorheology of glasses. Furthermore, our results highlight the influence of surface nanobubbles on the stability of immersed ultrathin glassy polymer films: the nanobubbles can drive the film towards dewetting, which would have important consequences for nanoimprint lithography The authors thank James Forrest, Robert Style, Detlef Lohse and Jacco Snoeijer for interesting discussions. Y. W. and S. R. appreciate financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51775028) and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 3182022). * These two authors contributed equally. † thomas.salez@u-bordeaux.fr ‡ wangyuliang@buaa.edu.cn