The efficiency of photo-conductive switches, which continue to be used for the generation and detection of THz waves, has been overlooked for a long time. The so far "optics-dominated" devices are making their way through to new and emerging fields of research that require ultrafast picosecond voltage pulses, as well as to new applications where power efficiency is of uttermost importance. To address the efficiency problems, in this article we present a novel photo-conductive switch that is based on a 3-dimensional design. In contrast to conventional planar designs, our photoconductive switch drastically enhances the overall efficiency by maximising the laser absorption within the device, while at the same time optimising the carrier collection efficiency at the electrodes. To maximise the optical absorption we take advantage of photonic and plasmonic modes that are excited in our device due to a periodic array of nanopillars, whereas the collection efficiency is optimised by converting each nanopillar into a single nano-photo-conductive switch. Our numerical calculations show a 50-fold increase in the overall generated current and a 5-fold bandwidth increase compared to traditional interdigitated planar photo-conductive switches. This opens up a wealth of new possibilities in quantum science and technology where efficient low power devices are indispensable. Since their development in the mid-80s With an increasing demand for THz photo-conductive switches used for commercial purposes and for new fields of fundamental research In this article, we present a novel architecture/design for THz photo-conductive switches which has a 3-dimensional photonic design. We demonstrate via numerical simulations that the proposed architecture has superior power conversion efficiency compared to the "classical" 2-dimensional planar devices. By incorporating concepts and ideas from the fields of solar cells In what follows, we will introduce the 3-dimensional design of the photo-conductive switch and how, with this architecture, we can optimise optical absorption through photonic and plasmonic resonant modes. This will be followed by a discussion on the electronic properties of the photo-conductive switch when a bias voltage is applied on the electrodes of the device. For completeness, we will numerically compare the performance of our photo-conductive switch with the conventional interdigitated electrode switches. The proposed photo-conductive switch takes a leap forward from the traditional 2dimensional planar designs. Figure To accelerate and collect the photo-excited carriers, we position metallic electrodes covering completely the bottom surface of the device as well as the top part of each nanopillar. In between the nanopillars and up to the top metallic electrode, we place a transparent insulator with a low dielectric index (n = 1.58) and high breakdown electric field. At the very top of the device, we connect all the top electrodes of all the nanopillars with a transparent electrode that allows the propagation of the incident laser beam through the interior of the device. Such a transparent contact can be an indium-tin-oxide (ITO) alloy with the right composition such that it has an increased optical transmission but low enough electrical resistance to avoid resistive losses. As pointed out earlier, to increase the overall performance of the photo-conductive switch we excite photonic and plasmonic modes in the device by positioning the nanopillars in a periodic array and by carefully choosing its height. As illustrated by the inset of Fig. By placing the nanopillars in a periodic lattice, we can add extra in-plane momentum (xy direction, k || ) to the incoming plane wave and thus excite the transverse electric (TE) propagating waveguide modes into the effective medium defined by the GaAs nanopillars and transparent insulator. We chose our working wavelength to be λ = 780 nm, since commercial femtosecond lasers are readily available at this wavelength, such as Ti:Sapphire or doped fibre lasers. At this wavelength, and with the periodicity of our device being P = 355 nm we can excite the TE 0 waveguide mode, shown by the large red diamond. While the TE 0 mode travels through the waveguide it couples to a Fabry-Perot mode that exists along the height (h = 330 nm) direction of the nanopillar. The second order Fabry-Perot mode, shown by the grey dashed line, is a dark mode and it cannot be excited by the incoming plane wave due to the presence of the nanopillar top metallic contact (Ag). It can be excited however through its coupling to the TE 0 waveguide mode. In addition to the two photonic modes supported by our device a third, plasmonic mode, exists. At the laser wavelength and for a nanopillar width of w = 140 nm, our periodic structure can weakly couple to a propagating surface plasmon polariton (SPP) As we will elucidate further in the text, even though the coupling to a SPP is weak, our device profits from large local field enhancements at the vicinities of the nanopillars. Since the proposed photo-switch can support three types of photonic/plasmonic modes that are different in nature, it is expected that it can absorb completely the input laser beam. Our simulations show that this is indeed the case, as illustrated by Fig. where 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ω is the angular frequency, E(x, y, z) is the electric field and { } is the imaginary part of the permittivity in each material. As we can appreciate from these data, although the overall absorbed power is almost unity, the input energy is not exclusively absorbed by the semiconductor. A ratio of around 20% is absorbed by the metal contacts and is potentially converted into heat through resistive losses. We note that resistive losses in the metal contacts can significantly deteriorate the efficiency of photo-conductive switches, especially those who rely solely on plasmonic resonances. For our simulations, to reduce metal losses as much as possible, we have compared several metals with various permittivities. The metals with the best performance for our device were gold (Au) and silver (Ag), with Ag being slightly better than Au. This is because losses in Ag are lower than Au at λ = 780 nm and this is reflected by their permittivity values, namely = -29 + 0.37i for Ag and = -22 + 1.4i for Au. The optimum thickness for the metal electrodes covering the bottom surface and the top part of each nanopillar was found to be h m = 45 nm. Figures The coupling to a SPP, although weak, causes a significant electric field enhancement at the vicinity of the nanopillar The electronic properties of a single unit cell of our device are numerically simulated with the Poisson-Drift-Diffusion equation. This is done by using the same commercial package as the one used for modelling the photonic response of our device (see Methods section). The main components of our model are the electron generation term, the recombination rate component and a carrier mobility model. To account for the complicated carrier dynamics in our nanopillar device, the semiconductor equations are solved with a time-domain solver. The electron generation term is derived directly from the photonic simulation and, more precisely, from the optical absorption per unit volume, shown in Eq. 1. This term is then multiplied by a Gaussian time-dependent function to account for the laser excitation, resulting, where the first term of the formula defines the fraction of the illuminated unit cell area with respect to the area of the laser beam, with P being the periodicity of our device and r the radius of the laser beam. The second part of the equation defines the peak power delivered by a femtosecond laser with ∆τ pulse width, f L repetition rate, and an average power of P av . The third part of the generation term accounts for the spatial absorption within the semiconductor structure, with the assumption that one photon of energy E ν = hc/λ will generate one electron-hole pair. The assumption of the quantum efficiency being equal to unity is a simplification to our model since taking into account any quantum effects will result into numerically cumbersome calculations. Finally, the last term in the generation formula is a Gaussian function to account for the temporal laser pulse shape, which arrives at time t 0 . The white arrows illustrate the direction of the electric potential. For the carrier recombination term, we used the well established trap assisted Shockley-Read-Hall model. This model takes into account an ensemble of carrier traps that are formed in the LTG-GaAs during epitaxial growth and subsequent annealing with an effective recombination time, τ r = 0.8 ps 9 . It is expected that the carrier recombination as well as the mobility will not be significantly affected by any surface effects, as the proposed nanopillars are bigger than previously studied nano-wire devices For simplicity, we have also assumed that the trapping rates for electrons are the same as for holes. In contrast to the "classical" interdigitated photo-conductive switch design, the photo-excited carriers in our vertical structure can be accelerated towards the top and bottom electrodes by very high electric fields. For instance, a bias voltage of 5 V can induce an electric field in the order of 150 kV/cm. Electron and hole drift velocities, and as a consequence carrier mobilities, are largely influenced by these high fields. This is because carriers acquire very large kinetic energies that lead to a non-equilibrium dynamic response in the picosec- The model takes into account the Γ, X, and L valleys of GaAs with energies 1.42 eV, 1.71 eV, 1.90 eV and effective masses 0.063m e , 0.87m e , 1.98m e respectively. Our results are illustrated in Fig. At moderate electric fields, 5 -10 kV/cm, consistent with what has been reported in the past However, at longer times the carrier energy exceeds the threshold for enabling transitions to the X and L bands which are higher in energy. As the electron effective mass in these bands is much bigger than the lower energy band, the electrons will begin to loose speed, eventually reaching a saturation velocity that is dominated by scattering mechanisms with the lattice. Finally, at very high electric fields the overshoot velocity can reach values up to 10 8 cm/s within the first 100 fs. The inset of Fig. As pointed out earlier, the vertical design of our photo-conductive switch has the advantage of inducing homogeneous electric potentials when a bias voltage is applied between the top and bottom electrodes. This is in stark contrast to the existing planar photo-conductive switches, where the electric potential becomes very weak in the bulk of the semiconducting LTG-GaAs. Positioning the two electrodes on the opposite ends of the photo-active region, in a similar way to a capacitor, can significantly increase the overall power performance of the photo-conductive switch Figures To quantify the overall photo-current generated by each nanopillar we have numerically calculated the current flowing through the top and bottom electrodes of our device. The time-dependent carrier mobility model used for these simulations takes into account the possible velocity overshoot demonstrated by our Monte-Carlo simulations. Figure To benchmark the efficiency of our novel photo-conductive switch, we compare our results to a "classical" interdigitated Auston photo-conductive switch, shown with a black dashed line on Fig. The results of Fig. To begin with, it is important to note that the proposed device cannot be made of a single nanopillar. This is because, for the collective photonic and plasmonic effects to take place, a minimum of fifteen periods should be used In addition, as we have seen from Fig. To estimate the capacitance of the proposed photo-conductive switch we assume a parallel In conclusion, we have presented a novel photo-conductive switch device that has a 3dimensional design. The optical to electrical power conversion efficiency of the proposed device is significantly increased by maximising the optical absorption in the LTG-GaAs through photonic and plasmonic resonances. In addition, by positioning the electrodes of the device at the end-sides of the LTG-GaAs we can uniformly accelerate the electrons under high electric potentials, thus reaching high carrier collection efficiencies. Our numerical results suggest that our nanopillar device can deliver electrical pulses with as much as 50 times more peak current and significantly broader bandwidth than the "classical" interdigitated photo-conductive switches. These qualities, will be useful and attractive to quantum information experiments as well as applications that require ultrafast voltage pulses at cryogenic temperatures we have calculated the drift velocity of carriers (u d(t,E) = μ(t, E) E) as a function of time, t, and applied electric potential, E, (see Fig. 