Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) are a unique class of intermetallic alloys that can cyclically sustain large deformations and recover a designed geometry through a solid-to-solid phase transformation. SMAs provide favorable actuation energy density properties, making them suitable for engineering applications requiring a significant, repeated, work output. To facilitate the development and validation of an SMA constitutive model considering the evolving anisotropic material response for High-Temperature SMA (HTSMA), uniaxial and pure bending actuation cycling tests on HTSMA specimens are performed by a custom-built testing frames. The phase transformation characteristics for Ni50.3TiHf20 HTSMA under uniaxial tension/compression and four-point bending actuation cycles are investigated. The experimental results show that the polycrystalline HTSMAs has a strong tension-compression asymmetry under uniaxial actuation cycling loading conditions. Furthermore, the four-point beam bending test shows that there is an intrinsic phenomenon when HTSMAs are subjected to cyclic actuation bending conditions, i.e., the zero-strain neutral axis shifts as a result of the asymmetric tension-compression phase transformations and the asymmetric generation of TRIP strains on different sides of the beam. The conducted experiments provide invaluable information to develop and improve the SMA constitutive model considering tension-compression asymmetry and TRIP strain generation within a unified modeling effort. As future work, additional experiments on other HTSMA components, such as torque tubes and specimens with notches or cutouts, under actuation cycling would provide more comprehensive validation data and component performance for HTSMA-based actuators. Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) exhibit a reversible solid-to-solid phase transformation between the austenite and martensite phases, facilitated through inputs of stress, temperature, or a thermomechanical combination. Although SMAs have a lower actuation frequency compared to other active materials, they are useful in actuation applications due to their large energy density, and their ability to recover extremely large transformation strains. In other words, SMA actuators can undergo recoverable shape changes under high stress levels and produce a large work output compared to other solid state actuator materials, such as piezoelectric ceramics or shape memory polymers. In general, SMAs can be characterized by a phase diagram based on their phase transformation between the austenite and martensite. The four critical transformation temperatures, M f , M s , A s , A f , describe the beginning and final transition of the SMA between the two phases. Depending on the material composition, heat treatment, and processing, the transformation temperatures can be modified to be below freezing, or even well above 85 • C. The martensite phase is further broken down into twinned martensite and detwinned martensite. For twinned martensite, the mechanical load applied to the SMA is not high enough to see a macroscopic deformation, only a lattice structure rearrangement. On the other hand, the detwinned martensite phase shows a significant deformation compared to the austenite phase, between 1% to 10% macroscopic strains. The thermomechanically induced phase transformation of an SMA under a constant load is shown in Figure SMAs are implemented in numerous commercial and industrial fields including: automotive, aerospace, electrical, robotics, and biomedical, and they can take the form of motors, actuators, transducers, structural materials, or sensors. While NiTi is the most studied SMA due to its large recoverable strain and corrosion resistance, HTSMAs such as the tertiary metal alloys NiTiHf and NiTiZr are becoming the present research focus due to their application in higher temperature ranges, mostly for aerospace applications. These alloys have transformation temperatures well above 85 • C, where the current Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics guidelines require components to be dormant in operation environments. After cycling from the austenite phase to the detwinned martensite phases under a thermomechanical loading path, unrecovered strains develop in SMA materials after each cycle. Unlike plastic strains in conventional metals, these remnant strains occur at significantly lower stress levels, well below the yield limit, and lead to functional fatigue of the SMA actuator. These remnant strains are due to the combination of transformation-induced plasticity (TRIP) and retained martensite. TRIP is defined as the plastic flow arising from solid state phase transformations involving shape changes at low stress levels. It is an evolutionary phenomenon during thermomechanical cycling of SMAs that leaves a number of permanent microstructural changes during the forward transformation into martensite. Previous experiments have shown that polycrystalline and single crystal SMAs have a significantly different macroscopic response in compression compared to tension. Compressive loading states result in smaller displacements, higher transformation stress levels, and strain hardening. The uniaxial actuation testing is conducted on a custom-built load control frame that allows for continued cycling of flat SMA dogbones with different heat treatment, see the test matrix in Table Compression tests are conducted on cylindrical bar specimen via a MTS Insight machine using a compression plate fixture. There are two modes of control available on the insight machine: load control and displacement control. Displacement control is the desired method with the MTS Insight machine and the most accurate. For this control, a crosshead displacement rate of 0.1 mm/min is used for quasi-static testing. For actuation tests, displacement control is used to reach the desired fixed load, and then load control is used to maintain the load with a PID controller. The parameters are tweaked manually until the load cell produced a maximum error of 15.8N. The cycling control is much slower to avoid temperature gradients in the specimen, test fixture, and thermal chamber. Temperatures are extracted using three thermocouples to determine the magnitude of the temperature gradients. The next test setup is specialized for four-point bending tests. This frame, see Figure The first step of the characterization process is to perform the DSC experiment on a small sample of the tested HTSMA materials. The latent heat release from the exothermic and endothermic phase transformation is captured to determine the phase transformation temperatures. Four DSC tests are performed on the HTSMA material with four different heat treatment conditions, i.e., as received, solutionized, solutionized and heat treated, and only heat treated conditions. The samples are vacuum sealed and water quenched if Pseudoelastic tests are also performed in order to get the basic SMA material parameters. These tests are conducted on the MTS insight load frame. The test is performed at a chamber stabilized temperature of 185 • C, 30 • C above A f , and loaded from 0 to 11,400 N in crosshead control at a rate of 0.1mm/min as quasi-static loading conditions. This material is not expected to provide a pseudoelastic response with the questionable purity, but 4.6% strain (out of the total 4.8%) is recovered upon unloading and the material clearly exhibits the pseudoelastic effect. The same test procedure is performed in compression as well. The stress-induced transformation starts at 560MPa for the tension case, and 680MPa for the compression case. Compression results show that there is no flat stress plateau and the martensite reorientation requires additional nominal stresses to complete detwinning. A tension test to calculate the elastic modulus in the martensite phase is conducted as well, see Figure 5. The Shape Memory Effect occurs when the deformation caused in martensite is recovered after heating into the austenite phase in a stress-free condition. The test is performed at chamber stabilized 35 • C, loaded from 0 to 4400 N in crosshead control at a rate of 0.1mm/min for quasi static conditions. The test results in 1% strain at an average stress of 400 MPa. The strain recovered from heating the tested specimen in a stress-free condition was 0.25%. Constant load actuation tests were conducted at average stress values of 50, 100, 150, 200, and 300 MPa in order to characterize the thermomechanical response of HTSMA. The joule heating is applied and controlled between a 35 • C lower cycle temperature and a 285 • C upper cycle temperature, which produces full transformation cycles. Each test was performed on a different specimen right after processing. The specimens were cycled enough for characterization and quantification of plastic strain. The actuation hysteresis for each applied stress for the first cycle is shown in Figure Three uniaxial actuation tests are performed in compression at the following nominal stress levels, i.e., 100, 200, 300 MPa. The results are compared against the tension cases at the first cycle is shown in Figure The four point bending experiment consists of a constant 15.2N load, corresponding to a 40MPa flexural stress, and thermomechanically induced actuation cycling. Results show a significant displacement, up to 11mm at the midpoint, a maximum tensile strain of 0.8%, and a maximum compressive strain of 0.48% during forward phase transformation. The strain field at the midpoint section shows obvious strain asymmetry across the thickness as shown in Figure In addition, as the cycling continued, the neutral axis kept on shifting into the compression side at a similar trend as the TRIP strain as shown in Figure There has been a lot of constitutive modeling efforts been made during recent decades to predict the intrinsic material response of SMAs, a through review can be found from elsewhere. The strain contour in the longitudinal direction across the beam thickness is shown in Figure In this work, tension, compression, and bending actuation cycling tests on HTSMA specimens are performed by the custom-built test frames to facilitate the development and validation of newly proposed SMA constitutive model considering the cyclic anisotropic phase transformation characteristics for HTSMAs. The performed experiment shows an intrinsic phenomenon for HTSMAs under cyclic thermomechanical conditions, i.e., TRIP strain accumulation and tension-compression asymmetric phase transformation. During the phase transformation in an SMA beam under four-point bending, tension-compression asymmetry occurs and the zero-strain neutral axis shifts as a result of the asymmetric generation of TRIP strains on different sides of the beam. The combination of tension-compression asymmetry and the formation of TRIP strains during thermomechanical actuation cycling is measured and simulated by using a recently developed phenomenological model, and there is good correlation between the experimental results and the simulation, but the model is still in need of further improvement. Future work along this paper can mainly focus on the development and improvement of the current SMA constitutive model considering tension-compression asymmetry, TRIP strain, thermo-mechanically coupling, and partial phase transformation loops through an unified large deformation framework. Additional experiments could be conducted to validate the proposed modeling capabilities for additional features. Also, experimental results from torque tubes under actuation cycling loading would provide more model validation data and component performance for HTSMAs actuators. Lastly, testing HTSMA specimens with notches, or localized stress concentrations and using the constitutive model to predict the cyclic response would be revolutionary for the analysis of HTSMA-based actuators.