We describe the cavity-enhancement of frequency combs over a wide tuning range of 450-700 nm (> 7900 cm -1 ), covering nearly the entire visible spectrum. Tunable visible frequency combs from a synchronouslypumped optical parametric oscillator are coupled into a 4-mirror, dispersion-managed cavity with a finesse of 600 to 1400. An intracavity absorption path length enhancement greater than 190 is obtained over the entire tuning range, while preserving intracavity spectral bandwidths capable of supporting sub-200 fs pulse durations. These tunable cavity-enhanced frequency combs can find many applications in nonlinear optics and spectroscopy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/ao.XX.XXXXXX The cavity enhancement of stabilized ultrafast pulse trains, or frequency combs, first demonstrated around the turn of the century The cavity-enhancement of frequency combs over a wide spectral range poses a number of technical challenges. First, one must have a tunable frequency comb with transducers to control both the f rep and f 0 of the comb, with at least one highbandwidth transducer to tightly lock the comb to the cavity or vice/versa. This rules out, for example, the recently popular offset-free "DFG combs" In this letter, we address these challenges, focusing on the visible spectral range, using a recently developed widely tunable frequency comb source To characterize the fsEC performance, we first measure the cavity finesse, F , across the design wavelength range. To measure the finesse independent of the complications of the comb cavity coupling described below, we use the cavity attenuated phase shift (CAPS) method Which, in turn, is related to finesse via: To measure finesse via the CAPS method while remaining frequency-locked to the cavity, we send two identical beams into the cavity in counterpropogating directions as shown in Fig. PZT: piezoelectric transducer, EOM: electro-optic modulator, LF: loop filter 1(a) and described in The measured cavity finesse across the design range is shown in Fig. The CAPS measurements are relatively simple and independent of the details of the comb/cavity coupling. For measuring the performance of the setup for cavity-enhancing frequency combs with maximum bandwidth, more discussion of the frequency comb and stabilization schemes is required. For all these measurements, we use a two-point Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) locking scheme The input combs are derived from a home-built synchronously pumped optical parametric oscillator (OPO) operating at 100 MHz repetition rate, previously described in For coupling the 2i comb to the cavity, since phase modulation on the pump is transferred directly to the 2i comb with no bandwidth penalty imposed by the OPO cavity For coupling the 2s comb to the cavity, the high-speed actuators of the pump laser are of no use since phase modulation on the pump comb is not transferred to the 2s comb, as discussed in detail in The fundamental limit to the attainable intracavity pulse duration is given by the attainable intracavity spectral width, which is in turn related to the input spectrum and the intracavity dispersion. We have measured both the incident OPO input spectrum and intracavity spectra across the tuning range. Example intracavity spectra of the 2s, 2i, and pump combs are shown in Figs. In order to use the cavity-enhanced combs for our target application of ultrasensitive ultrafast optical spectroscopy In conclusion, we have for the first time demonstrated the cavity-enhancement of frequency combs with a widely tunable platform. The wide tuning range of > 7900 cm -1 covers nearly the entire visible spectrum. Despite the technical challenges wavelength tuning imposes on the frequency comb generation, cavity mirrors, and comb/cavity coupling, we have demonstrated performance that is comparable to that used in previous experiments using cavity-enhanced combs National Science Foundation (NSF) (1708743). Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) (FA9550-16-1-0164).