Transverse acoustic phonons are believed to compete with structure disorder, such as in superionic crystals The high-performance MgAgSb-based thermoelectric materials have great potential as candidates for near-room-temperature thermoelectric generators Thus far, in addition to transport property measurements, experimental characterizations of the MgAgSb-based materials have been mainly based on X-ray diffraction and electron microscopy, which have provided microscopic insight into their crystalline structures Here, we use neutron scattering measurements together with systematic ab initio simulations to study the crystalline structure and the atomic dynamics of two α-MgAgSbbased materials, MgAg0.97Sb0.99 and MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 (the sample of Ni p-type substitution for Ag has a higher anomalous electrical resistivity Crystallographic structure properties. The evolution of the crystallographic structures of MgAg0.97Sb0.99 and MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 as a function of temperature was investigated by neutron diffraction. Both compounds maintain the α-MgAgSb structure (Fig. The distorted structure has a significant phonon scattering effect and the complex primitive unit cell has a large ratio of optical phonon branches (69/72) that significantly reduces κlat The temperature-dependent neutron diffraction data (Fig. Local structure distortion. Here we study the local structure of MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 using neutron total scattering. By the pair distribution function (PDF) analysis and fitting of G(r), which is a Fourier transform result of the static structure factor, S(Q) (see Methods) Consequently, we investigated the atomic dynamic properties of these materials by inelastic neutron scattering (INS). Figure This can be ascribed to the particular distorted crystal structure, which has many equivalent Brillouin zone centers in different reciprocal space directions folded at this sharpest-peak Q position. We consider these centers to be a quasi-Brillouin-zone (QBZ) center. Thus, a novel double-mushroom scattering pattern arising from the QBZ center is observed in Fig. To study the origin of the suppression of the transverse acoustic phonons, we adjusted the distorted Mg-Sb sublattice to a highly symmetric Mg-Sb rocksalt structure by making all of the Mg-Sb bonds equivalent (Fig. Phonon softening. Figure Since the ZT value of both MgAg0.97Sb0.99 and MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 increases with increasing temperature before reaching a maximum at ~450 K with a plateau from 450 to 550 K Figure Low thermal conductivity mechanism. To further verify the low thermal conductivity mechanism, we computed the intrinsic anharmonic effects of α-MgAgSb and the highsymmetry structure MgAgSb (the γ-MgAgSb shown in Fig. Based upon our ab initio simulation results, we determined that the low-energy phonon modes are mainly due to the heavy Ag atom-related vibrations (Supplementary Fig. Interestingly, by Ni-doping at the Ag site, the phonon modes of the Ni-doped sample are much softer than those of their parent sample, although the lattice parameters of the Nidoped sample are slightly smaller (Supplementary Fig. In summary, the microscopic origin of the ultralow thermal conductivity in α-MgAgSb has been unveiled. Since the transverse acoustic phonons are mostly scattered by the intrinsic Mg-Sb distorted rocksalt sublattice structure, the longitudinal acoustic phonons are consequently responsible for the κlat leading to the ultralow values, and the anharmonic nature of the atomic dynamics is further revealed by the phonon softening. The scenario of ultralow κlat induced by static local structure distortion is of fundamental significance since it potentially provides a general route to suppress transverse acoustic phonons, and thus the κlat of solids, especially rocksalt-related thermoelectric materials. Sample Synthesis. The two-step process combining ball milling with hot pressing was used to synthesize the materials MgAg0.97Sb0.99 and MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 as reported elsewhere Hall Measurements. The Hall coefficient measurement was performed on Accent HL5500 Hall System for MgAg0.97Sb0.99 and MgAg0.965Ni0.005Sb0.99 at RT An empty vanadium cell, a standard vanadium rod, and the empty background were also measured at the same temperatures for PDF analysis , with a cutoff (Qmax) of 30 Å -1 . The same parameters were applied to the data analysis for both samples. The real-space refinement of experimental G(r) was performed by PDFgui program Here, a small impurity-phase peak appears in the 450 and 500 K neutron powder diffraction data (Fig. Inelastic Neutron Scattering Measurements. INS measurements were performed at the MARI time-of-flight chopper spectrometers at the ISIS Neutron and Muon Source in the UK where Multi-Ei time-of-flight INS measurements were performed at the cold neutron disc chopper spectrometer BL14 AMATERAS One-dimensional "E-cuts" were taken along the Q-axis to obtain the phonon spectra at specific E- Computational Methods. The Kohn-Sham density-functional theory (DFT) calculations spacing Monkhorst-Pack mesh with a cutoff of 500 eV was used in the calculations. The vibrational properties of MgAgSb were studied within the harmonic approximation via density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) The two-dimensional, B(Q, E) patterns shown in Fig. The κlat of MgAgSb here is directly determined from full solution of the phonon Boltzmann transport equation using the ShengBTE code where υi,q, ci,q, and τi,q are the phonon group velocity the mode specific heat capacity and the relaxation time, respectively, for the i-th phonon mode at the wave-vector q point. This process requires the energies and forces acting on a supercell for a set of random configurations generated by the trial density matrix. During the calculations, the same settings * Here,