The optimal superconductivity (Tc ≈ 30 K) in BaFe2(As1-xPx)2 can be reached when the coupled antiferromagnetic (AF) order (TN ) and orthorhombic lattice distortion (Ts) are suppressed to zero temperature with increasing of P concentration or hydrostatic pressure. Here we use transport and neutron scattering to study the c-axis pressure effects on electronic phases in underdoped BaFe2(As0.72P0.28)2, which has TN = Ts ≈ 40 K and Tc ≈ 28 K at zero pressure. With increasing c-axis pressure, TN and Ts are slightly enhanced around Pc ∼ 20 MPa. Upon further increasing pressure, AF order is gradually suppressed to zero, while Tc is enhanced to 30 K. Our results reveal the importance of magnetoelastic couplings in BaFe2(As1-xPx)2, suggesting that the c-axis pressure can be used as a tuning parameter to manipulate the electronic phases in iron pnictides. The parent compounds of iron-based superconductors are long-range ordered antiferromagnets below a Néel temperature T N and also display tetragonal to orthorhombic lattice distortion below T s (T s ≥ T N ) Previous study on BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 with in-plane strain added along the orthorhombic axis reveals increased T N and decreased T c As the AF order and nematic phase in BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 disappears in a weakly first-order fashion near optimal superconductivity [Fig. We chose to study the effects of a c-axis aligned uniaxial pressure on slightly underdoped BaFe 2 (As 0.72 P 0.28 ) 2 superconductor with T N = T s ≈ 40 K and T c ≈ 28 K, because of its close proximity to optimal superconductivity but with distinctively different electronic phases to the x = 0.30 compound in zero pressure Figure Assuming that the kink in temperature dependence of the resistivity indeed arises from AF order, we can determine c-axis pressure evolution of the ordering transition T N by plotting the resistivity derivative dR/dT versus P c in Fig. As a function of increasing P c , T N shown as a dip in dR/dT increases slightly below 20 MPa, then it gradually decreases until vanishing at P c = 280 MPa. Figure The reduction in T N and the increased T c for 20 MPa < P c < 280 MPa is also seen in previous work where the value of P c is unknown To confirm the pressure-induced changes in AF order, we carried out neutron diffraction experiments in the same compound using the MIRA triple-axis spectrometer at Maier-Leibnitz, Garching, Germany Figure To summarize the transport and neutron scattering results, we plot in Fig. In general, electronic phases in iron pnictides such as BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 are believed to be related with crystal structural parameters including pnictogen height (the height of As/P to the Fe layer), a, c, and the c/a ratio In summary, we have systematically studied the c-axis uniaxial pressure evolution of the AF phase and superconductivity in underdoped BaFe 2 (As 0.72 P 0.28 ) 2 superconductor. With increasing P c , the AF order can be gradually suppressed to zero around at P c = 280 MPa with the appearance of optimal superconductivity, after the initial enhancement at ∼ 20 MPa. These results indicate that in addition to isoelectronic doping and hydrostatic pressure, uniaxial pressure along the c-axis can be used as a tuning parameter to manipulate the electronic phases and study in the interplay of magnetism and superconductivity in iron pnictides. The neutron scattering work at Rice is supported by the U.S. NSF Grant No. DMR-1700081 (P.D.). A part of the material synthesis work at Rice is supported by the Robert A. Welch Foundation Grant No. C-1839 (P.D.). The work at BNU is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. 115, 267202 (2015).