The Kohn-Luttinger mechanism for unconventional superconductivity (SC) driven by weak repulsive electron-electron interactions on a periodic lattice is generalized to the quasicrystal (QC) via a real-space perturbative approach. The repulsive Hubbard model on the Penrose lattice is studied as an example, on which a classification of the pairing symmetries is performed and a pairing phase diagram is obtained. Two remarkable properties of these pairing states are revealed, due to the combination of the presence of the point-group symmetry and the lack of translation symmetry on this lattice. Firstly, the spin and spacial angular momenta of a Cooper pair is de-correlated: for each pairing symmetry, both spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings are possible even in the weakpairing limit. Secondly, the pairing states belonging to the 2D irreducible representations of the D5 point group can be time-reversal-symmetry-breaking topological SCs carrying spontaneous bulk super current and spontaneous vortices. These two remarkable properties are general for the SCs on all QCs, and are rare on periodic lattices. Our work starts the new area of unconventional SCs driven by repulsive interactions on the QC. Introduction In Ref In this paper, we study the KL SC in a weak-U repulsive Hubbard model on a Penrose lattice. Via a realspace perturbative treatment up to the second order, we acquire an effective interaction vertex, through which we derive a linearized gap equation near the superconducting critical temperature T c , solving which we obtain the T c and the pairing gap functions. We classify the pairing symmetries and obtain the pairing phase-diagram after large scale numerical calculations. Two remarkable results are obtained. Firstly, the orbital-and spin-angular momenta of the Cooper pair are de-correlated even without the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which means that we can obtain both spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings for the same pairing symmetry, distinguished from the case on a periodic lattice. Secondly, any 2D irreducible representation (IR) of the D 5 point group can bring about TR symmetry (TRS)-breaking topological SCs (TSCs) hosting spontaneous bulk super current and spontaneous vortices. These two properties are caused by the combination of the point-group symmetry and the lack of translation symmetry, and are thus general for the SCs on any QC, and are rare on periodic lattices. [41] with lattice constant a shown in Fig. where c iσ annihilates an electron at site i with spin σ, n iσ is the electron-number operator, and μ denotes the chemical potential. The hopping integral t ij = e -|r i -r j |/ min({|r i -r j |}) , where |r i -r j | denotes the distance between different sites i and j, and min({|r i -r j |}) = 0.618a. The tight-binding (TB) part of Eq. ( For this repulsive Hubbard model, SC is forbidden in the mean-field (MF) level. However, it can be driven by the KL mechanism, wherein unconventional SC is mediated by exchanging particle-hole excitations. Due to the lack of translation symmetry, we engage a real-space perturbative treatment, whose details are provided in the Supplementary Material (SM) In our calculations, only about a 1000 × 1000 number of (m, l) near the Fermi level are summed in Eq. ( with χ ij ≡ χ with ∆mn = ∆mn f mn , where The formula F mn,m n for the singlet pairing is given as and for the triplet case it is The linearized gap equation ( Pairing symmetries and phase-diagram: The classification of pairing symmetries here is based on the symmetry of the linearized gap equation (4) [44]. It's proved that the "pairing potential" F mn,m n is invariant under the D 5 point group. Consequently, the set of solutions { ∆(α) mn } (α = 1 or 1, 2) of Eq. ( with any g ∈ D 5 . Then, from the IR which the set of matrices {D (g) } belong to, one can judge the pairing symmetry of the state with gap function The four IRs of the D 5 point group are listed in Table I, including two 1D IRs, i.e. A 1 and A 2 , and two 2D IRs, i.e. E 1 and E 2 . For each IR, we list the representation matrices for the two generators of D 5 , i.e. the C 2π/5 and σ x , up to an arbitrary unitary transformation. Each IR listed in Table I corresponds to one pairingsymmetry class. The identity representation A 1 is the s-wave with angular momentum l = 0. The A 2 representation is the h y 5 -10x 2 y 3 +5x 4 y -wave with l = 5 which is σreflection odd. The E 1 (E 2 ) representation provides the doubly-degenerate p-wave (d-wave) with l = 1 (l = 2). Note that for each of the pairing symmetry listed in Table The pairing phase diagram is shown in Fig. i,j of these mixed states show nontrivial winding-number structures: with each θ-angle rotation (θ = 2nπ/5) about the lattice center performed on combined (i, j), the complex phase of ∆ i,j would be shifted by ±lθ (l: angular momentum), as listed in Table To better characterize the topology of these pairing states on the QC without translation symmetry Here X and Y are the position operators, H is the BdG-Hamiltonian matrix and Sig represents the difference between the numbers of positive and negative eigenvalues of the matrix acted on ). Note that Ĵi is TR odd, whose expectation value Ĵi should vanish in TRI states. However, in the TRSbreaking chiral pairing states belonging to the 2D-IR, our numerical results shown in Fig. Discussion and Conclusion: One might wonder whether the lack of translation symmetry on the Penrose lattice would destroy the phase coherence of the pairing state. This puzzle can be settled by investigating the superfluid density ρ s defined as Here a weak uniform vector potential A along the β-direction is coupled with the system, Ĵ[A] = -δ Ĥ[A]/δA and |A represents the ground state of Ĥ[A]. It's proved here [44] that ρ αβ s = ρ 0 δ αβ and our numerical result yields ρ 0 > 0, suggesting a true superconducting state with nonzero superfluid density and hence measurable Meissner effect. The real-space perturbative approach engaged here and the insight acquired from this work would also apply to other QCs. Particularly, the recently synthesized 30 •twisted bilayer graphene In conclusion, we have performed a real-space perturbative calculation for the Hubbard model on the Penrose lattice. Our results reveal various classes of unconventional SCs induced via the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism. We have classified the pairing symmetries according to the IRs of the D 5 point group of this lattice, with most of them exhibited in the pairing phase diagram. Remarkably, each pairing symmetry can be both spinsinglet and spin-triplet. All the 2D-IR pairing states can be TRS-breaking chiral TSCs hosting spontaneous bulk super current and spontaneous vortices. These pairingmechanism-independent exotic properties of the SCs on the Penrose lattice are caused by the combination of the point-group symmetry and the lack of translation symmetry, and are thus general for all QC lattices, and are rare on periodic lattices. Our work starts the new area of unconventional SCs driven by repulsive interactions on the QC. Let's start from the following positive-U Hubbard model on the Penrose lattice, To treat with this interacting system, let's first investigate the tight-binding (TB) model in its kinetic-energy part, which can be diagonalized as Here the index m labels the eigen state on the Penrose lattice, and c mσ = i ξ im c iσ , with ξ im representing for the wave function for the state m. In the following, we shall perform a real-space perturbative treatment on the Hubbard interaction. The Matsubara single-particle Green's funciton is defined as, This Green's function can be Fourier transformed to the imaginary-frequency space as In the case of U = 0, we obtain the bare single-particle Green's function in the eigen basis as which is Fourier transformed to the real space as where ω n = (2n + 1)π/β is the fermion frequency. Let's define the real-space susceptibility function Here we only consider the connected Feyman's diagrams in the bare level. Employing Wick's theorem and Eq. (A6), Eq. (A7) can be evatuated, whose Fourier transformation to the imaginary-frequency space is given as where Ω n = 2nπ/β is the boson frequency. In the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism with The role of the effective Hamiltonian (A9) lies in that, for the calculation of the abnormal Green's function representing the pairing order parameter, the result obtained at the mean-field (MF) level using Hamiltonian (A9) can approximately provide the result obtained up to the second-order perturbative expansion of the S-matrix (see Mahan's book As the effective interaction (A9) is invariant under spin-SU(2) transformation, we can perform the MF decoupling in the singlet and triplet channels separately. In the singlet channel Eq. (A9) is MF decoupled as with The MF decoupling of Eq. (A9) in the triplet channel can be performed in three channels with the following three order parameters, which represents for the triplet-pairing components with the total S z of the Cooper pair to be , 0 andrespectively. Due to the spin-SU(2) symmetry, these three channels are exactly degenerate, which allows that we can only study one component, e.g. the (1, 0) component, among the three ones. The MF decoupling in this channel reads as with ∆ t † to be the abbriviation of the ∆ t † (1,0) in Eq. (A14). To make the calculation feasible, we constrain the summation of energy within a small window, ∆E, around the chemical potential μ. The BdG Hamiltonians for both the singlet and the triplet (1, 0) channels can be written as, where c σ is an abbreviation of (c 1σ , • • • , c Lσ ) and L is the number of energy levels in the truncated energy window. The BdG Hamiltonian can be diagonalized as with X = ωγ, where ω is the matrix of eigenvectors of H BdG . In the following, we derive the linearized gap equation at the critical temperature T c , solving which we can obtain T c and the pairing symmetry. We shall demonstrate the procedure of deriving the gap equation for the singlet channel as an example in the following, while for the triplet (1, 0) channel, we shall only give the results. The ∆ in Eq. (A17) can be self-consistently calculated by expanding c iσ by c mσ and further by γ m . We demonstrate the derivations as the following. For the singlet channel at any finite temperature T Here we explicitly express the index m of an eigen state with a pair of indices, i.e. m ≡ mα, with the first index labeling the energy level and the second one labeling the degenerate eigen state(s) with the same eigen energy. The D (g, m) is the matrix corresponding to the element g for the IR furnished by the eigenvector(s) belonging to ̃ m. Making use of the obviously equality, χ i,j = χ ĝi,ĝj , it is convenient to show that the F (s) is invariant under the following symmetry-group operation, and so as F (t) . From Eq. (A37), it can be easily proved that if ∆s/t mn ≡ ∆s/t m αñ β is a solution of Eq. (A27) or Eq. (A28), then ( Pg ∆s/t mμñν would also be a solution of Eq. (A27) or Eq. (A28) corresponding to the same T c . Let ∆ s/t ij be the real-space correspondence of ∆s/t mn via the relation ∆ s/t ij = mn ∆s/t mn ξ im ξ jn , then from Eq. (A36) it's easily obtained that the real-space correspondence of Pg ∆s/t mn is ∆ s/t ĝi,ĝj . Therefore, if ∆ ij is a real-space solution of the linearized gap equation with a T c , then ∆ ĝi,ĝj would also be a solution with the same T c . As a result, all the real-space solutions {∆ (α) ij } corresponding to the same T c furnish an IR of the point group, expressed as, Here D (g) is the representation matrix corresponding to the element g ∈ D 5 . From the IR that {D (g) } belongs to, we can classify the pairing symmetry of the group of pairing states with gap functions {∆ (α) ij }. In the remaining part of this section, we show the difference between the classifications of pairing symmetries on the QCs and periodic lattices: In the absence of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) here, for each of the pairing symmetry on the QC, both spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings are possible; while on centrosymmetric periodic lattices, the even (odd) orbital angular momentum is usually bound to the spin-singlet (triplet) pairing. Usually, the classification of pairing symmetries is performed on the basis of the linearized gap equation or more general the linearized Ginzburg-Landau theory obtained just below T c . At such temperatures, the pairing gap goes to zero, and the pairing state is in the weak-pairing limit (for most realistic superconductors, even the ground states belong to this limit). On periodic lattices in the weak-pairing limit, the Cooper pairing only takes place around the Fermi surface in the momentum space, and the Anderson's theorem requires that the pairing should only take place within intra-band. The pairing Hamiltonians are thus for the singlet pairings and k +h.c., or their arbitrary mixing for the triplet ones, respectively. Here k and α label the momentum and band index respectively. Note that due to the Fermi statistics, the gap function ∆ s,α k (∆ t,α k ) is even (odd) as function of k, as its odd (even) part always cancels itself in the summation between k and -k in the k . Generally, as an irreducible representation of the point group containing the inversion symmetry, the even (odd) gap function ∆ s,α k (∆ t,α k ) belongs to the irreducible representation marked by even (odd) orbital angular momentum l. However, for a QC, the lattice momentum is no longer a good quantum number and the Anderson's theorem is broken, so there is no corresponding relationship between spin and orbital angular momenta. Note that on noncentrosymmetric periodic lattice lack of inversion symmetry, each irreducible representation doesn't have definite parity of the pairing angular momentum. For example, on a lattice with D 3 symmetry, the pairing angular momentum l = 0 or l = 1 cannot be distinguished from l = 3 -0 = 3 or l = 3 -1 = 2, leading to ambiguity of the parity of the l. In such cases, the pairing angular momentum is also independent from the spin statistics. Based on the K-theory, the Chern number for a finite-size system can be expressed as the following pseudo-spectrum invariant index where Sig represents the difference between the numbers of positive and negative eigenvalues of the matrix acted on, X and Y are position-operator matrices with X defined by and Y defined similarly. The BdG-Hamiltonian matrix H is defined as in which h is the matrix of local BdG-Hamiltonian defined as From the above introduced definition of C ps , it's shown below that C ps has two universal properties. Firstly, any global unitary transformation will not change C ps . Such unitary transformation is embodied as a siteindependent unitary matrix u performed on all the h ij , leading to h ij → hij ≡ uh ij u † . Defining the unitary matrix which suggests that the global unitary transformation will not change C ps . From the above property, it's easily known that the two TRS-breaking triplet pairing states have the same Chern number: one is described by the pairing term ij ∆ ij (c i↑ c j↓ + c i↓ c j↑ ) + h.c., i.e. the (1, 0) component; the other is described by ij ∆ ij (c i↑ c j↑ ± c i↓ c j↓ ) + h.c., i.e. the (1, 1) ± (1, -1) component. Obviously, the two chiral pairing states are mutually related by a global spin-SU(2) rotation (i.e. ŝz → ŝx , for the case of (1, 1) -(1, -1)) followed by a spin-dependent U(1)-gauge rotation (i.e. c ↓ → ic ↓ , for the case of (1, 1) + (1, -1)), which makes them share the same Chern number. Further more, the matrix in the right side of Eq.(A39) for the (1, 1) ± (1, -1) state is block-diagonalized into the spin-up block and the spin-down one, suggesting that the Chern number of the two chiral triplet pairing state is twice as much as the one for a spinless system with the same pairing form factor. Secondly, the C ps for a pairing state and that for its time-reversal (TR) conjugate is different by a sign. This property is proved as follow. Under TR transformation, we have Here we have used the particle-hole symmetry of the BdG-Hamiltonian (in the third "=" above). Since we know that C ps (H) = -C ps (T HT -1 ). From the above property, we can know that the Chern numbers of all TRI pairing states are zero, because they should be equal to their opposite numbers. Therefore, all 1D-IR pairing states have zero Chern numbers, as the gap functions in these pairing states are real, which are TRI. Further more, the TRI helical triplet pairing state with pairing term Besides the above two universal properties, there is another important question to ask: for a triplet and a singlet pairing states with the same gap form factor except for the different exchanging parities, what's the relation between their Chern numbers? Obviously, the two states share the same pairing symmetry, but possess different total spins for the Cooper pair. Our numerical calculations on a lattice with 3466 sites and with restricted hopping integrals up to the third nearest neighbor show that such two pairing states share the same Chern numbers, although their total spins of Cooper pair are different, suggesting that the Chern number is only related to the pairing symmetry. symmetry broken. But the total super current i Ĵi [A = 0] should be zero with A = 0, otherwise the macro superfluid density should be infinity. Then, let's study the superfluid density, which is a tensor defined as Here Ĵα is the α-component of the total super current per site defined as Ĵ = 1 N i Ĵi . In the following, we shall prove that this tensor is diagonal and isotropic, i.e. ρ αβ s = ρ 0 δ αβ , for all the pairing symmetries listed in the Table. I of the main text. Let's consider an infinitesimal A imposed on the system, which will induce a super current J ≡ Ĵ , whose two components satisfy, (A50) Let's consider an arbitrary symmetry operation g ∈ D 5 acted on the system. For any pairing symmetry listed in the Table . I of the main text, the transformed gap function by g can be expressed as Pg ∆ mn P -1 g = e iθg ∆ mn , where θ g is the angle according to the specific representation. Therefore, the transformed Hamiltonian Pg ĤBCS P -1 g can be recovered to the original one by a succeeding global gauge transformation, c i,σ → e -iθg/2 c i,σ , which will not change the superfluid density. As a result, after the g ∈ D 5 symmetry operation acted on the system, the superfluid density 