We study ballistic transport in periodically gated bilayer graphene as a candidate for a 2D electronic metamaterial. Our calculations use the equilibrium Green function formalism and take into account quantum corrections to charge density changes induced by a periodically modulated top gate voltage. Our results reveal an intriguing interference-like pattern, similar to that of a Fabry-Pérot interferometer, in the resistance map as a function of the voltage VBG applied to the extended bottom gate and VT G applied to the periodic top gate. Photonic metamaterials are artificial structures used to control propagation of light waves To explore the possibility of constructing a 2D electronic metamaterial, we study theoretically the propagation of electrons in periodically gated bilayer graphene. Our calculations use the equilibrium Green function formalism to describe ballistic transport in bilayer graphene (BLG) and consider quantum corrections to charge density changes induced by a periodic modulation of the top gate voltage. Our results reveal an intriguing interference-like pattern, similar to that of a Fabry-Pérot * tomanek@msu.edu interferometer, in the resistance map as a function of the voltage V BG applied to the extended bottom gate and V T G applied to the periodic top gate. Due to its atomic-scale perfection and unique electronic structure, monolayer graphene (MLG) has emerged as an ideal 2D material to study charge transport Our study is devoted to periodically gated BLG which, same as MLG, is a semimetal. Unlike in MLG, scattering is not suppressed by Klein tunneling due to the lowered symmetry of BLG. In absence of Klein tunneling, the resistance of BLG can be tuned to be very high. The band structure of BLG is qualitatively different from MLG, as it is characterized by parabolas and not Dirac cones near E F . Consequently, v F and thus the wavelength of electrons can be modulated by local doping caused by changing the electrostatic potential. Thus, the BLG system appears to be a better candidate for electron optics than MLG, which we will also discuss for the sake of reference. The possibility of constructing the electronic counterpart of an optical DBR has not been explored so far. The schematic of a recently fabricated device To provide an adequate description of the gated BLG device under operating conditions, we distinguish its components and their function in the schematic crosssection provided in Fig. Even though region (II), which lies in-between region (I) and the contacts, may be of lesser interest, it still needs to be addressed in the transport study. This region is above the BG and thus affected by V BG , but outside the range of the TG and thus unaffected by V T G . Key to the interpretation of the resistance in region (II) is the interface between BLG and hBN layers above and below the channel. There is only negligible electronic interaction between graphene layers and the surrounding hBN due to its 5.97 eV wide band gap To determine the resistance pattern associated with the central region (I) of interest, we first calculate the electronic structure of BLG and the electrostatic potential U within the plane of the channel as a function of V T G and V BG . For a given V BG -V T G combination, the propagation of ballistic electrons and the net resistance of the gated BLG device is evaluated using the equilibrium Green function formalism. As indicated in Figs. The low-energy Hamiltonian of a free-standing, ungated BLG can be written as Here we use p = (k x + ik y ) with (k x , k y ) to describe the carrier momentum with respect to the Fermi momentum at the Fermi point in the corner of the hexagonal Brillouin zone. The tight-binding parameters describing these systems are The two low-energy bands of H BLG are where describes the dispersion in the conduction band and E -(k) that in the valence band. In BLG gated by a periodic top and a uniform bottom gate, the net electron number density n(x) varies periodically along the transport direction and is constant in the y direction. In BLG with isotropic band dispersion at E F , we find where k F (x) is the Fermi wavevector at position x. There is particle-hole symmetry with positive n for electron and negative n for hole doping. The dependence of the charge density n and the Fermi momentum k F on x is in response to the periodic electrostatic potential U (x) in the plane of the BLG. With the contact lead at the drain end at ground potential, which sets E F = 0 within the BLG, this potential is given by where e is the absolute value of the electron charge. The subscript η in the expression for E η in Eq. ( In principle, U (x) could be obtained for any gate geometry by solving the Poisson equation (5) Here, the doping charge density n(x) has been related to changes in the potential by the position-dependent partial capacitances which defines a new quantity, namely the classical net electron number density n c . This quantity depends on the position x within the BLG, considered to be a classical metal, the gate geometry and the gate voltages and can be calculated in the BLG plane using classical electrostatics for the specific gate geometry. For a given charge density σ T distributed uniformly across the top gate wires, which are separated by a dielectric of thickness h T and dielectric constant from the grounded BLG, we can numerically determine n c (x) and the electric field in the entire region using the image-charge technique, which also guarantees a constant zero potential in the BLG layer. Integrating the electric field between the TG and the BLG yields the corresponding value of V T G , and the same approach can be used for the bottom gate. We note that V T G is proportional to σ T and V BG is proportional to σ B , providing quantitative values for C T (x) and C B . V 0 is a nominal voltage value taken to be V 0 = 1 V. Substituting Eqs. ( where We note that considering the grounded BLG channel as a classical metal, nonzero V T G and V BG can induce periodic variation in the classical density n c (x) = n c (V BG , V T G , x) while keeping the electrostatic potential U (x, z = 0) constant within the BLG. The fact that BLG is not a classical metal, but a semi-metal with a vanishing DOS at E F , necessitates further consideration. Unlike in a classical metal with a large DOS at E F , periodic variations of n c (x) in BLG with a small DOS at E F will cause a nominal periodic modulation of E F . To keep E F constant, the classical carrier density n c within the BLG will be modified by what we call a quantum correction n(x)-n c (x). In this better description, the periodic electrostatic potential U (x, z = 0) in the semimetallic BLG is no longer constant and will play an important role. Then, also U (x, z) for a given z between the BG and the BLG will no longer be constant. In the region between the TG and BLG, quantum corrections dampen the oscillations in U (x, z) at constant z. The electrostatic potential U (x, z) associated with the quantum corrected carrier density n(x) within the BLG, caused by V T G = 3.48 V and V BG = -0.76 V, is shown in Fig. Being able to determine the electrostatic potential U (x) and the position-dependent Fermi momentum k F (x) using Eq. ( For BLG in the periodic potential energy surface φ(x), the system becomes a superlattice with the lattice constant L along the x direction, with L = 120 nm for the device shown in Fig. The electronic band structure of the gated BLG is presented in Fig. Conductance G is known to be quantized in a system with a finite cross-section in the ballistic regime where allowed k y values are integer multiples of 2π/W T G and f (k y ) is the average transmission probability per k y mode. At T = 0 K, an allowed state with given (k x , k y ) is either occupied or empty. In that case, it will fully contribute to transmission with probability f (k y ) = 1 if a band crosses the zero-energy level along k x for a given k y value, or otherwise not contribute at all, so that f (k y ) = 0. Transport calculations for a ballistic device at a nonzero source-drain voltage V sd are typically performed using the non-equilibrium Green function formalism In the device we consider, which is driven by a source of very small constant current, V sd is negligibly small. In that case, transport can be calculated using the equilibrium Green function that describes the electronic structure of the unperturbed system. The resistance of the central region (I) is then given by R = G -1 = (M G 0 ) -1 . To obtain a smooth map of R at T = 0 K as a function of V T G and V BG , we have convoluted the conductance G(V BG , V T G ) with a Gaussian function at each V BG and obtained where 2.355 σ is the full width at half maximum of the Gaussian function. The smooth resistance map R(V BG , V T G ) = 1/ G(V BG , V T G ) is then obtained and compared with the experimental results. Figure Electrons are doped into BLG at positive gate voltages and holes at negative gate voltages. At negative bottom gate voltages V BG and negative or small positive top gate voltages V T G , BLG is hole doped everywhere and thus shows low resistance, represented by the uniform dark blue color of the bottom left region of the resistance map in Fig. In order to understand the origin of oscillations of R(V T G , V BG ) in the resistance map, we refer to the calculated band structure of the BLG superlattice in a constant potential, shown in Fig. where we have given all energies with respect to E F = 0. We have further noted a near-linear dispersion of the mth band along k x , ranging from E min m (k y ) to E max m (k y ), for a given value of k y . k B is the Boltzmann constant. The effect of temperature on the resistance map, traced back to the temperature dependence of the channel transmission probability in Eq. ( Gated BLG The resistance map R(V T G , V BG ) also depends on the geometry of the BLG device. To inspect this dependence, we present in Fig. As a matter of reference, we compare in the following our results for BLG to MLG in the same device geometry, depicted in Fig. and which leads to the band structure presented in Fig. The MLG-based device we consider is nearly identical to that shown in Figs. These features in the resistance map of MLG are reflected in its band structure, shown in Fig. As seen in the middle panel of Fig. We note that the double-degeneracy of these eigenstates of free-standing MLG is protected in the 1D periodic potential φ(x) by the symmetry operation where K is the complex conjugation operator. This can be explained simply, since the Hamiltonian for MLG remains invariant under O, so that the degeneracy of the above-mentioned eigenstates is not broken by any periodic potential φ(x). We should also note that this symmetry protection only occurs for electrons with k y = 0 corresponding to normal incidence on the wires. There is no symmetry protection for off-normal incidence, so that such electrons may be reflected, giving rise to an interference pattern in the resistance map. Nevertheless, since k y is near-zero for most electrons contributing to transport in the device, most carriers are transmitted and do not contribute to the interference pattern in the resistance map. Since only a minority of electrons undergo reflection and interference in MLG, corresponding resistance maxima are less pronounced in the resistance map of MLG. The situation is different in BLG, where the interlayer hopping integral γ 1 breaks the O symmetry. As seen in the middle panel of Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the propagation of electrons in periodically gated bilayer graphene as a way to construct a 2D electronic metamaterial. We identified an intriguing interference-like pattern, similar to that of a Fabry-Pérot interferometer, in the resistance map in response to doping and potential modulation provided by the extended bottom gate and the periodic top gate. We provided a quantitative explanation for the observations by considering quantum corrections to the positiondependent potential in the channel region and the equilibrium Green function formalism that describes ballistic transport in BLG. We find periodically gated BLG to be a suitable candidate for a distributed Bragg reflector for electrons.