The vanadium doping effects on superconductivity and magnetism of iron pnictides are investigated in Ba(Fe0.92-xCo0.08Vx)2As2 by transport, susceptibility and neutron scattering measurements. The doping of magnetic impurity V causes a fast suppression of superconductivity with Tc reduced at a rate of 7.4 K/1%V. On the other hand, the long-range commensurate C-type antiferromagnetic order is recovered upon the V doping. The value of ordered magnetic moments of Ba(Fe0.92-xCo0.08Vx)2As2 follows a dome-like evolution versus doping concentration x. A possible Griffiths-type antiferromagnetic region of multiple coexisting phases in the phase diagram of Ba(Fe0.92-xCo0.08Vx)2As2 is identified, in accordance with previous theoretical predictions based on a cooperative behavior of the magnetic impurities and the conduction electrons mediating the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida interactions between them. Antiferromagnetic (AFM) correlations are closely related to the unconventional superconductivity (SC) in Febased superconductors The Vanadium impurity doping effect on iron pnictides has been rarely studied until recently. In a previous work, we found that vanadium serves as magnetic impurity and a very effective hole donor for the 122 system In this paper, we report the physical properties of Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 , which explore the effect of magnetic impurity V on the Ba(Fe 0.92 Co 0.08 ) 2 As 2 superconductor with near optimal T c ≈22 K. Besides a fast suppression of superconductivity, V doping could tune the short-range incommensurate AFM order back to a long-range commensurate one. The onset AFM ordering temperature identified from neutron scattering measurements can be greatly enhanced (>70 K) at some certain doping concentration, indicating possible new magnetic phases. Finally the phase diagram of Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 is given and the underlying physics is discussed. Single crystals of Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 were grown by self-flux method similar to our previous report Neutron scattering experiments were carried out on 'Xingzhi' cold neutron triple-axis spectrometer at China advanced research reactor (CARR) Fig. The temperature dependent resistivities of all samples are shown in Fig. In order to further clarify the evolution of AFM order in Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 , we performed elastic neutron scattering experiments on our samples using 'Xingzhi' and 'Kunpeng' cold neutron triple-axis spectrometers. Fig. To determine the spin-spin correlation length ξ, we fit all the (1 0 3) magnetic peaks by Gaussian function as shown by the solid lines in Fig. In order to further investigate the AFM and structural transitions, the temperature dependence of the intensities of nuclear Bragg peak (2 0 2) and magnetic Bragg peak (1 0 3) are studied for Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 , respectively (shown in Fig. The above experimental results confirm that the long-range commensurate magnetic order could be recovered through doping V into Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 . The ordered mo-ments of recovered AFM phases display a dome-like evolution versus x with maximum at x=0.12 (Fig. In summary, the phase diagram of Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 has been investigated using x-ray, transport, magnetic susceptibility and neutron scattering measurements. The vanadium magnetic impurity could quickly suppress the superconductivity of Ba(Fe 0.92 Co 0.08 ) 2 As 2 and restore a long-range commensurate C-type AFM order. The evolution of AFM ordered moments exhibits a dome-like behavior with V doping, indicating a Fermi-surface nesting picture of magnetism in FeAs-122 system. On the other hand the evolution of doping dependent AFM ordering temperatures reveals the possible existence of AFM Griffiths phases, AFM cluster glass and spin glass in Ba(Fe 0.92-x Co 0.08 V x ) 2 As 2 , which also provides as an experimental evidence for the previous theoretical prediction based on the RKKY interactions. The above results demonstrate the rich physics when vanadium magnetic impurities are introduced into iron pnictides superconductor, which may shed new light on understanding the Fe-based supercondcuting mechanism.