Understanding the interplay between the structure, composition and opto-electronic properties of semiconductor nano-objects requires combining transmission electron microscopy (TEM) based techniques with electrical and optical measurements on the very same specimen. Recent developments in TEM technologies allow not only the identification and in-situ electrical characterization of a particular object, but also the direct visualization of its modification in-situ by techniques such as Joule heating. Over the past years, we have carried out a number of studies in these fields that are reviewed in this contribution. In particular, we discuss here i) correlated studies where the same unique object is characterized electro-optically and by TEM, ii) in-situ Joule heating studies where a solid-state metal-semiconductor reaction is monitored in the TEM, and iii) in-situ biasing studies to better understand the electrical properties of contacted single nanowires. In addition, we provide detailed fabrication steps for the silicon nitride membrane-chips crucial to these correlated and in-situ measurements. In the current age of nano-fabrication, there is a general demand for characterization methods with a high spatial resolution. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) today achieves a spatial resolution well below typical inter-atomic distances, allowing characterization of the crystal lattice with atomic resolution. TEM is therefore an immediate choice to study nano-materials like nanowires (NWs) or nanotubes with the aim to better understand the physical properties originating from their atomic structure and composition. It is common practice to perform TEM on one or few of such nano-objects, and correlate these data with results from other characterization techniques extracted from a different set of nano-objects that were nominally identical (fabricated/grown under the same conditions). However, a common problem in the fabrication/growth of nano-structures is that the presence of small differences between the objects synthesized on the same wafer are unavoidable with current state-of-the-art fabrication/growth methods, and such small differences can have a crucial impact on their properties. Therefore, it is important to perform correlated studies where all characterization techniques are applied to the very same object, in order to better understand its properties and facilitate modelling of exactly the structure under study. For example, it has been shown by the correlation of TEM with electrical transport experiments that the conductive behaviour (metallic or semiconductor) of In 2 Se 3 NWs depends on the crystallographic growth direction of the NWs It is interesting to perform the TEM visualisation of the specimen at the beginning and at the end of a specific treatment to understand its effect at atomic length scales. However, it is certainly more powerful to study the effect of the treatment in-situ or in-operando in TEM with atomic resolution, in order to precisely understand the rearrangement of atoms during the reaction process, e.g. while the specimen is subject to heat or electrical stress. Recently, significant advances in TEM sample holders have opened the possibility to implement a variety of in-situ experiments, including in-situ heating and biasing, as well as allowing measurements in liquid and gaseous environments. Therewith, it becomes possible to observe processes in-situ Different approaches exist to perform electrical in-situ TEM. One possibility is to have a moveable tip on one side, and a static electrical contact on the other, to first make the electrical connection in-situ in the TEM, followed by the in-situ biasing A membrane-based chip with electrical contacts is an ideal platform for heating experiments, which can be easily combined with electrical biasing. If a suitable membrane-chip material with low thermal conductivity is chosen (e.g. silicon nitride We have performed numerous studies using these membrane-chips focusing on semiconducting NWs of different materials such as Si, Ge, GaN/AlN and ZnO. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate the potential this approach by giving an overview of the studies performed using this membrane-chip technology. These studies can be grouped into three categories: i) Correlated studies where the same unique object is characterized electro-optically ex-situ and by TEM -either to relate specific luminescence features to particular structural defects or to understand the performance of single NW devices such as photodetectors or quantum-dot light emitters. ii) In-situ visualization of chemical diffusion processes using Joule heating applied to metalsemiconductor reactions in a NW. iii) In-situ biasdependent TEM characterization using off-axis electron holography to assess doping concentra-tion and depletion length at Schottky contacts on single NWs. For reference, the fabrication process of the membrane-chips is first described in detail. We have developed an approach to fabricate contacted nanostructures on a silicon nitride membrane-chip suitable for in-situ TEM analysis. We produce full four-inch wafers containing 384 membrane-chips, ordered in 2 × 2 and 4 × 4 arrays. Therefore, contacting of nano-objects can be done on such an array of membrane-chips, which allows to perform the process on several chips, each with several nano-objects, all in one run. Simultaneous processing of several chips facilitates the lithography steps and significantly reduces the fabrication time per chip. The chip design can be adapted to the different TEM sample holders required for various experiments (TEM, micro-PL (μ-PL), energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (EDX), etc.). This includes making choices on the chip size, membrane size and thickness, nature of the contacts, presence of metal markers and calibration fields for electron beam lithography (EBL). The chip fabrication process starts with 400 μm thick, highly n-doped (As ++ ) Si(100) four inch wafers. The thickness of the wafer is primarily chosen to be compatible with the TEM sample holder that will be used. On both sides, the wafer is covered by 200 nm of thermal SiO 2 and 40 or 200 nm stoichiometric Si 3 N 4 synthesized by low-pressure chemical vapour deposition by LioniX International. The thermal SiO 2 layer increases the electrical insulation and reduces the capacitance between the substrate and the metal pads deposited on top of the Si 3 N 4 layer. The choice of the Si 3 N 4 thickness is a compromise to obtain high-resolution TEM im- The membrane-chip fabrication steps are illustrated in figure Figure The membrane itself is below the center of the chip and laterally centred. Three contact pads of around 0.3 × 1.3 mm 2 are placed on both sides of the membrane, each having a contact lead which connects to the membrane. On the membrane itself, markers are drawn as common reference for TEM or μ-PL experiments. As can be observed in Figure The first step in the fabrication process is to protect the front/sample side of the wafer by spinning a layer of photoresist (S1818, 30 s at 6000 r.p.m., accel. 4000 r.s -2 and hotplate baked for 1 min at 115 • C) [figure Subsequently, we spin the same photoresist on the other side of the wafer (back side) using the same parameters. Then the membrane area and cleave lines are defined by UV laser lithography (Heidelberg Instruments DWL 66FS system with a 405- At this point, if the membrane should include slits, they are patterned by laser lithography on the front side of the wafer (figures 2(b) and 4) followed by the Si 3 N 4 etching step. The laser lithography system employed includes a camera mounted below the sample stage that allows alignment of the wafer using features on its backside. It is important to minimise the rotation of the wafer with respect to the drawing below 3 mrad. The wafer is then immersed in a potassium hydroxide (KOH) bath to etch the Si where it is exposed. A KOH solution is prepared by dilution of 756 g of KOH (≥ 85%, Ph.Eur., pure pellets) in 950 ml DI-H 2 O. This solution is maintained at 80 • C. It is very helpful to add a dummy sample into the same KOH bath in order to determine the precise etching rate of Si of the prepared solution-typically around 70 μm/h. Around one extra hour should be allocated for etching the SiO 2 of the front side. In figure After the KOH bath, the wafer is extensively rinsed with DI-H 2 O and cleaned for 1 hour in HNO 3 (65%) at 80 • C. Finally, a lithography step on the front side of the wafer defines the metal pads and any desired markers or labels (Ti/Au, 5 nm / 35 nm, or Ti/Pt, 5 nm / 35 nm). Prior to metal deposition by electron beam evaporation, the sample is cleaned during 10 s using Ar plasma. To prepare the sample for the final laser lithography using 2.25% of the laser power, LOR 3A and a positive photoresist (S1805) are spun on the wafer (LOR 3A at 6000 r.p.m., accel. 4000 r.s -2 , 30 s, baked for 2 min at 200 • C, followed by S1805 at 6000 r.p.m., accel. 4000 r.s -2 , 30 s, baked for 1 min at 115 • C). The sample is developed in MF26A for 1 min and then rinsed with DI-H 2 O. After metal deposition, the lift-off of the metal is done by putting the wafer in PG remover (based on N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) at 80 • C for at least 2 hours. When the wafer is taken out, it is cleaned with IPA, rinsed with acetone and then put into an acetone bath. A pipette can be employed to agitate the acetone and help lift off the metal, which should proceed relatively easily. After rinsing the wafer with DI-H 2 O and carefully blow drying with a standard nitrogen gun (low pressure, low angle with membrane-chip surface) the membrane-chips are ready to use. The scanning electron micrographs of a finished chip along with zoomed images of membrane area and calibration field markers are shown in figure -On each chip, we define calibration fields of different sizes away from the membrane area to facilitate EBL, as shown in figure -Each electrical contact has a number and this number is repeated at the end of the contact line on the membrane, so that it is visible during TEM observation. -The cleave lines on the backside are indicated by metal lines on the front side. Chips can easily be separated from one another without damaging the membrane by pressing on the front side at the cleaving line with a diamond tip. It is best to perform this step on a thick piece of cleanroom paper. These custom-made membrane-chips allow the realisation of a variety of correlated and in-situ microscopy experiments. We present here an overview, where we have differentiated: • Ex-situ studies correlating the opto-electrical properties of a single NW with its structural properties such as the crystal structure, com-position and dimensions that are measured by TEM-based characterisation. • In-situ Joule heating studies on a solid state metal-semiconductor reaction induced by heating where the evolution of the reaction is directly visualised by TEM. • In-situ electrical biasing experiments where the variation of holographic measurements under bias can be used to analyse the behaviour of Schottky contacts and extract dopant concentrations. For all these experiments, as grown NWs were transferred from the growth substrate to the fabricated membrane-chips using a wet dispersion method, where a small piece of growth substrate was immersed in ethanol or isopropanol. Using an ultrasonic bath, the NWs were detached from the substrate, and pipetting of the solution on the membrane-chips ensures a random dispersion of NWs. Then, after finding suitably nice and long single NWs using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and localising their position with respect to metal markers, the NWs could be contacted by a sequential EBL step followed by metal evaporation or sputtering. For most correlated and in-situ Joule heating experiments scanning TEM was used, carried out either on a a probe corrected FEI Titan, Titan Themis or Titan Ultimate also equipped with an image corrector. Some in-situ Joule heating experiments were carried out on a CM300. In-situ electrical biasing combined with off-axis electron holography was carried out on the Titan Ultimate. Some of these experiments were carried out at lower acceleration voltage (80 or 100 kV) to avoid modifying the electro-optical properties of the NW. Systematically, (S)TEM characterization was carried out after performing electrical or optical characterization. 3.1. Ex-situ correlated microscopy studies 3.1.1. Optical signature of crystalline defects. Correlated microscopy studies that link a crystalline feature and opto-electronic property are of utmost interest for device development. They reveal the influence of structural disorder on, for example, the light emission properties of a nanoobject. We present examples where the abovedescribed membrane-chips were used in two studies relating specific defects in nanowires to their optical properties With regard to the optical effect of stacking faults in GaN, some reports had shown that I1 basal stacking faults could act as radiative recombination centres in GaN To clarify this issue, Nogues et al. of nanowires as material platform to explore the properties of stacking faults in GaN is motivated by the high crystalline quality of such nano-objects, where single stacking fault appear isolated from other crystalline defects. Nogues et al. showed that NWs exhibiting well-localized regions emitting light at 3.42 eV presented a single stacking fault in these regions. This allowed the assignment of this luminescence line to a stacking fault bound exciton, and precise measurements of the CL signal intensity in the vicinity of the stacking fault gave access to the exciton diffusion length in this region. Another feature commonly observed in the low-temperature PL spectrum of GaN NWs is a sub-bandgap transition at 3.45 eV Using correlated high-resolution high angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM [figure 3.1.2. Heterostructured single nanowire devices: photodetectors. Research on NWs as photodetectors We performed several studies on electrically contacted GaN/AlN NW heterostructures operated as UV photodetectors. The observation of the exact same NW with TEM that is previously characterized by opto-electrical measurements is very powerful to guide modelling of the strain and band profile of the structure. For most studies, we used aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM, as a qualitative chemical contrast is easily observed using this technique. In den Hertog et al. We observed a higher forward current for increasing GaN outer shell thickness as demonstrated in figure In the work by Spies et al. mensions and doping profile were designed in a way that the application of positive or negative bias leads to an enhancement of the collection of photogenerated carriers from the GaN/AlN superlattice or from the GaN base, respectively, as confirmed by electron beam-induced current (EBIC) measurements [figure In general, the photocurrent of GaN NW photodetectors presents a sub-linear dependence on the illumination power In the case of GaN-based UV photode-tectors, we exploited the band-to-band absorption to generate a photocurrent. However, it is also possible to fabricate intersubband photodetectors, which rely on transitions between quantum-confined electron levels within the conduction band of quantum wells, as sketched in fig- same growth batch, are represented in figure 3.1.3. Heterostructured single nanowire devices: light emitters. Single semiconductor quantum dots are interesting objects for the implementation of photon sources In reference Local Joule heating using a metal strip on a semiconducting NW can be used to propagate a quasi-metallic phase into the NW, as first demonstrated by Mongillo et al. Joule heating experiments were performed in the TEM, using both a metal line patterned directly on the NW that can also be used as electrical contact, or using temperature calibrated heater chips from DENSsolutions. The TEM . Kinetic experiments revealed that the reaction rate is limited by a diffusion process, however no unambiguous influence of the NW diameter on the reaction rate was observed. Therefore, the reaction rate appears to be limited by self diffusion of Al through the created Al segment, and Ge diffuses into the Al contact by surface diffusion, as illustrated in figure where L is the length of the converted region) A reliable procedure for the fabrication of sub-10 nm Ge quantum dots, combing both ex-situ heating via rapid thermal annealing (RTA) and insitu direct Joule heating technique, was proposed by Luong et al. Quantitative characterization of electrically active dopants and surface charges in nano-objects is challenging, since most characterization techniques using electrons The extension of the depletion length under bias observed in techniques based on SEM is unusual as it follows a linear rather than square-root dependence, and is therefore difficult to model by bulk equations or finite element simulations. In contrast, the analysis of the axial depletion length observed by holography, see figure This comparison of experiment and modelling permitted an estimation of a n-type doping level of 1 × 10 18 cm -3 and a negative sidewall surface charge of 2.5 × 10 12 cm -2 for the NW, resulting in a radial surface depletion to a depth of 36 nm, in good agreement with values found in literature We have demonstrated a detailed fabrication process of silicon nitride membrane-chips compatible with both correlated ex-situ and in-situ optoelectrical experiments in TEM. We have shown that such custom-made membrane-chips can be used for the study of a variety of nanostructures by a broad range of correlated and in-situ characterization techniques. Our review highlights their potential for correlated microscopy studies, in-situ heating experiments, as well as in-situ electrical biasing experiments. For ex-situ studies, they can be used to identify the same nano-objects in subsequent mea-surements. Thereby, optical emission features can be attributed to specific structural defects, or the emission and absorption properties of a semiconductor heterostructure can be correlated to its precise structural properties, which increases the accuracy of theoretical modelling. In-situ Joule heating can be applied to observe solid state reactions such as the propagation of metal into a semiconductor NW. Finally, in-situ biasing during off-axis electron holography allows discriminating electronic effects from other influences on the phase, in order to extract information about doping levels and depletion regions. Therefore, these experiments can give access to the charge, electric field and electrostatic potential distribution. The advantage of our approach and the use of custom-fabricated membrane-chips is the compatibility with lithographic methods to establish electrical contacts with the NWs. Commercial membrane-chips are not optimised for lithography as typically no suitable markers for EBL are defined on the chip (both to localize the object or calibrate the EBL writing field), and these are sold per chip complicating the batch contacting of several NWs in the same EBL step. Thus, the main advantages of home made membrane-chips are: • Batch contacting and easier handling during the process. • A variety of marker structures to facilitate contacting of nanowires and later characterization on the same nanowires. • The membrane-chips can be entirely customized and adapted to the needs of the experiment, while it is difficult to commercialize a large variety of different chips. The main limitation of the home made chips is that to obtain a reliable temperature calibration, substantial additional development is needed. The results presented here focus on the analysis of NW structures. However, our method can be used for different types of nano-objects, including 2D materials. Many more types of experiments can be realized on such membranechips. For example, micro-manipulators could be used to deterministically place the NW on a certain location or across a slit in the membrane in order to obtain a suspended and contacted NW or other object. Furthermore, contacts on the back side of the membrane-chip can be added, and used either as a back gate, or to influence the magnetization state of the sample. Moreover, while we have only shown experiments making use of direct currents for the biasing, also high frequency experiments could be realized on such a membrane-chip.