In this work, we report a new stop-band formation mechanism by performing the atomistic Green's function calculation and the wave-packet molecular dynamics simulation for a system with germanium-nanoparticle array embedded in a crystalline silicon matrix. When only a single nanoparticle is embedded, the local resonance, induced through destructive interference between two different phonon wave paths, gives rise to several sharp and significant transmittance dips. On the other hand, when the number of embedded nanoparticles further increases to ten, a stop band with complete phonon reflection is formed due to the two-path resonance Bragg-like phonon interference. The wave packet simulations further uncover that the stop band originates from the collective phonon resonances at the embedded nanoparticles. Compared with the traditional stopband formation mechanism that is the single-path Bragg reflection, the resonance mechanism has a significant advantage in not requiring the strict periodicity in the embedded nanoparticles array. We also demonstrate that the stop band can significantly suppress thermal conductance in the lowfrequency regime. Our work provides a robust, scalable, and easily modulable stop-band formation mechanism, which opens a new degree of freedom for phononics-related heat control. The ultimate impedance of phonon transport with a broad band of frequencies or mean free paths are of great scientific interest and engineering importance. This study is in response to the need for ultralow thermal conductivity crystalline materials in thermal management and thermalenergy storage/conversion technologies. Classical approaches to suppress thermal conductivity of crystalline materials have been aimed to introduce defects A promising approach to suppress the low-frequency phonon is to use the wave nature of phonons. There have been increasing number of reports on phononic crystals to harness interference These structures are practically superior to phononic crystals in terms of mitigating the harsh requirement to fabricate globally periodic nanostructure. Moreover, the local resonance allows us to manipulate the phonons with a wavelength much larger than the characteristic length of the nanostructure through interacting with the propagation phonons by creating a set of resonant frequencies From the experimental perspective, the exciting progress has been made in embedding nanoparticles in silicon (Si) crystal matrix In this work, using the atomistic Green's function method, we explore the possibility to create the stop band by introducing the collective two-path phonon-interference resonance in a Si crystal matrix by embedding in it an array of germanium (Ge) nanoparticles. The spherical Ge nanoparticles force the phonons to propagate in two wave paths that are through and around the nanoparticles and destructively interfere with each other, yielding a stop band. The frequency range of the stop band can be modulated via varying the size of the nanoparticles. A significant advantage of the two-path phonon-interference resonances is that they no longer require strict periodicity, which is demonstrated here by introducing random displacements of the nanoparticles in the array. Finally, the impact of the resonance on the thermal conductance is investigated. The atomistic Green's function (AGF) method is used to probe the ballistic phonon transport properties of the Si crystal matrix with several embedded Ge nanoparticles. Figure where r G and a G are the retarded and advanced Green's functions including the two leads, and is the coupling function of the β lead. Then, based on Landauer's theory, the phonon thermal conductance G is given by where ) (ω f p is the Bose-Einstein distribution function for the phonons. For the force field, we adopt the Stillinger-Weber potential We first study the possibility to form the stop band in the Si crystal matrix with the embedded Ge nanoparticles. Figure The results show that, compared with the pristine Si crystal matrix (no particles), several local dips (1.9 and 2.1 THz) appear in the phonon transmission when the nanoparticles are embedded, due to the distinct local phonon resonance. This local phonon resonance phenomenon has been found in the previous theoretical To understand the underlying physical mechanism for the formation of the stop band, we also performed the phonon wave-packet simulations, which can directly capture the wave characteristics of phonon propagation in the coordinate space Figure As shown in Fig. In the case of ten nanoparticles, the wave packet is nearly totally reflected (stop-band formation) by the nanoparticles array. The evolution of the wave packet in Fig. Therefore, the increase in the number of nanoparticles gives rise to the collective phonon resonance in the two-path phonon interference, which leads to the stop-band formation. The previous report showed that, in the case of a single nanoparticle, the resonance effect is significantly deteriorated unless the particle size is two-orders-of-magnitude smaller than the coherence length Since the local resonance frequencies are closely related to the diameter of the nanoparticles The above demonstration of the stop-band formation and frequency tuning was done for an ideal case where the nanoparticles are placed with an equidistance. However, fabricating such an embedded structure with a periodic array of nanometer-size (1-2 nm) particles would be difficult even with the state-of-art nanotechnology. In fact, one of the largest merits of the current two-path phonon interference is that a strict periodicity is not required, unlike the traditional single-path phonon Bragg interference used in superlattices. In superlattices, as illustrated in Fig. On the other hand, the current collective resonance illustrated in Fig. Here, the positions of the nanoparticles are displaced by a distance of Ls from the original regular periodic positions in random directions. Figure We further explore the stop-band effect on the thermal conductance of the Si crystal matrix. and Si crystal matrix with embedding one nanoparticle and ten nanoparticles at gamma point and full Brillouin zone at 300 K, respectively. Here, the diameter of the nanoparticles is fixed at 1.1 nm. As shown in Fig. Finally, we briefly introduce the research significance and its potential application. The stopband formation originating from the distinct local resonance in two interfering phonon paths breaks down the traditional restriction that requires a strict periodicity of the structure. This new mechanism suggests that a robust stop band can be achieved by embedding nanoparticles in the Si nanocrystal matrix, which is much easier to fabricate and scale-up in practical experiments. Furthermore, the effective modulation of the stop band can be combined with other thermal transport manipulation mechanism to scatter phonons by impurities, disorders, and grain boundaries to cover the entire heat conduction spectrum to realize ultimate inhibition of heat conduction. This also speeds up the development of the high-performance phononic devices by controlling thermal energy flow by offering a more practical path to utilize phonon coherence. This may lead to the phononic devices for controlling heat, such as heat waveguide, thermal imaging, thermal rectifier and thermal storage, in analogy with the photonics for electromagnetic waves and phononics for sound. There, the recent advanced possibilities to optimize the structures for phonon transport applications using materials informatics In summary, we have reported a new class of stop-band formation mechanism that is two paths phonon interference based on Si crystal matrix with embedded nanoparticles array by performing the atomistic Green's function calculations. We showed that the stop-band position is closely related to the diameter of the nanoparticles while the randomness has nearly no effect on the stop-band formation. By using the wave-packet simulation analysis, we demonstrated that the stop band arises from the two-path phonon interference induced by distinct local resonance, which is completely different from the traditional superlattice structure. Finally, a significantly suppressed thermal conductance in the low-frequency part induced by the stop band is presented. The advantage of this stop-band formation mechanism is that it no longer requires strict periodicity, which makes the effective-modulation largely accessible, and thus the work offers the possibility for a further significant development of the phononic-related devices. Here, the number of nanoparticles is fixed at 10. The diameter of the nanoparticles ranges from For the phonon wave packet simulation where  il, μ is the αth displacement component of ith atom in the lth unit cell, A is the amplitude of the wave packet, mi is the mass of the ith atom and   , i ε is the αth eigenvector component of eigenmode λ for the ith atom. The wave packet has the wave-vector k0 and is centered around 0 x in the coordinate space. The parameter η is used to define the spatial width (coherence length) of the wave packet. To initialize velocities, we add time dependence to Eq. S1 and differentiate it as, To present the phonon collective local resonance behavior in the Si crystal matrix, we perform the wave packet simulation and record the coordinate displacement of Ge nanoparticles in the time domain (Fig. When the number of Si nanoparticles embedded in the Si crystal matrix increases to ten, the nanoparticle resonance effect is enhanced further (Fig. , which demonstrates a clear out-of-phase collective phonon resonance. 