We investigate the possibilities to realize light extraction from single crystal diamond (SCD) nanopillars. This was achieved by dedicated 519 nm laser-induced spin-state initiation of negatively charged nitrogen vacancies (NV -). For the first time, we present possibility to perform effective spinreadout of NV -s that were naturally generated by the growth process during chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis within SCD without any postgrowth implantation strategies. Applied diamond was neither implanted with 14 N + , nor was the CVD synthesized SCD annealed, making the presence of nitrogen vacancy a remarkable phenomenon. To investigate the possibility to realize light extraction by the utilization of NV -bright photoluminescence at room temperature and ambient conditions with the waveguiding effect, we have performed a top-down nanofabrication of SCD by electron beam lithography (EBL) and dry inductively-coupled plasma/ reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) to generate light focusing nanopillars. In addition, we have fluorinated the diamond's surface by dedicated 0V ICP plasma. Light extraction and spin manipulations were performed with photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) at room temperature. We have observed a remarkable effect based on the selective 0V SF 6 plasma etching and surprisingly, in contrast to literature findings, deactivation of NV -centers.We discuss the possible deactivation mechanism in detail regarding 2-dimensional hole gas (2HG) and Fermi band bending. Diamond is the hardest material in Mohs scale that attracts attention spanning from antipodial fields of industrial abrasives to even quantum information In the present study, we have developed a new type of 0V SF 6 plasma and have investigated its effect on CVD grown diamond with nitrogen vacancies generated by in-situ annealing during the growth process. Suprisingly, we have observed a selective deactivation of the naturally generated NV -caused by fluorination. We discuss this finding in terms of surface quality and introduce phenomenon occuring in the thermodynamic stability of the NV -generated by non-conventional natural growth. Fig. Single crystal diamond was grown by chemical vapor deposition according to the procedure published earlier We refer the reader to earlier studies on the nanofabrication published earlier A custom-built confocal microscope of 0.8 numerical aperture (NA) was used to excite and characterize negatively charged nitrogen vacancies in single crystal diamond. The confocal filtering was faciliated by a single mode fiber and the laser of choice was a continuous diode-pumped solid-state laser (DPSS) with a wavelength of 519 nm. The photoluminescence signal was detected through the application of a 650 nm longpass-filter and Eselitas SPCM-AQRH-14 photon counters. The spin manipulations were performed with a microwave source (Standford Research Systems, SG 384) and Mini Circuits amplifier, ZHL -42W+. The microwaves were delievered by 20]μm thick gold wire. Naturally grown-in nitrogen vacancies have shown a remarkable stability during irradiation. It has been obeserved by others that negatively charged nitrogen vacancies usually change their charge state from -1 to neutral and sometimes even +1 upon prolonged laser exposure 4 Plasma-aided manipulations of NV -charge state. The role of surface termination on NV -/N + ratio. Inspired by the recent research performed on diamond surface modifications, we have attempted to fluorinate the surface of diamond to increase the stability of NV -upon laser irradiation Here z is the term used to describe charge distance from the surface, ψ i (z) is the i-th hole sub-band state wave function of eigenenergy i . Φ(z) descibes the electrostatic potential, q is the charge, ρ(z) stands for the charge density, which is inversely proportional to the eigenenergy i . Fluorination lowers the Fermi level of the nitrogen, making electron loss from successfully generated negatively charged nitrogen vacancy NV -thermodynamically favorable. According to the equation 2, as the Fermi level is lowered in energy, the charge density drops. We atribute this phenomenon to electron transfer from NV -to 14 N + . Many existing reports include possibilities of NV -activation by respective fluorine termination of the surface by means of plasma or wet chemical covalent (fluoride) and non-covalent (fluorine) termination In conclusion, we have developed a highly sophisticated photon emitter system based on naturally grown-in and stable nitrogen vacancies within single crystal diamond. We have successfully manipulated the spin of these naturally occuring negatively charged nitrogen vacancies with optically detected magnetometric techniques. These manipulations serve as a proof of concept for distinguishing other color centers present in the SCD. A broad distribution of this sample along the surface was correlated with measurements of NV - density. In addition we have observed that these color centers can be actively switched off by soft etching with 0V-biased fluorine plasma. This speaks well for the strong electron withdrawing effect of the halogenide attached to the surface (as proven by XPS) and instability upon stress relief induced by physical etching with heavy sulfur ions within the ICP RIE chamber. Interestingly, we have observed no signature of a negatively charged silicon vacancy, neither we witnessed any spectroscopic signature of other impurities present in diamond.