We report a 48-channel 100-GHz tunable laser near 1550 nm by integrating 16 DFB lasers. High wavelength-spacing uniformity is guaranteed by the reconstruction-equivalent-chirp technique, which enables a temperature tuning range below 20°C. Wide-band tunable lasers have been employed in the optical communication and sensing areas, such as the reconfigurable DWDM system, distributed fiber sensor, and optical coherence tomography. According to L. A. Coldren's talk We propose a wide-band tunable laser by integrating 16 multi-wavelength DFB lasers. The wavelength-spacing uniformity is guaranteed by the reconstruction-equivalent-chirp (REC) technique, based on which 60-wavelength laser arrays have been demonstrated with high wavelength-spacing uniformity in our previous work The proposed laser mainly consists of four layers of different materials: (from up to down) a p-type InP contact layer, a grating layer, a separate confinement heterostructure multi-quantum well layer, and an n-type InP contact layer. These material layers are grown on an InP substrate by the metal-organic chemical vapor deposition technology. The equivalent phase-shifted sampled grating is defined by two steps of exposure, one holography exposure, and one sampled pattern mask exposure, and then etched by inductively coupled plasma etching. The ridge-type waveguides are formed by mask exposure and inductively coupled plasma etching. In the same waveguide, the electrical isolations between different lasers are enabled by shallow-etched grooves. Ti/Pt/Au metal layers are deposited as p-and nelectrodes by magnetron sputtering. The lift-off technique is used to define the electrode shape. Thermal annealing is then applied to improve metal contact and lower electrical resistance. Then the lasers are obtained after wafer cleaving, and two cleaved facets are coated with silicon oxide layer for anti-reflection and protection. Noted that heterogeneous integration techniques are not required, which makes the fabrication simple and low-cost. The microscopic top view of the proposed tunable laser is shown in Fig. By changing the temperature of the TEC, 48 channels of 100-GHz are obtained. The superimposed spectra are shown in Fig. We demonstrated a wide-band tunable laser by a high-density integration of 16 DFB laser diodes. The high wavelength-spacing uniformity is guaranteed by the REC technique. Based on our statistics from 20 tunable laser chips, wavelength deviations of 89.3% LDs are within ±0.2 nm. 48 channels with 100-GHz-spacing can be obtained by a temperature tuning range of 18 °C.