Quantum network is a promising platform for many ground-breaking applications that lie beyond the capability of its classical counterparts. Efficient entanglement generation on quantum networks with relatively limited resources such as quantum memories is essential to fully realize the network's capabilities, the solution to which calls for delicate network design and is currently at the primitive stage. In this study we propose an effective routing scheme to enable automatic responses for multiple requests of entanglement generation between source-terminal stations on a quantum lattice network with finite edge capacities. Multiple connection paths are exploited for each connection request while entanglement fidelity is ensured for each path by performing entanglement purification. The routing scheme is highly modularized with a flexible nature, embedding quantum operations within the algorithmic workflow, whose performance is evaluated from multiple perspectives. In particular, three algorithms are proposed and compared for the scheduling of capacity allocation on the edges of quantum network. Embodying the ideas of proportional share and progressive filling that have been well-studied in classical routing problems, we design a new scheduling algorithm, the propagatory update method, which in certain aspects overrides the two algorithms based on classical heuristics in scheduling performances. The general solution scheme paves the road for effective design of efficient routing and flow control protocols on applicational quantum networks. Quantum networks (1) can enable many applications that are beyond the scope of classical data networks, such as quantum communication Still, the time required for remote entanglement generation increases exponentially with distance due to losses. In analogy with the link layer of classical networks, intermediate nodes serving as quantum repeaters Still, quantum repeater might not generate entangled pairs with the desired fidelity. Indeed, entangled pairs is required in many applications, such as quantum cryptography protocols (e.g., the BB84 protocol On top of the link layer mentioned above, where entanglement swapping and purifications are applied, the network layer is required to implement robust and wellfunctioning network design to enable the broader capabilities of quantum networks To tackle this routing problem, we assume that a central processor (scheduler) in the network conducts routing calculations and then broadcasts the results to all quantum stations, and no local processors on nodes or edges are required. At the beginning of each processing time window, upon receiving a set of connection requests, the processor determines the paths (virtual circuits) to be initiated within the network; then it carries out the scheduling of edge capacity allocation accordingly; and finally it determines the flows of each path according to the scheduling results. Such routing information is broadcast to nodes, and local physical operations, including entanglement purification and swapping, are conducted accordingly, realizing entangled pair connections between remote nodes. Entangled pairs between adjacent stations 1 C. Li and T. Li contributed equally to this work. 2 Correspondence: tianyil@mit.edu, pcappell@mit.edu (i, j) consists of multi entangled pairs (multi-channels) such as Bell states, and the number of pairs is denoted capacity Cij . Entanglement generation between S 1(2) and T 1(2) is requested and there are multi-paths for each requests. The probabilities for successfully building an entangled pair between adjacent nodes and performing local Bell state measurement are denoted as pout and pin, respectively. consumed in this time window are generated again to prepare for the next set of connection requests to be satisfied in the next time window. Recent work by M. Pant et.al. In this study, we propose a general routing scheme which can provide efficient solutions to the above entanglement generation problem, with advanced design features (multi-request, multi-path and multi-channel). We design algorithms to effectively allocate limited quantum resources and meet the needs of entanglement generation for arbitrary connected requests, while satisfying certain fidelity thresholds of generated entanglements. Routing protocols on classical data networks have been extensively studied and are continuously developed. Yet for the quantum networks we consider here, routing schemes well-established on today's communication networks (e.g., the Internet) are not directly applicable. The quantum no-cloning theorem forbids the duplication of entangled pairs and renders unfeasible the idea of packet switching, the major routing mechanism for large-scale data networks, which sends the same information package multiple times along indefinite routing paths. Instead, for quantum networks, one has to go back to early routing mechanisms that appeared when computers were expensive (although these mechanisms are still in use today for specific applications): the virtual circuit switching scheme The organization of the paper is as follows: we first formalize the problem statement of this study, based on which we introduce the step-wise routing scheme, in which three algorithms are proposed for scheduling the allocation of adjacent entangled pairs. The performance of the routing results are evaluated from multiple perspectives, after which we discuss the parameters and complexity of the algorithms. A sample routing result is demonstrated and explained in detail. Then we show extensive simulations to discuss system parameters, compare the three scheduling algorithms and test the robustness of the scheme under different conditions. Limitations, scope of use and potential future extensions of the solution scheme are discussed in the end, and the paper is concluded. Network parameters and capabilities. Consider a lattice quantum network G(V, E) of V nodes and E edges. Each node represents a quantum station with a finite number of qubit memories. The edge capacity C 0 is defined as the maximal number of entangled pairs that can be generated between adjacent nodes. Without loss of generality, we consider maximally entangled states (Bell states) between adjacent nodes, ). Since a simple local operation such as a single qubit X or Z gate can transform Bell states from one to another, this provides us the freedom of switching the states at low cost. Different Bell states or states with different entanglement entropy might serve as IDs for entangled pairs for further usages in the network layer At the start of a time window, a set R of simultaneous connection requests are received. Each request r ∈ R requires the generation of at least f r entangled pairs between two remote nodes (denoted source node and terminal node) by implementing entanglement swapping (see Fig. Routing Problem. With these preliminaries, we define the routing problem on small-capacity regular (lattice) quantum networks as the following: Given a quantum network with variable topology due to imperfect initialization and limited quantum memory on stations, design an algorithm that provides routing solutions to arbitrary entangled-pair requests, able to ensure above-threshold entanglement fidelity and to process multiple connection requests. To efficiently utilize network resources within each processing window, multiple connection paths L r are identified and established for each request r, as opposed to only using the single shortest path between the request pair. Specifically, the solution scheme determines the flow (allocated capacity) f r,l ij of each path l for each connection request r, on every edge (i, j) in the network, such that the aggregated flow of each request f r = l∈L r f r,l is able to meet the demand f r to a sufficient extent. This problem formulation considers multiple paths on the network for a specific connection request, as opposed to only utilizing the (single) shortest path as in most virtual circuit routing schemes Our stepwise routing scheme consists of both physical steps (in which quantum operations are conducted) and algorithmic steps (in which computational planning is performed). The overall scheme, summarizing both computational instructions and physical operations (labeled by red text), is shown below. At the start of each processing window (Step 0 ), the quantum network G = (V, E) is reinitialized. The maximal edge capacity is C 0 for all edges. Entanglement generation is attempted between adjacent nodes. Due to the non-unity entanglement generation probability p out between neighbor nodes, the realized capacity is ≤ C 0 . Multiple transmission requests R = {r} are then received. Each request consists of one source and one terminal node (r = [s, t]), the anticipated demand f r , as well as a weight w r . There is no restriction on the choice of source and terminal nodes; the protocol supports all possible scenarios, including same s, same t, same [s, t]. At Step 1, entanglement purification is carried out on the edges (i, j) ∈ E which have fidelity below the threshold F th , and a fraction of the maximum edge capacity C ij ≤ C 0 is physically realized on each edge. The initial edge fidelity, with normal distribution N(F mean , F std ), and the probability of successful entanglements between adjacent stations p out determines the realized capacity. We set the fidelity threshold F th that is applied on all edges. The value of F th may vary in practice for different network functionalities. To ensure enough bandwidth for each connection path, we apply a cap l max to the number of possible paths traversing a single edge. Edges with residual capacity C ij smaller than l max are then deactivated (graphically, removed from G), as shown in Fig. At Step 2, paths for different connection requests are identified in the revised graph G . In order to ensure sufficient redundancy in routing in case of potential network failures, k shortest paths The identified paths are collected in the path information set H = {h ij }. For each edge (i, j) along each path l identified for a request r, a new information entry h ij is added to the path information set H with the following form: where d is the path length and o the edge order in l. Step 3 is the core procedure of the routing scheme, setting the edge-wise capacity allocation scheduling. We propose and compare three methods for this task: (i) proportional share (PS), (ii) progressive filling (PF) and (iii) propagatory update (PU), of which (i) and (ii) are based on well-known scheduling heuristics on classical networks and (iii) is a novel algorithm combining the ideas of (i) and (ii). Illustrations of the three allocation algorithms are depicted in Fig. In the proportional share method, the scheduling is edge-specific: the capacity C ij is proportionally distributed to all paths that utilize (i, j), and only local information in H is used. The progressive filling method implements the algorithm in Combining ideas from these two conventional methods, the propagatory update method defines a global schedule table and assigns allocation on each edge in a backward, edge-specific manner. The algorithm calculates the summarized desired capacity for each edge from all paths that utilize it, using the information in the global schedule table, then allocates the unmet capacity demand to other paths. This requires to make corresponding deductions from the desired capacities that are beyond the real ones, and the schedule table is updated at each step. This is similar to what done in the progressive filling method, but there the incremental increases of values in the schedule table are uniform. Unlike the progressive filling, instead of treating all paths equally, the proportional share and the propagatory update methods adopt a similar two-stage strategy: the quota is first determined for each request, then for each path of different requests. Edge capacities are distributed proportionally at both stages: at the request level, the allocated capacity for each request is proportional to the number of paths of such request that utilize a given edge, to the power β. At the path level, the allocated capacity for each path of a specific request is proportional to the path length, to the power α (see details in Supplemental Materials). α and β are design features that control the exploitation-exploration tradeoff in path utilization, similar to the idea in the ant colonization algorithm The final allocated capacity (flow) of each path is determined in Step 4. The short-board constraint is applied along each path: for path l of request r, the actual flow f r,l is determined by the minimum capacity for this path among all the edges in l: where C r,l ij is the capacity determined in Step 3. Note that this constraint is only necessary if proportional share scheduling is used at Step 3 ; for both progressive filling and propagatory update methods, the constraint is already built in the allocation process. Step 2-4 complete the algorithmic computation of the routing scheme. Based on the determined routing schedule, local quantum operations (entanglement swapping) are conducted accordingly and scheduled remote entanglements are established (Step 5 ). The actual flow for each request f r = l∈L r f r,l is compared with the demand f r ; unsatisfied requests are queued to the next processing window and their weight can be adjusted accordingly. To evaluate the performance of our routing scheme, we consider three performance measures, targeting the three innovative features of our routing design (multi-request, multi-channel and multi-path). In line with typical performance evaluation of classical networks, these measures characterize well-established routing properties: throughput, traffic and delay. We also introduce a metric that characterizes the fairness of the scheduling scheme. We summarize these measures in Table . 1. Since our routing scheme ensures entanglement fidelity above the desired threshold, we do not consider fidelity among the metrics. Lattice network G = (V, E) resumed. Initial capacity C 0 generated on each edge. Perform entanglement generation between adjacent nodes. Realized capacity less than or equal to C 0 on each edge (i, j). Entanglement generation requests R = {r} received with anticipated flow demand f r (and possible weight W = {w r }). Conduct entanglement purification on the edges with fidelity below the required threshold F th . Realize capacity C ij ≤ C 0 on each edge (i, j). Determine system parameters X = {l max , k, α, β} and f min . 12: for each r ∈ R do Identify k shortest paths L r = {l} k between S r and T r . for each l ∈ L r do Append tuple h = [r, l, d, edge order] to the path information set H on each edge in l. (Proportional Share) for each r ∈ R do Determine f r,l = min C r,l ij for (i, j) ∈ l on path l of request r. Calculate F, u ij , γ r , J. Evaluate routing performance. Record scheduling result {R, G } ⇒ {C r,l ij }. Step 5 Conduct scheduled operations Perform entanglement swapping according to the above routing results. Compare realized flow f r = l∈L r f r,l with demand f r . Queue unsatisfied demand to the next processing window. Throughput -Besides fidelity, entanglement generation rate is the critical figure of merit typically used to evaluate quantum networks. Within a fixed time window, the entanglement generation rate corresponds to the number of successfully established entangled pairs for all requests. In network routing terminology, this is known as the throughput of the system, a term we adopt in this work. In our setting, we characterize the throughput via the total weighted flow, aggregated over all paths: This definition of throughput is slightly different from that for classical networks, due to a non-negligible possibility of failure during internal connections (entanglement swapping) within each station, i.e. p in = 1. Since the routing scheme is not a multi-commodity flow optimization, and hence it is not guaranteed to satisfy the whole requested demand f r , it is plausible in certain cases to ask to maximize the minimum flow over all requests. Instead of F , then, we could use an alternative metric to evaluate the system throughput, the minimum flow among all requests F min = min r w r l f r,l p Here we show the different paths with arrows for simplicity, but we point out that there is no directionality along the paths. c. Capacity allocation scheduling. Three paths for two requests (l1 for r1; l2, l4 for r2) utilize the starred edge (top left), on which the three algorithms (d-f) are illustrated. For proportional share and propagatory update, entangled pairs on the edge are distributed among the three paths through a two-stage allocation process: the quota is first determined for each request, then for each path of different requests. In proportional share, the realized edge capacity is directly allocated; propagatory update calculates the sum-marized desired capacity for each edge from all paths that utilize it, using the information in the global schedule table, then allocates the unmet capacity demand to other paths. Corresponding deductions from the desired capacities that are beyond the real ones are made, and the schedule table is updated at each step. The minimum capacity for each path is fmin; the minimum capacity deduction for path l of request r is f r,l max -fmin, where f r,l max is the desired capacity in the global routing table. For progressive filling, f r,l is 0 on all paths at t = 0 and increments by 1 at each time step. At t = 1, the starred edge is saturated and thus the three paths on it are saturated. At t = 2, f r,l keeps increasing on unsaturated paths. that F and F min are almost always positively correlated and thus could be used interchangeably; we thus keep F as the primary measure for throughput. Traffic -To evaluate the routed traffic on the network, we calculate the utilization factor u ij of the available capacity on each edge (i, j): Routed traffic could be signaled by the mean U ave and variance U var of the utilization factors u ij on all utilized edges. For an efficient routing performance, it is desired that capacity utilization U ave is high on edges (i.e. little idleness), while the traffic is evenly distributed without many bottleneck edges, i.e. U var is small. Delay -To preserve sufficient redundancy in routing, multiple paths of various lengths are exploited for each connection request. For each request r, we calculate the path length stretching factor γ r , which is defined as the average length of the request paths (weighted by the flow), normalized by the shortest path length d r,0 : where d r,l is the path length for a request r and path l. The average stretching factor γ of the system is calculated from γ r over all requests; γ r (and thus γ) is always no less than 1. Quantum connections take nontrivial processing time for each hop on the path, hence longer paths can induce more delay in entanglement generation. If one assumes the same processing time across each edge in the network, then γ indicates the average delay of a routing protocol: for γ = 1, all flows take the shortest paths and the routing has minimum delay; a large γ can correspond to a higher delay where circuitous paths are utilized. Fairness -Jain's index ( [7] J req falls between [0, 1] with J req = 1 representing complete fairness. Evidently, the progressive filling algorithm obtains the highest fairness (J req ≈ 1) among the three scheduling methods, guaranteeing max-min fairness A high fairness of flows over different paths is desirable, in order to avoid a situation where capacities are concentrated on one of a few paths. The routing will be less robust to potential network failures if one or few paths dominate the flow. The routing algorithms rely on a set of free parameters, X = {l max , k, α, β} for PS and PU, and X = k for PF. As at the start of each processing window the network is reinitialized, with edge capacities C ij reset according to entanglement purification results, and new requests R are received, the system parameters need to be determined specifically for the current time window. The parameters are chosen so as to optimize a desired objective function constructed from the performance measures discussed above. The specific form of the objective function can be adapted to specific requirements of a given application. An exemplary objective function can be obtained by simultaneously considering the throughput F , traffic (in terms of U ave and U var ), and delay γ, with π 1 , π 2 , π 3 denoting relative weight of each measure. Then, the corresponding optimization problem can be formulated as Note that the above optimization problem is distinct from the multi-commodity flow formulation for optimal routing on traditional networks. Requested demands f r do not serve as the constraints. The objective function is also flexible and contains multiple terms, instead of using the throughput or delay as the sole objective value. Depending on the computational capacity of the scheduler (the central processor), this optimization task could be solved either by brute force (given the relatively constrained degree of freedom), i.e. searching over {l max , k, α, β} through simulations, or by applying some machine learning techniques. One could, e.g., use supervised learning or reinforcement learning with the weighted adjacency matrix for the realized graph G and requests R as input , and for output the learned optimal parameters X * , with routing performances evaluated and recorded, either in a hard manner (i.e., success/fail; for supervised learning), or in a soft manner (i.e., as rewards; for reinforcement learning). The advantage of using machine learning approaches is that one could deal with multiple terms in the objective function more flexibly by designing sophisticated learning workflow. In practice, this would essentially allow learning high-dimension heuristics to evaluate the routing performance, beyond the straightforward measures discussed above. Given that a few critical mechanisms in real applications are excluded in the current simulation framework, notably network failures, it is desired that an effective machine learning workflow is assembled for the parameter determination of the routing scheme; we leave this open question for future work. Before presenting the simulation results, here we briefly discuss the computational complexity of the main workflow, namely, Steps 2-4. Step 2 incurs the largest computation cost in determining the shortest paths, with a computational time O(|R|kV 3 ) = O(|R|kE 1.5 ) for square lattices. Step 4 demands a cost O(|R|k) to calculate the allocated capacity for each request path. The complexity of the allocation process in Step 3 depends on the algorithm. The time is for progressive filling. The computational complexity of propagatory update is higher due to its iterative nature. In the worst case, the max flow on each path will decrease from the maximum value C 0 to the minimum value f min step by step. Therefore, for |R| requests and k paths for each request, the no improvement counter will be reset to 0 |R|k(C 0 -f min ) times, resulting in a computational cost O(|R|k(C 0 -f min )E). Since C 0 -f min ∼ C 0 , the time complexity of the propagatory update algorithm is approximately: The propagatory update method is then the slowest among the three scheduling schemes in general. Overall, the time complexity Q alg of the routing scheduler is: for proportional share, O(E 1.5 |R|k + C 0 ) for progressive filling, and O((E 0.5 + C 0 )E|R|k) for propagatory update. We performed extensive simulations to study the effect of design parameters X = {l max , k, α, β}, and to demonstrate the robustness of the routing design under different assumptions on entanglement fidelity, F mean , F std , F th , and operation success probabilities p in , p out . We characterize the performance of the simulation outcomes from multiple perspectives, using the established metrics: the throughput (total flow F ), the traffic (U ave and U var ), the delay (path stretching factor γ), and fairness over requests (Jain's index J req ) and paths (J path ). We focus on the comparison among the three scheduling schemes (PS, PF, PU in short). To limit the simulation complexity and better understand system parameters, we consider an 8×8 square lattice, with two connection requests [s i , t i ], i = 1, 2 with same weight and identical request distance. Here the request distance is defined as the Manhattan distance along one direction (the Manhattan distance along the two directions is same in our simulations for simplicity). Under this baseline case, we first demonstrate a sample result of our general routing scheme. Then we study the choice of k, which is used in all three scheduling schemes; tests show that it is the most important design parameter in determining the performances of the three algorithms. Later we study the other three parameters {l max , α, β} used in PS and PU, with a focus on the fairness of routing as compared to PF which guarantees the max-min fairness. Finally we study the system's robustness under different conditions of quantum parameters. For each set of parameters, 200 simulation runs are performed and the results are averaged to account for the stochastic nature in the quantum setup. Beyond the baseline case scenario, alternative network topologies (hexagonal/triangular), arbitrary connection requests (varied request number |R| and arbitrary distance) and potential network failures (edge/node failure) are studied in further simulations. Baseline case. In Fig. PF has less throughput and capacity utilization than PU, but as expected, the scheduling is completely fair, with respect to both requests (J req ) and paths (J path ). PU is the least fair scheme among the three and it can be attributed to the large flow on few paths (e.g., f 1,6 , f 1,7 , f 2,8 in Fig. Dependence on request distance and choice of k. In Fig. For fixed requests as shown in Fig. Effect of fidelity threshold. Finally, we discuss the fidelity threshold that can affect the entanglement purification steps (thus the realized capacity C ij ). Specific tasks in quantum network would demand different error rates or fidelity thresholds and the corresponding entanglement purification will modify the topology of the network in different ways. In Fig. One critical feature of our routing scheme is to be multi-path, and the claim is that by utilizing more than one path, the routing will be more robust to potential network failures. We simulate both edge failures (an edge is dead) and node failures (a station is dead; all edges linked to it are dead) to test the scheme's robustness (Fig. Within each processing window, we simulate 2-10 random connection requests (arbitrary [s, t] pairs) and compare routing performances (Fig. We benchmarked the performance of the routing scheme under different parameter regimes. Here we highlight differences in resource allocation for the three scheduling schemes. Performance results show that the three schemes have different advantages: progressive filling is the fairest method, whereas the fairness of the two proportional methods is compromised to a non-trivial extent, and depends on the system parameters α, β. In terms of system throughput and capacity utilization, the new propagatory update scheme stands out by a large margin, and the superiority is largely maintained under all network conditions, even in face of network failures. However, as a tradeoff, the increased throughput are not attributed to all requests in a fair manner, and propagatory update routing results demonstrate the largest variance on edge utilizations as well. The least efficient scheme is proportional share, which generates the least throughput. However, the variance of edge utilization is smaller than in propagatory update, and it is more robust against network failures. This suggests that this scheme utilizes network resources in the most economical way. Also, since a global information table is not maintained (hence not subject to errors) and proportional allocations are performed only at the local scale, the proportional share may also be the most robust scheme against network errors on top of failures. We now proceed to present the scope of use, limitations and potential future extensions of the routing scheme. We have demonstrated the performance of our routing scheme with a 8 × 8 square lattice network with edge capacity C 0 = 10 2 and < 10 requests per time window. In reality, the implementation scale of quantum networks will be determined by various physical, geological and economic constraints. Current lab-scale quantum networks are very small (∼ 2 × 2) with very limited edge capacity C 0 (only few qubits), since the preparation of entangled pairs is extremely costly; for our routing scheme to be put in use, huge leaps in quantum engineering are necessary. Practically, the lattice size and edge capacity should be decided by the specific functionality of the quantum network, and the number of requests being processed within a time window are determined by service considerations. Also note that alternative lattice topologies (e.g., hexagonal, triangular) could be experimented in real applications; current results apply to square lattice, yet it is believed that similar results could be obtained on other common regular lattice structures. We further note that, in the space domain, we are assuming a central processor in the network and global link-state information is broadcast to each nodes. Under restricted cases, however, only local link-state knowledge (link with the nearest neighboring nodes) is available at each node. For example, as the size of the network G(V, E) increases, the classical communication time is non-negligible and can be far beyond the quantum memory lifetime. In this scenario, instead of finding the paths with a global processor, one can perform entanglement swapping on two local quantum memories in a way such that the sum of their distance to the request pair can be minimized, as shown in In the time domain, the current protocol is used for processing a certain number of connection requests within one active time window; it is expected that a queueing model ( Next we point out that in the above protocol we consider entanglement purification only at the first step, that is, only between adjacent nodes. As successive entanglement swapping operations are imperfect, they might degrade the fidelity of generated remote entanglement. To overcome this drawback, one can adopt a nested protocol Finally, while here we consider entanglement between two nodes, i.e., Bell states, an extension to GHZ states and local GHZ projection measurement might bring advantages in generating remote entanglement In conclusion, we have proposed an efficient protocol that tackles the routing problem on quantum repeater networks. We have shown that entanglement purification, which increases entanglement fidelity, can modify the network topology and affect the following routing design. For general multi-request, multi-path and multi-channel problems, we developed three algorithms that can allocate limited resource to efficiently generate entangled pairs between remote station pairs. Among the first attempts to tackle this complex problem, our routing scheme provides a solution to exploit the full capability of complex quantum networks, where efficient entanglement generation of remote station pairs are desired. The routing design here may also inspire future work that combine the quantum information science with classical network theory. In Step 3 of the routing protocol, capacity allocation scheduling is carried out. We propose and compare three methods for this task: (i) proportional share, (ii) progressive filling and (iii) propagatory update, of which (i) and (ii) are based on well-known scheduling heuristics on classical networks and (iii) is our invention. The difference of the proportional share and the propagatory update methods lies in the direction of managing capacity allocation. The first method forwardly divides the realized (maximum) edge capacity C i,j into proportions, according to the weights of divisors. At the first stage, the division is carried out on different requests. On edge (i, j), the capacity allocated for request r is given by: where #r i,j is the number of paths under request r passing edge (i, j), and w r is the weight of request r. We assume that the allocated capacity is proportional to the request weight, but is inversely proportional to the power (β) of the number of paths under the requests, i.e. β > 0; requests have fewer paths across the edge are compensated. At the second stage, in a similar top-down manner, the allocated capacity on each request is further divided among different paths. The flow capacity for path l of request r on edge (i, j) is given by: Similarly, we assumes that the division is proportional to the power (α) of the path length d r,l . For α = 1/-1, allocation is proportional/inverse proportional to the path length; for α = 0, no dependence occurs. The polarity of α represents different strategies for the coordination of allocation on different paths: α > 0 corresponds to the situation where longer paths get more flow quota as compensation, since long paths have low success rates; on the contrary, α < 0 means shorter paths get more flow quota, as a strategy of prioritizing short paths as major paths for requests. α and β could be viewed as controlling the exploitation-exploration tradeoff of the algorithm, similar to the idea in the ant colonization algorithm. When α > 0, the algorithm encourages the exploration of different paths by compensating longer paths, while α < 0 indicates the exploitation on the usage of short paths. Similarly, when β > 0 the edge capacity is distributed on multiple requests in a fair manner, and β < 0 is the situation that prioritizes those requests with more paths passing through the edge. The optimal α and β is experimented in simulations and the corresponding strategies are discussed. Finally, the allocated capacity for each path is lower-capped by the minimum flow f min : as a hard constraint. As expected, this treatment will likely raise the problem of capacity outbound, where: If this happens, the overflow r,l C r,l i,j -C i,j is iteratively subtracted from paths receiving the largest share, until the outbound is resolved, which is guaranteed to converge under the definition of f min . This forward local allocation process is summarized in Algorithm 1. C r,l i,j = max (C r,l i,j , f min ) end for while r,l C r,l i,j > C i,j do Subtract C r,l i,j -C i,j from max (C r,l i,j ) end while end for The progressive filling method could guarantee max-min fairness. Unlike the other two methods, in the progressive filling algorithm, all paths are treated equally. For each path l of each request r, flow f r,l starts at zero. The unsaturated edge set E un is the entire E, and the unsaturated path set L un is all paths L r for all r ∈ R. The filling process assigns a uniform increase on each unsaturated path. Since in our setting edge capacities are integers, the increment is simply 1. Edges are gradually saturated along the filling process, and paths utilizing saturated edges stop flow increases. The integer scenario decides a slight different definition of edge saturation from the definition for non-integer flows, since it is often the case that an edge is left with a small number of unallocated channels, yet insufficient to distribute one more channel on all the unsaturated paths through it, i.e, C i,jr,l f i,j;r,l temp < |H| i,j -|L| i,j un ; in this case the edge is viewed as saturated (with a small leftover capacity). Therefore, at each time step, an attempt of increment 1 is made on all l ∈ L un . On each edge, we check the capacity constraint and decide if the attempt is successful, i.e., if the attempted aggregated flow is out of bound. When the attempt is successful, if the remaining capacity after deducting the attempted aggregated flow is less than the number of unsaturated paths passing through it, the edge is saturated and removed from E un . Correspondingly, paths on this edge are removed from L un . The filling process terminates when the new attempt is unsuccessful, i.e. it is not possible to assign one more channel uniformly to all unsaturated paths, without causing at least one remaining unsaturated edge to go off bound. Note that since flows increase in a fair manner, f min is unnecessary for this method. Algorithm 2 (Progressive Filling) Capacity Allocation Scheduling 1: Initialize flow matrix f r,l for each path l of each request r. Stage 2 Check the capacity constraint on each edge. for (i, j) ∈ E do 10: if r,l f i,j;r,l temp > C i,j then 11: end f lag ← 1 if C i,jr,l f i,j;r,l temp < |H| i,j -|L| i,j un then 15: Remove (i, j) from E un . Stage 3 Record succeeded attempt. f r,l ← f r,l temp for all r, l 23: Update L un according to updated E un . 24: end while 25: Obtain flow matrix f r,l . In the proportional share method, each edge decides its own capacity allocation and no communication between edges takes place. In the end, the final flow of the path is determined at Step 4, where the short-board constraint is applied on each edge. Intrinsically, this method will result in certain waste of edge capacity: capacity on edges will not be fully utilized, if some edges along the same path have narrower channels. Therefore the average capacity utilization of the network will be low. This problem could be overcome if the short-board constraint is integrated into the capacity allocation process, instead of being carried out at the end. To achieve this, we store the global maximum flow information for each path, and constantly update this information (reducing the maximum flow of each path) throughout the allocation process. In fact, the allocation process on each edge could now be viewed as a backward-moving process: on a specific edge, assume that each requested path tries to claim its maximum flow, and then, we make deductions on those flows based on the current edge capacity. The gap between the sum of (desired) maximum flows over all paths passing the edge and the edge capacity is the amount to be deducted, and now we allocate the capacity deduction (instead of the capacity) to different requests, then to different paths in a similar two-stage manner as in the first method. The total amount of capacity ∆ i,j to be deducted is given by: where f r,l max is the desired max flow of path l for request r, whose value is set as the flow of the previous edge in the path: f r,l max = f r,l i,j prev . On each path, the maximum amount of deduction (its maximum possible contribution to the total deduction) ∆ r,l,max i,j is the difference between its maximum desired flow and its minimum flow: ∆ r,l,max i,j = f r,l maxf min . (S12) Correspondingly, the maximum amount of capacity deduction a request could contribute is the sum from all its paths: ∆ r,max i,j At the first stage, the total amount of deduction ∆ i,j is allocated to different requests as: where requests with large weights w r gets small amount of deduction and the realized amount could not exceed the maximum amount ∆ r,max i,j . This allocation procedure begins from requests having the smallest ∆ r,max i,j and proceeds until all ∆ i,j has been allocated, which is guaranteed since: Algorithm 3 (Propagatory Update) Capacity Allocation Scheduling 1: Initialize max flow vector f r,l max for each path l of each request r. Select the next edge (i, j) ∈ E following the fixed edge order with startover. if R i,j = None then 6: count + +. Cut path list L = {L r i,j } s.t. |L| ≤ l max by path length. Keep short paths/sole paths for requests. 10: Stage 1 Allocate ∆ i,j onto different requests R i,j = {r in h for h ∈ H}. 12: Calculate max deduction on requests ∆ r,max i,j = f r maxf r min 13: from smallest ∆ r,max i,j for r in R i,j do 14: end if Recalculate ∆ i,j = ∆ i,j -∆ r i,j . Stage 2 Allocate ∆ r i,j onto different paths L r i,j = {l in h for h ∈ H} of request r. Calculate max deduction on paths ∆ r,l,max i,j = f r,l maxf min 20: from smallest ∆ r,l,max i,j for l in L r i,j do 21: ∆ r,l i,j = ∆ r i,j ∆ r,l,max i,j (d r,l ) -α l ∆ r,l,max i,j (d r,l ) -α if ∆ r,l i,j > ∆ r,l,max i,j then ∆ r,l i,j = ∆ r,l,max i,j end if Recalculate ∆ r i,j = ∆ r i,j -∆ r,l i,j . Stage 3 Apply deduction and determine flow f r,l i,j . f r,l i,j = f r,l max -∆ r,l i,j Stage 4 Update max flow f r,l max of the path. 29: if f r,l max updated then 30: Reset count = 0. count + +. end if 34: end while 35: Determine converged f r,l i,j . i.e. the total amount of desired deduction is no greater than the total amount of maximum deduction. At the second stage, the amount of deduction on each request is allocated to different paths according to: ∆ r,l i,j = min(∆ r i,j ∆ r,l,max i,j /(d r,l ) α l ∆ r,l,max i,j /(d r,l ) α , ∆ r,l,max i,j ). (S16) Again, the maximum constraint ∆ r,l,max i,j is applied. Similar to the first method, the weight of each path is assumed to be proportional to the power α of path length d r,l . To make sure in this backward deduction process the polarity of α corresponds to the same strategies as in the forward allocation process, we put (d r,l ) α in the denominator. After the two stages, the amount of capacity deduction on each path l for request r ∆ r,l i,j is determined, so the flow capacity f r,l i,j is given by: f r,l i,j = f r,l max -∆ r,l i,j . (S17) f r,l i,j is then the updated maximum flow on edges in the path, if it's smaller than the previous value. Note that not only the maximum flow values on following edges, but also on previous edges are updated. Essentially, the short-board constraint also narrows the flow on previous edges along the path, whose capacity allocation is then recalculated; since the flow on the current path is narrowed, recalculation may release extra capacity for other paths and hence the overall capacity allocation becomes more efficient. Given that the path information is required in the algorithm, this method does not follow a predefined order in treating the edges, as opposed to the first method where all edges could be treated individually. Since lattice networks are regular and easy to be ordered, we used a fixed order in treating the edges and iterate with startovers, until no update of flow occurs on any edge, i.e. the headcount of no improvements equals the edge number. The iteration is guaranteed to converge if the (directed) paths are all non-cyclic; in practice we ensure that the two nodes in a request pair are not identical, thus the condition holds. The backward adaptive deduction process is summarized in Algorithm 3. In this section, we discuss the parameters that are important in determining the performance of capacity allocation algorithms. The parameters are X = {l max , k, α, β} for proportional share and propagatory update, and X = k for progressive filling. We will focus on {l max , α, β} here. The maximal allowed number of paths on each edge l max characterizes the controllability of edge traffic. In Fig. The parameter α determines the relation between capacity allocation and path length for the PS and PU algorithms, as we discussed in Section 2.1. Here we show the dependence of routing performance on α. In the first scenario (in Fig. The parameter β determines the relation between capacity allocation and number of paths under different request for the PS algorithm, as we have discussed in Section 2.1. The throughput and traffic metrics (Fig. In the main text, we have shown the total flow in the presence of network failures. Besides system throughput, the changes of other performance measures before and after network failures are shown below for the convenience of readers. Note that after network failures, some paths are not accessible, so some values of γ are missing. In each figure, white/red bars indicate values before/after failures, 2: Start new processing window 3: Step 0 Initialization 4: 3, we demonstrate a sample result of our routing scheme. Initially, C 0 = 100 entangled pairs are prepared at each station. After entanglement purification (Step 1 ), 106/112 edges in the 8 × 8 square lattice are est throughput F and average capacity utilization U ave . Li et al. | Li et al. | Li et al.