Our world is composed of various materials with different structures, where spin structures have been playing a pivotal role in spintronic devices of the contemporary information technology. Apart from conventional collinear spin materials such as collinear ferromagnets and collinear antiferromagnetically coupled materials, noncollinear spintronic materials have emerged as hot spots of research attention owing to exotic physical phenomena. In this Review, we firstly introduce two types noncollinear spin structures, i.e., the chiral spin structure that yields real-space Berry phases and the coplanar noncollinear spin structure that could generate momentum-space Berry phases, and then move to relevant novel physical phenomena including topological Hall effect, anomalous Hall effect, multiferroic, Weyl fermions, spin-polarized current, and spin Hall effect without spin-orbit coupling in these noncollinear spin systems. Afterwards, we summarize and elaborate the electric-field control of the noncollinear spin structure and related physical effects, which could enable ultralow power spintronic devices in future. In the final outlook part, we emphasize the importance and possible routes for experimentally detecting the intriguing theoretically predicted spin-polarized current, verifying the spin Hall effect in the absence of spin-orbit coupling and exploring the anisotropic magnetoresistance and domain-wall-related magnetoresistance effects for noncollinear antiferromagnetic materials. Electrons have two intrinsic attributes, i.e., charge and spin. In the last century, traditional semiconductor electronic devices were achieved by manipulating the motion of electrons which utilized the electron charge. With the rapid development of microelectronics, the increasing demand for the technique of high-density and low-power storage made people start to focus on another property of electronsspin. In 1988, Albert Fert and Peter Andreas Grünberg simultaneously discovered the giant magnetoresistance effect As the spins of electrons could orient in any direction, the structure of spins could be miscellaneous. Here, we generally classify the spin arrangement into two kinds of patterns, collinear spin and noncollinear spin structures. Materials with a noncollinear spin structure can be ferromagnets, ferrimagnets and antiferromagnets. Moreover, we can further classify the noncollinear spin structure into noncoplanar and coplanar noncollinear structures. In recent years, the study on the noncollinear spin structure has drawn great attention because of various novel physical phenomena such as skyrmions, the topological Hall effect, the multiferroic effect, the anomalous Hall effect in antiferromagnets, spin-polarized current in antiferromagnets, Weyl fermions and the possible spin Hall effect in the absence of spin-orbit coupling as summarized in Fig. In 1962, Skyrme In 2006, Rößler et al. Additionally, the candidate bulk materials for realizing this novel state are particularly referred to the cubic B20 crystal structure, for example, FeGe and MnSi. Three years later in 2009, skyrmions were observed in bulk MnSi Additional studies by Ohuchi et al. In 1879, Edwin Hall initially presented that when a charge current flow through a conductor, a voltage would generate in the vertical direction because the electrons mobile transversely under the applied field The Fermi arcs, connecting the two Weyl points, are known as topologically protected zero-energy surface states. The emergence of Weyl fermions requires either time reversal break or inversion symmetry break. The first experimental realization of Weyl fermions was based on TaAs with a non-centrosymmetric structure. However, a time-reversal-break system for observing Weyl fermions had been rare. meV. Almost at the same time, Kuroda et al. Spin-polarized current is a powerful tool for realizing various spintronic devices. In the past few years, spin-polarized current has been traditionally achieved in ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic materials. Nevertheless, antiferromagnetic materials with zero net moment are generally thought to generate zero spin polarization. However, in 2017, Železný et al. In 2016, Nakatani et al. The exotic phenomenon in this work is thought to come from the free energy of the skyrmion phase induced by electric fields and magnetoelectric coupling in Cu2OSeO3 (Fig. The topological Hall effect is a combination of spin-orbit coupling and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction caused by symmetry breaking. As seen in Fig. and anisotropic magnetoresistance (Fig Nevertheless, the Mn3Sn films are not stable upon the applied electric fields as the obvious cracks can be generated on the surfaces due to the cracking of ferroelectrics. Note that when we inserted a 100-nm-thick LaAlO3 interlayer between the film and substrate (Fig When the tensile strain is applied, the local magnetic moment rotates in the opposite direction relative to the compressive strain. In addition, the local magnetic moment decreases with compressive strain while it increases with tensile strain. The relationship between net magnetic moment, rotation angle and biaxial strain is summarized in Fig. Although the spin-polarized current is predicted to exist in noncollinear antiferromagnetic materials, it has not been experimentally confirmed yet. Based on our recent work on Mn3Sn, the possible Weyl state and the electric-field-control anomalous Hall effect imply that the noncollinear Mn3Sn may own high spin polarization and become the arena for the study of spin-polarized current. In addition, in the surface/interface system, the Rashba spin-orbit coupling originating from structural inversion asymmetry can be controlled by the gate voltage. In this case, we can apply a proper electric field to offset the Rashba effect and thus build a circumstance in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (Fig. Thus, it will be quite interesting if the anisotropic magnetoresistance effect in noncollinear spintronic materials including ferromagnets and antiferromagnetically coupled materials can be confirmed, which is of great interest for developing tunneling junctions based on noncollinear spintronics for high-density information storage in the future. In addition, we would like to briefly comment on the magnetic thin film growth on common ferroelectric single-crystal substrates such as PMN-PT and BaTiO3 and relevant electrical measurements, which may be useful for future studies. Based on our research experience, a too high deposition temperature of antiferromagnetic intermetallic thin films in sputter could always lead to ferromagnetic defects such as in MnPt It is indeed rather promising to combine noncollinear spintronic materials with an ultrathin ferroelectric oxide thin film to build a complex magnetic/ferroelectric/magnetic heterostructure, which could enable the electric-field control of the tunnel magnetoresistance via either ferroelectric polarization switching Lastly, it is interesting to notice that recent studies on antiferromagnetic materials have demonstrated that domain walls can significantly scatter electrons and thus increase resistance by several or even ten percent, which is one or two orders of magnitude larger than the anisotropic magnetoresistance (~0.1%) of antiferromagnetic materials. For example, the work by Kaspar et al. 