Arrays of metallic particles patterned on a substrate have emerged as a promising design for on-chip plasmonic lasers. In past examples of such devices, the periodic particles provided feedback at a single resonance wavelength, and organic dye molecules were used as the gain material. Here, we introduce a flexible template-based fabrication method that allows a broader design space for Ag particle-array lasers. Instead of dye molecules, we integrate colloidal quantum dots (QDs), which offer better photostability and wavelength tunability. Our fabrication approach also allows us to easily adjust the refractive index of the substrate and the QD-film thickness. Exploiting these capabilities, we demonstrate not only single-wavelength lasing but dual-wavelength lasing via two distinct strategies. First, by using particle arrays with rectangular lattice symmetries, we obtain feedback from two orthogonal directions. The two output wavelengths from this laser can be selected individually using a linear polarizer. Second, by adjusting the QD-film thickness, we use higher-order transverse waveguide modes in the QD film to obtain dual-wavelength lasing at normal and off-normal angles from a symmetric square array. We thus show that our approach offers various design possibilities to tune the laser output. spontaneous emission of QDs with plasmonic-particle arrays has been demonstrated, Here, we integrate CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell/shell QDs with arrays of plasmonic Ag disks for single-and dual-wavelength lasing at visible wavelengths. We adapt the method of template stripping Because the resulting lasing wavelengths possess perpendicular polarization we can control their farfield emission using a linear polarizer. In a second approach, we return to the square-lattice geometry but now increase the QD-film thickness and the substrate refractive index. For sufficiently thick QD films, the stack supports both zero-and higher-order waveguide modes, which are coupled through diffraction by the plasmonic lattice. In addition to the fundamental normal-angle lasing, feedback in these coupled modes can result in off-normal laser emission at a second wavelength. Our findings highlight the potential of QDs as a gain material for plasmonic-lattice lasers and provide guidance for engineering the feedback conditions of such devices. We begin by discussing the plasmonic-lattice resonator without QDs (Figure A scanning electron micrograph (SEM) in Figure A template-stripped array of Ag disks supports SLRs that depend on the geometry and the dielectric environment of the lattice. where G ⃗ . , G ⃗ / are the reciprocal lattice vectors of the array and k "⃗ inc,|| , k "⃗ *,+,|| are the in-plane wave-vector components of the incoming light and the [i, j] diffraction order, respectively. Special diffraction events occur when the diffracted wave travels in plane. This arises for incoming photons with energy ħω when the so-called Rayleigh condition 39 is fulfilled: where n is the refractive index of the dielectric medium surrounding the lattice. Combining eq 1 and eq 2, we obtain the Rayleigh condition for a particular lattice as a function of the in-plane momentum k "⃗ inc,|| of the incoming light. We refer to this as the empty-lattice dispersion, since the effect of the Ag disks on the refractive index n in eq 1 is neglected. For light propagating in the xz-plane (see schematic in Figure The color map on the left side of Figure where h is Planck's constant. According to eq 3, the energy where a lattice provides feedback is determined by the lattice spacing and the refractive index of the medium surrounding the array. Due to the higher refractive index, the LSPR appears at 2.2 eV and the SLR band structure is shifted by 196 meV (at k ? = 0) towards lower energy. The stop gap is now at 1.9 eV, which is in good agreement with eq 3 that predicts 1.90 eV. The different SLR bands have distinct polarization properties that can be probed in the transmission measurement. SLR modes (see Figure Now that we understand the band structure of periodically arranged plasmonic particles in a homogeneous medium, we next integrate the QDs. We used CdSe/CdS/ZnS core/shell/shell nanocrystals synthesized according to a previously published recipe. In this structure, the plasmonic Ag disks are embedded inside a high-refractive-index QD film (n QD ≈ 1.85 at 630 nm) Therefore, we adapt the empty-lattice dispersion above (eqs 1 and 2) by replacing the refractive index n in eq 2 by the frequency-dependent effective index n eff (ω) of the waveguide mode of interest. Hence, the band structure of the plasmonic lattice is now governed by n eff (ω), which in turn is determined by n QD , n epoxy , and the thickness of the QD layer. Our approach to fabricate plasmonic lattices offers simple ways of controlling the effective mode index n eff (ω) of the waveguide modes in the QD film. Figure To fabricate a device for lasing, we aim for a 180-nm-thick QD film and deposit it onto a Agparticle square lattice (a ?,@ = 390 nm; d = 70 nm). This particular layer thickness ensures that only the fundamental TE0 and TM0 modes are supported by the waveguiding layer (orange region in Figure Based on the lattice spacing and the energy of the stop gap we can estimate the effective index of the TE0 waveguide mode to be n [\\,]^_ ≈ 1.67 at the emission wavelength of the QDs (see eq 3). Comparing this value with the data in Figure When the same structure is excited with ~340 fs laser pulses at 405 nm (65 μm spot size, 10 kHz repetition rate), lasing emission is observed. Figure By measuring the Fourier image of the lasing signal without spectrally dispersing it, we retrieve the full 2D in-plane momentum map. Above threshold the momentum-resolved laser emission of our sample shows a cross with a single bright spot in the center at k ? = k @ = 0 (see Figure To design a plasmonic-lattice laser that allows for dual-wavelength operation, we break the symmetry of the square array into a rectangular array, as recently demonstrated by Pourjamal and coworkers. We fabricated a rectangular Ag-particle lattice with a ? = 390 nm and a @ = 375 nm using template stripping and covered it with a ~180-nm-thick QD-film. Figure This difference is likely related to slight differences in the quality of the QD film, which can affect the losses and therefore the lasing threshold. Compared to previous experiments, where dual-wavelength lasing was obtained from a rectangular array of lossy Ni disks In a rectangular lattice the two lasing energies can be tuned independently. Figure Rectangular lattices can be used to widely tune the lasing wavelengths. The only constraint remains sufficient spectral overlap between the resonance conditions of the lattice and the gain envelope of the QDs. These restrictions could be eased at sufficiently strong pumping, because this can extend the gain window of the QDs due to high-energy emission transitions from the QD shell, as has recently been demonstrated for QD ring resonators. and Figure An alternative approach to achieve dual-wavelength lasing, which does not rely on a broken array symmetry, is to modify the layer stack surrounding the lattice (see Figure To fabricate a sample that supports higher-order waveguide modes, we template-stripped a square lattice (a ? = a @ = 355 nm and d = 70 nm) with a high-index epoxy (n epoxy = 1.7) and covered it with a ~750 nm thick film of QDs. Figure When we excite the QD film using a fs-pulsed laser at 405 nm, we observe two lasing peaks with fwhm <2 meV (1 nm) at 1.92 and 1.97 eV in the momentum-resolved emission spectrum (see Figure 