The superfluidity and pairing phenomena in ultracold atomic Fermi gases have been of great interest in recent years, with multiple tunable parameters. Here we study the BCS-BEC crossover behavior of balanced twocomponent Fermi gases in a one-dimensional optical lattice, which is distinct from the simple three-dimensional (3D) continuum and a fully 3D lattice often found in a condensed matter system. We use a pairing fluctuation theory which includes self-consistent feedback effects at finite temperatures, and find widespread pseudogap phenomena beyond the BCS regime. As a consequence of the lattice periodicity, the superfluid transition temperature Tc decreases with pairing strength in the BEC regime, where it approaches asymptotically Tc = πan/2m, with a being the s-wave scattering length, and n (m) the fermion density (mass). In addition, the quasi-two dimensionality leads to fast growing (absolute value of the) fermionic chemical potential μ and pairing gap ∆, which depends exponentially on the ratio d/a. Importantly, Tc at unitarity increases with the lattice constant d and hopping integral t. The effect of the van Hove singularity on Tc is identified. The superfluid density exhibits T 3/2 power laws at low T , away from the extreme BCS limit. These predictions can be tested in future experiments. Ultracold atomic Fermi gases loaded in optical lattices have attracted enormous attention in condensed matter and atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physics Including the Hubbard model, there has been extensive literature on 3D (and 2D or 1D) lattices in the field of condensed matter In this paper, we study two-component fermions loaded in 1D optical lattices using a pairing fluctuation theory, which has been applied successfully to various BCS-BEC crossover phenomena While the in-plane (xy directions) motion of the fermions has a free parabolic dispersion, we use a one-band nearestneighbor tight-binding model for the out-of-plane lattice dimension (z direction), with the single particle dispersion given by Here k ≡ (k x , k y ) and t is the hopping integral between neighboring lattice sites, d the optical lattice constant and μ σ the fermionic chemical potentials for two (pseudo)spins σ =↑, ↓. In the absence of imbalance, we have μ σ = μ, and ξ kσ = ξ k , and we shall drop the spin indices. We restrict k z to the first Brillouin zone (BZ) [-π/d, π/d] due to the lattice periodicity and set the volume V = 1, = k B = 1. The oneband approximation is justified when the band gap is tuned large. The fundamental formalism of the pairing fluctuation theory for the present work is the same as that given in Refs. The (inverse) bare Green's function is given by G with the short range s-wave pairing interaction pairing strength U < 0 and the pair susceptibility Here G(K) is the full Green's function, with the self-energy given by Σ At T ≤ T c , the generalized Thouless criterion , where ∆ 2 pg ≡ -Q t pg (Q) and we have discarded the incoherent background part of the self energy. (The parameter ∆ pg is referred to as pseudogap, as is widely found in cuprate superconductors where From the number constraint n = 2 K G(K), we can get the fermion number density where f (x) = 1/(e x/T +1) is the Fermi distribution function. Above T c , the Thouless criterion should be modified by U -1 + χ(0) = a 0 μ p , where μ p is the effective pair chemical potential and a 0 is the coefficient of the linear Ω term in the Taylor expansion of the inverse T -matrix (see below) with μ p = 0 at T ≤ T c . Here, the coupling strength U has been replaced by the s-wave scattering length a via U -1 = m/4πak 1/2 k . Note that this scattering length is different from that defined in simple 3D free space, since k z is now restricted to within the first BZ. We caution that it does not necessarily yield the experimentally measured scattering length. One can define an effective scattering length via a eff = a/ √ 2mtd, which is more comparable to the physical scattering length. For details, see Ref. The inverse T -matrix expansion with Here B = 1/2M , with M being the effective pair mass in the xy-plane, and t B is the effective hopping integral for noncondensed pairs. The a 1 term serves as a small quantitative correction; except in the weak coupling BCS regime, we have a 1 T c a 0 . The coefficients a 1 , a 0 , B and t B can be derived from the pair susceptibility via straightforward Taylor expansion, as given in the Appendix. Consequently, we have the pseudogap equation where b(x) is the Bose distribution function and 1 is the pair dispersion. When a 1 /a 0 is small, we have Ωq = Ω q -μ p . Then a 0 ∆ 2 pg yields the density of finite momentum pairs. Including the condensate, the total pair density is given by n p = a 0 ∆ 2 . Equations ( In the deep BEC regime, μ → -∞. The integrals in the equations can be performed analytically using Taylor expansions. The fermion number equations reduce to With the help of Eq. ( Note that the exponential behavior of μ and ∆ as a function of 1/k F a is an important feature of the quasi-two dimensionality of the continuum-lattice mixed system. This should be contrasted with the corresponding behaviors in the 3D continuum and 3D lattices, where power law dependencies are found. In particular, a 3D continuum has the scaling relation ∆ ∼ |μ| 1/4 in the BEC regime and thus ∆ 2 /μ decreases with 1/k F a. On the other hand, for a 3D lattice, due to the finite volume of the unit cell, both |μ| and ∆ grow linearly with |U |, with a ratio of ∆/|μ| = √ 2n -n 2 /(1 -n) for n < 1 per unit cell. In contrast, for the present continuum-lattice mixed system, the ratio ∆ 2 /μ approaches a constant, independent of pairing strength. For this reason, the (2nd and 3rd) correction terms in Eq. ( To solve for T c , we first derive the pair dispersion, and find While the in-plane pair mass in the BEC regime is given by 2m, as expected, the out-of-plane pair mass becomes exponentially heavy, as a function of increasing d/a. This can be easily understood since on a lattice pairs hop mainly via "virtual ionization" and the coefficient a 1 is given by which becomes exponentially small in the BEC limit. Now one readily derive the solution for T c , where use has been made of the definition of (as in 3D continuum) in the last step, and we have dropped the small logarithmic correction ln(t/T c ) in the denominator. An important and interesting aspect of this result is that the BEC asymptote is essentially independent of d, and the effect of t only enters through a logarithmic correction, which can be safely neglected in the asymptote as well. Given the solution of the self-consistent equations, one can easily investigate the transport behavior of the system. As an example, in this subsection, we shall present calculations for superfluid "density" n s /m, which is important quantity in the superfluid phase. In superconductors, it is often measured via the London penetration depth λ L , especially at low T , with the relation n s /m ∝ λ -2 L . The temperature dependence at low T often serves as a strong indicator for the pairing symmetry of a superconductor, as it depends strongly on the pairing symmetry. BCS mean-field calculations show that it exhibits exponential T dependence for an s-wave superconductor, and linear T dependence for a nodal d-wave superconductor The expression for superfluid density can be derived following Refs. Without imbalance, the superfluid density is given by Following Ref. In contrast, in the lattice direction, the inverse band mass ) is k z dependent and scaled by the factor td 2 . As a consequence, we expect (n s /m) z ∝ t 2 d 2 and becomes small for realistic lattices, based on Eq. ( In this subsection, we first investigate the effect of latticecontinuum mixing on the behavior of T c and phase diagram throughout the BCS-BEC crossover regimes. Shown in Fig. There are further distinctions between the present latticecontinuum mix and the pure systems. In Fig. In Fig. From Fig. The parameters t and d are the decisive factors for the shape of the Fermi surface. This can be seen from that of the lattice component in Fig. Now we study the effect of t, d on the behavior of T c . First, we focus on the T c behavior at unitarity as a function of t and d, since the unitary limit is a special point where the scattering length diverges, and thus the system may exhibit some universal behaviors. Shown in Fig. In Fig. It should be pointed out that the increase of T c in Fig. With multiple tunable parameters, the complete superfluid phase diagram is very complex, occupying a hyper volume in the high dimensional phase space. We can show only hypersurfaces corresponding certain fixed parameters. As an example, presented in Fig. Behavior of the gaps and -μp, as labeled, as a function of T /Tc, for (a) 1/kF a = -1, (b) 0, (c) +1, with Tc/TF = 0.07060, 0.13135 and 0.05156, for the BCS, unitary, and BEC regimes, respectively. Also plotted are (d) 2np/n for 1/kF a = -1, (e) B and Bz as well as 10Bz for 1/kF a = 0, and (f) a0 and a1 for 1/kF a = +1. Here t/EF = 0.1, and kF d = 2. Gaps and chemical potential are in units of EF . The coefficients B's are in units of 1/2m, a0 and a1 in units of k 3 F /E 2 F and k 3 F /E 3 F , respectively. In Fig. Figure We show in Fig. The lattice component of the superfluid density, (n s /m) z , (red curves) in Fig In summary, we have studied the ultracold atomic Fermi gases in a 1D optical lattice with a pairing fluctuation theory, as they undergo a BCS-BEC crossover. We find that T c decreases with 1/k F a in the BEC regime and approaches asymptotically T c /T F = πan/2m, which is independent of the lattice parameters t and d. Both |μ| and the gap ∆ grow exponentially as e d/a and e d/2a , respectively, in the BEC regime so that the pair hopping integral t B decreases as e -d/a . Moreover, the (maximum) T c near unitarity increases with both t and d, with fractional power law exponents. On the BCS side, the effect of van Hove singularity on T c has been identified in the T c contours. We find generally a pseudogap above and below T c , away from the extreme BCS limit. While the total gap ∆ is a smooth function across T c , the order parameter sets in at T c , and the pseudogap starts to decrease as T decreases below T c . Our calculated behavior of the pair chemical potential μ p above T c are also in good agreement with existing literature. At low T , ∆ 2 pg ∼ T 3/2 . This leads to T 3/2 power laws for the low T dependence of the superfluid density, despite that it looks visually like exponential in the BCS regime. Our findings have not been reported in the literature. Although precise control and measurements of the gaps and superfluid density remains challenging experimentally at present, we believe that our predictions can be tested in future experiments. We thank the useful discussions with Chenchao Xu, Lin Sun and Yanming Che. In this Appendix, we present concrete expressions for the coefficients of the Taylor expansion of the inverse T -matrix, t(Ω, q), after analytical continuation, t -1 pg (q, Ω) = a 1 Ω 2 + a 0 (Ω -Ω q + μ p + iΓ q,Ω ) . (A1) Here μ p = t -1 (0, 0)/a 0 , which vanishes for T ≤ T c . In the long wavelength limit, with Before expansion, the inverse T matrix is given by Then we have and the imaginary part We have Γ q,Ω = 0 when -(E k -ξ k-q ) min < Ω q < (E k + ξ k-q ) min , and in general Γ q,Ω is much smaller than Ω q for small q at T ≤ T c . For details, see Ref. The pair dispersion coefficients are given by 