Starting from a continuum-model description, we develop a microscopic weak-coupling theory for superconductivity in twisted double-bilayer graphene. We study both electron-phonon and entirely electronic pairing mechanisms. In each case, the leading superconducting instability transforms under the trivial representation, A, of the point group C3 of the system, while the subleading pairing phases belong to the E channel. We explicitly compute the momentum dependence of the associated order parameters and find that the leading state has no nodal points for electron-phonon pairing but exhibits six sign changes on the Fermi surface if the Coulomb interaction dominates. On top of these system-specific considerations, we also present general results relevant to other correlated graphenebased moiré superlattice systems. We show that, irrespective of microscopic details, triplet pairing will be stabilized if the collective electronic fluctuations breaking the enhanced SU(2)+ × SU(2)spin symmetry of these systems are odd under time reversal, even when the main SU(2)+ × SU(2)-symmetric part of the pairing glue is provided by phonons. Furthermore, we discuss the disorder sensitivity of the candidate pairing states and demonstrate that the triplet phase is protected against disorder on the moiré scale. The family of moiré superlattice systems displaying correlated physics has been expanding rapidly In a recent publication This article is organized as follows. As a starting point, in Sec. II, we introduce the continuum model for TDBG that serves as the basis for our microscopic computations. Next, in Secs. III and IV, we examine pairing mechanisms based on electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions, respectively, and evaluate the basis functions for the associated superconducting states. At the end of Sec. IV, we also discuss the interplay of the two pairing mechanisms. Proceeding further, we also consider the impact of disorder on these states in Sec. V. Finally, four appendices, A through D, supplement our discussion in the aforementioned sections with the details of our calculations. The TDBG heterostructure is composed of two individually aligned Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene (BLG) sheets, twisted relative to each other by a small angle θ 1, forming a moiré superlattice. When the two BLGs are decoupled, the spectrum of each exhibits a familiar pair of linearly dispersing Dirac cones The resulting electronic band structure of TDBG is well described by a continuum model For an accurate description of the band structure, we incorporate lattice relaxation effects To begin our analysis of superconductivity, we first consider the option that the attractive interaction between electrons is mediated by the phonon modes of the two-dimensional graphene layers To this end, we consider, in particular, acoustic phonon modes, prompted by previous works on TBG m ω q (-iq.ê q ) α q,l + α † -q,l ρq,l . Here, m is the mass density, N and Ω denote the number and area of moiré unit cells, respectively, êq is the displacement unit vector, and ω q = v ph |q| the phonon frequency; we take v ph = 2 × 10 6 cm/s of the reciprocal moiré lattice. Thus, in contrast to TBG Integrating out the phonon modes, one arrives, within the conventional BCS approximation, at the phononmediated electron-electron interaction, which is of the form of a density-density interaction, V s,s l,l (q) ˆ q,l,s ˆ -q,l ,s , where ˆ q,l,s is the electronic density operator in sheet s = 1, 2 of the l-th BLG at in-plane momentum q, i.e., ρq,l = s ˆ q,l,s . For the case of the electron-phonon coupling discussed above, we obtain with bosonic Matsubara frequencies ν n . In order to study superconducting instabilities, we project this interaction to the partially-filled conduction band harboring superconductivity. Within our approximations, the projected interaction and the noninteracting band structure of the system do not couple the spins of electrons in different valleys. This enhances the spin symmetry from the usual SU(2) to SU(2) + × SU(2) -, corresponding to independent spin rotation in the two valleys. In this limit, singlet and triplet are exactly degenerate, which enables us to discuss both of them simultaneously; the type of singlet or triplet pairing that arises when breaking the enhanced spin symmetry is completely determined by symmetry and has been worked out in Ref. where c k,σ,ξ annihilates an electron in the conduction band with momentum k and spin σ in valley ξ. In Fig. The full mean-field theory of superconductivity in TDBG is developed in Appendix C; while we relegate the details to that section, let us highlight here the salient features thereof. Focusing on the energetically most favorable intervalley pairing, the superconducting order parameter ∆ becomes a momentumdependent 2 × 2 matrix in spin space that couples as ∝ c † k,σ,+ ( ∆k ) σσ c † -k,σ ,-to the low-energy electrons. In the Nambu basis Due to the SU(2) + × SU(2) -spin symmetry, singlet, ∆k = iσ 2 ∆ k , and triplet, ∆k = iσ 2 σ • d ∆ k , are exactly degenerate. Which of the two is realized depends on the sign of the interaction breaking the enhanced spin symmetry, which we come back to later in Sec. IV C below. For details on the form of the triplet vector, the admixture of singlet and triplet despite the absence of spin-orbit coupling, and the behavior of the irreducible representation (IR) E, we direct the interested reader to Ref. 17. For the electron-phonon interaction introduced above, which exhibits an exact SU(2) + × SU(2) -symmetry, we can treat singlet and triplet on equal footing. The momentum dependence of ∆ k close to the superconducting transition and, hence, its IR can be inferred from the linearized gap equation, with a kernel in momentum space given by where V k,k [defined in Eq. (C14)] is simply a symmetrized rewriting of the interaction V s,s l,l , modulated with the appropriate form factors. The linearized mean-field equation ( More importantly, beyond these numerical values, this formalism enables us to determine the IRs under which the superconducting instabilities transform. The crystalline point group of TDBG is C 3 . It is well known On top of reducing the critical temperature in an electron-phonon-driven superconductor, the Coulomb repulsion can also be the central driving force of superconductivity where e is the electronic charge and 0 the vacuum permittivity. In Eq. ( With the aim of describing screening in TDBG, we now turn to the random phase approximation (RPA) Using the low-energy continuum model and restricting ourselves to the lowest conduction band as before, we compute the Lindhard function where the factor of 2 represents the spin degeneracy, and f k,ξ is the Fermi function evaluated at band energy E k,ξ . The resultant effective screened electron-electron interaction is given by V rpa (q) = V (q)/(1 -Π 0 (q) V (q)), which is plotted in Fig. The screening of the Coulomb interaction is highly anisotropic, leading to a nontrivial texture of V rpa in momentum space. If V rpa (q) > 0 ∀ q and has a local maximum at q = 0, one expects that the kernel M(T ) of the gap equation does not have a positive eigenvalue, signaling the absence of a superconducting instability. This is indeed what we find below half-filling of the isolated band, i.e., for hole doping relative to the correlated insulator, with V rpa illustrated by Figs. At the electron concentrations where superconductivity is favored, we find attractive interactions both in the A and E representations with basis functions shown in Fig. Despite transforming under the same, trivial, representation, the dominant superconducting states in Fig. We first point out that singlet will generically dominate over triplet if phonon-mediated interactions alone are responsible for pairing To study this scenario further, let us assume that the dominant contribution to the SU(2) + × SU(2) -symmetry breaking interactions comes from the fluctuation of a set of collective electronic modes, φ j q , that couple to the electrons, c k,α , according to Here, we allow for a momentum-dependent coupling matrix λ that can couple different internal degrees of freedom, captured by the multi-indices α, β (spin, valley, and potentially also different bands). We show in Appendix D that, irrespective of the detailed form of λ and the action of the collective mode φ j q , the competition between singlet and triplet is determined by the properties of φ j q under time reversal: if φ j q is time-reversal even (odd), i.e., it corresponds to a nonmagnetic (magnetic) particle-hole order parameter such as charge (spin) fluctuations, singlet (triplet) will dominate. Due to the proximity of the superconductor in graphene moiré systems to magnetic phases In this section, we analyze the disorder sensitivity of the dominant superconducting states derived in Secs. III and IV above for electron-phonon and Coulomb-driven pairing. We will see that although both transform under the IR A, they behave quite differently in the presence of impurities. In addition, we discuss an "Ander- son theorem" for triplet pairing that naturally emerges in graphene-based moiré superlattice systems as a result of the valley degree of freedom. In Ref. All nonuniversal details of the system and the impurity potential are encoded in the sensitivity parameter ζ that can be written as a Fermi-surface average of the trace tr Here, T is the unitary part of the time-reversal operator (in our case iσ 2 τ 1 with Pauli matrices σ j and τ j in spin and valley space, respectively), W k,k is the Fourier transform of the impurity potential (in our low-energy description, a matrix in spin and valley space), and t W = +1 (t W = -1) for nonmagnetic (magnetic) disorder. Furthermore, ∆ k is the superconducting order parameter, now expressed in the full valley-spin space, i.e., we have for singlet and triplet pairing, respectively. As follows from our analysis above, the leading superconducting instabilities have ∆ k = ∆ A k , transforming trivially under the point group C 3 of the system (IR A), and its explicit form is given by the left panel in Fig. To be concrete, let us focus on spinless, nonmagnetic (t W = +1) local impurities, i.e., W k,k = σ 0 (w 1 τ 0 +w 2 τ 1 + w 3 τ 2 ), w j ∈ R, normalized such that j w 2 j = 1. As in Ref. The sensitivity parameter can be written as where FS k F k ≡ F k FS represents an average of a function F k over the Fermi surfaces of the system (normalized such that 1 = 1). After some algebra, we are led to for singlet pairing. We see that, independent of the ratio of intra-(w 1 ) to intervalley (w 2 and w 3 ) scattering, the sensitivity of the singlet state is just the variance of the basis function ∆ A k on the Fermi surface. For the basis function of the conventional pairing state illustrated in the first panel of Fig. Contrarily, despite transforming under the trivial representation, the order parameter in Fig. Accordingly, ζ should be close to the maximal possible value of 1/2 that is typically associated only with nontrivial representations, where ∆ r k FS = 0 by symmetry. From the momentum dependence in Fig. Next, we analyze triplet pairing. From Eq. ( Consequently, if intravalley scattering dominates, i.e., w 1 w 2,3 , the triplet and singlet states behave identically. Intuitively, this results from the fact that the relative sign change of the triplet order parameter between the two valleys is irrelevant if intervalley scattering is weak. Note that the values of w 1,2,3 parametrizing the impurity potential are immaterial for the basis function in Fig. so ζ 0.5, as in the singlet case. The only difference between singlet and triplet arises for the phonon-mediated state, where Here, the stability of superconductivity is determined by the ratio of intra-to intervalley pairing. While, in general, impurities can mediate scattering between different valleys, the intervalley scattering am-plitudes will be suppressed as long as the impurity potential only varies on the length scales of the moiré lattice, but is smooth on the atomic scale. Thus, the triplet state with basis function in Fig. In order to connect to the continuum-model operators, e.g., in Eq. (B1), we first Fourier transform to get where v τ τ (q) = N -1 R v τ τ (R)e iR•q is the Fourier transform of the impurity potential. Clearly, if the potential of the local perturbation is smooth on the atomic length scales, v τ τ (q) with q connecting the K and K points (in the original Brillouin zone of graphene) is negligibly small. Transforming back to real space, Eq. ( in the continuum description. Most importantly, it is diagonal in valley space. This property will remain unchanged upon projection onto the bands of the system (see Appendix B). We finally note that the resulting protection of the triplet state against this type of disorder is not altered by the fact that, in general, the impurity potential will be momentum dependent, with scalar functions f (1,2) (constrained to respect timereversal symmetry): as long as the basis function ∆ A k is (almost) momentum independent, the commutator in Eq. ( In this work, we have analyzed the dominant and subleading superconducting instabilities for TDBG using a microscopic continuum model, and discussed both electron-phonon and RPA-screened purely electronic pairing mechanisms. In both cases, the leading superconducting instability transforms under the IR A, i.e., is invariant under all point symmetries of the system, and its order parameter can be found in Fig. We also discussed the scenario that the dominant pairing glue, which preserves the enhanced SU(2) + × SU(2) - spin symmetry of the system, is provided by the electronphonon coupling while the residual interactions breaking this symmetry are associated with fluctuating bosonic modes φ j . It is shown that time-reversal even (odd) φ j generically favor singlet (triplet) pairing. In combination with the fact that there are indications of magnetism in the phase diagram of several graphene-based moiré superlattice systems the l-th BLG, are given by a (l) i = R(∓θ/2)a i (with ∓ for l = 1, 2), R(θ) being the matrix for rotations by angle θ. Correspondingly, the reciprocal lattice vectors are modified to b (l) i = R(∓θ/2) b i . The moiré pattern thus formed is characterized in the limit of small θ by the reciprocal lattice vectors i (i = 1, 2). In valley ξ = ±1, the Dirac points of graphene are located at 2 ]/3 for the l-th BLG. Denoting by A , B the sublattice on layer = 1, 2, 3, 4 [labeled by the double-index (l, s) in Sec. III], the continuum Hamiltonian for TDBG at small twist angles θ ( 1) can be expressed in the Bloch basis of carbon's p z orbitals, where ξ ) with ± for l = 1, 2. Using the shorthand k ± = ξk x ± ik y , the other building blocks are H 0 and H 0 above are the Hamiltonians of monolayer graphene, where the band velocity v is v/a = 2.1354 eV The long-wavelength moiré potential stemming from the angular twist between the two BLGs also induces couplings between the atoms in the second and third layers. This moiré interlayer hopping is effectively described by the matrix U in Eq. (A1), which is given by where u = 0.0797 eV and u = 0.0975 eV Lastly, another important tuning knob in the experimental setup is the potential difference between the top and bottom graphene layers. This lends another useful degree of controllability to the system, enabling one to change the band separations by adjusting the gate voltage difference. In Eq. (A1), it is parametrized by V , the interlayer asymmetric potential, where 1 stands for the 2 × 2 unit matrix, and d connotes the electrostatic energy difference between adjacent layers, arising from a constant perpendicular field. Putting all these ingredients together, we numerically diagonalize the Hamiltonian (A1) in momentum space (with only a limited number of wavevectors q inside the cutoff circle |q -(K ) to obtain the low-energy eigenstates and energy bands. Despite this truncation, one can ensure satisfactory convergence of the electronic property of interest by choosing a sufficiently large cutoff parameter In TDBG, there are four main degrees of freedom for our continuum fields, which are indexed by σ (spin), = (l, s) (layer), τ (sublattice), and ξ (valley), so the electronic creation operators at (continuum) position r ∈ R 2 will be denoted by a σ, ,τ,ξ (r). Although the following framework can be applied to any observable, let us begin with the total electronic density at a two-dimensional position r, given by where α is a multi-index encompassing all four individual indices. Using the completeness relation for the Bloch states |Ψ k,n -where the sum involves all momenta of the first moiré Brillouin zone (FBZ) and all bands n of the system-we can write, at the level of the field operators In this equation, we have introduced the vector notation ( Ψ k,n (r)) α ≡ α, r|Ψ k,n , and c k,n are the electronic operators in band n with momentum k. When all bands are taken into account, Eq. ( Recognizing that Ψ † k,σ,ξ (r) Ψ k ,σ ,ξ (r) ∝ δ σ,σ and independent of σ, the total density can be split into two components as ρ (r) = ρ intra (r) + ρ inter (r), with Within the continuum description used in this work, the overlap between the Bloch states for ξ and, hence, ρ inter , vanishes identically. This eventually gives rise to the enhanced SU(2) + ×SU(2) -spin-rotation symmetry. In reality, ρ inter is nonzero (but small), which breaks this symmetry. However, as has been shown in Ref. 17, the behavior when this symmetry is weakly broken is completely determined by symmetry, which is why we do not have to consider it separately in this work. Once again turning to Bloch's theorem, we can write where U k,ξ is lattice periodic, but with the periodicity of the moiré superlattice. The Fourier transform of the density is simply ρ q = dr e -iq.r ρ (r) such that k, k +q -G ∈ FBZ. This condition is satisfied by exactly one G , therefore allowing us to eliminate the summation over G in the last equation above. Note that in the penultimate step, we have made use of the relation , which we can always enforce; this is equivalent to asserting Ψ k+G (r) = Ψ k (r) ∀ G. We finally have where we have introduced the form factors with G q = q -FBZ(q), i.e., the reciprocal lattice vector which folds the wavevector q back into the first Brillouin zone. The last form in Eq. (B9) shows most clearly, why the form factors are expected to decay with large |q|. Finally, let us elucidate how the U k entering the form factors are computed from the continuum model in Appendix II. For notational simplicity, let us recast both spin and valley blocks of Eq. (A1) in the form of a single Hamiltonian H AB-AB = h(-i∇) + T (r), where h, which is a matrix in α-space, has no explicit spatial dependence whereas T encapsulates the interlayer coupling and is moiré-lattice periodic. Appealing to translational symmetry and decomposing the latter in a Fourier series as T (r) = G T G exp (iG.r), it is straightforward to show that the Schrödinger equation ∀ k ∈ FBZ. This provides a prescription to read off U k from the eigenvectors obtained upon diagonalizing the Hamiltonian H AB-AB in Eq. (A1). On a side note, we remark that the density, ˆ q,l,s , in a particular layer = (l, s), rather than the total density, can be projected in a similar fashion, ˆ q,l,s → q,l,s as with where P l,s is a square diagonal matrix that projects on to layer (l, s). By definition, it necessarily holds that F k,q,ξ = l,s F l,s k,q,ξ ≡ F k,q,ξ . Appendix C: Linearized mean-field gap equation Having established the procedure for the projection of the density operators to the low-energy subspace formed by the single conduction band (per spin and valley), we are now well-positioned to construct a mean-field theory of superconductivity in TDBG. We start from the density-density interaction given by Eq. ( Using the expression for the densities from Eq. (B10) and the same multi-index notation, = (l, s) introduced in Appendix A, we find with k, k ∈ FBZ. All repeated internal indices (σ, σ , ξ, ξ , , ) are summed over, and we adopt this convention for the remainder of the discussion as well. Furthermore, we omit the "FBZ" hereafter and implicitly assume that the momentum arguments of the field operators are folded back into the first Brillouin zone. Retaining only terms in the homogeneous intervalley Cooper channel (k = -k , ξ = -ξ ), H int reduces to The form factors in this channel can be simplified further: time-reversal symmetry dictates F k,q,ξ = (F -k,-q,-ξ ) * , wherefore An advantage of Eq. ( whereas for the screened Coulomb interaction, V rpa (q), The mean-field decoupling proceeds by defining, as usual, the expectation value whereupon we get (neglecting a constant piece) Compactly expressing the q-sum as the mean-field interaction is consolidated into In terms of the Nambu spinor ψ T k,σ = (c k,σ,+ , c † -k,σ,-) T [56], the full Hamiltonian, including both hopping and pairing, can be kneaded into the BdG form of Eq. ( For self-consistency, Eq. (C8) is required to hold, where the expectation value on the right-hand side [see Eq. (C6)] is calculated within H mf . We have the numbers 1, 2 denote the indices in Nambu space, while σ and σ are spin indices, and the BdG Green's function is given by G We expand in the superconducting order parameter, and get, to linear order in ∆: It is easy to observe that In Eq. (C13), we now see explicitly that singlet and triplet are degenerate as expected due to the presence of the SO(4) SU( At sufficiently large T , M k,k (T ) ∼ 1/T and Eq. (4a) does not have a solution. If, below a critical temperature T c , a solution exists for the order parameter, its structure in momentum space is, of course, interaction-dependent: when V k -k > 0 (< 0), i.e., the interaction is repulsive (attractive), ∆ k and ∆ k are favored to have the opposite (same) sign. below, it is sufficient to specify the behavior of φ j q under time-reversal symmetry: we will focus on all of these modes being time-reversal even, t φ = +, or odd, t φ = -, corresponding to where Θ and Θ are the anti-unitary time-reversal operators in Fock and single-particle space, respectively. For the remainder of this section, we use the fieldintegral description and denote the associated field operators of the electrons and collective bosonic modes by the same symbols, c k,α and φ j q , employing the combined Matsubara-frequency and momentum notation, k ≡ (iω n , k) and q ≡ (iν n , q); here ω n and ν n are fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequencies, respectively. The effective low-energy dynamics of the collective bosonic modes is described by where q • • • ≡ T νn q . . . and χ -1 (iν n , q) is the (full) susceptibility in the corresponding particle-hole channels. It can be shown that While the first property simply follows from χ being a correlator of twice the same real bosonic field, the second equation is related to time-reversal symmetry and Hermiticity. Apart from S φ , the total action S = S 0 + S φ + S int + S cφ contains the free electronic theory, the fermion-boson coupling, S cφ , analogous to Eq. ( To study superconductivity, we use the following lowenergy description. We diagonalize the free Hamiltonian, where we have already taken into account that spin-orbit coupling can be neglected (spin σ is a good quantum number) and further ignored any intervalley mixing on the level of the noninteracting Hamiltonian h(k). These mixing terms are very small leading to the approximate valley-charge-conservation symmetry, U(1) v , which allows us to focus on intervalley pairing Integrating out the bosonic modes φ j q , we obtain an effective action S f = S f 0 + S f int with free contribution S f 0 = k f † kξσ (-iω n + E kξ )f kξσ and electron-electron interactions described by S f int . The relevant Cooper channel of S f int can be written as where V σ1σ2 σ3σ4 (k , ξ ; k, ξ) = W σ1σ2 σ3σ4 (k , ξ ; k, ξ) + t φ ∆V σ1σ2 σ3σ4 (k , ξ ; k, ξ) is the sum of the SU(2) + × SU(2) --preserving interactions (W) and the additional contribution (∆V) from the collective bosonic modes. Making use of Eq. (D1) and the fact that time-reversal symmetry implies Θ ψ kξσ = s σ ψ -k-ξσ , where s ↑ = +, s ↓ = -and ↑ =↓, ↓ =↑, the latter can be rewritten as introducing the shorthand Λ j ξσ,ξ σ (k, k ) = ψ † kξσ λ j (k, k ) ψ k ξ σ . Next, we decouple, as usual, the interaction in Eq. (D7) in the Cooper channel with the help of the Hubbard-Stratonovich fields ∆ ξ σσ (k) and ∆ ξ σσ (k). To linear order in these fields, the saddle-point equation with respect to ∆ ξ σσ (k) can be written as As the system has SU(2) spin-rotation symmetry and the enhanced SU(2) + × SU(2) -symmetry is broken, we know that we can discuss spin singlet and triplet separately. Beginning with the former, we write ∆ ξ σσ (k) = s σ δ σ,σ ∆ ξ k , with ∆ ξ k = ∆ -ξ -k . The saddle-point equation (D9) leads to where we introduced ∆ ξ k = ∆ ξ k /(ω 2 n + E 2 kξ ) 1/2 (to make the kernel Hermitian). F 0 ξk,ξ k is related to the SU(2) + × SU(2) --symmetric W, while the contribution of the collective electronic modes, i.e., ∆V in Eq. (D8), is contained in σ,σ Λ j * ξσ,ξ σ (k, k ) [χ(k-k )] j,j Λ j ξσ,ξ σ (k, k ). (D11) Note that, due to Eq. (D4), χ(q) has real eigenvalues, all of which must be positive as required by stability; hence, we find F s ξk,ξk > 0. Furthermore, F s is symmetric, F s ξk,ξk = F s ξ k ,ξk , as follows from Eq. (D3). Like previously, we view the saddle-point equation as a matrix equation, ∆ λ(T ) = M(T ) ∆ with a Hermitian matrix M(T ): upon decreasing temperature, the largest eigenvalue λ(T ) increases and reaches 1 at T c . Denoting the eigenvalue when setting F s ξk,ξk → 0 by λ 0 (T ) and treating F s ξk,ξ k as a perturbation yields λ(T ) ∼ λ 0 (T )+t φ δλ s (T ) at leading order, where . (D12) Similarly, for triplet, with, say, ∆ ξ σσ (k) = δ σ,σ ∆ ξ k , ∆ ξ k = -∆ -ξ -k , we find the same equations as above, only with F s k,k replaced by F t k,k = 1 2 σ,σ s σ s σ Λ j * ξσ,ξ σ (k, k ) [χ(k -k )] j,j Λ j ξσ,ξ σ (k, k ). Most importantly, the eigenvalue will behave as λ(T ) ∼ λ 0 (T )+t φ δλ t (T ), where δλ t (T ) is given by Eq. (D12) but with F s k,k → F t k,k . Since ∆ + k > 0 (without loss of generality) if electron-phonon coupling dominates F 0 , as proven in Ref. 60 and can, for example, be seen in Fig. 