The existence of quantized vortices is a key feature of Bose-Einstein condensates. In equilibrium condensates only quantum vortices of unit topological charge are stable, due to the dynamical instabilities of multiply charged defects, unless supported by strong external rotation. Due to immense fundamental interest in the physics of these fundamental topological excitations, a great deal of work has been expended towards understanding ways to force their stability. Here we show that in photonic Bose-Einstein condensates of exciton-polariton quasiparticles pumped in an annular geometry, not only do the constant particle fluxes intrinsic to the system naturally stabilize multiply charged vortex states, but that such states can indeed form spontaneously during the condensate formation through a dynamical symmetry breaking mechanism. We elucidate the properties of these novel states, notably finding that they radiate acoustically, in a process analogous to the emission of gravitational waves from binary black holes. Finally, we show that the vorticity of these photonic fluids are fundamentally limited by a quantum Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, and therefore by the condensate radius and pumping intensity. This represents the first report of this instability -deeply fundamental in fluid dynamics -in a quantum photonic fluid. From their macroscopic coherence it follows that Bose Einstein condensates (BECs) may only support rotational flow in the form of quantized vortices In our study we focus on a BEC away from the thermodynamical equilibrium supported by continuous gain and dissipation such as polariton In this article, we show theoretically that multiply charged vortex states can appear spontaneously and remain throughout the coherence time in a BEC of excitonpolariton quasiparticles excited by a ring-shaped laser profile, without the application of any external rotation, trapping potentials, or stirring. Previously, the spontaneous formation of multiply charged vortices of a given charge has been theoretically proposed and experimentally realised in polariton condensates by pumping in an odd number of spots around a circle The dynamics of the polariton BEC in the mean field are described by the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation (cGLE) coupled to a real reservoir equation representing the bath of hot excitons in the sample, nonresonantly excited by the spatially resolved laser pump profile P (r) in which ψ represents the condensate wavefunction, N R and the exciton reservoir density. U 0 and g R give the polariton-polariton and exciton-polariton interaction strengths, R R and η represent the scattering and diffusion rates. The effective mass of the polariton is given by m. Finally, the loss rates of excitons and polaritons are described by γ C and γ R . To rewrite these equations in a more amenable, nondimensional form, we employ the transforms where we set l 0 = 1μm. This yields It is well known that vortices can form during the rapid condensation of a Bose gas, via the Kibble-Zurek mechanism Direct numerical integration of Eqs. (3-4) not only confirms that this process can take place, but that for low FIG. pump power, the condensate takes on a net topological charge more often than not From the spatial separation of the condensate and the reservoir, the reservoir density is negligible near the central core of the multiply charged vortex, so that Eq. ( Under the Madelung transformation ψ = A exp[iSiμt] where μ is the chemical potential, the velocity is the gradient of the phase S: u = ∇S and the density is ρ(r) = A 2 , the imaginary part of the dNLSE yields ∇ • (ρu) = -γρ. Except for a narrow spatial region where the density heals itself from zero to the density of the vortex free state the density is almost a constant, so the radial component of the velocity becomes u r = -γr. The real part of the dNLSE reads which coincides with the corresponding steady state equation for the equilibrium condensates where velocity profile plays the role of the external potential. We therefore expect the structure of the vortices to be similar to those in equilibrium condensates with the external potential given by u 2 . Close to the centre of the condensate the velocity becomes u = -γrr + r θ, where r and θ are unit vectors in polar coordinates. When this expression for u is substituted into Eq. ( The profiles A take the approximate form with parameters w and n in which we incorporated the power expansion behaviour of the amplitude A ∼ r| | FIG. as r → 0. Figure Next we consider the arrangements of multiple multiply charged vortices imprinted away from the trap center and brought together by the radial fluxes. Fig. The process of coalescence of two or more vortices is interesting from the point of view of analog gravity and "cosmology in the lab" and the analogies can be drawn to the collision of two or more black holes Figure with time at a fixed rate until the vortex cores begin to overlap (left vertical line). During this phase, the frequency distribution narrows and the average radiation frequency increases linearly at a much lower rate than in the well-separated vortex regime. This continues until the singularities within the core overlap within a healing length (right vertical line), after which a fixed narrow band of acoustic radiation is emitted. These acoustic excitations are not unlike the gravitational waves found in the case of binary astronomical systems, which also exhibit a three stage signature in their coalescence Of course, multiply charged vortices may also collide: we find that from merger of two equal multiply charged vortices of increasing topological charge, the characteristic acoustic resonances have decreasing frequency, in the near-terahertz regime. This is because the effective mass of the vortex increases with topological charge, so that vortices of larger multiplicity orbit more slowly. As expected, we see that in contrast, when multiple singly charged vortices placed evenly about a common radius merge, they emit higher frequency radiation as the number of unit vortices is increased. Once the multiply charged vortex has formed and is allowed to settle, low energy density perturbations can be applied to the condensate. To model this, we simulate the effect of a small Gaussian laser pump pulse centered on the vortex. The observed effect is the emission of an acoustic energy pulse at the characteristic frequency of the vortex, as is seen in from the merger of the equivalent number of unit vor-tices. As in any physical system there exist many small perturbations due to intrinsic disorder, it is likely that multiply charged vortices in a real system are regularly being excited and emitting acoustic radiation. Kelvin-Helmholtz instability. Next we will establish the limit on the vortex multiplicity that the trapped condensate can support. This limit is set by the maximum counterflow velocity that can be supported between the condensate and the reservoir, therefore, is determined by the onset of a Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (KHI). KHI is the dynamical instability at the interface of two fluids when the counterflow velocity exceeds a criticality. It appears in variety of disparate systems, both classical and quantum, but has never been discussed in the context of the polaritonic systems. In quantum fluids KHI manifests itself via nucleation of vortices at a counterflow velocity exceeding the local speed of sound v c = U0ρ m . It has been extensively studied for the interface between different phases of 3 He Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that exciton-polariton condensates excited by an annular pump can spontaneously rotate despite a uniform sample and no angular momentum applied, forming multiply charged vortices. The formation, dynamics and structure of these vortices were studied. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.