We introduce a variational state for one-dimensional two-orbital Hubbard models that intuitively explains the recent computational discovery of pairing in these systems when hole doped. Our Ansatz is an optimized linear superposition of Affleck-Kennedy-Lieb-Tasaki valence bond states, rendering the combination a valence bond liquid dubbed Orbital Resonant Valence Bond. We show that the undoped (one electron/orbital) quantum state of two sites coupled into a global spin singlet is exactly written employing only spin-1/2 singlets linking orbitals at nearest-neighbor sites. Generalizing to longer chains defines our variational state visualized geometrically expressing our chain as a two-leg ladder, with one orbital per leg. As in Anderson's resonating valence-bond state, our undoped variational state contains preformed singlet pairs that via doping become mobile leading to superconductivity. Doped real materials with one-dimensional substructures, two near-degenerate orbitals, and intermediate Hubbard U/W strengths --W the carrier's bandwidth --could realize spin-singlet pairing if on-site anisotropies are small. If these anisotropies are robust, spin-triplet pairing emerges. Quantum Materials merge topological concepts Within Quantum Materials, quasi one-dimensional (1D) ladders and chains are attractive because powerful computational techniques, such as the Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) In this context, there are few studies of the effects of hole doping and magnetic-based hole pairing on topological interacting systems. Early work in the t-J limit (no double occupancy) for doped S=1 chains, indicated a narrow region of pairing, suppressed by competing ferromagnetism Here we fill this conceptual gap. Our main conclusion is illustrated in Fig. Our conclusions are not obvious: naively there are preformed triplets at each site because of the robust JH/U. Actually, we found that triplet pairing -a rarity The present effort for two-orbital chains has qualitative implications for other multiorbital systems, such as iron-based superconductors. More specifically, our results, and the hole binding found in multiorbital ladders Model. We use a canonical two-orbital Hubbard model with kinetic energy and interaction terms written as H = HK + HI + HD. The tight-binding portion is where c iγσ † (c iγσ ) creates (destroys) an electron at site i of a chain, orbital  (a and b in our case, although our Hamiltonian notation is generic for arbitrary number of orbitals), and spin projection . The nearest-neighbor (NN) electron hopping is here a 2x2 orbital-space unit-matrix, i.e. t ' = t ', with t the energy unit throughout the publication. The non-interacting bandwidth is W = 4.0t. The hopping symmetry between the two orbitals, and the absence of crystal-field splitting, prevents the appearance of the orbital-selective Mott physics recently studied in related multiorbital models The electronic interaction is standard for multiorbital fermionic systems The first term is the intraorbital Hubbard repulsion U. The second contains the interorbital repulsion at different orbitals, with the usual relation U' = U -2 JH due to rotational invariance. The third term involves the Hund's coupling JH, and the last term represents the on-site interorbital electron-pair hopping (P iγ ′ = c iγ ′ ↑ c iγ ′ ↓ ). Later it will also be important to incorporate an easy-plane anisotropy component (D>0): The spin 1/2 operators (S x , S y , S z ) are defined as via Pauli matrices. For our results we used the Lanczos method as well as DMRG, with up to m=1800 states and truncation errors below 10 -6 as in previous investigations In summary, although with quantitative differences, the undoped Hubbard model qualitatively resembles the Haldane chain as long as D/t does not cross a threshold beyond which edge states disappear and a topologically trivial regime develops. Pairing in the doped two-orbital Hubbard model. Our main focus is why pairing occurs and why in the channel it occurs. However, before addressing these issues, let us review and extend recent studies about hole-pair formation and pair-pair correlations in the doped two-orbital Hubbard model. This analysis will provide hints for the intuitive explanation. In Fig. with E(M) the ground state energy with M holes (zero holes refers to the half-filled state with one electron per orbital). When E becomes negative, it signals a 2-holes bound state. Clearly, Fig. The DMRG results unveiled a parameter space region (small D/t, low hole-doping, intermediate U/W, and robust JH/U) where superconducting spin-singlet correlations dominate. These results are surprising. First, the connection with the S=1 chain suggests that antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations are short-range and perhaps not sufficiently strong for pairing. Second, at every site and at intermediate-strong U/W a nonzero magnetic moment develops due to JH/U. Naively, these same-site electrons can be considered as local preformed triplets. Then, after hole doping the resulting ground state could be envisioned as these triplets becoming mobile. For D/t > 0.2, this naive perspective is compatible with numerical results in Fig. Then, why singlets dominate at small D/t? Although in a Haldane regime all triplet correlations must decay exponentially, such reasoning does not explain why singlet pairing is enhanced. Hints for the variational state presented below arise from the AKLT exact solution where |1/2, 1/2⟩ means total spin 1/2 and z-projection ↑, etc. For two spins 1, the global spin zero state is still relatively simple Because in our case each site S=1 arises from two real S=1/2 electrons at each orbital and same site, we use the|1, notation and an analogous expression at site 2. Then, simple algebra leads to What is remarkable is that this last expression can be exactly rewritten as a combination of S=1/2 singlets, involving either different or the same orbitals: Intuition is gained when this result is represented visually, Fig. Our exact result is counterintuitive: with perfect S=1 states at each site, the total spin-zero state of the two-orbital two-sites Hubbard model can be represented exactly as a linear combination of S=1/2 singlets. This resembles the original AKLT perspective Then, intuitively, as in the AKLT states, the undoped state has preformed S=1/2 singlet pairs in all possible arrangements that upon doping should become mobile, leading to spin-singlet pairing dominance. Thus, we predict that doping real quasi-one-dimensional materials with two dominant nearly-degenerate orbitals should lead to superconductivity in the spin-singlet channel if anisotropies are not large. We need two ``similar'' orbitals because we used a 2x2 unit hopping matrix. How is this generalized to more sites? The two-site exact result in Fig. Lanczos overlaps. How accurate is this state? Using Lanczos, we calculated the normalized exact ground state GS of the two-orbital Hubbard model in short chains and computed the overlap with the ORVB linear combination of the individual AKLT-like states of Fig. We extended to more sites using PBC. As already explained, below when ``classes'' are mentioned for the undoped case, they represent groups of valence bond states related by applying translations and orbital exchange to a particular representative. For 6 sites, there are 8 classes and at U/W=2, where binding is maximized, the overlap is 0.79. As the lattice size grows, other configurations involving longer S=1/2 singlets and especially doubly occupied orbitals will contribute to the ground state because the optimal U/W where binding is maximized is reduced towards the intermediate range. But finding a robust 0.79 overlap with 6 sites indicates that ORVB is a good variational state. The same occurs for 8 sites: here the number of classes is 16, and when U/W=1.5 is chosen because it optimizes the binding energy, the overlap |⟨ORVB|GS⟩| remains robust at 0.61. Increasing the system size, the optimal binding converges to intermediate U/W, see Fig. Should we worry about a reducing overlap with increasing size? As example consider the simple (,) spin staggered state |stagg⟩ = |↑↓↑↓. . . ⟩ of the S=1/2 Heisenberg model two-dimensional square lattice. For a 2x2 cluster its overlap with the true ground state is 0.58 but for the 4x4 cluster it decreases to 0.29. However, |stagg⟩ is certainly a good variational state. A reducing overlap is natural because with increasing cluster size the fraction of the total Hilbert space spanned by simplified variational states --such as proposed here for two-orbitals or the spin staggered state for Heisenberg models --rapidly decreases. Thus, after confirming the overlap is robust for small clusters, what matters more is whether the proposed state captures the essence of the ground state, as shown next. Let us generalize our variational state to the doped case, a topic barely addressed in the AKLT context. In our DMRG studies in Fig. This is exemplified for 4-sites PBC in Fig. Additional remarks: (1) here we use the unit hopping matrix, but in most realistic situations a nonzero crystal field among the orbitals (rendering them non-equivalent even after a change of basis) as well as inter-orbital hoppings and non-equal diagonal hoppings could be present. What occurs in these conditions remains to be studied. (2) While at very large U/W the AKLT guidance should work well, at intermediate U/W the form of the orbital hopping matrix influences on the energy. Then, in the ORVB Ansatz, the states with all inter-orbital singlets will not have the same weight as the states with all intra-orbital singlets. Two extra ingredients are needed. First, quantum mechanically each hole in each orbital is ``oscillating'' (zero-point motion) via the intraorbital hopping because these are not frozen holes. Then, the configuration with 2 holes in the same rung must be included because it is generated by oscillations within the bound state. Second, to avoid unpaired S=1/2 electrons left and right of that 2-holes rung, a singlet across is required, as in the three classes in Fig. This procedure resembles qualitatively the exact solution of the infinite U single-orbital Hubbard chain The ORVB state generalized from Fig. Panel Fig. Varying D/t. When easy-plane anisotropies are included, the spin-triplets product state at each site TPS, Eq.( In addition, we observed that the spin-spin correlations involving the z components within the two orbitals of the same rung correctly evolve with increasing D/t. At small D/t, they are FM because a spin close to S=1 forms at each site. At large D/t, they become AFM because only the spin zero z-projection component survives in the XY product state. Also note the ORVB and TPS states states are not orthogonal to one another, but their overlap is very small (0.02 for N=8, 0.07 for N=6, both at D=0 PBC). The case of 2 holes, panel (b), is more interesting. Here a level crossing occurs [panel (c)]: at small D/t the ORVB 2-hole-doped state has a nonzero overlap with the 2-hole Lanczos state because both states have quantum number (-1) under orbital exchange (orbital antisymmetric). However, at D/t ≈ 0.125, where the von Neumann entropy Fig. We introduced a variational state for the undoped and hole-doped two-orbital Hubbard chain, verified its accuracy, and explained the development of spin-singlet pairing upon doping. Our analysis relies on valence bond states defined in an extended ladder-like geometry spanned by the real chain in the long axis and the number of orbitals in the short axis. Our variational state is an optimized linear combination of AKLT singlets. Using DMRG and Lanczos, we find excellent agreement with our variational predictions at intermediate U/W. The entanglement spectra and von Neuman entropy indicate that the undoped intermediate U/W regime is connected to the Haldane limit at U/W >> 1. However, in the realm of spin models at U/W >> 1, a strong competition with ferromagnetism upon doping prevents pairing from occurring. Our variational state relies on a mathematical expression involving two S=1 spins at NN sites, with one electron per orbital. The global spin-zero state of these two sites is written exactly exclusively using spin-1/2 singlets linking electrons at those NN sites, involving the same or different orbitals. When extended to more sites, the proposed variational state is an optimized linear combination of spin-1/2 singlets in all possible NN arrangements. Note that same-rung singlets are excluded because of the large ferromagnetic Hund coupling. Using Lanczos, our variational state was shown to be a good approximation to the true ground state for small easyplane anisotropy D/t, robust Hund coupling JH /U, intermediate U/W, and light hole doping. The preformed NN spin singlets --Cooper pairs --become mobile upon hole doping, and will form a coherent superconducting state if employing the canonical BCS-like product-state construction, at least within the limitations of one dimensionality that only allow for power-law decays. A weak coupling among chains will render the state truly superconducting with long-range order, as in two-leg Cu-or Fe-based ladders. Because of the small size of the Cooper pairs, the coherent state is likely in the Bose Einstein condensation class. What occurs if more orbitals are used? The pioneering work of Haldane established that integer and half-integer spin chains are intrinsically different. Thus, if we use three orbitals and still a unit-matrix hopping, a generalized ORVB state with a spin gap due to the presence of spin singlets should not be a good variational state. However, using four orbitals we should return to the class of two. The situation becomes more complicated, and difficult to predict, if in addition to modifying the number of orbitals we also add crystal fields, inter-orbital hoppings, or assign different values in the diagonal for different orbitals. In this case, the subject is totally open. First indications In summary, our study combines topological concepts with correlation effects. Pairing emerges with hole doping via the liberation of preformed spin-1/2 singlets already contained in the undoped limit. For experimentalists to realize our model the challenge is to find quasi-1D materials with two nearly-degenerate dominant active orbitals, and with similar overlaps along the chain so that the hopping matrix is nearly the unit matrix, as in our calculations. How robust the Haldane regime is with regards to small deviations from this hopping symmetric case, as well as the introduction of an orbital small crystal-field splitting, remains to be investigated (the orbital-selective Mott phase is close in parameter space Operators. To address pairing, we defined a general pair creation operator as where i,j are sites, ,'are orbitals (a or b), and ± sign represents a spin singlet or triplet. We only focused on two different pair operators: (1) nearest neighbor pair that is odd under spin (singlet) and under orbital exchange (S nn † (i) below), ( In the main text, we often refer to S nn † (i) as odd diagonal singlet and to T on † (i) as on-site triplet, where ``diagonal'' and ``rung'' refers to the ladder representation of a two-orbital chain Fig. where NR represents the number of total neighbors at distance R with respect to site i, summed over all sites. 