An indium arsenide photovoltaic cell with gold front contacts is designed for use in a nearfield thermophotovoltaic (NF-TPV) device consisting of millimeter-size surfaces separated by a nanosize vacuum gap. The device operates with a doped silicon radiator maintained at a temperature of 800 K. The architecture of the photovoltaic cell, including the emitter and base thicknesses, the doping level of the base, and the front contact grid parameters, are optimized for maximizing NF-TPV power output. This is accomplished by solving radiation and charge transport in the cell via fluctuational electrodynamics and the minority Thermophotovoltaic (TPV) power generators convert infrared photons from a terrestrial heat source into electricity and consist of a high-temperature radiator and a narrowbandgap photovoltaic (PV) cell separated by an infrared-transparent gap. TPV devices have been proposed for use in several applications as they offer flexibility in terms of the heat source employed to maintain the radiator at a high temperature, including nuclear fuels, waste heat, and concentrated solar radiation, amongst others Despite more than a decade of active research, a handful of laboratory-scale experiments have reported modest NF-TPV performances. DiMatteo et al. One of the major barriers preventing the physical realization of NF-TPV devices beyond laboratory-scale proof-of-concepts is the ability to maintain a nanosize vacuum gap between macroscale surfaces. However, recently, the ability to maintain vacuum gaps on the order of 100 to 200 nm, distances that are small enough to obtain substantial near-field radiative transfer enhancement, between millimeter to centimeter-sized surfaces have been demonstrated The objective of this work is therefore to design a narrow-bandgap InAs photovoltaic cell with gold (Au) front contacts suitable for a NF-TPV device consisting of macroscale surfaces (~ mm 2 ) separated by a nanosize vacuum gap. This is done by determining the cell architecture and doping level, as well as the front contact grid parameters, maximizing NF-TPV power output while accounting for shading and series resistance losses introduced by the front contacts. Solutions of radiation and charge transport via fluctuational electrodynamics and the continuity equations for minority charge carriers clearly show that a cell design that includes the front contact grid must account not only for the radiator temperature, but also for the gap thickness and size of the surfaces. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the description of the problem, with a specific focus on the optical and electrical properties needed to perform radiation and charge transport calculations. Next, the results of the InAs cell design for 1 × 1 mm 2 and 5 × 5 mm 2 NF-TPV devices are discussed. Finally, concluding remarks are provided. The NF-TPV device analyzed in this work is shown in Fig. InAs is selected as the semiconductor material for the PV cell because it has a narrow bandgap at 300 K (0.354 eV The cell front contacts are typically composed of Au/Zn/Au for p-type contacts A minimum vacuum gap of 100 nm is chosen based on current state-of-the-art fabrication of near-field radiative heat transfer devices with millimeter-size surfaces One-dimensional radiation and charge transport along the z-direction is considered. Twodimensional effects are negligible because the vacuum gap thickness is much smaller than the radiator and cell surface dimensions. In all simulations, the emitter and base are discretized into control volumes, which allow for calculation of the z-spatial distribution of absorbed radiation and carrier generation in the p-n junction as well as the total radiative power absorbed by the p-n junction and the cell (p-n junction, substrate and back contacts). Converged results are obtained by discretizing the emitter and the base into a total of 900 uniform control volumes, leading to individual control volumes having an equal thickness of 3.33 nm. The specific number of control volumes in the emitter and the base depends on their thickness. Radiation transport is calculated assuming flat surfaces. Since the width of the fingers, wf, and their separation distance, l, are sufficiently large in comparison to the characteristic wavelength of thermal emission (~ 3.6 μm), any radiation scattering due to the front contact is assumed to be negligible. Under this assumption, the front contact grid is not included directly in the radiation transport model. Instead, its presence is taken into account via a shading effect when calculating the photocurrent generated by the cell (see Section 2.2.2). Radiation transport is calculated using fluctuational electrodynamics, where a fluctuating current representing thermal emission is added to Maxwell's equations The dielectric function of p-doped Si (10 19 cm -3 ) and Au are calculated using a Drude model where is the high-frequency permittivity, wp is the plasma frequency, and G is the damping coefficient due to free carriers. The optical properties of InAs (both p-and n-doped) are modeled by taking into account absorption by the lattice (phonons), absorption by the free carriers, and interband absorption. The lattice and free carrier contribution to the dielectric function of InAs, eFCL, is calculated using a Drude-Lorentz model The dielectric function for interband transitions, eIB (= ) is calculated from the complex refractive index for interband transitions, mIB (= ), using the relations and . The imaginary part of the refractive index is calculated directly from the interband absorption coefficient, aIB, as follows: ( where c0 is the speed of light in vacuum. Once is known, the real part of the refractive index, , can be constructed using the Kramers-Krönig relations Due to the narrow bandgap of InAs, energy states near the bottom of the conduction band are easily filled, and the semiconductor can become degenerate beyond a certain doping concentration. At high enough doping concentration, the Moss-Burstein shift plays a decisive role in the behavior of the interband absorption coefficient The interband absorption coefficient and the dielectric function for interband transitions are calculated only for frequencies greater than the angular frequency corresponding to the bandgap of InAs (wg = 5.38 × 10 14 rad/s), whereas eFCL is calculated at all frequencies in the spectral band of interest. Lastly, the complete dielectric function of InAs, accounting for all three absorption mechanisms, is given by . Radiation absorbed by the control volumes in the cell is used to calculate the local generation rate of electron-hole pairs, which in turn serves as an input to the continuity equations for minority charge carriers under the low-injection approximation The properties required to perform the electrical transport calculations are the mobility of majority and minority carriers in the emitter, base, and substrate, in addition to minority carrier lifetimes and surface recombination velocity. An empirical Caughey-Thomas-like model (4) All parameters required for the Caughey-Thomas model as well as the models and parameters used for minority carrier lifetime due to radiative recombination, Auger recombination, Shockley-Read-Hall recombination, and surface recombination velocity are provided in Table Matthiessen's rule. The results obtained from solving the minority charge carrier continuity equations must be modified to account for the presence of the front contact grid (additional series resistance and shading losses) and the substrate (additional series resistance). These contributions are included in the model following the method of Ref. The series resistance contributions of the substrate (rsub), emitter (due to lateral current flow) (re), busbar (rbb), and grid fingers (rf) normalized to unit area (Ωm 2 ) are calculated as follows (5) where rsub is the resistivity of the substrate (Ωm), and Rsh is the sheet resistance of the emitter (Ω) calculated using the resistivity of the emitter re (Ωm). The resistivity of the substrate and emitter, and the sheet resistance are respectively given by: ( where μmaj is the mobility of majority carriers (electrons in the substrate, μe, holes in the emitter, μh), N is the doping level of the substrate or emitter (Nd for electrons in the substrate, Na for holes in the emitter), and e is the fundamental charge. The total additional series resistance normalized to unit area, rs, introduced by the grid and the substrate is the sum of Eqs. ( The grid is optimized to extract maximum power from the cell, which introduces a tradeoff between the additional series resistance, rs, and shading losses. Their impact on the current-voltage characteristics is considered by introducing a voltage loss: (11) where is the modified voltage, V is the applied voltage, is the net total current flowing through the device (i.e., photocurrent minus dark current) modified due to the shading effects of the grid, and rs/Acell is the additional series resistance of the grid and substrate in units of Ω. Shading effects are accounted for geometrically, meaning that the fraction of the total area that is shaded by the grid is removed from the photocurrent: The maximum power output, Pmpp, in units of W is calculated as: hjun, and cell efficiency, hcell, which include the p-n junction, substrate and back contacts, are defined as: where and are the total radiative power absorbed by the p-n junction and the cell, respectively, determined from the radiation transport model. The efficiencies are defined in this way because it is not possible to calculate the incident radiation power when evanescent waves are accounted for Fig. Note that validation of the calculation of the InAs absorption coefficient is presented in Fig. The optimal set of parameters can be understood in terms of the physics of near-field thermal radiation and the properties of InAs. Unlike propagating electromagnetic waves, evanescent waves have a small penetration depth, ranging from approximately a wavelength down to the vacuum gap thickness d for materials supporting surface plasmon polaritons, such as doped Si As the doping concentration of the base increases, absorption below the bandgap due to the lattice and free carriers increases by orders of magnitude (see Fig. Fig. For vacuum gap thicknesses smaller than 1 μm (marked by the vertical dashed line in Fig. Wm -2 , the equivalent of ~ 118 suns. Table The optimal front contact grid architecture is a strong function of the vacuum gap thickness and the dimensions of the device. For example, a 1 × 1 mm 2 device operating in the far field requires a busbar with a width of 31 μm and 6 fingers having widths of 20 μm to maximize power output. The same device operating with a gap thickness of 100 nm requires a thicker busbar (77 μm) and more fingers (13 fingers having widths of 20 μm) which are more closely spaced together to extract charge carriers with minimal losses due to the increase in illumination from evanescent waves. As a result, the shading losses increase, but this is outweighed by the reduction in additional series resistance losses rs. The maximum power output for the far-field case is 0.0690 mW (1x1 mm 2 device), while it is 2.25 mW for the near-field case when no additional losses are considered, resulting in an enhancement factor of ~ 33. When all losses are taken into account, the maximum power output is 0.0435 mW and 0.910 mW for the far-field and the near-field cases, respectively, such that the corresponding near-field enhancement is reduced to a factor of ~ 21. Therefore, similar to CPV, it is clear that series resistance losses are more severe in the near field due to the substantial level of illumination. Note that the power enhancement is larger than the flux enhancement since the efficiency of the 100-nm-thick gap NF-TPV device is larger than the efficiency of the far-field device (see Table If the optimized grid for the 1 × 1 mm 2 device is simply scaled up for the 5 × 5 mm 2 device (i.e., all grid parameters are held constant except for the number of fingers and the finger length equal to the lateral dimension of the cell), the maximum power output is 0.982 mW when all losses are included, which is only ~ 1.08 times larger than that of the 1 × 1 mm 2 device despite an increase of the surface area by a factor of 25 (see Table A narrow-bandgap PV cell made of InAs with Au front contacts was designed for a NF-TPV device made of millimeter-size surfaces separated by a nanosize vacuum gap. Specifically, the architecture of the InAs cell, including the emitter and base thicknesses, the doping level of the base, and the Au front contact grid parameters were optimized for maximizing NF-TPV power output. For the first time, the impact of losses due to shading by the front contacts and losses due to series resistance introduced by the front contacts and the substrate were quantified. Results showed that these additional loss mechanisms significantly affect NF-TPV performance, and that the maximum power output is a tradeoff between shading losses and series resistance introduced by the front contacts. The key conclusion is that the PV cell in NF-TPV devices must be designed by taking into account not only the temperature of the radiator, but also the vacuum gap distance at which the device operates and the surface area of the device. Shading losses were taken into account in this work via geometric optics, a reasonable approximation provided that the front contact grid parameters were larger than the thermal wavelength. For front contact parameters of the same order of magnitude as or smaller than the thermal wavelength, it will be necessary to account for radiation scattering μ G+~,F = 1000 cm -2 V -1 s -1 nm: (a) Nd,base = 10 16 cm -3 . (b) Nd,base = 10 19 cm -3 . The horizontal axis represents depth within the cell, with the vertical dashed line showing the demarcation between the emitter (0 -0.4 μm) and the base (0.4 -3 μm) for the optimal emitter (p-region) and base (nregion) thicknesses. The horizontal dashed line shows the angular frequency (wg = 5.38×10 14 rad/s; Eg = 0.354 eV) corresponding to the bandgap of InAs.