Current technologies for infrared detection have been based on epitaxially grown semiconductors. Here we review some of the recent developments relative to colloidal nanocrystals and their use as building blocks for the design of low-cost infrared sensors. We focus on HgTe nanocrystals which appear as the only material leading to infrared photoconductivity and ultra-broad spectral tunability: from the visible to the long-wave infrared. We review some of the important results which demonstrated that colloidal nanocrystals can be compatible with air stable operations, fast detection, and strong absorption. We discuss the recent progresses relative to multipixel devices and show results obtained by coupling short-wave infrared nanoparticles with CMOS circuits to achieve video rate VGA format imaging. In particular we present that nanocrystals are a promising material for long range (>150 m) active detection in both continuous wave and pulsed mode with a time resolution down to 10 ns. Current technologies for infrared (IR) sensing are driven by epitaxially grown semiconductors. The high maturity of technologies such as InGaAs, InSb, HgCdTe, or type II superlattices Thermal detectors such as pyrometers and bolometers offer room temperature operation and reduced fabrication costs, but signal-to-noise ratio is lower and time response is slower compared with epitaxially grown detectors. Among these technologies, the bolometer is certainly the one achieving the best imaging performances however, it operates in the long wave infrared (LWIR) which let both short-wave IR (SWIR) and mid-wave IR (MWIR) without real low-cost alternative. Extremely cheap (a few hundred euros) focal plane arrays (FPAs) are available but the number of pixels and the frame rate are restricted, leading to low quality images. There is an alternative technology if the latter can combine the efficiency of quantum sensors (speed and spectral tunability) with the low costs of thermal detectors. Such detector might be useful for applications in night driving, industrial vision for fast sorting, and LIDAR detection. All these applications require a cost break down by at least a factor of 5 compared to current IR sensors. When it comes to low cost, organic-electronic materials are often seen as a possible candidate, but they are ineffective beyond 1 μm. Several materials have been proposed as alternative candidates such as graphene In the IR range, nanocrystals have drawn tremendous attention for the design of solar cells to collect the near IR part of the solar spectrum. In particular the observation of a low energy threshold for multiexciton generation in nanocrystals offered a path to overcome Shockley Queisser limitation, compared to the bulk In this paper we review some of the recent developments relative to the integration of colloidal nanocrystals for IR sensing The first colloidal nanocrystals with interband absorption that were developed where based on lead chalcogenides. They are well suited to be used as solar cell absorbers thanks to their tunable band gap around 1.2 eV While CdSe nanocrystals have been widely investigated for several years, only a few work have been done on HgTe before 2010 The synthesis of 2D HgTe colloidal quantum wells It is also possible to explore extremely reduced confinement in this material. The Bohr radius of HgTe The principle of IR absorption in colloidal nanocrystals can be classified by two different mechanisms: interband transition in a narrow band gap/semi metal material or intraband absorption. The latter requires degenerate doping, which has been a synthetic challenge for long. Significant progresses have been realized over the recent years, to obtain doped nanoparticles via introduction of extrinsic impurities within the NCs In the case of mercury chalcogenides, the doping magnitude will tune the observed IR transition. When the size of particles is small, confinement reduces the doping and this is mostly interband absorption that is observed, see Figure A critical step for the integration of these nanocrystals into devices, especially for diode type devices, is the determination of their electronic spectrum in absolute energy scale. The band diagram of bulk HgTe is already unusual with an inverted band structure for THz absorption thanks to vanishing confinement. The optical absorption in this material occurs between the two bands with Γ8 symmetry In contrast to the bulk original band structure, HgTe nanocrystals add two other specificities which are the quantum confinement (Erreur ! Source du renvoi introuvable.b) and the dependence on the spectrum with surface chemistry (Erreur ! Source du renvoi introuvable.c). These different effects combined make this is currently impossible to predict a priori the exact energy level of each band for a given nanocrystal. This is why the exact energy has to be measured. Two main methods can be used: electrochemistry high signal-to-noise ratio, but also imposes to provide similar temporal stabilities and fast time response. For long these issues have not been still addressed. Recently we started to tackle this issue. HgTe nanocrystal arrays are intrinsically porous which makes the material more exposed to oxidation by the environment. We indeed observe that the conductance of a film stored in air rises by a factor >50 over a week, see Figure Another challenge about the potential use of nanocrystals lies in transport and time response optimization. Transport in nanocrystal arrays occurs via a hopping mechanism, typically a nearest neighbor hopping at room temperature. First, this mechanism requires essentially a ligand exchange procedure. During this process, the native long ligands grafted onto the nanocrystal surface behaving as a tunnel barrier, are stripped and replaced by shorter organic molecules or even inorganic ions The previously mentioned low carrier mobility leads to a short carrier diffusion length (below 100 nm), which is typically 1 order of magnitude smaller than the material absorption depth (a few μm) To further enhance the absorption of a nanocrystal film, it has been proposed to introduce plasmonic resonators All previously discussed results were focused on single pixel devices. It is worth pointing that the interest in nanocrystals is not only generated by the reduced fabrication cost but possibly also by their ease to be hybridized to the read-out circuit. Thanks to their solution processability, direct deposition of the nanocrystal film onto the read-out circuit should be possible. There have been several demonstrations of this concept either using PbS nanocrystals in the near IR To achieve a higher image quality, the nanocrystal film was then deposited on a VGA format read-out integrated circuit (ROIC) by New Imaging Technologies. One can follow the recent progresses achieved while coupling such absorbing nanocrystal films to these ROICs in Figure We have discussed some of the recent developments of IR nanocrystals and their use for IR sensing including for imaging and active detection. 10 years ago, the challenge was to grow nanocrystals absorbing in the IR. Material growth is now mature, and the electronic structure of the material is mostly known. Great progresses have also been obtained for the doping of the nanoparticles which has open the way for the use of intraband absorption. Nanocrystals can achieve air stable (>3 months), fast (down to 20 ns) operation and absorb most (>70%) of the incident light. Large format imaging is also possible with limited dead pixels and edge effect. More sophisticated operation mode based on active detection and time gated operation appears to be also possible. 