In this article we report the atypical and anomalous evaporation kinetics of saline sessile droplets on surfaces with elevated temperatures. In a previous we showed that saline sessile droplets evaporate faster compared to water droplets when the substrates are not heated. In the present study we discover that in the case of heated surfaces, the saline droplets evaporate slower than the water counterpart, thereby posing a counter-intuitive phenomenon. The reduction in the evaporation rates is directly dependent on the salt concentration and the surface wettability. Natural convection around the droplet and thermal modulation of surface tension is found to be inadequate to explain the mechanisms. Flow visualisations using particle image velocimetry (PIV) reveals that the morphed advection within the saline droplets is a probable reason behind the arrested evaporation. Infrared thermography is employed to map the thermal state of the droplets. A thermo-solutal Marangoni based scaling analysis is put forward. It is observed that the Marangoni and internal advection borne of thermal and solutal gradients are competitive, thereby leading to the overall decay of internal circulation velocity, which reduces the evaporation rates. The theoretically obtained advection velocities conform to the experimental results. This study sheds rich insight on a novel yet anomalous species transport behaviour in saline droplets. Thermo-hydrodynamics and species transport in microscale droplets and sprays has been an area of intense interest to the researcher community for the past two decades. Droplet evaporation, an apparently simple phenomenon, yet inherently rich in physics, is encountered in daily life in a wide range of applications. Typical processes and systems include the automobile industry and combustion engines The physics behind sessile droplet evaporation is an intriguing problem, as it is strongly dependent on the interactions between the droplet fluid molecules, the surrounding gas phase, and the surface involved Many prior studies on sessile droplet evaporation focussed on the CCR mode of evaporation Xu and Lo Articles discussing the role of thermal properties of the substrate on sessile droplet evaporation dynamics have also been reported. The role of the thermal conductivity of the surface Taking cue from the previous study In the present studies, Sodium Iodide (NaI) salt (procured from Merck, India, and used as obtained) solution in de-ionised (DI) water is employed. The salt is selected based on the results by the authors from literature The substrates were placed on a metallic plate heater made up copper, which is connected to a T-type thermocouple and a digital heating unit controller (refer fig. An experimental setup (shown in fig. For the case of hydrophilic substrate, the droplet height is very low, and hence PIV of the vertical plane of the droplet is of poor resolution. Consequently, top view micro-PIV studies are done using a fluorescent microscope. A CMOS monochrome camera (Sony Corpn.) is used at 30 fps and 10x optical zoom of the microscope. The microscope objective is focused at the horizontal mid-plane of the droplet. For the micro-PIV, graphite nanoflakes (0.3-0.5 μm size) have been used as the seeding particles. Using image processing, the images were later binary inverted such that the particles were converted to white pixels and the fluid domain was converted to black. The open-source PIV code PIV-Lab was used for the velocimetry analysis. A four pass, cross-correlation algorithm has been employed in the post processing, with consecutive interrogation window sizes of 64, 32, 16, and 8 pixels, to obtain high signal to noise ratio. Standard noise reduction and contrast enhancing preprocessing algorithms are employed to enhance peak locking. Infrared thermography (at 4X thermal zoom) has been used to determine the thermal gradients and temperature distribution within the evaporating droplets (FLIR T650sc infrared camera). It employs an infrared detector of resolution 640 x 512 pixels and has an accuracy of ±0.3 o C in the temperature range of 0-100 o C. The evaporation rate in the sessile droplets is likely to enhance with temperature , where V is the instantaneous volume and V 0 is the initial volume of the droplet) for different thermal conditions. In case of hydrophilic substrate (fig. The presence of solvated components and inclusions is known to modify the evaporation kinetics of droplets by augmenting the internal hydrodynamics of the droplets On the SHS (fig. In the previous report by the authors where T min is minimum temperature and T max is the maximum temperature inside the droplet. These results are based on the infrared images data taken during the initial five minutes of the evaporation process to overlap with the PIV timeframe. The distribution obtained in the data is due to the evaporative cooling of the droplet's bulk. Figure Where, the left hand side represents the energy flux due to evaporation, and the terms of the right hand represent the modes of thermal transport in the droplet Where, Ma T , Ca, andJa e represent the associated thermal Marangoni number, the Capillary number and the evaporation Jacob number, respectively Where d c , θ, ṁ, h fg , k,C p ,ρ, σ, μ and α denote the contact diameter, contact angle, rate of evaporative mass loss, the enthalpy of vaporization, the thermal conductivity of the liquid, specific heat of the liquid, density of the liquid, fluid surface tension, viscosity of the liquid and thermal diffusivity of the liquid, respectively. The average internal circulation velocity due to thermal gradient u m is scaled as σ T ∆T m μ Where, β the thermal expansion coefficient and g is the acceleration due to gravity. The increment in the evaporation rates due to Rayleigh convection in the gaseous phase is weaker, and hence To understand the dominance of the thermal Marangoni and Rayleigh convection over each other, and to deduce the effect of enhanced substrate temperature on these governing numbers towards the modulating the internal circulations, a stability analysis has been put forward. As proposed by Nield The Ma c and Ra c rely on the associated Lewis number ( 0 / Le q d k  ), and their values ~81 and ~1708 respectively But as the substrate temperature is increased (∆10 and ∆30 case), the points for water shift towards the top and to the right, and moves above the Nield (N) and Davis (D) lines. This indicates that the advection is conditionally stable and higher the temperature, more stable is the circulation behaviour. Further, the cause of this circulation is predominantly thermal Marangoni effect, as the points cross the stability lines in the upward direction. With increase in the temperature, the Ra increases but is very less compared to the Ra c , which signifies negligible role of buoyant forces in inducing the internal circulation. On the SHS, similar behaviour is observed, with the points traversing to the stable circulation regime at elevated temperatures, with the thermal Marangoni effect being the dominant mechanism. The values of Ma T at elevated temperatures are higher on the SHS as compared to that on hydrophilic substrate. In solvated systems as saline droplets, the solvated ions are preferentially adsorped and desorped to the interface and the bulk of the fluid, which leads to modulation of the effective interfacial tension Where, A c is the frontal cross sectional area of the droplet, A s is the droplet surface area, D is the diffusion coefficient of the salt in water, ∆C is the difference in concentration between the bulk and at the interface (refer fig. . σ c is the rate of change of surface tension due to change in the salt concentration (obtained experimentally using the pendant drop method for a large number of salt concentrations and by fitting a best-fit correlation Where, Ma s = As per previous report by the authors It is interesting to note that the thermal Marangoni advection analysis shows that the strength of the internal advection increases with increase in the substrate temperature. However, the velocimetry shows reduction in the internal circulation velocity. But it is also noteworthy that the same analysis presented was shown by the authors to predict the internal advection kinetics accurately To infer, the article sheds insight on the evaporation kinetics of sessile saline droplets on heated hydrophilic surfaces and SHS. The major points of highlight from this article are as follows:  Experiments on sessile droplet evaporation of water and saline droplets at the ambient and different heated cases show that the evaporation kinetics possesses atypical and anomalous behaviour. In the ambient case, the saline droplets evaporate at faster rates compared to the water droplets.  On the heated substrates, the water droplets evaporate faster than the ambient case. However, anomalously, the saline droplets evaporate slower compared to the water counterpart.  Experiments show that the regimes of evaporation and their duration, along with the behaviour of the contact diameter and contact angles, are modulated by the substrate temperatures.  PIV studies reveal that the internal advection in the water droplets is augmented by the substrate heating; however, the advection velocity is diminished in case of saline droplets on heated substrates. Thus the observations are counter-intuitive.  Scaling analysis of the energy and species conservation reveals that the thermal and the solutal Marangoni numbers are augmented with substrate temperature. However, the effective improvement in the thermal Marangoni number is higher compared to that of the solutal Marangoni number. In essence, theory dictates that internal advection is augmented, whereas velocimetry reveals the opposite.  It is theorized that the thermal and solutal Marangoni advection within such heated saline droplets are competitive in nature, and the opposing behaviour is effectively revealed experimentally. The velocity predictions from the theory are noted to be in good agreement with the velocimetry observations. The article thus discusses anomalous and counter-intuitive evaporation behaviour of saline sessile droplets on heated surfaces, and puts forward the crux mechanism behind such characteristics. The findings may hold utilitarian implications in several micro and macroscale systems and applications employing hydrodynamics, and thermo-species transport phenomena in droplets, sprays and jets.