The method of neutron imaging was adopted to map the concentration evolution of aqueous paramagnetic Gd(NO3)3 solutions. Magnetic manipulation of the paramagnetic liquid within a miscible nonmagnetic liquid is possible by countering density-difference driven convection. The formation of salt fingers caused by double-diffusive convection in a liquid-liquid system of Gd(NO3)3 and Y(NO3)3 solutions can be prevented by the magnetic field gradient force. Paramagnetic liquids are created by dissolving salts containing transition-metal or rare-earth ions in a solvent This expression relates the force density to the magnetic susceptibility of the solution χ, the magnetic flux density B, and the permeability of free space μ 0 . It is possible to trap aqueous paramagnetic salt solutions in the magnetic field gradient of a magnetized iron wire At present, the possibility of extracting paramagnetic ions from a homogeneous aqueous solution with an inhomogeneous magnetic field is garnering significant research interest In this study, we use neutron imaging to track the concentration distribution of aqueous paramagnetic gadolinium(III) nitrate (Gd(NO 3 ) 3 ) solutions in a liquid-liquid system with a miscible nonmagnetic counterpart. This direct method consists of measuring the attenuation of a white neutron beam on passing through a sample and has potential for applications in a variety of fields Neutron imaging experiments were carried out at the IMAGINE station 28 located in the neutron guide hall of the Orphée reactor at the Laboratoire Léon Brillouin just before its final shutdown. The spectrum of the white neutron beam contained cold neutrons (λ = 2-20 Å), which emerged from a 10 mm pinhole and travelled 2.5 m to the detector where the neutron flux was 2 × 10 7 cm -2 s -1 . The detection system consisted of a 50 μm thick 6 LiF/ZnS scintillator, with a resolution of 18 μm/pixel, coupled to an sCMOS camera. Recorded images of 2560×2160 pixels correspond to a field of view of 46 × 39 mm 2 . All images shown here were obtained with an acquisition time of 60 s. The spatial resolution is on the order of 50 μm. Quartz cuvettes with path lengths of 1 mm were filled with the liquid solutions and placed 5 mm in front of the detector (see sketch in Fig. Incoherent scattering by water molecules (σ inc = 160.5 barn) was minimized by dissolving salts in D 2 O (σ inc = 4.1 barn). For max- imum contrast, the analyzed paramagnetic salt solutions were restricted to colorless and transparent Gd(NO 3 ) 3 solutions. The neutron absorption cross section of Gd dwarfs the scattering cross section of D 2 O (σ s = 19.5 barn). Thus, effects of parasitic scattering on the final signal are expected to be weak and it is unnecessary to employ a scattering correction algorithm An empty beam was recorded during each measurement session. This was necessary for normalization to the intensity of the white beam I 0 . Furthermore, the electronic noise I df was subtracted from the image to obtain the transmittance: The final step of the image processing was the removal of noisy pixels by using an outlier filter. The Beer-Lambert law describes the attenuation of the neutron beam by the Gd 3+ ions in D 2 O: with the molar neutron absorption coefficient ǫ, the Gd 3+ concentration c and the sample thickness l. Strictly speaking, ǫ depends on the neutron energy and the assumption of a single value for a polychromatic neutron beam is a simplification. This approximation is not a concern, considering the fact that the neutron wavelengths constituting the beam (2-20 Å) lie within one order of magnitude of each other. A calibration of the transmitted intensity to the Gd 3+ concentration was performed by recording images of solutions in 1 mm path length cuvettes (see Fig. The magnetic susceptibility of a 1 M Gd(NO 3 ) 3 heavy water solution (χ 1M = 322 × 10 -6 ) is the sum of the diamagnetic D 2 O contribution (χ D2O = -8 × 10 -6 ) and the paramagnetic Curie-law contribution of the Gd 3+ ions 8 . This value and the magnetic field distribution of the Nd-Fe-B magnet allow the computation of the magnetic field gradient force in the vicinity of the magnet (see Fig. In the case of an inhomogeneous solution comprising a paramagnetic and nonmagnetic component, a magnetic field gradient orthogonal to the concentration gradient alters the equilibrium state with Gd 3+ starting concentration c 0 . The value of D = 1.2 × 10 -9 m 2 s -1 obtained for the nonmagnetized region after 3 h is reasonable for rare-earth ions in water The density difference between the Gd(NO 3 ) 3 solution and the nonmagnetic liquid can be adjusted by addition of Yttrium(III) nitrate (Y(NO 3 ) 3 ), which is transparent to neutrons (σ a = 7.0 barn 34 ), to the D 2 O. Decreasing the density difference leads to more vigorous magnetically induced migration and facilitates magnetic confinement. If the density of the Gd solution is higher than that of the Y solution, the removal of the magnet before homogenization has taken place prompts a The system snaps back into the stratified state in less than 10 min and the cascading salt fingers homogenize the mixture after 2 h (t3: time since removal of magnet; Multimedia view). (g) Horizontal cross sections (broken lines in the neutron images) of the salt fingers in (b), (c), and (e) show a periodic variation of the Gd 3+ concentration by ≈0.02 mol L -1 . The plotted data was smoothed with a Savitzky-Golay filter. buoyancy-driven Rayleigh-Taylor instability In conclusion, neutron imaging is a viable method for capturing quasi two-dimensional convective and diffusive processes in solutions containing Gd 3+ ions. A pre-existing concentration of paramagnetic fluid in some region can be redistributed within a miscible liquid by the magnetic field gradient force, which counteracts density-difference driven convection. Furthermore, double-diffusive convection in the system of magnetic Gd(NO 3 ) 3 and nonmagnetic Y(NO 3 ) 3 salt solutions is suppressed. This manifests itself in the stratification by salt fingers when the magnet is absent. The implication of this is of great importance for the development of the magnetic separation of rare-earth ions, as even minor differences in diffusivity can precipitate salt fingering instabilities. If left unchecked, these will mix the separated solutions. A prerequisite for the generation of the liquid-liquid interface is a driving force that creates and preserves the concentration gradient of the paramagnetic ions. The magnetic field gradient is then able to bestow stability upon the system. Driving forces can range from the weak factor of evaporation to the more substantial injection of electrochemical energy, which can drive convection See supplementary material for time sequenced images of liquid-liquid systems containing Gd(NO 3 ) 3 and Y(NO 3 ) 3 solutions: undisturbed double-diffusive convection and magnetic confinement of a Gd(NO 3 ) 3 drop. This work forms part of the MAMI project, which is an Innovative Training Network funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 766007.