Braiding Majorana zero modes is essential for fault-tolerant topological quantum computing. Iron-based superconductors with nontrivial band topology have recently emerged as a surprisingly promising platform for creating distinct Majorana zero modes in magnetic vortices in a single material and at relatively high temperatures. The magnetic field-induced Abrikosov vortex lattice makes it difficult to braid a set of Majorana zero modes or to study the coupling of a Majorana doublet due to overlapping wave functions. Here we report the observation of the proposed quantum anomalous vortex with integer quantized vortex core states and the Majorana zero mode induced by magnetic Fe adatoms deposited on the surface. We observe its hybridization with a nearby field-induced Majorana vortex in iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45. We also observe vortex-free Yu-Shiba-Rusinov bound states at the Fe adatoms with a weaker coupling to the substrate, and discover a reversible transition between Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states and Majorana zero mode by manipulating the exchange coupling strength. The dual origin of the Majorana zero modes, from magnetic adatoms and external magnetic field, provides a new single-material platform for studying their interactions and braiding in superconductors bearing topological band structures. scanning tunneling microscope/spectroscopy (STM/S) on the vortex lattice of this type-II superconductor 6- 9 . This Majorana platform also presents new challenges for the basic understanding of defect excitations in superconductors with a topological nontrivial band structure, and new possibilities for creating MZMs under different physical conditions. In general, superconductors can host two kinds of defect excitations as in-gap bound states: the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states 10-17 localized at a magnetic impurity and the Caroli-de-Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states 18-26 inside a magnetic vortex core. To date, these excitations have appeared distinctly in nature; a magnetic impurity induces the YSR states carrying spin, whereas an external magnetic field creates vortices of the whirling supercurrents. In stark contrast to the traditional YSR states, robust zero-bias peaks (ZBPs), sharing the quintessential spectroscopic properties of MZMs, were observed by STM/S at the magnetic interstitial Fe impurities in FeTe0.55Se0.45 27 , but without applying a magnetic field. A recent theoretical proposal 28 attributes the observed ZBP to a MZM bound to a quantum anomalous vortex (QAV) nucleated spontaneously at the magnetic Fe atom. The role of the magnetic field is played by the exchange coupling of the spin and orbital moment of the Fe impurity located at the C4 symmetric sites, which generates circulating supercurrents by the spin-orbit coupling and modulates the phase of the superconducting order parameter. When the exchange coupling is strong enough, a condition favored by the very small Fermi energy (~ 5meV) in FeTe0.55Se0.45 3 , a transition from the vortex-free YSR states to the QAV was predicted to take place 28 . A MZM emerges inside the QAV core from the superconducting TSS, since the Berry phase of the Dirac fermions transforms the total angular momentum quantum number of the CdGM vortex core states 18 into integers, naturally supporting a zero-energy bound state To probe the remarkable nature of defect excitations in the superconducting TSS, we deposit magnetic Fe adatoms on the cleaved (001) surface of a single crystal of FeTe0.55Se0.45 (Fig. The STM image of a surface region after the atomic deposition (Fig. We begin with the type-I Fe adatoms. A high-resolution topographic image (Fig. The band structure of iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45 has a nontrivial Z2 topological invariant and supports helical Dirac fermion topological surface states (TSS) It is necessary to check the temperature and magnetic field dependence of the ZBP, since a vortex MZM would respond differently than vortex-free defect states. The temperature evolution of the ZBP on the Fe adatom turns out to be very similar to that of the MZM in a field-induced vortex Next, we turn to study the type-II Fe adatoms (Supplementary Note 4). In contrast to the type-I adatoms, the conductance exhibits predominantly a pair of in-gap peaks at nonzero energies without the ZBP. Applying an external magnetic field, we observe that the peaks shift approximately linearly to higher energies (Supplementary Fig. These observations motivate us to manipulate the exchange coupling between the magnetic adatoms and the substrate by tuning the tip to sample distance Unexpectedly, as the STM tip approaches a significant number of the type-II Fe adatoms (~ 27%), the pair of YSR states modulates with increasing GN, but then coalesces into a single ZBP in the water-fall plot of dI/dV spectra (Fig. The phase coherence of the MZMs is stored nonlocally and protected by the topological degeneracy against environmental decoherence caused by local perturbations, which is the central to the idea of topological quantum computing Our STM/S measurements on magnetic Fe adatoms deposited on the surface of FeTe0.55Se0.45 superconductors revealed the spontaneous formation of anomalous vortex matter with integer quantized core states and MZMs in zero external field, and the reversible transition between a YSR impurity and a QAV with increasing exchange interaction strength. These fundamental properties, previously unobserved in superconductors, are consistent with the predications of the theoretical proposal of the QAV High-quality single crystals of FeTe0.55Se0.45 with Tc of 14.5 K are grown using the self-flux method The Fe adatoms are deposited from a high-purity (99.95%) single crystal Fe rod acquired from ESPI METALS to the surface of FeTe0.55Se0.45 at a temperature below 20 K. Before Fe deposition, we scan the surface of FeTe0.55Se0.45 to ensure that there is no visible interstitial Fe impurity (IFI). The STM experiments are performed in an ultrahigh vacuum (1 × 10 -11 mbar) LT-STM systems (USM-1300s-3 He), which can apply a perpendicular magnetic field up to 11 T. STM images are acquired in the constantcurrent mode with a tungsten tip. The energy resolution calibrated on a clean Pb (111) surface is about 0.27 meV. The voltage offset calibration is followed by a standard method of overlapping points of I-V curves. Differential conductance (dI/dV) spectra are acquired by a standard lock-in amplifier at a frequency of 973.1 Hz, under modulation voltage Vmod = 0.1 mV. Low temperature of 0.4 K is achieved by a single-shot 