Detecting dopamine is of great biological importance because the molecule plays many roles in the human body. For instance, lack of dopamine release is the cause of Parkinson's disease. Although many researchers have carried out experiments on dopamine detection using carbon nanotubes (CNTs), there are only a few theoretical studies on this topic. We study the adsorption properties of dopamine and its derivatives, L-DOPA and dopamine o-quinone, adsorbed on a semiconducting (10, 0) CNT, using density functional theory calculations. Our computational simulations reveal that localized states originating from dopamine o-quinone appear in the bandgap of the (10, 0) CNT, but those originating from dopamine and L-DOPA do not appear in the gap. Therefore, dopamine oquinone is expected to be detectable using an external electric field but dopamine and L-DOPA should be difficult to detect. Dopamine is one of the most fundamental neurotransmitters that act as messengers for synaptic transmission in a brain. It plays roles in motor control, attention, motivation, learning, reward, etc When dopamine is oxidized to dopamine o-quinone, two hydrogen atoms in the hydroxyl groups are removed. The organic compound becomes highly reactive and may be toxic Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are attractive macromolecules which are applicable to the sensing of biomolecules because of their unique electrical and chemical properties In this paper, we report a first-principles investigation of the adsorption properties of dopamine, L-DOPA, and dopamine o-quinone molecules adsorbed on the semiconducting (10, 0) CNT. The binding energies of dopamine, L-DOPA, and dopamine o-quinone were 0.69, 0.69, and 0.75 eV, respectively. Our results show that the localized states originating from dopamine and L-DOPA do not exist in the bandgap of the tube, but that those from dopamine o-quinone appear in the bandgap. Based on density functional theory (DFT) Considering the fact that a molecule with a larger HOMO-LUMO gap is more stable, dopamine and L-DOPA molecules should be stable and dopamine o-quinone relatively unstable. Therefore, we can conclude that dopamine is similar to L-DOPA with respect to energy spacing, but it is very different from dopamine o-quinone. The wave functions of the three types of molecules also show interesting features, as displayed in Next, we turn to the (10, 0) CNT, which has a bandgap of 0.75 eV in its pristine state Interestingly, when dopamine o-quinone is adsorbed on the CNT, a remarkable feature is revealed. if the LUMO of the molecule approach to the CNT. This system is unstable and the energy of 1.05 eV is required to make this endothermic reaction occur. For the case of the adsorption of dopamine o-quinone on the CNT, further analysis of the localized state in the bandgap should prove meaningful to understand. We applied an external electric field with the magnitude of 0.1V/Å perpendicular to the tube axis. In the computation, the tube axis is in the z direction and the field is in ±y directions. For an electric field in the +y direction, the bandgap of the CNT was the same as the one before adsorption which is calculated to be 0.76 eV. However, the binding energy was increased by 0.13 eV owing to the electrostatic attraction. In addition, the localized states of dopamine o-quinone are upshifted by 0.27 eV, compared to the case in the absence of the electric field. It means that dopamine o-quinone is likely to donate electron to the CNT. We performed first-principles calculations to investigate the adsorption properties of dopamine, L-DOPA, and dopamine o-quinone molecules on CNT. Considering various adsorption configuration, we found that AB stacking between the catechol rings and the CNTs' hexagon was the most stable. The binding energies we obtained were 0.69, 0.69, and 0.75 eV for dopamine, L-DOPA, and dopamine o-quinone but the bandgap of the CNT and the geometries of the molecules did not significantly change upon adsorption. Dopamine and L-DOPA tend to donate electrons to the CNT as localized states in the band structures showing upshifting tendencies. Unlike dopamine and L-DOPA, dopamine o-quinone accepts electrons from the CNT and a flat band occurs within the bandgap. When a uniform electric field is applied to this system in the +y direction, dopamine o-quinone donates electrons which it accepted from the CNT under no external electric field. This property is evidence that dopamine o-quinone could be detected by CNTs in experiments whereas dopamine and L-DOPA will be hard to detect.