The search for superconducting hydrides has, so far, largely focused on finding materials exhibiting the highest possible critical temperatures (Tc). This has led to a bias towards materials stabilised at very high pressures, which introduces a number of technical difficulties in experiment. Here we apply machine learning methods in an effort to identify superconducting hydrides which can operate closer to ambient conditions. The output of these models informs subsequent crystal structure searches, from which we identify stable metallic candidates prior to performing electron-phonon calculations to obtain Tc. Hydrides of alkali and alkaline earth metals are identified as especially promising; of particular note, a Tc of up to 115 K is calculated for RbH12 at 50 GPa, which extends the operational pressure-temperature range occupied by hydride superconductors towards ambient conditions. While hydrogen is predicted to be a room-temperature superconductor at very high pressures Experimental measurements of superconductivity in high-pressure hydrides have helped to address several misconceptions about conventional superconductivity, fuelling hope that it may be achieved at ambient temperature and waving a definitive farewell to the Cohen-Anderson limit In this work, we train machine learning models on a set of literature data for superconducting binary hydrides. Machine learning has previously been used in modelling hydride superconductors, with a focus on predicting the maximum obtainable critical temperature for a given composition A large amount of computational -and some experimental -data for the binary hydrides is available in the literature • hydrogen content (n) • van der Waals radius of E • atomic number of E • mass number of E • numbers of s, p, d and f electrons in the (atomic) electron configuration of E Once constructed, we apply the model to all materials with the chemical composition EH n , where E is any el- ement in the periodic table and n ∈ [1, 2, . . . , 32) We train a fully-connected neural network (using the Keras frontend to the Tensorflow machine-learning library The basic behaviour of the machine learning model is shown in Fig. We note that the points included in our dataset will be of varying quality, come from different research groups, and are of both experimental and theoretical origin. The majority are theoretical and calculated within the harmonic approximation. Although it has been shown that anharmonicity can affect the calculated critical temperature for hydrides The models constructed in the previous section point towards the alkali and alkaline earth metal hydrides as some of the best candidates for superconductivity near ambient conditions. From these, we studied caesium and rubidium hydrides; these systems were chosen due to their predicted proximity to superconductivity at ambient conditions (see Figs. hydrides of other elements in these two groups. Caesium and rubidium polyhydrides have been studied previously using structure searching methods in Refs. Our structure searching calculations were performed using ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS) For each selected stoichiometry, the enthalpy was calculated as a function of pressure for the most stable structures arising from the AIRSS search. These geometry optimisations were performed using quantum espresso The Hamiltonian of a coupled electron-phonon system is given by In this work, we calculate the electronic Kohn-Sham eigenvalues nk , phonon frequencies ω q,ν , and electronphonon coupling constants g mnν (k, q) appearing in H from first-principles using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) as implemented in the quantum espresso code To carry out these calculations, we use the PBE functional, the same ultrasoft pseudopotentials as in the geometry optimisations, an 820 eV plane-wave cut-off, and a q-point grid with a spacing of ≈ 2π × 0.1 Å-1 (e.g., a 2 × 2 × 2 grid for a 26-atom unit cell of RbH 12 ). Two separate k-point grids are used (of 6 3 and 8 3 times the size of the q-point grid, respectively), allowing us to determine the optimal double-delta smearing width necessary to calculate the critical temperature Electron-phonon calculations were performed for a range of competitive RbH 12 , CsH 7 and RbH 3 structures predicted in this work and the results are shown in Table I. The highest-T c results arise from structures with a cage-like arrangement of hydrogen atoms surrounding a central non-hydrogen element. The electronic states that originate from these cages are near the Fermi level, and are strongly coupled together by cage vibrations. This provides the phonon-mediated pairing mechanism necessary for conventional superconductivity. Combined with a high average phonon frequency, owing to the light mass of the hydrogen atoms, this results in a high critical temperature (c.f the Allen-Dynes equation In this work we also tested two potential methods for cheaply estimating T c ordering between structures. Good superconductivity in hydrides generally requires hydrogenic states close to the Fermi level, which (as exemplified by the findings of this work) often means favouring cage-like structures and avoiding structures with molecular-character H 2 units. It is therefore possible that the hydrogen-derived DOS normalised by the total DOS at the Fermi energy, N H (E F )/N (E F ), may give some indication of whether a particular structure will exhibit high-T c superconductivity. Here we also consider the hydrogen-derived electron-phonon coupling estimates (η H ) from Gaspari-Gyorffy theory electron-phonon calculations. We implemented Gaspari-Gyorffy theory within the elk code The calculated T c values for the structures predicted and studied in this work allowed us to directly assess these potential screening methods. We observe that η H correctly predicts the T c ordering for the RbH 12 structures at fixed pressure, as was the case for the LaH 10 and YH 10 systems on which preliminary tests were performed Having identified the need to reduce the operational pressure of hydride superconductors, we searched for crystal structures which would exhibit superconductivity in novel regions of pressure-temperature space. We found that guiding structure searching techniques using a machine learning model allowed us to target the most promising regions. Specifically, we constructed models of critical temperature and operational pressure trained on the available theoretical and experimental results for binary hydride superconductors. Several novel systems were identified as promising superconductors closer to ambient conditions; here we focused on Cs and Rb hydrides, using AIRSS to identify stable stoichiometries and predict crystal structures. Other promising candidates included Ca, Sr, Ba, Ra, Ac, Th, La and Sc hydrides, most of which had already been theoretically studied to some extent Appendix A: Gaspari-Gyorffy theory McMillan λ can also be reformatted as where η is the so-called Hopfield parameter. Hopfield was one of the first to stress the importance of the local environment in determining λ where j is the atom type. The quantity I 2 appearing in Eq. A1 can be approximated using Gaspari-Gyorffy (GG) theory where N (1) l is the free-scatterer DOS given by and the δ l are the scattering phase shifts. Here R M T is the muffin-tin radius associated with atom type j and R l is the scattering solution of the Schrödinger equation. The phase shifts, which characterise the long-distance behaviour of the wavefunction, can be written in terms of the logarithmic derivative of the radial wavefunction where k = √ E F , L l = R l /R l is the logarithmic derivative, j l are spherical Bessel functions and n l are Neumann functions. We can therefore directly calculate the logarithmic derivative and use Eq. A5 to obtain the phase shifts Since M j ω 2 j is often considerably smaller for hydrogen than for the other components, it is clear from Eq. A2 that the hydrogen atoms can provide a considerable fraction of λ even if the Hopfield parameter of the other atom type is similar in magnitude. Calculating η H can therefore, in some cases, provide a cheap screening method for identifying potential high-T c hydrides. In particular, the average phonon frequencies for different structures are often similar when considering the same stoichiometry at the same pressure. If the average phonon frequencies are assumed to be exactly equivalent in such cases, we then arrive at a potential way of estimating T c ordering between structures, simply by considering η H . It is in this context that we assess the utility of GG theory in this work. To provide a baseline against which to test the neural network, we also carry out a linear regression on our binary hydride dataset, constructing the following models for critical temperature and operational pressure (1) essentially building a linear combination of powers p j ∈ {1, 2, 1/2, 1/4} of the basic descriptors d i (introduced in the main text). The goal of linear regression is to make a linear model of the relationship The linear model looks like Linear model where c i are the linear coefficients of the features. In matrix notation this looks like P = f c + , where we call f the feature matrix. We pick the coefficient vector c by minimizing the modulus of the residual vector; c = arg min c | | 2 . In order to simplify the model, we may bias the coefficient vector using Tikhonov regularization. This involves adding a cost function, |M c| 2 , which is large when the coefficient vector has many significant entries. The matrix M is known as the Tikhonov matrix. This results in the minimization Using implied summation our objective function can be written as * mjh261@cam.ac.uk † ams277@cam.ac.uk Minimizing with respect to c n we require In matrix notation this reads which gives us the optimal feature coefficients c for the model in Eq. 4. In order to allow a direct comparison of the resulting coefficients, we normalize each column of the feature matrix to a mean of 1 before carrying out the regression. To reproduce the L 2 regularization that we apply to the (self-normalizing) neural network, we choose the (post-normalization) Tikhonov matrix as 10 times the identity matrix. The coefficients for the linear regression model discussed in the main text are given in Table We constructed (static-lattice) convex hulls using AIRSS As shown in Fig. After constructing convex hulls and deciding which stoichiometries to investigate, we performed further AIRSS searches. From these searches we then selected the lowest enthalpy candidates and relaxed these structures within quantum espresso Before performing expensive electron-phonon calculations to assess potential superconductivity, we also wanted to ensure that the materials were metallic at the pressures of interest. In the following Tables we therefore present the electronic density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level (E F ) for each of the structures at 50 GPa and 150 GPa, calculated using quantum espresso. In this section we compare η j values calculated using Gaspari-Gyorffy, (GG) theory The average phonon frequencies for different structures are often very similar when we are considering the same stoichiometry at the same pressure. If we assume that the average phonon frequencies in such cases are exactly equivalent, we arrive at a potential way of cheaply estimating the T c order between structures. Using our results to rank the various LaH 10 and YH 10 structures (considering η H only since this term tends to have the most impact on the total λ), we arrive at F m 3m > P 6 3 /mmc > C2/m for LaH 10 and F m 3m > Cmcm > P 6 3 /mmc for YH 10 . Agreement with the calculated T c order is seen in both cases (while the N H (E F )/N (E F ) predicts a slightly incorrect ordering for LaH 10 ). Based on the initial DOS calculations, RbH 12 was chosen as one of the most promising compositions as it has several metallic structures down to 50 GPa. Looking at the RbH 12 enthalpy plot, the lowest enthalpy structures across the whole pressure range are Cmcm (2 formula units), Cmcm (3 formula units), C2/m (1 formula unit), Immm (1 formula unit) and Immm (2 formula units). On refining the structures, Cmcm-3 reduced to the structure with 2 formula units; similar behaviour is seen for the two Immm structures. All of these structures are metallic at 50 GPa according to the initial DOS calculations. We calculate the N H (E F )/N (E F ) ratios and η H values for these structures at 50, 100 and 150 GPa in order to test these screening methods -these values are displayed in the Table below. C2/m-1 and Immm-1 have similar (and fairly high) DOS ratios and η H even at these low pressures. Cmcm-2 also appears promising. We perform full electron-phonon superconductivity calculations on these 3 structures at various pressures. According to the initial DOS calculations, CsH 7 is also a promising stoichiometry. The CsH 7 enthalpy plot shows a group of structures that are competitive at P < 90 GPa (Imm2-2, I4mmm-2, Cm-3, P 4mm-2) and then another competitive group at slightly higher pressures (I4mm-1, P 1-3, Cmc2 1 -2, I4mm-2). The Table below shows DOS ratios and η H values for these structures at 100 GPa. Many of the structures look fairly promising and we proceed with running full electron-phonon superconductivity calculations. The test screening methods described here suggest that Cmc2 1 -2, I4mm-1 and P 1-3 may give the highest T c at a given pressure. We also consider CsH 15 . None of the structures are particularly metallic at 50 GPa according to initial DOS calculations, with a few becoming metallic at 150 GPathese include Ima2-2, P 2 1 -2, P 2/m-2, P m-2 and Cmc2 1 -2. Looking at the enthalpy plot, the most competitive structures are Cm-1, Cm-2, P 1-1, P 1-2, P mn2 1 -2, Imm2-1, P m-2, P 2 1 m-2, P 2 1 -2 and Cmc2 1 -2. These results show that P m-2, Cmc2 1 -2, P 2 1 m-2 and P 2 1 -2 are the only structures which are both energetically competitive and metallic. We calculate the DOS ratio and scattering theory parameters for some of the competitive structures at 150 GPa, but do not go on to perform electron-phonon calculations. We also consider RbH 3 . We first refine the set of structures we will look at by considering the enthalpy plots. Ignoring the most energetically unfavourable structures at the static-lattice level (here, the highest 3) and noting that Cmmm-2 and Cmmm-1 correspond to the same structure, we are left with I4 1 /amd-2, C2/c-2, Cmmm-1, Cccm-2, P 2/m-3, P 6 2 22-3 and P mma-2. However, I4 1 /amd-2 and C2/c-2 were not sufficiently metallic at 100 GPa to be able to calculate η values or DOS ratios; this reflects the results shown in the initial DOS Table and explains why they are not included in the Table below. We performed electron-phonon calculations for two of the predicted best structures of RbH 3 , but found their superconducting temperatures to be extremely low; this can be explained by their layered nature as addressed in the main text. We have not considered the other structures any further. We also consider RbH 11 -for this stoichiometry, Cmc2 1 -2 is most stable at lower pressures and P mmn-2 and Immm-1 are competitive at higher pressures. Cmc2 1 and P mmn were not metallic enough at the pressure considered in order to be included in the Table . We did not perform electron-phonon calculations for any RbH 11 structures -Immm could be promising, but since the enthalpy plot suggests it becomes competitive only above ∼ 125 GPa, we have not considered it further. As addressed in the main text, our calculated T c values allow us to further assess the screening/ranking methods tested in this work. The η H values correctly predict T c ordering for the RbH 12 structures at fixed pressure and N H (E F )/N (E F ) also comes close to doing so. N H (E F )/N (E F ) appears to be much less predictive for the CsH 7 structures and the performance of η H is also mixed. We note that in some cases the trends predicted by the DOS ratio and the scattering calculation disagree considerably (see I4/mmm-CsH 7 and P 1-CsH 7 ). This can occur for cases in which the structure has a low total DOS at E F and the DOS ratio is therefore artificially inflated. Typically, within DFT the nuclear coordinates, R, are treated as fixed and the electronic Kohn-Sham system is solved within the fixed nuclear potential. In order to calculate the effects of electron-phonon coupling from within the DFT formalism we must consider leading-order corrections to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in nuclear displacements. Expanding our Kohn-Sham potential in terms of these displacements leads to • δR κ,p + O(δR 2 ). (9) where R κ,p is the position of atom κ in unit cell p. An atomic displacement of an atom can be written in terms of phonon creation and annihilation operators This allows us to write down the resulting electronphonon coupling Hamiltonian in second-quantized form as where R κ,0 is the position of atom κ in the first unit cell. We may now write Eq. where we have defined This allows us to write down the Hamiltonian for an interacting Kohn-Sham-electron-phonon system, correct to first order in electron-phonon coupling constants g mnν (k, q) = m, k + q| G electron-phonon coupling from which we may approximate the critical temperature using the McMillan formula where and μ * is the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential . Critical temperatures calculated using DFPT for promising hydride compositions -the structures listed here were found in this work using AIRSS and are available in an online repository FIG. Michael J. Hutcheon, * Alice M. Shipley, † and Richard J. Needs Theory of Condensed Matter Group, Cavendish Laboratory,