We have synthesized high-entropy-alloy-type (HEA-type) RE123 superconductors Y 0.28 Nd 0.16 Sm 0.18 Eu 0.18 Gd 0.20 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- and Y 0.18 La 0.24 Nd 0.14 Sm 0.14 Eu 0.15 Gd 0.15 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- with a superconducting transition temperature (T c ) exceeding 90 K. From comparison between HEA-type and conventional RE123 samples, we found that the mixing entropy at the rare earth site does not affect T c and critical current density (J c ) of the RE123 samples. For all the examined samples, orthorhombicity was found to be an essential parameter for T c and J c . In the regime near orthorhombic-tetragonal boundary, J c for the HEA-type sample was larger than that of conventional-type samples, which suggests that HEA-type RE123 may be useful to improve J c in the structure with low orthorhombicity. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) Recently, we discovered a superconductor AgInSnPbBiTe 5 with a NaCl-type structure Another concept of material design using a HEA site is introduction of a HEA site into layered materials. We have reported the synthesis and superconducting properties of REO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 (RE: rare earth) with a HEA-type REO blocking layer We have synthesized polycrystalline samples of REBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . For the RE site, Y, La, Nd, Sm, Eu, and Gd were used. For all the samples, Y was contained in the composition, which is to reduce the number of testing composition. Pr was removed from the candidate elements because inclusion of Pr resulted in suppression of superconductivity in REBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ samples. In the starting nominal composition, RE elements were evenly mixed, except for sample #6 (See Table To characterize the purity and the crystal structure of the synthesized sample, powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on MiniFlex-600 (RIGAKU), which is equipped with a D/tex-Ultra detector, with a Cu-K α radiation by a conventional -2 method. Rietveld refinement was performed using RIETAN-FP software The actual composition of the synthesized samples was investigated by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) on a scanning electron microscope SEM [TM-3030 (Hitachi)]. The superconducting properties were investigated using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer on MPMS-3 (Quantum Design). Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured after both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) with an applied field of about 10 Oe. The critical current density was estimated from the magnetic-field dependence of the magnetization (M-H curve) using the Bean London model We have characterized the synthesized samples using EDX and XRD. The RE-site compositions obtained from EDX analyses are summarized in Table As shown in Fig. To investigate superconducting properties, we measured temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility for all the samples. Except for #12 and #13, synthesized samples showed a superconducting transition. Typical temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility for #14 is shown in Fig. Therefore, the OP is a good scale for superconductivity in the RE123 system. As shown in Fig. For the samples in which superconductivity was observed, we measured magnetic field dependence of magnetization. The typical M-H curves for #14 at various temperatures are displayed in Fig. If we could synthesize tetragonal (or low-orthorhombicity) RE123 superconductor samples with a T c higher than 90 K and a J c larger than the current largest record of J c in RE123 systems, it will be useful for practical applications like superconducting wires. We which is calculated from in-plane lattice constants obtained by Rietveld analyses. c RE123 with tetragonal (or low-orthorhombicity) structure, which is suitable for practical applications like superconducting wires.