This work reports on the effect of high temperature annealing on the electrical properties of p-type implanted 4H-SiC. Ion implantations of Aluminium (Al) at different energies (30 -200 keV) were carried out to achieve 300 nm thick acceptor box profiles with a concentration of about 10 20 at/cm 3 . The implanted samples were annealed at high temperatures (1675-1825 °C). Morphological analyses of the annealed samples revealed only a slight increase of the surface roughness RMS up to 1775°C, while this increase becomes more significant at 1825°C (RMS=1.2nm). Room temperature Hall measurements resulted in a hole concentration in the range 0.65-1.34×10 18 /cm 3 and mobility values in the order of 21-27 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The temperature dependent electrical measurements allowed to estimate an activation energy of the Al-implanted specie of about 110 meV (for the post-implantation annealing at 1675°C) and a fraction of active p-type Al-dopant ranging between 39% and 56%. The results give useful indications for the fabrication of 4H-SiC JBS and MOSFETs. Silicon carbide (4H-SiC) is by now considered as the best semiconductor for energy efficient modern power electronics Because of the extremely low diffusion coefficients of the dopant species in SiC even at high temperatures, ion implantation is practically the unique choice to achieve selective area doping of 4H-SiC during devices fabrication The main dopant species for SiC are Nitrogen (N) and Phosphorous (P) for n-type doping, and Aluminum (Al) for p-type doping. High post-implantation annealing temperatures (> 1500°C) are typically required to bring these species in substitutional positions and achieve their electrical activation Hence, understanding the dependence of the properties of p-type implanted layers on the activation annealing temperature is very important for device manufacturers to set the right process for the optimal device characteristics. In this context, although several investigations reported on the properties of Al-implanted 4H-SiC layers Hall-effect measurements are often used to study the electrical properties of p-type 4H-SiC layers, in order to determine key parameters like the holes concentration and mobility This paper reports on the morphological and electrical properties of p-type implanted 4H-SiC annealed at three different temperatures for electrical activation. The activation of the p-type Aldopant has been investigated by means of Van der Pauw and Hall effect measurements, taking into account the concentration dependent Hall scattering factor rH N-type doped 4H-SiC (0001) epitaxial layers grown onto heavily doped substrates with a nominal doping concentration of ND-epi=1×10 16 at/cm 3 were used in this study. The samples were implanted at 500°C with Al-ions at different energies (30-200 keV) and doses of 3×10 14 -1×10 15 at/cm 2 in order to obtain an almost flat (box-like) profile with a thickness timp = 300 nm and a concentration of 1×10 20 at/cm 3 . After implantation, the samples were annealed at three different temperatures (1675°C for 30 minutes, 1775°C and 1825°C for 15 minutes). During annealing, the sample surface was protected by a graphite capping layer, formed by an appropriate thermal backing of photoresist The surface morphology was monitored by means of Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), using a PSIA XE-150 microscope. In order to determine the electrical properties of the p-type implanted layers, Hall measurements were carried out in the temperature range 300-500 K, using a MMR Hall Effect Measurement System H-50 equipment. The Hall structures were fabricated by defining isolated p-type implanted square structures and contacting their four corners by Ti (70 nm)/Al (200 nm) Ohmic contacts annealed at 950°C. Fig The dependence of the resistivity on the annealing temperature of the implanted layer provides useful information on the mechanism of activation of the implanted dopant. In particular, an Arrhenius plot of the sheet resistance RSH can allow to estimate an activation energy for the electrical activation of the dopant, i.e., the energy needed to Al atoms to contribute as acceptors to the p-type doping of the 4H-SiC implanted layer. Fig. Ref. [20] is also reported. Thereafter, a magnetic field of intensity B = 0.1 T, perpendicular to the sample surface, has been applied to perform Hall-effect measurements, as can be seen from the schematic reported in Fig. where q is the elementary charge and the term is the so called Hall coefficient. Then, combining the values of the sheet resistance RSH and of the carrier density p, it is possible to determine the Hall mobility μ as : Using Eq. ( In order to determine the electrical activation and the compensation ratio of the p-type implanted dopant under different annealing conditions, temperature dependent Hall measurements have been carried out. In particular, in a p-type semiconductor the hole concentration p as a function of the temperature can be described by the neutrality equation where NA is the acceptor concentration, ND is the compensating donor concentration, NV is the density of states in the valence band, EA is the activation energy (i.e., the energy level of the acceptors above the valence band) and g is the degeneracy factor of the ground level of the Alacceptor fixed to 4 where As specified in the introduction, one of the methodology issues encountered in the correct determination of the hole concentration p is to take into account the Hall scattering factor rH. In fact, the hole concentration p determined by Hall measurements is related to the Hall coefficient RH by the expression Hence, by simply assuming rH = 1 typically leads to an overestimation of the carrier density in SiC ( ) ( ) where pexp (T) is the experimental hole concentration obtained assuming rH=1 and ptheor (T) is the theoretical value calculated from the neutrality Eq. ( More recently, Asada et al. Fig. Similarly, the experimental Hall mobility values determined from Eq. (3) as a function of the measurement temperature have been corrected considering the Hall scattering factor. Then, the same correction has been applied also for the other samples annealed at 1775°C and 1825°C. The Hall mobility values are in the range 21-27 cm 2 /Vs for these annealing temperatures, that well agree with the results reported by Rambach et al. In order to determine the values of NA and ND, the application of the neutrality equation (Eq. ( where timp is the thickness of the implanted layer. From the neutrality equation (see Eqs. ( On the other hand, the carrier mobility shows a much weaker dependence on the measurement temperature ( ) Under this approximation, the value of the ionization energy EA can be estimated from a linear fit of the plot of ln(RSH) as a function of q/kT. As an example, Fig. As could be deduced from our analysis, an Al activation of 56% could be reached with an increase of the annealing temperature up to 1825 °C. At his temperature, however, a degradation of the surface morphology has been observed by AFM (Fig. where E0 is the ionization energy for an isolated impurity centre, and α is a constant. Then, Fig. In summary, in this paper the morphological and electrical behaviour of Al-implanted 4H-SiC annealed at different temperatures was investigated. The morphological analyses of the annealed samples indicated that the surface roughness is well preserved upon annealing at 1775°C, while an increase of the RMS (1.2nm) occurs at 1825°C, due to a degradation of the graphite capping layer during annealing at such high temperatures. Van der Pauw and Hall-effect measurements have been carried out as a function of temperature, taking into account the previously reported Hall scattering factors values. These analyses allowed to determine an active Al-doping concentration of 3.87×10 19 cm -3 after annealing at 1675°C, corresponding to an activation of 39%. The electrical activation can increase up to 56% with increasing the annealing temperature up to 1825°C. This latter can be useful for JBS technology to improve the quality of Ohmic contacts. However, further optimization of the capping layer process is required to prevent the RMS increase of Al-implanted 4H-SiC regions upon annealing at such high temperature. Finally, the dependence of the ionization energy EA on the acceptor concentration NA has been discussed comparing our results with other literature Hall data and TLM measurements. summarizes all the physical parameters calculated by Van der Pauw and Hall effect measurements for the three samples at room temperature.