The transport properties of a YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) based on grooved Dayem bridge weak links are studied as a function of temperature: at high temperatures (60 K< T < T c = 89 K) the weak links show properties similar to SNS junctions, while at temperatures below 60 K the weak links behave like short Dayem bridges. Using these devices, we have fabricated SQUID magnetometers with galvanically coupled in-plane pick-up loops: at T = 77 K, magnetic field white noise levels as low as 63 fT/ √ Hz have been achieved. One of the most prominent applications of superconducting materials is the superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) In this letter we present a study of GDB-based SQUID properties as a function of temperature. From the temperature dependence of these properties, we conclude that the GDB is governed by superconductor-normal conductor-superconductor (SNS) like behaviour at T > 60 K, whereas at lower temperatures the weak link is better described by an SS S type of weak link, where S describes a superconducting constriction. By coupling a GDB-based SQUID galvanically to a 9 mm × 8.7 mm pick-up loop on a 10 mm × 10 mm substrate we achieve a magnetic field sensitivity as low as 63 fT/ √ Hz at 77 K. The SQUIDs are fabricated by first depositing a 50 nm thick YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (YBCO) film on a (001) oriented SrTiO 3 substrate by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The lateral size of the substrate is 10 mm × 10 mm which allows accommodation of a pick-up loop, and thus an effective area, that is significantly larger as compared to our previous work. The sensitivity of a SQUID magnetometer is limited by its magnetic flux noise S 1/2 Φ (1/f and white), and its effective area, A eff . The minimal intrinsic flux noise of a SQUID can be achieved for a screening parameter The amplifier input voltage noise S 1/2 V,a contribution to the total white flux noise should moreover be minimized. This contribution is given by S V,a /V Φ , where V Φ = max(δV /δ Φ) π∆V max /Φ 0 is the SQUID voltage-to-flux transfer function. ∆V max is the maximum voltage modulation depth in response to an externally applied magnetic flux (see Fig. In Fig. Here we used T c = 89 K, the critical temperature of the YBCO film. In our previous work Here the length of the bridge is approximately given by the GDB gap length (L G = 50 nm) and the thickness is given by the thickness of the remaining superconducting film, t G , inside the gap buried under the redeposited amorphous YBCO Properties of Grooved Dayem Bridge based YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ SQUIDs and Magnetometers For T > 60 K the measured critical current, I c (T ), clearly departs from the temperature dependence of a bare Dayem bridge predicted by the Bardeen expression, I fit c (T ). A possible explanation is the weakening of superconductivity in the constriction of the GDB for T approaching T GDB c 84 K, which could also explain the increase of the differential resistance above T = 60 K. Indeed, in thin (t ≤ 30 nm) YBCO films, a clear broadening of the superconducting transition in resistance vs temperature measurements has been observed Alternative explanations include thermal activation of vortex-antivortex pairs or vortices overcoming the Bean-Livingston edge barrier. Φ /A eff , where A eff = Φ/B a (here Φ and B a are the magnetic flux through the SQUID loop and the externally applied magnetic field, respectively). Due to their small size, bare SQUIDs have extremely small effective areas A eff , resulting in rather large values for S 1/2 B . This is a problem that is common to all SQUIDs, but particularly acute for nanoSQUIDs. To improve the magnetic field sensitivity, SQUIDs can be coupled to a much larger pick-up loop. The magnetic field sensitivity of three different devices were measured at T = 77 K in a magnetically shielded room. A commercial Magnicon SEL-1 dc-SQUID electronics Hz, achieved in devices based on grain boundary junctions C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, M. Fretto, N. De Leo, and V. Lacquaniti, "Threedimensional spin nanosensor based on reliable tunnel josephson nano-junctions for nanomagnetism investigations," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 102602 ( 2013).27 M. Xie, M. Chukharkin, S. Ruffieux, J. Schneiderman, A. Kalabukhov, M. Arzeo, T. Bauch, F. Lombardi, and D. Winkler, "Improved coupling of nanowire-based high-t c squid magne- M. Chukharkin, A. Kalabukhov, J. F. Schneiderman, F. Öisjöen, M. Jönsson, M. Xie, O. V.