Multilayer van der Waals (vdWs) semiconductors have great promising application in high-performance optoelectronic devices. However, the photoconductive photodetectors based on layered semiconductors often suffer from large dark current and high external driven bias voltage. Here, we report a vertical van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) consisting of multilayer indium selenide (InSe) and tellurium (Te). The multilayer InSe-Te vdWHs device shows a record high forward rectification ratio greater than 10 7 at room temperature. Furthermore, an ultrasensitive and broadband photoresponse photodetector is achieved by the vdWHs device with an ultrahigh photo/dark current ratio over 10 4 , a high detectivity of 10 13 , and a comparable responsivity of 0.45 A/W under visible light illumination with weak incident power. Moreover, the vdWHs device has a photovoltaic effect and can function as a self-powered photodetector (SPPD). The SPPD is also ultrasensitive to the broadband spectra ranging from 300 nm to 1000 nm and is capable of detecting weak light signals. This work offers an opportunity to develop next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices based on multilayer vdWs structures. Photodetectors, converting the optical signals into the electrical signals, have enormous applications in communication, national defense, and health monitoring. To develop highperformance photodetectors, various nanomaterials have been investigated, such as zerodimensional (0D) quantum dots The designing a p-n junction is a good way to overcome those drawbacks. The p-n junction is an important device since it is a foundation block for photodetector, diode, and solar cell. Several p-n junctions based on multilayer InSe have been developed Here, we report a vdWHs device that can work as a high-performance forward diode, photodetector, and self-powered photodetector (SPPD). The vdWHs consist of multilayer InSe and Te nanosheets. The InSe-Te vdWHs diode achieves an ultrahigh forward rectification ratio exceeding 10 7 , which is the record value for forward diodes made of multilayer vdWHs devices. More importantly, the vdWHs device can work as an ultrasensitive and broadband photoresponse photodetector with an ultrahigh photo/dark current ratio over 10 4 , a high detectivity of 10 13 , and a comparable responsivity of 0.45 A/W under visible light illumination with weak incident power. Moreover, the vdWHs device shows a photovoltaic effect and can work as an SPPD. The SPPD is also ultrasensitive to the broadband spectra ranging from 300 nm to 1000 nm and is capable of detecting weak light signals (nW). The fabrication processes of vertical multilayer InSe-Te vdWHs device were presented in supporting information. Figure The quality of isolated InSe, Te, and heterojunction is evaluated by the Raman spectrum as shown in Figure Multilayer InSe and Te nanosheets show typical n-type and p-type electronic transport behaviors, respectively, which agree well with early reports of multilayer InSe and Te nanosheets The I-V curves of the InSe-Te vdWHs diode are measured under various gate voltage (Vg) and a gate-dependent rectifying behavior is observed as shown in Figure Hence, the vdWHs devices show a broadband photoresponse due to benefited from a small bandgap of multilayer InSe (1.26 eV). The photo/dark current ratio can be calculated by Iph/Id, where Id is dark current. Figure For further investigate the photoresponse properties, the vdWHs device is irradiated under 400 nm light with various incident powers and the I-V curves are depicted in Figure The calculated R values decrease with increasing incident powers, which is a common phenomenon in photodetectors based on multilayer van der Waals materials. This incident powerdependent R mainly originates from defects and traps at the interface between InSe/Te and substrates In summary, we have successfully fabricated the multilayer InSe-Te vdWHs device and demonstrate that the device can work as a high-performance forward diode and photodetector. Notably, an ultrahigh forward rectification ratio greater than 10 7 is achieved. Moreover, the highperformance photodetector is demonstrated with an ultrahigh photo/dark current ratio over 10 4 , a high detectivity of 10 13 , and a comparable responsivity of 0.45 A/W under visible light illumination with weak incident power. Furthermore, the InSe-Te vdWHs device also has a photovoltaic effect and can work as an SPPD. The SPPD is also ultrasensitive to the broadband spectra ranging from 300 nm to 1000 nm and is capable of detecting weak light signals. Our work offers an opportunity to develop next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices based on multilayer vdWs structures. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website. Descriptions of the experiment, calculated equations for responsivity, detectivity and external quantum efficiency.