We determine the ground-state phase diagram of the three-band Hubbard model across a range of model parameters using density matrix embedding theory. We study the atomic-scale nature of the antiferromagnetic (AFM) and superconducting (SC) orders, explicitly including the oxygen degrees of freedom. All parametrizations of the model display AFM and SC phases, but the decay of AFM order with doping is too slow compared to the experimental phase diagram, and further, coexistence of AFM and SC orders occurs in all parameter sets. The local magnetic moment localizes entirely at the copper sites. The magnetic phase diagram is particularly sensitive to Δ pd and t p p , and existing estimates of the charge transfer gap Δ pd appear too large in so-called minimal model parametrizations. The electron-doped side of the phase diagram is qualitatively distinct from the hole-doped side and we find an unusual two-peak structure in the SC in the full model parametrization. Examining the SC order at the atomic scale, within the larger scale d x 2 -y 2 -wave SC pairing order between Cu-Cu and O-O, we also observe a local p x ( y) [or d xz ( yz) ]-symmetry modulation of the pair density on the Cu-O bonds. Our work highlights some of the features that arise in a three-band versus one-band picture, the role of the oxygen degrees of freedom in new kinds of atomic-scale SC orders, and the necessity of re-evaluating current parametrizations of the three-band Hubbard model. The three-band Hubbard model, also known as the Emery model However, despite the progress in understanding the oneband Hubbard model and its variants, there are still important reasons to go beyond the one-band picture to study the original three-band model directly. For instance, (a) some important physics may be lost in the reduction to the one-band approximation (such as a role for the oxygen degrees of freedom in the pseudogap phase Over the past few years, density matrix embedding theory (DMET) In earlier work, DMET successfully provided an accurate description of the ground-state orders of the one-band Hubbard model where • • • denotes nearest neighbors, d ( †) i σ and p ( †) j σ destroy (create) a hole with spin σ (∈ {α, β}) on the Cu d and O p orbitals respectively, n d i σ and n p j σ are the corresponding hole particle-number operators, and the charge transfer gap Δ pd is defined as the orbital energy difference, ε p -ε d . Similarly to in the one-band Hubbard model, the hopping term and on-site Coulomb repulsion will be denoted t and U, and the Coulomb interaction between nearest-neighbor p, d orbitals will be denoted V pd . Note that the hopping term involves a phase factor (±1) introduced by the choice of orbital orientation in the basis as shown in Fig. There has been much work to determine the parameters of the three-band model; however, a consensus set does not exist DMET approximates the expectation values in the interacting lattice by those in a quantum impurity model. The impurity model is solved simultaneously with a fictitious noninteracting lattice problem, whose ground state defines the bath sites of the impurity model via a Schmidt decomposition In this work, we are interested in both magnetic and superconducting phases. Consequently, the correlation potential takes the form where optimizing over v σ and Δ αβ in the self-consistency procedure allows for formation of spin polarized and singlet superconducting pairing (between two spin channels α and β) order in the lattice and impurity problems. The non-interacting lattice Hamiltonian is then of Bogoliubov-de Gennes form We used a 2×2 impurity cluster of CuO 2 primitive cells The impurity model Hamiltonian was constructed using the non-interacting DMET bath formalism We carried out DMET self-consistency using full impuritybath fitting We minimized w using a conjugate gradient (CG) minimizer with line search. Since the gap of the non-interacting lattice model is often small (in the case of doped systems), a finite inverse temperature β = 1000 t pd was used to define the non-interacting density matrix to ensure smooth convergence (see Appendix B for further discussion and expressions for the analytic gradient of the cost function at finite temperature). We matched the particle number on the impurity sites and on the lattice exactly by separately fitting the chemical potential using quadratic interpolation To characterize the doping dependence of the ground-state, we define average AFM and d-wave SC order parameters. As usual, the AFM order parameter is chosen as the staggered magnetization, where m d i is the local magnetic moment on a Cu-d orbital, 1 2 n d i α -n d iβ , and the η AFM is the local structure factor, The SC order parameter here is evaluated as the average of the Cu-Cu and O-O d-wave pairing components, where • • • limits the summation such that only the pairing between nearest Cu-d orbitals is taken into account, and similarly • • • involves only the next-nearest coupling between O-p orbitals. The d-wave superconducting structure factor η SC is defined as, A. Undoped state We present the order parameters for the undoped state from DMET and from reference calculations and experimental measurements in Table As a simple estimate of the single-particle gap, we also computed the energy gap of the converged DMET non-interacting lattice Hamiltonian (DMET NI gap), i.e. E g = ε CBM -ε VBM , where C(V)BM denotes conduction (valence) band minimum (maximum). Note that although the charge and spin densities in the different parametrizations are generally similar, the DMET NI gap varies more significantly, from 2.2 to 4.4 eV. The Hybertsen and Hanke parameter sets were derived from calculations on La 2 CuO 4 (LCO), where the optical energy gap is variously reported as lying in the range 1.5 to 2.0 eV Unlike in the one-band Hubbard model, where the insulating gap arises between Hubbard bands, the gap in correlated insulators in the three-band model can arise from both Hubbard and charge-transfer mechanisms. In Fig. Comparing the DMET NI band structure to the Hartree-Fock mean-field description (also shown in Fig. More interesting ground states, including those with superconducting order, appear under doping. An important difference with the one-band case is the asymmetry of the three-band model under doping. We first focus on the orders that appear under hole-doping. Although our calculations are all at zero temperature, we can loosely identify the magnitude of the order parameters with transition temperatures in the phase diagram, thus allowing us to compare them to the experimental phase diagram. In Fig. For all parameter sets, we observe that the AFM order pa- rameter decreases as doping increases, consistent with the general behavior of the cuprate phase diagram As a result of the overestimation of AFM order discussed above, the minimal models show coexistence of AFM + SC order for all the studied dopings. However, in the full parametrization, the two coexist in the range 0.1 to 0.4 (for solution 2), and 0.1 to 0.3 (for solution 1), with d-wave order reaching a maximum near x ≈ 0.30 -0.35, somewhat larger than seen in experiments (≈ 0.15 -0.2) In view of the significant differences between the minimal and full parametrizations, we now examine more deeply how individual parameters influence the phase diagram. To do so, we change the individual parameters appearing in the Hanke minimal model, and restrict ourselves to the magnetic order for simplicity. We compare the magnetic phase diagram computed using both Hartree-Fock and DMET. While the mean-field Hartree-Fock method overestimates the magnetic moments, and the resulting AFM domes always lie above the DMET ones in the plots, it should be noted that parametrizations are often derived from mean-field calculations. Thus the difference in sensitivity between DMET and HF to the model parameters gives some insight into the sizes of errors arising from meanfield parametrization schemes. We first study the influence of Δ pd , whose value is uncertain in the literature We next check the effect of on-site Coulomb repulsion terms. The moment versus U d is shown in Fig. We finally study the effect of nearest neighbor oxygen hopping t p p (see Fig. Overall, we find that the magnetic phase diagram is sensitive to Δ pd and t p p , but not to U d and U p . The improved results of the full model are thus likely due to the introduction of t p p , rather than U p . In particular, if we wish to have a reasonable description of the three-band Hubbard model within a minimal set of parameters, Δ pd should be renormalized to a smaller value to take the effect of t p p into account. The Hanke parametrization of the full model yields more physical results, and thus we will only use this full model in the remainder of the discussion. However, we note that it is still not optimal with respect to choosing values of Δ pd and t p p that match experiment. This may in part be due to the mean-field derivation of some of the parameters. We now turn to the electron doped orders, which as mentioned above, are different from the hole-doped orders, unlike in the one-band model For the SC phase, the overall d-wave pairing magnitude is smaller in the electron doped region, similar to the lower T c s seen in experiment. Also, the SC phase on the electron doped side has an interesting "M" shaped two-peak structure: The d-wave SC order increases first with respect to the doping, but decays to a small value around the AFM critical x c , before growing to another peak after the AFM order vanishes. The first peak around x = 0.05 is very similar in shape to the peak in DMET calculations of the one-band Hubbard model, where the SC order emerges immediately after doping (see the lower panel of Fig. Beyond the bulk order parameters, the three-band model and the explicit inclusion of both copper and oxygen atoms into the DMET impurity cluster allows for the possibility of studying the magnetic and superconducting order at the atomic scale. The explicit charge, spin, and pairing orders are shown in Fig. In summary, we have used density matrix embedding theory to characterize the ground-state phases of the three-band Hubbard model. We have calculated the charge, local magnetic moments, projected energy bands and density of states of the undoped three-band model, which support a charge-transfer insulating character at zero doping. We also studied the doping dependence of the ground-state (phase diagram) of the model paying particular attention to the local antiferromagnetic (AFM) and superconducting (SC) orders. In a broad range of model parameters we find a decrease in AFM order upon doping and a SC dome. Unlike in the one-band picture, the models all predict a large region of coexistence of AFM + SC orders, with the AFM order decreasing quite slowly. Comparison to experimental data and earlier theoretical studies suggests that the minimal parametrized models overestimate the AFM order and lead to poorer energy gaps, relative to the full parametrizations, which also include oxygen and oxygen-copper Coulomb repulsion, and oxygen-oxygen hopping. The magnetic moment is particularly sensitive to the Δ pd and t p p parameters, and in the minimal model, the charge transfer gap Δ pd should be renormalized downwards to better capture the experimental phase diagram. Within the full model, there are qualitative differences between the SC orders on the hole-and electron-doped side, with the electron-doped side supporting two different SC domes, one of which appears more similar to the one observed in the one-band model, and the other like the SC dome observed on the hole-doped side. The three-band model further allowed us to study order at the atomic scale. In the SC region, we observed strong dwave pairing between Cu-Cu and the next-nearest O-O, weak extended s-wave coupling between the nearest O-O atoms, and p-(or d xz , d yz )-like symmetry pairing between Cu-O. The intriguing symmetry of the latter order, similar to that seen in some experiments, illustrates the new physics that emerges at atomic length-scales in the three-band model. Exploring such physics in more detail will be the subject of future work. remaining cells as the environment, the whole density matrix of the lattice is divided into four blocks, where γ imp-imp is the density matrix of the first cell, i.e. γ(R = 0); while γ env-imp is the coupling density matrix between the first cell and other cells, i.e. γ(R ≠ 0). These two blocks can be easily computed in periodic systems by a Fourier transform of the density matrix in k-space, where N k is the number of k-points in the first Brillouin zone. The bath can then be computed by SVD of γ R≠0 where B yields the bath orbital coefficients and the singular values Λ measure the entanglement between bath and impurity orbitals. We note that the γ imp-env and γ env-env blocks are not needed for bath construction and in fact, their computation and storage would be prohibitively expensive in a periodic calculation with many k points. Therefore, using the SVD of γ R≠0 is more economical (O (N k N 3 orb ) cost) than diagonalizing the γ env-env block. In addition to the cost, there are two other advantages of using the SVD. First, it is easy to discard the non-coupled bath orbitals, i.e. bath orbitals with (almost) zero singular values. These bath orbitals are essentially core or virtual orbitals, which have little entanglement with the impurity, and they should be removed from the impurity problem for better numerical stability during the DMET self-consistency. Second, when using finite temperature smearing, the idempotency of the lattice mean-field density matrix is slightly broken. Rigorous treatment of finite-temperature requires a large number of bath orbitals than the number of impurity sites For the superconducting states Φ HFB , the construction of the bath can still be carried out using SVD, but acting on the (env-imp block of) of the generalized density matrix ) where the anomalous part of the density matrix κ allows for a non-zero SC order parameter. Within the singlet pairing picture, particles of one spin sector are allowed to couple with holes of the other spin. Therefore, the number of bath orbitals is effectively two times larger than in the normal state DMET. Once the gradients of Eq. ( and thus the key task in Eq. (B1) is to evaluate the response of the mean-field density matrix with respect to a perturbation, ∂γ mf kl /∂u i j . The response at zero temperature can be written in terms of orbital coefficients and energies (see e.g. Refs. where we have assumed the system is gapped. However, when the system becomes (nearly) gapless, this expression diverges. In such cases, the divergent gradient causes the optimization to fail, and this is a source of many convergence difficulties in DMET. One way to ameliorate this issue is to introduce a finite temperature smearing, similar to what is used in mean-field calculations of metals. With an inverse temperature β and a perturbation δu, the Fermi-Dirac density matrix is defined as, where μ is the Fermi level for the (quasi-)particles. The response of γ with respect to the correlation potential u then involves two terms, where the first term is the direct response of the density at a fixed Fermi level, while the second term reflects the contribution of the implicit change in the Fermi level due to the change in potential. The final expression for the first term in Eq. (B4) is, where It is easy to check that K pq is always finite when ε p = ε q . One can also let β go to infinity and choose p / q to label occupied / virtual orbitals; the gradient then gives the correct zero temperature limit in Eq. (B2) (up to a symmetrization). The final expressions for the second term in Eq. (B4) are, Usually this contribution is very small at low temperatures, compared to the direct response in Eq. (B5). However, this contribution will be important in a real finite temperature simulation, e.g. in Ref. We summarize the derivation of Eqs. (B5) -(B7) in the Supplemental Material Here we assess the accuracy and convergence of the DMET procedure in the three-band model calculations. The error in the DMET calculations arises from three possible sources: (a) DMET self-consistency error (from incomplete convergence), (b) DMRG solver error due to the finite bond dimension, and (c) error from the finite size of the impurity. The finite size error (c) can, in principle, be eliminated by increasing the cluster size and extrapolating to the thermodynamic limit (TDL), as performed in the one-band Hubbard model case The error from the DMRG solver can be estimated using standard techniques based on the discarded weight in the DMRG calculation In summary, from the above analysis, we find that the DMET calculations can be smoothly converged, with minimal error from either the self-consistency or from the solver. a From Ref. a DMRG result from Ref.