In this study, an analytical approach has been developed to couple the wellbore heating process by hot water circulation and the associated methane hydrate dissociation in the reservoir. A coaxial wellbore is assumed as the heat source where both conduction and convection heat transfers are considered. It consists of an inner tube and an outer structure of casing, gravel, and cement layers. In the reservoir, a similarity solution employing a moving boundary separating the dissociated and undissociated zones is employed to build the analytical solution. Two different operating schemes for water supply into wellbore heat source have been studied: i) from the inner tube; and ii) from the annulus section of the wellbore. Temperature distribution along the wellbore, temperature and pressure distributions in the reservoir, hydrate dissociation rate, and energy efficiency considering various initial and boundary conditions and reservoir properties are evaluated. The two different operating schemes have almost the same results with slightly higher gas production in the case of hot water entry into annulus, which is in direct contact with the reservoir. Increasing the inlet water temperature or decreasing the wellbore pressure increases gas production. Applying them simultaneously results in a greater gas production and energy efficiency. Some of the reservoir's properties, such as porosity, thermal diffusivity, thermal conductivity, and reservoir thickness, have direct relation with the dissociation rate, but the reservoir's permeability and gas viscosity have almost no impact on the process. The wellbore parameters, such as flow rate of hot water, inlet temperature, and wellbore radius except the inner tube radius, have direct impact on the wellbore mean temperature and the associated results in the dissociation process. Natural gas hydrates are cage-like substances composed of gas molecules trapped inside water molecules by high pressure and low temperature conditions underground in the presence of sufficient water and gas MH reservoirs found in permafrost regions comprises only a small portion of the world's total reservoirs, most of which are in off-shore regions (approximately 3%), but they are accessible and affordable sites for research activities Main methods applied to dissociate MH are as follows Many mathematical studies of hydrate dissociation employing the above methods have been performed so far and can be categorized into the following: i) analytical solutions, which provide fast answers with a good mechanistic prospective of the phenomena; and ii) numerical solutions, which are comprehensive but complicated by a number of assumptions. Analytical solutions are universal, which means that they return the exact solution to problems by direct substitution of variables For instance, a three dimensional (3D) numerical study on MH dissociation upon depressurization was performed in 1982 assuming an MH layer with a free gas zone and involving the effect of conduction heat transfer and gas fluid flow Different numerical simulators have been developed to investigate MH dissociation, for example TOUGH2 Increasingly, MH reservoirs are attracting researchers, who study them deeply through mathematical tools as well as real field or experimental work In 1990, Selim and Sloan Recently, Roostaie and Leonenko Apart from the mathematical investigations, several experiments have also been designed and performed on MH dissociation upon different methods. One of the major challenges in those experiments, which significantly affects the outcome of tests, is the size of the setup During the previous decades, several investigations have been performed on gas production from MH dissociation and the associated changes in the reservoir The purpose of the present work is to develop radial analytical models of MH dissociation upon thermal stimulation, assuming an infinite hydrate reservoir in the radial coordinates and considering a wellbore heat source with three main completion layers-the casing, cement, and gravel-as its external structure. A coaxial heat exchanger with an inside tube and a surrounding annulus is assumed to model hot water injection in the wellbore and heat transfer to the reservoir. The energy efficiency, gas production, and temperature and pressure distributions assuming different heat exchanger and reservoir characteristics are calculated and compared with the previous studies. The results of this study, for the first time, provides an important opportunity to advance the understanding of the effect of wellbore structure, composition, and its associated heating mechanism on the gas production from MH reservoirs upon thermal stimulation. A schematic of the dissociation process inside the reservoir is presented in Figure Heat transfer to the reservoir occurs through the borehole's external wall. The borehole's external layers, shown in Figure Convective heat transfer resistance (m.K/W) between the inner tube surface (r=r1) and the water flow inside the tube is defined as follows: where cii R is the convective heat transfer resistance (m.K/W), f k is the fluid thermal conductivity (W/m.K), and ii Nu is the Nusselt's number of the fluid flow in the inner tube. Different formulas have been suggested for Nusselt's number in previous literature with various degrees of accuracy 1/2 2/3 ( / 2)(Re 1000) Pr 1 12.7( / 2) (Pr 1) where Rei is the Reynolds number in the inner tube, Pr is the Prandtl number, and f is the friction factor for smooth pipes. Rei, Pr, and f are calculated respectively as follows: Pr (1.58ln(Re ) 3.28) where D is the pipe diameter (m The convection thermal resistance (mK/W) of the heat transfer from the outer surface of the inner tube (r=r2) to the fluid flow in the annulus can be represented as follows where oi Nu is the Nusselt's number of the fluid flow close to the outer surface of the inner tube, and * r is the ratio between the inner and outer radii of the annulus 23 ( / ) rr. Petuhkov and Roizen where 3 r and 2 r are the radii (m) of the annulus, shown in Figure where oa Nu is the Nusselt's number of the water flow close to the outer surface of the annulus, which is defined as follows based on the work performed by Petuhkov and Roizen And finally, in order to calculate the conduction thermal resistance of the external wall of the wellbore, the wall can be considered as a homogenous layer by summing the thermal resistances of the cement, casing, and gravel layers together as stated in equation 13: where x k stands for thermal conductivity (W/(m.K)) with the s, c, p, and g subscripts respectively referring to the steel (casing), cement, inner pipe, and gravel. Figure Therefore, the total thermal resistances ((m.K)/W) associated with qi and qa are as follows: At steady-state condition, the convection heat transfer in the water flow should be equal to the transverse heat transfer between the inner tube and annulus (qi) and between the annulus and wellbore (qa). This expression is presented in equations 16 and 17: where fi T is the water flow temperature (K) in the inner tube, and fa T is the water flow temperature in the annulus (K), and z represents the axial distance along the wellbore, which is in the range of 0 (at the base of the wellbore) to h (top boarder of the hydrate zone). Some notations in equations 16 and 17 should be taken into account: i) the  sign refers to the direction of the water flow, with + standing for the water flow in the direction of the z-axis; and ii) in qa calculation, an average temperature along the outer surface of the external wall of the wellbore ( 7 () Considering the latter assumption, it should be noted that temperature profile along the outside surface of the wellbore with respect to z-coordinates is calculated ( ( , ) fi T z t and ( , ) fa T z t ). Due to the matrix structure in the dissociated zone, which consists of porous media as well as methane gas and water created from the dissociation, both conduction and convection heat transfers exist in this zone. Inconstant temperature along the wellbore surface, especially through the lower-end section, would affect the water flow (produced from dissociation), which tends to accumulate in the bottom of the reservoir due to the earth gravity, through convection heat transfer. However, in the present study, the generated water from the dissociation is assumed to remain motionless in the pores. Thus, the authors decided to investigate the effect of inconstant temperature along the wellbore surface on the dissociation in the future works by considering the water flow generated from the dissociation to avoid unreliable results (caused by considering the inconstant temperature along the wellbore surface and neglecting the water flow inside the reservoir), which make the model away from the real conditions. Furthermore, a full discussion of dependency of the interactions and thermal processes inside MH reservoir on the wellbore's inconstant surface temperature lies beyond the scope of this study. The main contribution of this work is to investigate the impact of wellbore heating process by hot water circulation on MH dissociation and vice versa. The temperature distribution resulted from the two operation models ( fi T and fa T ) can be obtained by solving equations 16 and 17 and considering two boundary conditions: i) the inlet temperature (Ti) is constant; and ii) no heat flux occurs at the base of the wellbore. More details are provided in the supplementary file. Then, the heat transfer rate to the reservoir can be obtained, after which, the subsequent hydrate dissociation will be calculated as described next. Basically, the heat transfer from the heat source to the reservoir is consumed in two ways: i) by increasing the temperature of the sediments and the water-gas produced in the dissociated zone; and ii) hydrate dissociation at the moving boundary and increasing the temperature of the matrix materials in Zone II close to the moving boundary. The input heat should transfer through the dissociated region, during which, a large part of the input heat will be consumed in the first way mentioned above (i), reducing the rate of hydrate dissociation and the speed of the moving interface as the process continues. i) MH completely fills the porous media; Well log data determinations and core studies in Malik site, located in Mackenzie Delta, revealed that the hydrate saturation exceeds 80% in at least 10 discrete MH layers ii) thermodynamic equilibrium is applied at the dissociation interface for temperature and pressure; iii) the water produced during the dissociation remains motionless in the porous media; The volume of generated water from MH dissociation is negligible compared to that of generated gas Sparrow et al. the reservoir is assumed to be infinite; The idea of heat transfer from environment to the reservoir occurs in a finite MH reservoir model. Wang et al. Schicks et al. v) thermophysical properties of the phases remain constant during dissociation; v) the produced gas is modelled as an ideal gas; vi) the produced gas instantaneously reaches the same temperature as that of local sediments; vii) no viscous dissipation or inertial effect exists. The following formulas represent the basic equations and solution procedure used in exploring dissociation, which are similar to those of our previous work The continuity equation of gas in Zone I is: where g  is gas density (kg/m 3 ),  is reservoir porosity, r is the radial distance (m), and g v is gas velocity (m/s). The gas velocity ( g v ) in Zone I is calculated as follows by employing Darcy's Law: where k is gas effective permeability (μm 2 ),  is gas dynamic viscosity (Pa.s), and P is gas pressure (Pa). Equations 20 and 21 show the energy balance in Zones I and II, respectively: The gas density in Zone I, based on the ideal gas law, can be calculated by the following equation: where m is the gas's molecular mass (kg/mol), and R is the universal gas constant (J/(mol.K)). The above equations are representative of the fundamental concept of the MH dissociation process employed in the present work. The initial and boundary conditions are: i) temperature and pressure at the inner wall of the wellbore (r3) are known at each time step due to the calculations mentioned earlier for temperature distribution inside the wellbore; and ii) no pressure drop is assumed in the wellbore, and the pressure at the outer surface of the well (r7) is Pi. The heat transfer from the wellbore's external wall to the reservoir is stated by Equation where Aw is the wellbore surface area (m () where FgH is the mass ratio of the methane gas trapped inside the MH to the total mass of hydrate and is assumed to be equal to 0.1265 kg CH4/kg hydrate 1 On the moving dissociation interface, equation 20 becomes: ,0 r S t  Therefore, by using equations 34-36, the previous equations are simplified and transformed, as presented in the supplementary information in detail. An exponential integral (Ei) function is employed to find the solution to the temperature distribution in the reservoir during dissociation as described in equations 37 and 38. This solution has also been recommended in previous works The A, B, C, a, and b constants are defined in the supplementary information. The parameter "b" in equations S17 and S25 defines the convection heat transfer for gas by taking into account the specific heat capacity of gas. The gas produced from dissociation will absorb some of the transferred heat from the wellbore to the dissociation interface. This definition is in line with previous analytical studies Then, the pressure distribution in Zone I can be calculated from equation S12 as follows: By replacing TI according to equation 37, the pressure distributions in zone I will be calculated as shown in equation 40: ) By integrating Equation The total volume of gas produced up to time t can be calculated as follows at the standard temperature and pressure (STP) of dry gas: where rp V and rt n are respectively the total volume (m 3 /m 2 ) and total moles (mole/m 2 ) of produced gas per surface area of the moving interface up to time t with STP T and STP P respectively as the temperature and pressure of dry gas at STP conditions. Further details of the calculation of the total volume of produced gas are provided in the supplementary information. In order to assess the efficiency of gas production during a dissociation process that uses thermal stimulation method, the ratio of the amount of energy that can be produced from combustion of the total produced gas to the amount of input energy to the system during dissociation is introduced as the energy efficiency ratio (Equation where f  is the energy efficiency ratio, and g Q is the heating value of the gas at STP conditions (J/m 3 ). Pressure and temperature at the dissociation interface ( s P and s T ) are coupled to the pressure and temperature at the wellbore (outer surface of the wellbore) due to their associated equations, mentioned earlier in the previous section. Thus, The dimensionless position and dimensionless velocity ( T (equation S27), are related to the pressure and temperature at the wellbore. The temperature at the outer surface of the wellbore is dependent on the temperature of the annulus section and time. The temperature inside the wellbore changes due to time and the temperature at the wellbore, which changes over time as the dissociation progresses. Table As shown in Figure The results presented in Figure These differences may be due to the following reasons: i) Selim and Sloan On the other hand, if Ts falls below T0, some part of the heat required for dissociation will be provided from the hydrate zone, causing in the temperature of the hydrate zone near the dissociation interface to drop. K. It should be noted that the temperature of the injected water is below the saturation temperature of water in the present work. Black dashed lines in Figure The temperature distribution differences between the two operation schemes is negligible, with only slightly higher temperature at the wellbore upon injection into the annulus, causing higher dissociation pressures and farther interface location from the wellbore. Figure S1a and S1b also show a negligible difference between the amount of heat transfer to the reservoir following injection into the inner tube or annulus. The produced gas and the input heat are higher under BC 2 than BC 1. The energy efficiency is higher in the model with BC 2 than that with BC 1 as shown in Figure Although, our previous radial analytical model Li et al. The associated difference between the present results and those of the previous works could be due to some experimental conditions, such as direct hot water (with constant temperature) injection and circulation into the reservoir, which increases the heat loss and reduces the heat transfer to undissociated region (due to the blockage effect of water which will reduce the conduction heat transfer Selim and Sloan Figure Increasing the thermal conductivity of Zone II causes faster heat transfer to this zone from the moving interface, reducing the dissociation rate and gas production. Increasing the thermal diffusivity of Zone II reduces heat storage in this zone, increasing heat consumption for dissociation and raising gas production (Figure Conduction heat transfer and input heat from the wellbore decrease for higher porosities (Figure diffusivity in Zones I and II, caused by the rise in gas production and drop in input heat induced by increasing the thermal diffusivity. On the other hand, the energy efficiency has an inverse relation with the thermal conductivity of Zones I and II, perhaps due to: i) higher input heat induced by the higher thermal conductivities of Zone I (Figure This also reveals that reservoir permeability and gas viscosity have no impact on the dissociation. The results shown in Figures Selim and Sloan They also reported that almost no change occurred in the dissociation by changing the relative permeability of water and gas, due to the negligible impact that the convection heat transfer of water and gas has on the process. Zhao et al. and Sloan Increasing the wellbore radius reduces the velocity of the hot water flow inside the wellbore, which in turn reduces the mean temperature inside the wellbore. As a consequence, the input heat from the wellbore to the reservoir drops as well (Figure A higher reservoir thickness decreases the input heat (Figure The input heat decreases by increasing only the annulus radius (Figure The input heat and the energy efficiency increase by increasing the inlet temperature (Figures The input heat increases by increasing the flow rate (Figure The amount of produced gas and input heat are always higher for the case of injection into annulus than those of the other operating scheme, but, the resulted energy efficiency is always slightly higher for the case of injection into the inner tube except for the cases of studying different flow rates. In fact, by increasing the flow rate in the annulus or in the inner tube, the flow rate would be increased through the wellbore by the same ratio, and it does not depend on hot water inlet. The abovementioned results reveal the significant role played by the wellbore structure and its associated working conditions (i.e., hot water circulation in the wellbore and heat transfer process to the reservoir) in MH dissociation upon wellbore heating by hot water circulation. This is also an important aspect in field-test investigations, which deal with real equipment along with real conditions. For example, one vertical well was designed and employed to induce depressurization and thermal stimulation by hot air and steam injection for gas production from hydrate deposits in the Qilian Mountain permafrost The present study was designed to determine different aspects of MH dissociation upon thermal stimulation employing a coaxial wellbore structure as the heat source. For the first time, radial analytical models have been developed to couple operational conditions of the heat source and the associated MH dissociation in the reservoir. Heat and mass transfer in both wellbore and reservoir as well as the convection heat transfer in the wellbore are taken into account. Two operating schemes for wellbore heating are considered: i) hot water supply into the inner tube; and ii) hot water supply into the annulus section. The effects of various parameters of wellbore and reservoir as well as different boundary conditions on dissociation are also evaluated. Two main factors are considered to assess the production process performance: i) dissociation rate (β), and ii) energy efficiency of the process (η). Taken together, the most important findings to emerge from the results are as follows: -The dissociation process has direct relation to the temperature of the reservoir and the inlet water, but it has an inverse relation to the wellbore pressure. -The different operating schemes have approximately the same outcome with negligible differences due to the model conditions. -Increasing the inlet water temperature while decreasing wellbore's pressure increases the dissociation rate and the produced gas. It also increases the energy efficiency despite some of the previous works' reports. This could be due to the inconstant wellbore temperature in the present work. Hence, more information about the heat source operating conditions can help increasing the accuracy on this matter. -Different wellbore radii, water inlet temperatures and flow rates along with various properties, such as thermal diffusivities, porosities, thermal conductivities, and reservoir thicknesses have significant effects on the process. On the other hand, some of the reservoir and wellbore parameters, such as inner tube radius, reservoirs permeability, and gas viscosity, have almost no impact on the process. Thus, a thorough investigation on the reservoir properties and applicable heat source characteristics is necessary before performing a field work. -Temperature at the wellbore surface changes over time due to the different temperatures inside the wellbore induced by convection and conduction heat transfer of the hot water flow inside the wellbore. It is also affected by the heat conduction from wellbore to reservoir, which is dependent on the wellbore outer structure. -Temperature at the wellbore surface affects both the pressure and temperature at the dissociation front. -The results of this study are in good agreement with those of the previous experimental and numerical studies. It also validates the assumptions made during the model development. The findings of the present study contribute in several ways to our understanding of MH dissociation upon wellbore heating method and provide a basis for future investigations. The presented analytical approach takes into account: i) coupling the heat transfer process inside the coaxial wellbore and the associated thermal response in the reservoir which governs the dissociation and methane production; ii) heat transfer through the wellbore structure, consisting of multiple layers with different thermal properties; and iii) various wellbore and reservoir parameters. Some discrepancies exist between the results of the present work and those of our previous works These differences could be related to the different wellbore characteristics (e.g., a coaxial wellbore heat-source and a constant-temperature heat source) and model geometries (e.g., radial and flat models) and conditions employed in the present work, which make this study more reliable, comprehensive, and closer to real practical conditions. Equation S2 is a second-order nonhomogeneous differential equation, which can be solved to obtain fi T due to the following initial and boundary conditions: i) injection temperature is fixed and constant through the process ( ( , ) fi T h t ); and ii) no heat flow occurs at the base of the wellbore ( (0, ) (0, ) For the other model of how water injection into the annulus, fa T based on fi T is as follows: Then, by inserting equation S3 to equation 17, the new expression based on fi T is: Equation S4 is also a second-order nonhomogeneous differential equation, and can be solved by the same procedure and with the same initial and boundary conditions as those of equation S2. In the following, the transformation of the fundamental equations of dissociation process with the initial and boundary conditions in terms of  is provided. In the equations 37 and 38, A, A1, B, B1, and C constants are defined using equations S2 and 14 as follows:   In order to obtain the total volume of gas produced at STP conditions, the produced gas moles at each time step should be calculated. Equations S32 and S33 show respectively the volume of dissociated hydrate and the moles of produced gas per average surface area of the dissociation front at each time step (t-1, t) as shown in equation S31. / ( ) , where h is the methane hydrate thickness (m). By summing the moles of produced gas at each time step from the beginning of dissociation to time t as shown in equation S34, the total number of moles of produced gas up to that time can be calculated. Equations 18, 20, and 24 are simplified by employing equations 19 and 22 to eliminate the gas velocity and density, provided through the following equations T