Nanoporous structures including single nanopores and nanoporous membranes have been utilized as a platform to study fundamental liquid-vapor phase change heat transfer (PCHT) processes as well as a promising candidate for high flux heat dissipation. Previously, we implemented nanoporous membranes to support a thin liquid film for boiling, which was termed "thin film boiling", and realized high heat transfer performance. Besides thin film boiling, thin further increase of the heat flux beyond the transition points led to decreasing HTC and deviation from the kinetic limit, which can be attributed to the increasing vapor resistance in the vapor space and inside the nanopores. This increasing vapor resistance was also confirmed by experiments on IPA with different vapor pressures. Our work could shed light on PCHT on nanoporous structures with respect to the kinetic limit, and could advance the development of high heat-flux heat dissipation devices, especially using dielectric fluids. film evaporation through nanoporous structures have also been demonstrated to achieve high heat flux, but these two mechanisms are usually considered two mutually exclusive regimes operated under vastly different conditions, and the factors dictating how close the PCHT process is to the kinetic limit are elusive. In this work, we utilized a unique transition between thin film boiling and evaporation through nanoporous membranes to clarify the factors determining the heat flux and heat transfer coefficient (HTC) with respect to the kinetic limit conditions. We unambiguously showed the controllable transition from boiling to evaporation, when the liquid receded into the nanopores and provided additional driving force from capillary pumping sustained in the nanoscale pores. We showed that this transition is universal and can be understood from a simple fluid transport model for all the four types of fluids we studied, which cover a wide span of surface tension (water, ethanol, IPA, FC-72). More importantly, PCHT conditions at the transition points between boiling and evaporation were close to those of the kinetic limit of all these fluids. However, Nomenclature c p liquid specific heat capacity, [J kg -1 K -1 ] D h average hydraulic diameter of the pores, L length of the pore, equals to the membrane thickness, The utilization of the latent heat of vaporization in liquid-vapor phase change heat transfer (PCHT) allows the transport of a large amount of thermal energy efficiently. As such, liquid-vapor phase change heat transfer has been used extensively for a variety of applications, including power generation, water desalination, and thermal management There are mainly two types of boiling studied in the literature: pool boiling and flow boiling. In pool boiling, a stagnant bulk pool of liquid is heated up and bubbles are generated on the heater surfaces. The bubble behaviors dictate the heat transfer performance. The critical heat flux (CHF) in pool boiling represents the maximum heat flux that can be dissipated under safe operation conditions, which is usually on the order of 100 W cm -2 for a flat surface for water at the atmospheric pressure. Extensive efforts have been made to enhance the CHF and decrease the wall superheat using various strategies, including managing the bubble nucleation sites Flow boiling can significant increase the CHF and heat transfer coefficient (HTC) by forcing the liquid to flow along the heated surfaces, and have thus been intensively studied in the past and widely applied for cooling in various systems such as cooling of nuclear reactors, which demands superior stability and reliability for safety. The use of microchannels with various micro-and/or nanostructures However, the large volume expansion of phase change could lead to flow instability inside the microchannels and a pre-mature CHF if not properly designed As another main mode of phase change heat transfer, evaporation from a thin liquid film has been used in heat pipes and vapor chambers. However, due to the intrinsic low thermal conductivity of the liquid, the majority of heat transfer takes place only at the so-called "thin film evaporating region" of the liquid-vapor interface near the triple-phase contact line To achieve high heat flux PCHT, the theoretical limit of the phase change process is considered to be the kinetic limit, which, according to the Hertz-Knudsen (HK) or Schrage formula, essentially relates the maximum vapor mass flux leaving the liquid-vapor interface to the speed of sound. Recent work by Lu et al. This leads us to ask whether or not the near kinetic limit behavior can be universally observed, for example, across different fluids and more importantly, feasible under conditions with larger vapor pressure or Mach number that would result in higher absolute heat flux. Answering these questions would help us better understand and eventually mitigate the factors preventing the PCHT processes from reaching the theoretical limit. In this study, we systematically controlled the experimental conditions such that the PCHT can be tuned to be close to or far away from the kinetic limit. This level of control was achieved by leveraging the concept of "thin film boiling" on nanoporous membranes recently demonstrated by us, which showed high CHF and HTC for boiling due to the small liquid thickness (e.g., 1.8 kW cm -2 on 8.4 mm 2 area was demonstrated using water as the working fluid The experimental system, as shown Supplementary Information Figure There were two chambers in the system, each with a controlled pressure in a specific experiment. The pressure in the liquid chamber, P L , was fixed at a preset value before and during each experiment by adjusting the air pressure inside the chamber with either an air compressor (for above-atmospheric pressure) or a vacuum pump (for sub-atmospheric pressure). The pressure in the vapor chamber (P V ) was constantly monitored using a digital pressure gauge and maintained at the preset values using an adjustable valve and a vacuum pump with a PID control loop. The pressure difference between the liquid chamber and the vapor chamber pushed the liquid through the nanoporous membrane, with the excess amount of liquid overflowed to the side of the membrane and eventually reached the bottom of the vapor chamber. We used nanoporous anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) (Whatman 6809-6022) as the nanoporous membrane. The membrane was epoxy-bonded onto an acrylic sample holder with a 0.71×0.71 cm 2 (0.5 cm 2 area) hole for liquid flow. A thin Pt film (~70 nm) was deposited on the membrane using magnetron sputtering to serve as the heater and resistance temperature detector simultaneously. In the current work, we implemented a much thinner shadow mask compared to our previous work Figure However, it remains unclear what are the conditions leading to boiling or evaporation and if a transition between these two regimes is possible. We note that as the liquid on top of the membrane is dried out, it could recede into the nanopores and form liquid-vapor menisci, as shown in Figure We tested the heat transfer using four fluids at various liquid pressures and a fixed vapor pressure for each fluid. Figure water, ethanol, IPA, and FC-72. For the curves shown in Figure It can be seen from Figure shown previously It is worth mentioning that due to the more uniform thickness of the deposited Pt layer (as described in Section 2), we obtained higher heat flux and HTC in the pool boiling regime than those obtained in our previous work As the heat flux increases, the slope of the curves becomes negative, which is what we referred to as the "thin film boiling" regime. In this regime, the increase of heat flux caused the reduction of the liquid layer thickness on top of the membrane, which led to a smaller thermal resistance for bubble growth and smaller bubble departure diameter, and consequently the decrease of superheat. This regime gave rise to the interesting negative slopes in the boiling curves, as shown in all the four fluids in Figure Different trends can be observed between the curves for water and the curves for other fluids at the end of the thin film boiling regime. In the case for water, after the termination of the negative slope portion, the curves ended, and no higher heat flux was achieved in the experiments. On the other hand, in the curves for low surface tension fluids, another portion with a positive slope emerged. The extra positive slope in the curves for low surface tension fluids represented the porelevel thin film evaporation regime, and the point where the slope of the curve turned from negative to positive was considered the "transition point", namely, indicating the transition from thin film boiling to pore-level evaporation. When the vaporization flux is balanced by the maximum liquid flux that can be provided by the pressure difference (P L -P V ) across the membrane, liquid layer on top of the membrane would dry out, which occurred at the transition points. Any further increase of the heat flux would cause the liquid-vapor interface to recede inside the pores and generate capillary pressure for sustaining the higher liquid flux until the eventual CHF was reached. In this capillary-aided evaporation regime, as more vapor needs to be removed from the interface with increasing heat flux, the vapor removal resistance becomes increasingly dominant, resulting in the positive slope, as will be discussed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. The absence of this pore-level evaporation regime in the water experiments was probably caused by the poor wettability of water on the heater surface, such that any local dry-out spots cannot be quickly replenished by lateral spreading of water on the heater surface. When the thin film boiling regime ended (marked by the stars in Figure The maximum heat flux dissipated in the thin film boiling regime, which corresponds to the CHF in the experiments with water and the heat fluxes at the transition points in experiments with other fluids, highly depends on both the experimental condition (liquid pressure and vapor pressure) and the working fluid used, which will be discussed in the following sections. In order to predict the maximum heat flux that can be sustained by thin film boiling, a model based on fluid transport was developed. As shown in Figure if assuming circular pore geometry in the AAO. Here, D h is the average hydraulic diameter of the pores, L is the membrane thickness, η is the membrane porosity, T s and T L are the wall temperature and liquid reservoir temperature, respectively, μ, ρ l , h fg , and c p are the viscosity, density, latent heat, and specific heat capacity of the working fluid, respectively. In this equation, the viscosity of the liquid μ is highly temperature dependent. By using viscosity values at different temperatures within the experimental temperature range, the calculated heat flux can vary by several times. We choose the wall temperature T s , which was also the sample surface temperature measured from the Pt thin film heater, to extract the viscosity, as the fluid inside the AAO was estimated to be at the same temperature as T s based on our heat transfer analysis (see Supplementary Information Section S1). In order to better reflect the effect of the thermophysical properties of the liquid on thin film boiling performance, we defined a normalized liquid property factor Π as Π is normalized using water properties and represents the ability to achieve high heat flux in thin film boiling according to Eq. ( It can be seen from Figure The evaporative heat flux q ′′ can be normalized using the maximum heat flux equation ) where R is the gas constant, T s is the membrane surface temperature which also represents the liquid temperature, and ρ v,s is the density of saturated vapor at T s . The experimental results at the transition points between the boiling and evaporation regimes (i.e., onset of pore-level evaporation or the termination point of thin film boiling regime) shown by stars in Figure The kinetic limited evaporation heat flux is also calculated using the Hertz-Knudsen equation (HK equation, see Supplementary Information Section S4) and plotted in Figure This agreement shows that the liquid-vapor interfacial resistance is the dominant one, compared to other possible resistances in the system (such as fluid flow and vapor transport). In the thin film boiling regime, the thickness of the liquid induces thermal resistance for conduction. Right after the transition happened, the characteristic length scale of the liquid layer became the pore radius r p . That is, the conduction thermal resistance in the liquid phase (scales with r p /k l , where k l is the liquid thermal conductivity) became small and resulted in low superheat to sustain the heat flux at the transition point. For example, in the IPA experiment with 101.3 kPa liquid pressure (the purple circles in Figure , which is still orders of magnitude smaller than the overall thermal resistance of the system (~1.6×10 -5 m 2 K W -1 achieved at the transition point). Therefore, the liquid thermal conduction resistance is not important in the thin film evaporation regime. At the pore-level evaporation regime, three possible resistances could limit the highest heat flux that can be dissipated: the kinetic limited interfacial resistance of evaporation, the hydraulic resistance of liquid transport, and the vapor diffusion/advection resistance from interface to the far field in the vapor space. At the onset of evaporation regime, the liquid-vapor interface forms menisci and provides sufficient liquid transport, rendering the liquid transport resistance less important, and the interface is mostly likely either pinned on top of the pores or spread outside the pores, rendering the vapor removal resistance small. Therefore, at these transition conditions, the kinetic limited interfacial resistance becomes the dominant resistance, resulting in the heat transfer characteristics close to those predicted by the kinetic limit. Due to the near-kinetic-limit condition, PCHT at the transition show high heat flux achieved at small superheat. Figure For all of the curves for low surface tension liquids, although there were stable thin film evaporation regimes beyond the transition points shown in the previous section, the HTC (or slope of heat flux vs. superheat) decreased and became far lower than that of the transition points as shown in Figure We used IPA as an example, and conducted experiments with various vapor pressures while maintaining the pressure difference across the membrane in a narrow range, as shown in Figure In Figure The experimental heat flux deviates away from the kinetic limit as the driving potential increases (which corresponds to the superheat increase, as shown in Figure More experiments are carried out following the same conditions shown in Figure In this work, we experimentally studied thin film boiling and evaporation heat transfer of different types of fluids through nanoporous membranes. Transition from thin film boiling to evaporation was observed for the three low surface tension fluids (ethanol, IPA, and FC-72) but not for water, which was attributed to hotspot formation due to membrane nonuniformity. The transition heat flux for these fluids universally agreed with the model prediction. At the transition points, interfacial resistance dominates the heat transfer behavior which resulted in heat flux and HTC close to the kinetic limit. After transition into the pore-level evaporation regime, the vapor resistance became increasingly dominant and eventually limited the achievable CHF. Our work provides a systematic study of PCHT through nanoporous membranes and can benefit the understanding and application of PCHT through nanoporous membranes for thermal management and modulation. Experimental data for water from Ref. Since the sensible heat c p (T s -T L ) of the liquid under the experimental conditions is at least an order of magnitude smaller than the latent heat h fg , the Reynolds number of liquid flow inside the pore can be roughly estimated by where μ is the viscosity of the fluid, η is the membrane porosity, q ′′ is the applied heat flux, and D h is the hydraulic diameter of the nanopores, as similarly defined in Eq. ( Under the experimental conditions, the calculated Reynolds number is on the order of 10 -3 or smaller, which indicates that the convective heat transfer of liquid flow inside the pores can be negligible and the heat transfer across the membrane can be considered as pure conduction. The thermal resistance network is shown in Figure Thus, the upper bound of the temperature drop across the membrane T s -T bottom is 0.24% • q ′′ t mem /k mem . We further conservatively assume that k mem is as low as that for an air-filled membrane (close to the membrane itself) which has cross-plane thermal conductivity of ~1.5 W m -1 K -1 For the low surface tension fluid tested in this work, thin film evaporation regime is realized in the experiments, and thus, the CHF of these experiments are higher than the maximum heat flux in thin film boiling calculated using Eq. ( The schematic of the experimental setup used in this work is shown in Figure Therefore, the liquid pressure underneath the membrane is approximately the same as the liquid chamber pressure, P L . Figure Figure Figure In Figure 