Higgs spectroscopy is a new field in which Higgs modes in nonequilibrium superconductors are analyzed to gain information about the ground state. One experimental setup in which the Higgs mode in s-wave superconductors was observed is periodic driving with THz light, which shows resonances in the third-harmonic generation (THG) signal if twice the driving frequency matches the energy of the Higgs mode. We derive expressions of the driven gap oscillations for arbitrary gap symmetry and calculate the THG response. We demonstrate that the possible Higgs modes for superconductors with non-trivial gap symmetry can lead to additional resonances if twice the driving frequency matches the energy of these Higgs modes and we disentangle the influence of charge density fluctuations (CDF) to the THG signal within our clean-limit analysis. With this we show that THG experiments on unconventional superconductors allow for a detection of their Higgs modes. This paves the way for future studies on realistic systems including additional features to understand the collective excitation spectra of unconventional superconductors. In recent years with the emergence of THz spectroscopy, studies on matter were possible in regimes which were inaccessible before One interesting field within the THz studies are excitations of collective modes like the Higgs mode in superconductors The Higgs mode does not possess a dipole moment therefore it does not couple linearly to light. This makes its experimental excitation and detection difficult. Except in the special situation, where a charge-density wave order coexist with the superconducting order on a similar energy range providing a coupling between the two orders and making the Higgs mode Raman-active Especially the consideration of unconventional superconductors may open a new field of spectroscopy. For superconductors with non-trivial gap symmetry, there are multiple Higgs modes possible which can be decomposed into the irreducible representation of the underlying lattice symmetry Recent studies on light-induced superconductivity in different systems As pump-probe experiments are difficult to conduct due to the requirement of ultrashort single-cycle THz pulses within the energy range of the superconducting gap, it is worth to consider alternative experimental setups for measuring Higgs oscillations. Instead of quenching the superconducting condensate with a THz pump pulse and observing the intrinsic Higgs oscillations directly, a periodic driving scheme with multicycle pulses can be used (Fig. Free energy F of a superconductor as function of the complex order parameter ∆ shaped as a Mexican hat. Radial oscillations in the potential correspond to amplitude energy gap δ∆(t) with twice the driving frequency 2Ω. This nonlinear coupling also induces higher-order currents j, where a third-harmonic generation (THG) component j (3) (t) arises, resulting from the driven gap oscillations, i.e. j (3) (t) ∝ A(t)δ∆(t) This setup was already successfully demonstrated in an experiment for the s-wave superconductor NbN There are several experimental difficulties while performing THG experiments. With current technology, the frequency of the driving field in the THz range cannot be tuned arbitrarily. The experiment is performed in such a way that the driving frequency is fixed and the temperature is changed to obtain the resonance condition. Second and more seriously is the fact that the Higgs mode is not the only process leading to a resonance in the THG spectrum. Due to the driving, charge density fluctuations (CDF) are excited as well which resonate at the pair-breaking energy 2∆ coinciding with the Higgs mode. Depending on the system considered, these contributions may exceed the Higgs contribution by several orders In this paper, we generalize the analysis of We show, how an arbitrary gap symmetry affects the THG intensity and that composite gap-symmetries can lead to additional resonances. In addition we show how an asymmetric driving scheme may resonate with additional asymmetric Higgs modes leading to multiple resonances in the THG spectrum. Such a driving scheme was inspired by recent experimental findings The starting point of our study is the minimal model for Higgs oscillations, i.e. the mean-field BCS-like Hamil-tonian, where we allow a k-dependent energy gap Hereby, k = -k is the energy dispersion measured from the Fermi energy F , c † kσ and c kσ are the electron creation or annihilation operators and the momentum-dependent energy gap, where we assume a separable pairing interaction V kk = V f k f k with strength V and the symmetry function Hereby, we assume that f k is normalized to 1. With this, ∆ corresponds to the maximum of the absolute value of the gap. We implicitly restrict all summations over k in the range -k c < k < k c with the momentum cutoff k c and number of k-points N . For the sake of simplicity we will restrict all of our calculations to two dimensions having also the quasi-2d layered cuprates in mind. Coupling to an electric field is incorporated via minimal substitution k → k-eA(t) with the electron charge e and the vector potential where A 0 is the driving amplitude, Ω the driving frequency and θ the polarization angle. The choice of our vector potential is such that its wave vector is perpendicular to the superconducting plane without an in-plane component. This choice matches the experiments done so far for the conventional s-wave superconductor NbN For our further analysis we will make use of Anderson pseudospin formalism with τ the vector of Pauli matrices. The BCS Hamiltonian can then be rewritten in terms of the pseudospin and takes the form of a Hamiltonian for a magnetic spin in an external magnetic field with the definition of the pseudomagnetic field and ∆ = ∆ + i∆ . The gap equation takes the form In the equilibrium situation with A 0 = 0 at temperature T , all the pseudospins are aligned parallel to the pseudomagnetic field. Therefore, the equilibrium expectation values of the pseudospins read with the quasiparticle energy Hereby, we assumed a real equilibrium gap, i.e. ∆ = 0 and ∆ = ∆ . We use the following ansatz to describe the deviations x k (t), y k (t), z k (t) and δ∆(t) from the equilibrium pseudospin expectation values and the gap The time evolution of the expectation values is governed by Heisenbergs' equation of motion which take the form of Bloch equations Note that we have set = 1 here and in the following. For the further calculation, we expand the z-component of the pseudomagnetic field up to second order in A 0 with the definition where we used the short notation . Due to the assumption k = -k , the term linear in A 0 vanishes and only the quadratic coupling remains. Written out explicitly, we find with The term D k (θ) contains the polarization dependence and the second derivatives of the dispersion. We can see that a non-parabolicity is crucial for the coupling as a parabolic dispersion would lead to a k-independent coupling term describing only a time-dependent variation of the Fermi energy. This changes in the dirty-limit, where also the paramagnetic coupling term remains leading to a much stronger coupling To gain a first insight into the driven dynamics and see the differences to the known s-wave case, we start by deriving analytic expressions for the gap oscillations. To this end, we assume a small driving amplitude eA 0 1, such that we can neglect terms in second order of the deviation from equilibrium. For simpler notation, we will show only the results for the zero temperature case T = 0. A generalization for finite temperature is straight forward by including the factor tanh(E k /(2k B T )) in the respective expressions and numerical results for this case are shown in the later sections. The linearized equations of motion read We perform a Laplace transform from time t to complex frequencies s according to to obtain algebraic equations Solving for the deviation terms, we find To proceed with a further analytic analysis we use several assumptions and approximations, e.g. isotropy in xand y-direction (for details see appendix A). With these assumptions, we can simplify the interaction term A k (t) under a summation with an arbitrary factor a k which becomes polarization independent Hereby, α i are expansion coefficients. To evaluate the momentum sum in the gap equation Eq. ( with λ = V D( F ), where the density of states D( F ) is assumed to be constant near the Fermi energy. In the following we will replace the integral borders of the integral with ±∞ which is valid for c ∆. For further notation simplification, we will drop the energy and angular dependencies of the functions in the integrands. Next, we insert the expressions for x k (t) and y k (t) into the real and imaginary part of the gap equation We start by solving the equation for the real part of the gap. The terms ∝ δ∆ (s) and ∝ α 0 in Eq. ( due to the asymmetry of the integrand. The resulting expression reads To obtain this result we identified the equilibrium gap equation by adding a zero 4∆ 2 f 2 +s 2 -4∆ 2 f 2 -s 2 in the nominator of the respective expression in the integrand. The function F (s, φ) is defined by Next, we use and define The solution in the time domain is obtained by performing the inverse Laplace transform. The calculation can be found in the appendix B. The solution δ∆ (t) consists of three contributions In the case of s-wave, a sharp resonance at 2Ω = 2∆ occurs, whereas for d-wave a broad peak slightly below 2∆ is apparent. In addition, the phase of s-wave shows a sharp jump from 0 for 2Ω < 2∆ to π/2 at 2Ω = 2∆ and a drifting for 2Ω > 2∆. For d-wave, there is a broad phase change from 0 for Ω = 0 up to a value slightly below π/2 for 2Ω = 2∆. At this point there is a sharp kink and a drifting for 2Ω > 2∆ similar to the s-wave case. where δ∆ The term δ∆ D (t) is a forced oscillation of the gap with twice the driving frequency Ω due to the nonlinear A(t) 2 driving. The term δ∆ H (t) is the intrinsic Higgs oscillation with a frequency of ∼ 2∆ induced by an effective interaction quench resulting from the periodic driving where A(Ω) represents the oscillation amplitude and ζ(Ω) the phase relative to the driving. Let us first recapitulate the known result for the s-wave case The amplitude A(Ω) and phase ζ(Ω) of the resonance term is plotted in Fig. For nontrivial gap symmetry, the gap oscillation spectrum does not have to be peaked at exactly 2∆. It depends on several factors including the density of states or the exact shape of the gap symmetry function. In particular, here, the position of the peak is determined by the interplay between the terms f 2 and ∆ 2 f 2 -Ω 2 under the integral over φ in After studying the real part, we will finally also calculate the imaginary part of the gap with Eq. Solving for δ∆ (s) yields and the solution in time-domain is given by We can see that the imaginary part is independent of the gap symmetry. It follows the oscillation of the driving frequency with a frequency independent amplitude. In addition it contains a drift linear in time. Like in the s-wave case, for small driving amplitudes, the imaginary part only contributes to the phase φ ∆ of the gap ∆ The absolute value of the gap is independent of the imaginary part and is solely determined by the real part IV. THIRD HARMONIC GENERATION The resonance of the forced gap oscillation with the Higgs mode can be found experimentally in the transmitted light field. The nonlinear coupling of the vector potential to the condensate leads to higher-harmonic generation where the lowest non-vanishing order is third-harmonic generation. Its intensity I THG , which is proportional to the amplitude squared of the induced current j (3) (3Ω) shows the same resonance as the gap oscillation and will be calculated in the following. However, not only the driven gap oscillations contribute to THG but also charge density fluctuations, i.e. single particle excitations resonating at the pair-breaking energy 2∆. In the clean-limit, depending on material parameters, these can be significantly larger in an experiment and overlay the contribution from the gap oscillation. Therefore, this contribution is considered and calculated in this section as well and compared to the contribution from the Higgs oscillation. Driving the superconductor periodically will induce an electric current with the group velocity v k = ∇ k and the charge density To calculate the lowest order response, we expand the velocity in The charge density can be expressed with the z-component of the pseudospin and we obtain for the current where The first term j (0) (t) vanishes due to parity, the second term j (1) (t) represents the induced current oscillating with the driving frequency Ω. The third term j (3) (t) is the lowest order of higher-order generation, which oscillates with 3Ω due to the proportionality ∝ A j (t)z k (t) as we have seen in the previous section that z k (t) oscillates with 2Ω. The induced current for an arbitrary angle relative to the polarization of the vector potential can be decomposed into a parallel and perpendicular component which we will calculate separately. We insert the expression for the vector potential and expand the summation of the components j with ê A = êA , ê⊥ A = (sin θ,cos θ) , D k = D k from Eq. ( To obtain an expression for the spectrum, we perform a Fourier transform and make use of the solution z k (s = iω) from the linearized Bloch equations where Using the same assumptions from the previous section and rewriting occurring sums as integrals one obtains For these expressions we defined the integrals Each of the three terms for the current contribute to the THG intensity Within the chosen assumptions we get an important result, namely that the Higgs and phase contributions are polarization independent and their contributions perpendicular to the polarization vector vanish. In case of the CDF, both parallel and perpendicular contributions exist and are polarization dependent with a characteristic dependency independent of the gap symmetry and dispersion. Both expressions G(2iΩ) occurring in the phase and CDF terms as well as 1/H(2iΩ) in the Higgs term diverge for 2Ω = 2∆ in the s-wave case or show a maximum in the d-wave case. Therefore, the resonance of the amplitude oscillation with the Higgs mode is not the only cause of the peak found in the THG. In particular, the individual strengths are determined by the parameters λ and α 0 . For α 0 = 0, e.g. the half-filling case in the tight-binding model, the resonance due to the G term vanishes, which removes the phase contribution completely and strongly suppresses the CDF term. For a polarization value of θ = π/4, the CDF contribution perpendicular vanishes and the diverging part due to G in the parallel contribution exactly cancels with the phase contribution. The polarization dependence will be discussed in Sec. VI in more detail. For large λ, i.e. large interaction strength, the CDF contribution is enhanced over the Higgs contribution. It can be understood in this way that the resonance term for the Higgs contribution scales with 1 λ due to the 1 H term, whereas the resonance term for the CDF contribution scales with λ due to the G term. Therefore one can roughly estimate that j (3)H (3Ω) ∝ 1/λ 2 j (3)CDF (3Ω). In Fig Despite the fact that the CDF contribution may exceed the Higgs contribution in our simple analysis, it is still useful for the understanding of the physical mechanisms. The actual weighting of the terms in an experiment depends strongly on the material by further effects not considered in our analysis, like retardation effects in materials with phonon-mediated interaction After gaining a first understanding of the terms con-tributing to the THG intensity under the chosen assumptions for k and f k , we will drop these in the following sections and solve the summations numerically without approximation and include the temperature dependence. This allows for arbitrary dispersion and gap symmetries to be considered which can introduce new features like additional resonances and polarization dependencies. In all current experiments so far, the driving frequency cannot be tuned continuously like done in the theoretical analysis from the previous section. In order to find the resonance, the driving frequency is fixed and the temperature is varied until 2Ω = 2∆(T ) is fulfilled In Fig. Even though the calculation for a pure s-wave order parameter compared to a pure d-wave order parameter shows a clear difference in the peak to background ratio for the Higgs contribution, a comparison of intensities in an experiments is difficult. On the one hand, there is nothing to compare to for a given material. On the other hand, peak intensities can vary due to additional damping effects, which makes a clear distinguishing very unreliable. The phase analysis confirms the analytic result in Fig. As an example for what new features a more exotic gap symmetry may introduce, we will study a case with d+ssymmetry, i.e. d-wave with an admixture of s-wave as it was observed for overdoped YBCO with ∆ d = 0.9∆ and ∆ s = 0.1∆. The temperature dependence of the THG intensity is shown in Fig. , two resonances occur when the driving frequency matches these two maxima. This can be seen both in the THG intensity as two peaks as well as in the phase, where a broad phase transition occurs over the range of the two resonance temperatures with sharp kinks at the resonance points. It is interesting to note that the two-peak structure is an effect originating alone from the Higgs contribution despite its smaller value. While the CDF contribution only shows a single peak, it is the Higgs contribution which shows the two-peak structure. We can understand this as two Higgs modes at energies ∆ max 1 and ∆ max 2 for each local gap maxima which resonate with the driving frequency. This shows that even if the CDF contribution dominates, the Higgs contribution may still contribute to specific features visible in the spectrum. If the polarization is tuned to θ = π/4, the CDF contribution contains a two peak structure as well as the G term in Eq. ( As stated above, one possibility in an experiment to gain more insight about the relative weight of Higgs and CDF contributions is the polarization dependence. As one can see in Eq. ( However, the derived formulas for the current are only valid under the chosen special assumptions f 2 k and k are symmetric under the exchange of k x ↔ k y , as it is the case for s-or d-wave symmetry and a tight-binding dispersion. For the d+s case this is no longer valid. In Fig. with δ 0 = -0.03 and t = 200 meV, t = -80 meV and F = -240 meV In an experiment, the coupling of light to the superconducting condensate may contain more subtleties and consists not only of a symmetric diamagnetic A 2 term. For examples, small in-plane components of the wavevector induced by non perfect perpendicular alignment of laser and crystal or on purpose tilted lasers as well as higher order couplings to other finite-momentum modes may induce an asymmetry while driving. Such a momentum dependent driving can lead to asymmetric oscillations of the condensate with respect to the origin. One finds We propose a phenomenological asymmetric driving scheme to describe such effects in an experiment. Due to a momentum dependent driving, the gap symmetry gets altered by an additional symmetry component f A k . We add such a term to the pseudomagnetic field altering the gap symmetry with the same time-dependence as the usual driving term where δ A determines the strength of the asymmetric driving. There is some similarity to Here, we dynamically drive an asymmetric oscillation of the gap to study the effect on the Higgs spectrum. Our approach is purely phenomenological and neglects additional polarization dependencies which are likely to occur due to the asymmetric driving. As the polarization dependence is hard to predict without an detail understanding of the actual microscopic coupling, we neglect it for our approach. Using the modified pseudomagnetic field and performing a linearization in the same way as in Sec. III one would neglect important contributions from the products between the asymmetric driving term and the deviations, e.g. δ sin 2 (Ωt)f A k x k (t), etc. Therefore, we solve the Bloch equations for this section numerically without any approximation by integrating the differential equations in time. As we haven't added an additional polarization dependence, we can suppress the CDF contribution by choosing θ = π/4 to obtain the contribution from the Higgs channel. In Fig. In a recent THG experiments on cuprates a collective mode below 2∆ was observed In this work we analyze the induced gap oscillations in unconventional superconductors due to periodic driving with THz light within BCS theory in the Anderson pseudospin formalism. We show exemplary for d-wave how a non s-wave symmetry broadens both the resonance peak and the phase change in the oscillation amplitude and derive analytic expressions for the oscillations. The gap oscillations lead to third-harmonic generation whose intensity shows a resonance peak if twice the driving frequency coincidences with the energy of the Higgs mode. Although, the calculated spectra for pure s-and d-wave differ significantly, experimental conditions can wash out the spectrum for s-wave as well, which makes a differentiation of the two gap symmetries only from an observation of the spectrum difficult. We compare contributions from CDF and Higgs and illustrated that the Higgs contribution to THG follows closely the amplitude of the gap oscillation, whereas the CDF contribution shows still a sharp peak even in the non s-wave case. The temperature dependence of the THG signal as measured in the experiment shows the same characteristics as the THG signal as a function of the driving frequency. In addition one finds that more complex gap symmetries, shown exemplary for d+s-wave, which contain multiple local gap maxima show resonances for each maxima. Hereby it is the contribution of the Higgs oscillation which shows this feature as the composite gap contains two Higgs modes with frequencies at these local gap maxima. Thus, THG experiments can be used to detect the occurrence of multiple Higgs modes in unconventional superconductors. For d-wave, or in general for gap symmetries where the squared symmetry function is isotropic in x-and y-direction, the polarization dependence of the THG signal is the same as for s-wave. For a simple squarelattice tight-binding dispersion, the Higgs contribution is polarization-independent, whereas the CDF contribution has a characteristic dependency. However, devia-tions both from the isotropy of the gap symmetry as well as the simple tight-binding dispersion lead also to deviations in the polarization dependence and the Higgs contribution can become polarization dependent. Yet, if the band-dispersion is known, a measurement of the polarization dependency allows to distinguish the individual contributions from CDF and Higgs. This result is probably true even beyond a clean-limit analysis. Typical impurity-scattering introduces no additional direction dependence as the scattered momenta are randomly distributed. Therefore, the polarization dependence should be unaffected In our analysis for the clean-limit, where the coupling to the vector potential is exclusively through the nonparabolicity of the band dispersion, the CDF contribution exceeds in general the Higgs contribution. Nevertheless, this work gives an interesting insight into the driven dynamics of unconventional superconductors. On the one hand, the Higgs contribution can still show its unique features as seen in the d+s-wave case with the two-peak structure, which is a result from the Higgs contribution alone. On the other hand as it was shown elsewhere Finally, we propose an asymmetric driving scheme to model experiments where the coupling of the driving field acts non-symmetrically with respect to the groundstate symmetry on the condensate. Such asymmetry induces asymmetric oscillations of the condensate which can show up as an additional oscillation frequency of the gap, dependent on the symmetry of the gap and the deviation. With our proof of principle calculation we show that THG experiments should be in principle able to measure asymmetric Higgs modes and provide therefore the same information as pump-probe experiments. However, as the proposed phenomenological asymmetric driving scheme may be difficult to realize experimentally, the information obtained by THG experiments are limited in this respect. In addition to the measurement of the collective modes itself, spectroscopy of Higgs modes may be used in future as an alternative or complementary probe to investigate the gap symmetry. A controlled excitation and observation of Higgs modes allows to gain information about symmetry properties of the underlying gap In addition to pump-probe experiments, where the gap is quenched by a short pulse and the following intrinsic Higgs oscillations can be observed, THG experiments can serve as an alternative tool for identifying Higgs modes of a superconductor. These driven experiments have some advantages over the pump-probe experiments. No ultra-short single-cycle pulses are required and the strongdamping of Higgs modes in gaps with nodes are partly overcome due to the forced periodic driving and oscillation of the gap. Thus, in the context of Higgs spectroscopy, i.e. the detection and characterization of Higgs modes in superconductors, THG experiments extend the range of possible experimental setups. ture dependence. Using the definitions , (C5) To understand these expression, we make use of the same approximations as in the previous sections. It follows x 2 (s) = 0 , (C15) x ⊥ 4 (s) = 0 , (C16) x ⊥ 5 (s) = 0 , (C17) x ⊥ 6 (s) = 1 4 sin 4θ sin 4θ 2α 2 0 x 0 (s) + 2α 2 1 x 3 (s) , (C20) sin 2 2θ 2α 2 0 x 0 (s) + 2α 2 1 x 3 (s) . (C21) where we identified sin 4 θ + cos 4 θ = 1 -1 2 sin 2 2θ, 2 sin 2 θ cos 2 θ = 1 2 sin 2 2θ and sin θ cos θ(cos 2 θsin 2 θ) = 1 4 sin 4θ and neglected sums with terms ∝ (∂ 2 xx k )(∂ 2 yy k ). We use the general fact that x 3 (s) = 1 2 -∆ 2 x 1 (s) - 