The knowledge of the charge carrier distribution among the different orbitals of Cu and O is a precondition for the understanding of the physical properties of various Cu-O frameworks. We employ electron energy-loss spectroscopy to elucidate the charge carrier plasmon dispersion in (La, Ca)xSr14-xCu24O41 in dependency of x as well as temperature. We observe that the energy of the plasmon increases upon increasing Ca content, which signals an internal charge redistribution between the two Cu-O subsystems. Moreover, contrary to an uncorrelated model we come to the conclusion that the holes transferred to the Cu2O3 ladders are mainly located in the bonding and not in the anti-bonding band. This is caused by an orbital dependent Mott transition. Thirty-three years after the discovery of hightemperature superconductivity in cuprates, A way to test the general validity of the t -J model is to look at compounds which contain Cu-O structures that are similar to the two-dimensional CuO 2 layers in high-T c superconductors. In a recent study of T-CuO Another possibility to study the validity of the Zhang-Rice singlet picture is to investigate the electronic structure of cuprates with a reduced dimension, e. g., the quasi-one-dimensional compound (La, Y, Sr, Ca) 14 Cu 24 O 41 Moreover, there is a strong spread in the distribution of the holes on the two O atoms, two on the legs and one on the rung in the Cu 2 O 3 units of the ladders. If one assumes an equal distribution of the holes in the square of O atoms surrounding the Cu sites, as in the t -J model, one would expect the same number of holes in the rungs and in the legs. Most of the previous studies came to the conclusion that the holes are predominantly on the rungs The two-leg ladders are a representative example between one-dimensional electronic systems forming a Luttinger liquid and the two-dimensional Cu-O layers in high-T c superconductors. DFT calculations came to the conclusion that the low energy physics of the ladders can be described by two bands close to the Fermi level: a bonding and an anti-bonding band along the c direction The influence of electronic correlations in this class of materials is profound. The interplay of spin and charge degrees of freedom in both subsystems exhibits a rich variety of exotic spin and charge arrangements. As a consequence, it makes both the chains as well as the ladders extremely sensitive to variations of external parameters, such as temperature, doping, and pressure. Therefore, the evolution of the electronic and magnetic structure upon Ca substitution is one of the key issues for the development of a microscopic understanding in such a complex system. Electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) is a useful tool for the investigation of materials at all levels of complexity in the electronic spectrum Single crystals of R x Sr 14-x Cu 24 O 41 (with R = La and Ca) were grown by using the traveling solvent floating zone method We start the presentation of our results with the evolution of the loss function as a function of doping, for a momentum transfer of 0.15 Å-1 parallel to the c -axis, as shown in Fig. dimensional edge-sharing Cu-O chains is small. Starting from the undoped compounds the energy of these excitations slightly increases with increasing doping concentration. These excitations are also detected for a momentum transfer parallel to the a-axis (see supplementary information and Ref. In the energy range 2 -3 eV there are dispersive excitations which according to our previous studies of the one dimensional corner sharing CuO 3 and CuO 2 chain compounds Sr 2 CuO 3 and SrCuO 2 Finally, a plasmon excitation is observed for x ≥ 0 while for the undoped compound the plasmon is absent. Fig. In Fig. Finally, we consider the temperature dependence of the plasmon energy in the compound Ca 11.5 Sr 2.5 Cu 24 O 41 . In Fig. Experiments using optical spectroscopy and EELS, which are related to two-particle excitations, are normally much less sensitive to correlation effects than ARPES in which a single hole is excited. The reason for this is that dipoles are much less screened compared to a single hole. Nevertheless, in optical spectroscopy and EELS of cuprates clear differences in the spectra are observed between undoped and optimally doped compounds. In the former a Mott-Hubbard gap is observed while in the latter, due to a reduction of correlation effects, the gap is closed and a plasmon is detected Here ∆E = E k+q -E k and ∆F = F k+q -F k where F is the Fermi function. Using the complex dielectric function we then calculate the loss function [-1/ (ω, q)]. Calculating the maximum of the loss function for a particular momentum q as a function of energy yields the plasmon dispersion as a function of the momentum q. The effective mass for the band renormalization was adjusted to the experiment in such a way that the plasmon energy at the highest q values corresponds to the experimental data. The reason for this is that the plasmon energy at high q is essentially determined by the total bandwidth. Mass enhancements between 1.1 and 1.3 have been used for the calculations. On the other hand, the background dielectric function was adjusted in order to fit the plasmon energy at low momentum transfer, and it was kept constant thereafter. In Fig. Much better agreement between experiment and calculations can be achieved when we assume that only the bonding band contributes to the measured spectral weight of the loss function. The results for this model are shown in Fig. In Fig. Next, we discuss the plasmon excitation which is the central point of the present study. Previous studies of Ca x Sr 14-x Cu 24 O 41 clearly indicated that upon Ca doping there is a transfer of holes from the chain to the ladders Our data clearly signal that there is a visible temperature dependence of the hole number in the ladders in Ca 11.5 Sr 2.5 Cu 24 O 41 (see Figs. As described in Section IV the calculation of the loss function for a sum of uncorrelated bonding and antibonding band predicts that in this case the loss function is dominated by the plasmon of the anti-bonding band, because that of the bonding band is strongly damped. The energy of an intra-band plasmon at low momentum transfer is directly related to the Fermi velocity On the other hand, the calculation using the bonding band only leads to results that are close to the presented EELS data (see Figs. The bonding band, having most of the charge density between the legs of the ladder, has probably mainly 2p character from the O ions on the rungs. On the other hand, the anti-bonding band has probably mainly O 2p character on the legs of the ladders on O 2p orbitals which could be parallel a or c. Our observation of holes on the O sites in the rungs supports the conception that hole doping of the symmetric bonding band leads to an antisymmetric spin-singlet of the rungs. This means that the low energy charge density wave and superconductivity is based on singlets on the rungs. Our interpretation of the difference between bonding and anti-bonding band is supported by the observation that even for high Ca concentrations, the charge transfer excitation is detected for q||a (see Fig. Our interpretation of the plasmon dispersion in these compounds in terms of doping of the rungs is supported by various other experimental results. The XAS results on Ca x Sr 14-x Cu 24 O 41 indicate that upon replacement of Sr by Ca, the holes move into O 2p orbitals on the rungs while the hole number on O 2p orbitals parallel to the legs remain constant In the following, we compare our EELS results with ARPES data of Ca x Sr 14-x Cu 24 O 41 published in the literature. For the compound without Ca (x = 0) Koitzsch et al. The cuprate ladder compounds are in some way the intermediate systems between the doped 1D systems forming a Luttinger liquid with spinon and holons and the two-dimensional cuprates, which in the overdoped case form a Fermi liquid. The t -J model We have investigated the charge carrier plasmon in the spin-ladder compound Ca x Sr 14-x Cu 24 O 41 as a function of Ca substitution and temperature using electron energy-loss spectroscopy. The energy of the plasmon increases upon increasing Ca content, which signals an increasing number of holes in the Cu 2 O 3 ladders due to an internal charge redistribution between chains and ladders. A comparison of the experimental plasmon excitations with RPA-like calculations for the bonding and anti-bonding band indicates that the holes, which are transferred from the chain and the ladder upon replacement of Sr by Ca, are mainly located in the rungs. The reason for this is the different filling of the bonding and antibonding band leading to a Mott Hubbard splitting for the half-filled anti-bonding band and rather mobile charge carriers in the bonding band having predominantly O 2p character with orbitals along the rungs. Thus the charge carriers cannot be described by Zhang-Rice singlets very often employed for the 2D cuprates. Rather in the ladder system which is between the 1D and the 2D cuprates, the charge carriers are singlets on the rungs fundamentally different from those of the 1D and 2D cuprates. Our results may question the general application of the t -J model to cuprate high-T c superconductors. q || c FIG. 2.