We configure and analyze a nanostructured device that hybridizes grating modes and surface plasmon resonances. The model uses an effective index of refraction that considers the volume fraction of the involved materials, and the propagation depth of the plasmon through the structure. Our geometry is an extruded low-order diffraction grating made of dielectric nano-triangles. Surface plasmon resonances are excited at a metal/dielectric interface, which is separated from the analyte by a high-index dielectric layer. The optical performance of the refractometric sensor is highly competitive in sensitivity and figure of merit (FOM) because of the the ultra-narrow spectral response (below 0.1 nm). Moreover, it is operative within a wide range of the index of refraction (from 1.3 till 1.56), and also works under normal incidence conditions. The generation of surface plasmon resonances using waveguides and diffraction gratings has been extensively studied, and successfully applied to advanced photonic devices in the last decade Currently, device's improvement relies on the extension of its response to a wider dynamic range for multi-sensing applications, and on a better performance for dedicated sensors in specific applications A surface plasmon wave is excited at the interface between metal/dielectric media when the incoming light satisfies the wave matching condition at that interface In optical sensing, several parameters inform us how to adapt each configuration for a given application. These parameters include: sensitivity, figure of merit (FOM), limit of detection, dynamic range, resolution, and linearity. Furthermore, the competitiveness of a sensor also depends on its fabrication feasibility, and the simplicity of operation This contribution focus on the combination of a low-order diffraction grating and a metal/dielectric interface where the SPR is generated. Therefore, the period of the grating, P , is similar to the wavelength λ. In the proposed configuration, SPRs are excited in reflection at the interface between a thick metal layer and a dielectric buffer. On top of this dielectric layer, a periodic grating made of dielectric nano-triangles route the light towards the metal/dielectric interface. This triangular relief also triggers funneling and guiding mechanisms that improve the performance of the devices This contribution is organized as follows. In section II we describe the physical mechanisms at play in this device, propose a feasible structure showing the reflectance dip of interest, and optimize it by selecting the geometric parameters, and the materials for improved performance. We analyze the device and characterize it as a refractometric sensor in section III. Finally, the main conclusions of the paper are presented in section IV. Fig. In this paper, we analyze the performance of nanophotonic structures that combine low-order diffraction grating modes and SPRs. Figure where k 0x is the x-component of the wavevector of the incoming wavefront; k grating = 2πM/P is the grating wavevector, being P the grating period, and M the diffraction order; and k spp is the surface plasmon wavevector generated at the interface. If we include the angle of incidence in the wavevector matching conditions, it becomes where k 0 is the wavevector in vacuum, θ is the angle of incidence of the incoming wave (in our case θ = 0 • and it is not depicted in Fig. The structure depicted in Fig. When the metal layer is thick enough to prevent the excitation of the SPR at the bottom interface, we find the configuration shown in Fig. The electromagnetic behavior of the device is numerically analyzed and tested using COMSOL Multiphysics. In this section we focus on the design shown in Fig. The SiO 2 substrate could be replaced by other materials, even plastic, because it does not influence the optical behavior. For the grating and buffer layer, the selection of the dielectric materials is key to obtain a high-contrast of the index of refraction. Our grating is made of Si 3 N 4 with an index of refraction n g 2 at the operating wavelength (λ ∈ [1.35 -1.55]μm). This value is large compared with the index of refraction of the analyte. In this design, we take water as the analyte. We vary the index of refraction between 1.30 and 1.56 to consider for any additions, variations, or even if water is replaced by other bio-chemical media At this point in the simulation, we use Eq. ( As customary, we compare the performance of optical sensors by the sensitivity and the figure of merit The field enhancement parameter, FE, is defined here as the maximum value of FE(x, y, z) within the analyte volume. Reflectivity characterizes the behavior of the structure globally at the wavelength of resonance, R = R(λ res ). This merit function highlights hot spots in the field map, and distinguishes the optimum coupling of the incoming radiation to the SPR (in this case, as far as transmittance is negligible, a minimum reflectance means a maximum absorption). The goal of the optimization is to set the geometrical and material parameters that maximize this merit function (Eq. 4). We first analyze the effect of the geometry of the dielectric grating and the metal selection, and then we will move to optimize the thickness and material choice of the buffer layer. Figure Figure So far, we have optimized the proposed device by changing the geometric parameters of the grating and the material of the metal layer. Now, we consider the buffer layer and how its thickness (see t BL in Fig. All the previous changes and parameterizations are used to evaluate sensitivity and FOM when these devices work as refractometric sensors and the figure of merit, FOM, is defined as where δλ is the wavelength shift of the resonance when the index of refraction of the analyte changes by an amount δn, and FWHM is the full width at half maximum of the resonance. Therefore, to complete the evaluation of the device we calculate the sensitivity and FOM for different analyte refractive index values, where the device operates efficiently, which determines the device dynamic range. The geometric and material parameters of this optimum design are presented in table II. Figure The proposed configuration has been optimized for both the geometry and material selection. The materials that perform best are Ag for the metal, and Si 3 N 4 for the high-index material of the buffer layer and the nano-triangles. This buffer layer plays two important roles: (i) it coats the silver surfaces enhancing device's biocompatibility, and (ii) it provides a high contrast of the index of refraction that favors the existence of field enhancement regions localized at the analyte volume. Once optimized, the device has been characterized as a refractometric sensor. Its dynamic range goes from 1.30 to 1.55 in the index of refraction of the analyte. This allows the device to operate at several wavelengths and makes multifunctional operation possible. The values of sensitivity (S B = 940 nm/RIU) are competitive with other proposed structures, plus the FOM sharply increases when moving to higher index of refraction because the spectral reflectivity minimum becomes narrower as n a increases. To summarize, we have demonstrated an efficient refractometric sensor that exploits the hybridization of grating modes and SPR. Its performance is highly competitive and it is also biocompatible. We have considered current limitations in fabrication methods for the dimensions of the device. Moreover, its capability to be excited under normal incidence conditions allows its integration with optical fibers. We foresee a biomedical application: determination of tear samples (involving nano or picoliters volumes) to improve the diagnose of dry-eye syndromes.