The ability to create micro/nano patterns of organic self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on semiconductor surfaces is crucial for fundamental studies and applications in a number of emerging fields in nanoscience. Here, we demonstrate the patterning of thiol molecular SAMs on oxide-free GaAs surface by dip-pen nanolithography (DPN) and micro-contact printing (μCP), facilitated by a process of surface etching and passivation of the GaAs. A quantitative analysis on the molecular diffusion on GaAs was conducted by examining the writing of nanoscale dot and line patterns by DPN, which agrees well with surface diffusion models. The functionality of the patterned thiol molecules was demonstrated by directed self-assembly of gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) onto a template of 4-Aminothiophenol (ATP) SAM on GaAs. The highly selective assembly of the Au NPs was evidenced with atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The ability to precisely control the assembly of Au NPs on oxidefree semiconductor surfaces using molecular templates may lead to an efficient bottom-up method for the fabrication of nano-plasmonic structures. Hybrid structures of functional molecules and solid-state (SS) materials have attracted extensive interest in surface nanoscience and molecular electronics. Both DPN and μCP have been applied extensively for patterning thiol SAMs on gold surfaces. One of the applications of the SAMs is the directed assembly of nanostructures on a SS substrate, which has been realized on Au substrates by DPN As a first step, we carried out a detailed investigation of SAM pattern formation by DPN and the diffusion of MHA molecules on the GaAs surface. The DPN was performed on sulfur-passivated GaAs. An AFM tip coated with MHA ink was brought into contact with the GaAs surface, and the tip was controlled by a software for the AFM to dictate the ink deposition on the substrate. Dots of varying sizes were obtained with a stationary tip by controlling the contact time and lines of varying widths by changing the speed of a moving tip. Immediately after a set of patterns were created, lateral force microscopy (LFM) images were taken, which discern regions of different SAMs and the GaAs based on the different frictional forces with the AFM tip. Figure In dot writing, the AFM tip was stationary on the surface and molecules diffuse from the center outwards. With increasing deposition time, the dot size increases accordingly, as seen in Figure where l is the grid length, D is the diffusion constant and ∆t is the time interval. The factor '4' arises from the twodimensional random walk simulations, considering the four nearest neighbor sites, (x+l, y), (x-l, y), (x, y+l) and (x, y-l) available for a random jump from (x, y). where ρ is the areal density of the ink molecules in the ordered SAM structure, J is the ink diffusion rate, and R is the radius of the meniscus footprint at the tip. Line writing by DPN is shown to exhibit increasing diffusion rate with increasing tip velocity in the model, which can be described by the relationship ) where Ds is the ink diffusivity and C0 is the initial molecular concentration of the ink on the surface. Figures Both undoped and doped GaAs wafers were used. The undoped wafers were purchased from China Crystal Technologies Co., Ltd and the Zn-doped wafers with carrier density varying from 5 × 10 18 to 5 × 10 19 cm -3 were purchased from Wafer Technology LTD. The 21 % ammonium sulfide solution, MHA, ATP, Gold (III) chloride trihydrate (HAuCl4 • 3H2O, ≥ 99.9% trace metals basis) and sodium citrate dihydrate (HOC(COONa) (CH2COONa)2 • 2H2O ≥ 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. GaAs samples (5 x 5 mm 2 ) were cleaned by sequential ultrasonication in acetone, methanol and isopropanol for 3 min and dried with nitrogen gas. Ammonium sulfide was diluted in deionized (DI) water at a volume ratio of 1:20. Then for each 100 mL solution, 0.5 g of elemental sulfur was added to make ammonium polysulfide solution ((NH4)2Sx). Subsequently, the GaAs samples were soaked in the (NH4)2Sx solution for 10 min at 50 °C. Then, the samples were rinsed with DI water and ethanol to remove excess sulfur and blown dry with nitrogen gas. The passivation remains effective for days without significant re-oxidation of the surface based on our previous XPS results. Fabrication Process: Dip-Pen Nanolithography (DPN): An AFM tip (NanoInk Type A or Bruker's AFM probe MSCT-A) was cleaned with 10.15 W oxygen plasma (Expanded Plasma Cleaner from 'Harrick Plasma') for 10 min to increase the hydrophilicity. Then, it was immersed into 1 mM MHA ethanolic solution for about 30 s and the excess solvent was removed by nitrogen gas. During the writing process, the tip was operated in contact mode and moved to the desired region for drawing patterns controlled by the software in a NanoInk system. The ambient conditions were 23-25 °C and 55-60 % relative humidity for the characterization of DPN dot and line writing. Micro-contact Printing (μCP): The polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps were prepared by mixing Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer base and curing agent in a volume ratio of 10:1. Master molds with 5 μm-deep features based on silicon substrates patterned by photolithography were used as to cast the PDMS mixture. The PDMS was cured at 70 °C for two hours in an oven and carefully peeled from the master. Stamps with two different feature dimensions were used in the experiment: Stamp I has an array of 7 μm diameter circular pillars and 3 μm edge-to-edge separation, and stamp II has 30 μm diameter pillars and 10 μm separation. Prior to the SAM patterning, the stamps were sonicated in ethanol for 3 min. They were then covered by one drop of MHA solution, dried by nitrogen gas, and finally brought into contact with the substrate. After the stamping, samples were sonicated in ethanol and dried with nitrogen gas to remove superfluous molecules. The ambient conditions were 23-27 °C and 65-75 % relative humidity for all μCP experiments. Au NPs assembly: The sulfur-passivated GaAs samples were patterned with ATP by μCP with stamp II, then left in an aqueous solution of Au NPs for 24 h. After the assembly, the samples were sonicated with deionized water and dried with nitrogen gas. DPN was performed with a commercial system from NanoInk, Inc. This system included a commercial AFM from Thermomicroscopes to allow observation by LFM. LFM images presented have a left-to-right scan direction. An Icon AFM from Bruker was used for AFM topography imaging. SEM images were obtained by a Nova NanoSEM from FEI with an accelerating voltage of 10.00 kV.