A high Q-factor microwave resonator in a high magnetic field could be used in a wide range of applications, especially for enhancing the scanning speed in axion dark matter research. In this letter, we introduce a polygon-shaped resonant cavity with commercial YBCO tapes covering the entire inner wall. We demonstrated that the maximum Q-factor (TM010, 6.93 GHz) of the superconducting YBCO cavity was about 6 times higher than that of a copper cavity and showed no significant degradation up to 8 T at 4 K. This is the first indication of the possible applications of HTS technology to the research areas requiring low loss in a strong magnetic field at high radio frequencies. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) science and technology involves the application of superconducting properties to radio frequency systems. Due to the ultralow electrical resistivity, which allows an RF resonator to obtain an extremely high quality (Q) factor, SRF resonant cavities can be used in a broad scope of applications such as particle accelerators The natural choice of material for fabricating the superconducting cavity under a high magnetic field is the high temperature superconductor (HTS) YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x (YBCO) whose surface resistance is lower than copper in any direction of the applied magnetic field. The upper critical field is very high (> 100 T) and the vortex depinning frequency is more than 10 GHz A possible solution to this problem is to implement a three-dimensional (3-D) surface with two dimensional (2-D) planar objects. We took advantage of high-grade, commercially available YBCO tapes by AMSC, whose fabrication process, structure, and properties are wellknown To fabricate a 3-D superconducting cavity utilizing YBCO tapes, we devised a novel scheme by employing a 12-piece polygon cavity to which grain-aligned tapes are attached. Each tape was prepared and attached securely to the inner surface of a cavity piece with a minimum be- nding to prevent cracks (Fig. The assembled cavity was installed in a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator BF-LD400 [28], equipped with an 8 T cryogen-free NbTi superconductor solenoid Investigating the abrupt behavior of the measured Q-factor near 0.23 T, the same Q-factor measurement was repeated using a 12-piece Cu cavity with Ni-9W tape attached only on one piece. The comparison between Fig. The maximum Q-factor achievable with a YBCO cavity is currently unknown but the comparison between the surface resistance of copper at 4 K (5 mΩ at 5.712 GHz) 