We study the in-gap states that appear at the boundaries of both 1D and 2D topological superconductors. While the massless Majorana quasiparticles are guaranteed to arise by the bulk-edge correspondence, we find that they could be accompanied by massive Volkov-Pankratov (VP) states which are present only when the interface is sufficiently smooth. These predictions can be tested in an s-wave superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling placed on top of a magnetic domain wall. We calculate the spin-resolved local density of states of the VP states about the band inversion generated by a magnetic domain wall and find that they are oppositely spin-polarized on either side of the topological phase boundary. We also demonstrate that the spatial position, energy-level spacing, and spin polarization of the VP states can be modified by the introduction of in-plane electric fields. Topological superconductors (TSCs) are materials which are predicted to host Majorana quasiparticles: excitations which behave as their own antiparticles. In 1985 Volkov and Pankratov showed that semiconductor junctions with mutually inverted bands can result in the emergence of both massless states and massive states localized at the interface. We therefore demonstrate that smoothly varying band inversions generated by magnetic domain walls in both 1D and 2D SCs, schematically shown in Fig. In this work we analyze the emergence of VP states in two systems: a 1D nanowire and a 2D monolayer. Let us assume that both of these systems lie in the x -y plane with a Zeeman exchange field B(r) along the zaxis, as shown in Fig. Here and in the remainder of this paper we use a system of units with = 1. The parameter α is the strength of the Rashba SOC, μ is the chemical potential, and σ i are the Pauli matrices in spin space. To model a nanowire, we may remove the degrees of freedom along the x-direction in the above Hamiltonian to obtain In this section we shall explicitly derive the solutions for the monolayer system, and note that the same techniques can equally be applied to H wire . The Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is then Here Ψ(r) = (ψ ↑ (r), ψ ↓ (r), ψ † ↑ (r), ψ † ↓ (r)) T is the Nambu spinor with ψ σ (r) being the electron field operators, τ i are the Pauli matrices for the particle-hole space of the BdG Hamiltonian, and ∆ is the s-wave superconducting order parameter chosen to be real and positive. In the case that the magnetic field is homogeneous, such that B(r) = B, the energy spectrum of this system has an energy gap at zero momentum given by For positive Zeeman exchange field, we see that the band gap closes at B = ∆ 2 + μ 2 . In the presence of a spatial variation in B, there will be a topological phase transition from a Zeeman-dominated region (B > ∆ 2 + μ 2 ) to a pairing-dominated region (B < ∆ 2 + μ 2 ). Standard arguments based on topology show that the boundary between these regions shall lead to a CMM. ( Here the magnetic exchange field has a slope b > 0 and a characteristic length scale given by y 0 = ∆/b. To maintain the consistency of our low energy treatment, we shall later ensure that the localization length of the model's bound states is smaller than y 0 . We also note that, as discussed in Ref. 45, the linear domain wall profile presented in Eq. ( In the presence of an exchange field described by Eq. (5) our system exhibits two TPBs at ±y 0 , as shown by the dotted lines in Fig. Since our system is translationally invariant along the x-direction, we write where k is the momentum along the x-direction and L is the length of the system. These allow us to write our Hamiltonian in a more suggestive form, Here Ψ k (y) = (ψ k↑ (y), ψ k↓ (y), ψ † -k↑ (y), ψ † -k↓ (y)) T , and we have defined the ladder operators These are harmonic oscillator ladder operators defining states localized at ∓y 0 , respectively. Using the easily obtained eigenvectors of Eq. ( Here n is an integer, and φ ± |n| (y) are the Hermite functions which are eigenfunctions of the operators a † ± a ± with eigenvalues |n|, given by Here H |n| (z) are the Hermite polynomials. We can see that these states are localized at ∓y 0 , while the spatial extent of the wavefunctions are determined by the localization length = α/b. The factors A kn and Q kn are given by , n = 0 . ( The energy eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian are found to be This demonstrates that the CMMs (n = 0), localized at ∓y 0 , are generically accompanied by massive VP states (n = 0). As the transition becomes sharp, the parameter b increases and pushes the energy of the VP states above the superconducting gap ∆. Therefore, the VP states are only observable when the transition from non-magnetic to magnetic regions is sufficiently smooth. From the above expression we see that the first (n = ±1) VP states enter the gap of the SC at the critical slope b c = ∆ 2 /2α, signaling the emergence of VP states into the system. We require that the localization length be smaller than the TPB length scale y 0 , y 0 , which is equivalent to assuming √ αb ∆. Indeed, one sees from Eq. ( To analyze the charge of the CMMs and VP states we calculate the expectation value of the charge operator Ξ = diag(e, e, -e, -e) with respect to φ ± kn (y), where here e is the electron charge. A quick calculation shows that these expectation values are always zero for both the CMMs and VP states, implying that they are electrically neutral. As discussed in Ref. 49, this feature is a consequence of setting μ = 0. To diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian we set Ψ k (y) = n (φ - kn (y)γ kn + φ + kn (y)β kn ) in Eq. ( Here γ kn and β kn are the annihilation operators for the bound states localized at +y 0 and -y 0 respectively. By expressing γ kn and β kn in terms of the electron field operators it can be shown that they each obey the relations γ † kn = γ -k-n and β † kn = -β -k-n . When n = 0 these expressions reduce to the Majorana criterion, according to which the Majorana quasiparticle is identical to its own antiparticle. If we then assume that the TPBs at ∓y 0 are sufficiently far apart such that φ ± |n| (±y 0 ) ≈ 0, in agreement with the condition that y 0 , we may focus on the bound states localized at +y 0 by writing ψ kσ (y) ≈ n B knσ (y)γ kn . Next, we study the response of the CMMs and VP states under an in-plane electric field along the ydirection. To include this in our model, we introduce a spatially varying chemical potential into our Hamiltonian. The electric field is then given by the negative of the gradient of this potential. Still neglecting the kinetic energy term, the normal state Hamiltonian is then Here we define where m is the strength of the electric field which can either be positive or negative. The BdG Hamiltonian may then be written as As shown below, it is sufficient to consider the case |m| < b. In this case we shall show that the BdG Hamiltonian may be transformed to a similar form as that of the previous section. To find the eigenvectors of the first quantized Hamiltonian such that Hφ = Eφ, we apply a hyperbolic transformation that is akin to a Lorentz boost generated by exp(ητ 0 σ z /2), where η = tanh -1 (m/b). where here N is a normalization constant included because the exponential matrices modify the norm of the wavefunction. By rewriting the exponential matrices we may obtain the Lorentz-boosted Schrödinger equation, Here γ = 1/ 1 -(m/b) 2 and φ = N e -ητ0σz/2 φ. We have also defined the Lorentz-boosted BdG Hamiltonian: where b = b/γ and E = γ m b E. Importantly, the spatially varying terms associated with μ(y) are no longer present in H. This Hamiltonian is then similar in form to the original BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Recall that we assumed that |m| < b. If we instead had that |m| > b, we would be in the m-like quadrant of Fig. The similarity of Eq. ( This allows us to write our Lorentz boosted BdG Hamiltonian in a more suggestive form, Here we have defined the ladder operators The similarity of Eq. ( The eigenvectors of H in Eq. ( Here, the Hermite functions φ ± |n| (y, k) are once again the eigenfunctions of a † ± a ± with eigenvalue |n|, and are given by The spatial location of the wavefunctions depends on the energy and electric field strength through E n (k) = γ m b E n (k), while their spatial extent now depends on the localization length = α/ b which increases with the electric field strength. The terms A kn and Q kn are given by From Eq. ( Using the wavefunctions in Eq. ( We have shown that the CMMs occuring in TPBs can be generically accompanied by low-energy VP states. Our next task is then to determine signatures of the VP states in the LDOS that is measurable via tunneling spectroscopy. We may determine the LDOS from the spectral function of the system. In the following we focus on the states localized at +y 0 under the assumption that < y 0 . From the Fourier transform of the electronic retarded Green's function G R (rσt, r σ t ) = -iθ(t -t ) {ψ σ (r, t), ψ † σ (r , t )} , with θ(t) the Heaviside step function, we find the spectral function A(rσ; ω) = -2ImG R (rσ, rσ; ω) and thus the spin resolved LDOS as (26) The total LDOS ρ(r, ω) is then given as the summation of both spin components. We may then analyze both the 1D nanowire and 2D monolayer systems originally shown in Fig. Applying the techniques of the previous section to the case of a 1D nanowire, we find a discrete energy spectrum given by E n = sgn(n) γ 2α b|n|, which describes a set of MZMs and additional VP states localized at y = ± E 2 n + ∆ 2 / b. Motivated by recent experiments, we set ∆ = 0.3 meV, α = 0.1 meV nm, and b = 0.1 meV nm -1 . In Fig. As < y 0 , we find that the two sets of bound states localized at ∓y 0 do not overlap in space, and may fo- cus our analysis on the +y 0 states. The LDOS of the bound states centered at y 0 is given by ρ(y, ω) = σn |B nσ (y)| 2 δ(ω -E n ), where here B nσ (y) is found by setting k = 0 in Eq. (13). In Fig. In Fig. To analyze the case of a 2D monolayer, we adopt the parameter values of the previous section and plot the dispersion of Eq. ( To evaluate the LDOS in Eq. ( We note that the "X-shape" of these peaks in Fig. To prove that the additional states found in Ref. 36 are truly VP states, we may analyze the spin-resolved LDOS in Fig. In order to study the LDOS under the presence of an electric field, we once again convert the momentum summation of Eq. ( In this work we analyzed smooth magnetic domain walls that generate band inversions within 1D and 2D SCs. It is known that band inversions in 1D superconducting nanowires exhibit MZMs fixed at zero energy, while band inversions in 2D superconducting monolayers lead to linearly dispersing CMMs. While modern proposals have focused on CMMs as a potentially more robust alternative to the MZM for topological quantum computation, both MZMs and CMMs have been difficult to experimentally verify. We have shown that if the transition between topological and trivial regions is smooth enough, the massless Majorana quasiparticles are accompanied by massive VP states. These VP states arise purely as a consequence of the transition between topologically different phases. While in this work we have focused on magnetic domain walls, we emphasize that our predictions equally apply to any other smooth transition that results from the variation of a parameter controlling the topological phase. We have shown that the energy level spacing of the VP states is controlled by the slope of the Zeeman exchange field, and that the VP states are only observable below the superconducting gap when the slope of the exchange field is smaller than a critical value. We also found that while the Majorana states are localized at the TPB, the VP states split in space away from the TPB. In the case of a 2D monolayer, the splitting of the VP states creates an "X-shape" in the LDOS as a function of position. This Xshape is similar to what is experimentally observed in 2D SCs around spatially extended magnetic Co clusters, and we predict that VP states may be present within these systems. We derived the spin-resolved LDOS of the Majorana and VP states in the vicinity of a TPB. In contrast to the Majorana quasiparticles, we have found that the VP states are strongly spin polarized. As the VP states split in space away from the TPB, we have shown that oppo-site sides of the TPB display opposite spin polarizations. The magnitude of these spin polarizations is dependent on both the strength and direction of the electric field. In the case of zero field, the magnitudes of the spin polarization are equal and opposite on either side of the TPB, while nonzero electric fields lead to an asymmetry of these magnitudes across the TPB. We predict that this will be an observable signature of the VP states via spin-resolved scanning tunneling spectroscopy.