It is well known that superconductivity in quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) materials is hindered by large fluctuations of the order parameter. They reduce the critical temperature and can even destroy the superconductivity altogether. Here it is demonstrated that the situation changes dramatically when a Q1D pair condensate is coupled to a higher-dimensional stable one, as in recently discovered multiband Q1D superconductors. The fluctuations are suppressed even by vanishingly small pairexchange coupling between different band condensates and the superconductor is well described by the mean field theory. In this case the low-dimensionality effects enhance the coherence of the system instead of suppressing it. As a result, the critical temperature of the multiband Q1D superconductor can increase by orders of magnitude when the system is tuned to the Lifshitz transition with the Fermi level close to the edge of the Q1D band. It is a common knowledge that superconductivity in 1D systems is suppressed due to large fluctuations of the order parameter. The superconducting state can still be achieved when several 1D structures (parallel chains of molecules or atoms) are coupled one to another, creating a weakly coupled matrix. Earlier theoretical studies demonstrated that such Q1D materials can superconduct Subsequent theoretical efforts were focused on finding the conditions under which the critical temperature of the Q1D superconductors could be increased rather than reduced. In particular, it was suggested that such an increase can be achieved in the vicinity of the Lifshitz transition at which the chemical potential approaches the edge of the Q1D single-particle energy band Recently the interest in Q1D superconductors has been boosted by the discovery of Cr 2 As 3 -chain based materials In this work we show that the advent of multiband Q1D superconductors opens up a fundamental opportunity to achieve superconductivity at high temperatures. It has already been demonstrated that the presence of the pair-exchange coupling between different bands can reduce the fluctuations due to the multiband screening mechanism We assume the s-wave pairing in both Q1D and 3D bands with the Josephson-like interband transfer of Cooper pairs. Superconductivity in this system is described by the standard two-band model introduced in Refs. where m 1,2 are the effective band masses and k = (k x , k y , k z ). The energy and μ are measured relative to the bottom of the Q1D band. The lowest energy of the 3D band is negative ε 0 < 0 and, to have a BCS-like condensate in the 3D band, we assume |ε 0 | μ. Our study is focused on the superconducting state near the Lifshitz transition at μ = 0. The system is considered in the clean limit, where the role of impurities is neglected. In what follows we set k B = 1 for the Boltzmann constant. Following Refs. where ψ † νσ (r) and ψνσ (r) are the field operators for the carriers in band ν, T ν (r) is the single-particle Hamiltonian with the single-particle energies given by Eq. ( where components of R are the anomalous Green functions R ν = ψν↑ (r) ψν↓ (r) . The model based on Eqs. ( Assuming that T c0 is known, one expands the r.h.s. of Eq. ( where the coefficients A ν , a ν , b ν , and ν are to be calculated using the microscopic model for each band, and external fields are assumed to be zero. For the 3D BCS-like band with the spherically symmetric Fermi surface one obtains the standard expressions where τ = 1-T /T c0 , ω c is the energy cutoff (assumed to be the same for both bands), γ is the Euler constant, ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function, the DOS of the 3D band at the Fermi energy is For the Q1D band the expressions for the coefficients are given by the integrals to be evaluated numerically. At |μ| < ω c (near the Lifshitz transition) the coefficients can be written as This is the matrix equation with the solution in the form where η is an eigenvector of Ľ corresponding to its zero eigenvalue while ψ(r) is a coordinate dependent GL order parameter of the system with G = g 11 g 22 -g 2 12 . Of the two solutions to Eq. ( Notice that this choice is unique up to the normalization factor which is absorbed by ψ(r). The actual critical temperature T c is lower than its mean field value T c0 due to fluctuations with The stationary condition for the functional given by Eqs. ( where f ψ and f φ have the same structure given by Eq. ( In addition, f ψφ in Eq. ( whereas the coefficients in f φ are given by with Here α (0) φ = 0 since S is real. This means that only f ψ represents the critical fluctuations in the vicinity of the superconducting transition because α ψ → 0 in the limit T → T c0 . The contribution f φ describes non-critical fluctuations and can be safely omitted With this simplification, we can apply the known results for the fluctuation-driven shift of the critical temperature in the single-component GL theory. Using the renormalization group approach, one obtains where Gi is the Ginzburg number (Ginzburg-Levanyuk parameter). For the 3D anisotropic system it reads [31] with a ψ = da ψ /dT . Using Eq. ( where Gi 3D is the Ginzburg number of the uncoupled (standalone) 3D band, given by Eq. ( 1 }. Using the obtained expressions, we can now calculate both the mean-field T c0 and fluctuation-shifted T c critical temperatures. Essential parameters of the model are the three coupling constants g νν and the band DOSs N ν , while the cutoff ω c sets the energy scale. It is convenient to introduce the dimensionless coupling constants λ νν = g νν √ N ν N ν . The parameter S, which controls Eqs. ( Numerical results for T c0 and T c versus the chemical potential μ, calculated for several values of the dimensionless pair-exchange coupling λ 12 , are shown in Fig. In contrast, the fluctuation-induced shift of the critical temperature strongly depends on the pair-exchange coupling. In the limit λ 12 → 0 the fluctuations suppress the superconductivity. However, this suppression ceases rapidly with increasing the pair-exchange coupling. Figure The superconductivity enhancement, based on the interaction between a Q1D condensate near the Lifshitz point and a BCS-like condensate, is general and does not depend on the model details. Thus, it opens a possibility for a significant amplification (up to orders of magnitude) of the critical temperature by tuning the Lifshitz transition. Notice that in addition to the chemical engineering, Lifshitz transitions can be tuned by an appropriate doping of multiband superconducting compounds, as e.g. reported in Finally, we note that although our results are obtained for the model with the s-wave pairing, one can expect that the fluctuations screening mechanism, based on the coupling of multiple condensates, applies also to materials with the d-wave symmetry and even to the case of the triplet pairing, having the multicomponent order parameter. In this regard we note that first theoretical calculations of the possible pairing symmetry in Q1D multiband superconductors A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (with A = K, Rb, Sc) are in favour of the triplet pairing A.V. acknowledges support of the CAPES/Print Grant, process No. 88887.333666/2019-00 (Brazil), and from the Russian Science Foundation Project 18-12-