The story of information processing is a story of great success. Todays' microprocessors are devices of unprecedented complexity and MOSFET transistors are considered as the most widely produced artifact in the history of mankind. The current miniaturization of electronic circuits is pushed almost to the physical limit and begins to suffer from various parasitic effects. These facts stimulate intense research on neuromimetic devices. This feature article is devoted to various in materio implementation of neuromimetic processes, including neuronal dynamics, synaptic plasticity, and higher-level signal and information processing, along with more sophisticated implementations, including signal processing, speech recognition and data security. Due to vast number of papers in the field, only a subjective selection of topics is presented in this review. The story of information processing is a story of great success. Todays' microprocessors are devices of unprecedented complexity and MOSFET transistors are considered as the most widely produced component in the history of mankind, with a total number of devices approaching 13 sextillions (1.3×10 These facts stimulate intense research on neuromimetic devices. Their performance, at the present stage of development, cannot be compared with natural systems, but also provide stimulation for other fields of investigation, including chemistry, physics, electronics, and computer sciences. This feature article is devoted to various in materio implementation of neuromimetic processes, including neuronal dynamics, synaptic plasticity, and higher-level signal and information processing. From the plethora of various in-materio implementation of information processing, involving inorganic and organic materials, polymers, various molecular species, as well as biopolymers and even living organisms Human intelligence emerges from the complex structural and dynamical properties of our nervous system. The primary cellular elements of our nervous systems are neurons. The ultimate computational power of our nervous system relies on the dynamical properties of neurons and their networks. Every neuron is a nonlinear dynamic system, Excitable neurons are another type of neurons present in the nervous system. Excitability can be twofold -"tonic" or "phasic". When neurons react to a constant excitatory signal by firing a sequence of spikes, they are classified as "tonic". On the other hand, excitability is "phasic", when neurons react in an analog manner and shoot only once, when receiving a sharp excitatory signal. Excitatory "tonic" neurons are present e.g. in the cortex whereas "phasic" excitable neurons act e.g. in the auditory brainstem (involved in precise timing computations) and in the spinal cord. The Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction is a catalyzed oxidative bromination of malonic acid in aqueous acidic solution (1): 2BrO3 - (aq) + 3CH2(COOH)2(aq) + 2H + (aq) → 2BrCH(COOH)2(aq) + 3CO2(g) + 4H2O(l) (1) Various metal ions or metal-complexes, such as either cerium ions or ferroin (i.e. tris-(1,10-phenanthroline)-iron(II)) or tris(2,2'-bipyridyl)dichloro-ruthenium(II) (Ru(bpy)3 In (2), τ is the "time delay", i.e., the time since the most recent spike occurred, and T0 is the period of the previous oscillations. The addition of BBrr -leads always to a delay in the appearance of a spike. In other words, ∆TT = TT pppppppp -TT 0 (TT pppppppp is the period of the perturbed oscillation) is always positive. The higher the phase of the addition of BBrr -, the larger the ΔT. The oscillatory BZ reaction with cerium ions as catalysts gives rise to appreciable transmittance oscillations in the UV part of the electromagnetic spectrum (see Figure The periodic UV or visible radiation, transmitted or emitted by the BZ reaction, can be sent to luminescent and photochromic compounds. Photochromic materials find further applications in neuromimetic systems based on optical signals. Photo-reversible photochromic compounds allow to implement memory effects: if they are direct photo-reversible photochromes, UV and visible signals promote and inhibit their colorations, respectively. Furthermore, when a photochromic compound receives excitatory optical signals at the bottom of a liquid column, wherein there are either laminar or turbulent convective motions of the solvent generated by a vertical thermal gradient, it gives rise to a Hydrodynamic Photochemical Oscillator that originates chaotic spectrofluorimetric signals. Various photoelectrochemical processes have been considered as a computational platform for quite a long time. where Δt is the time interval between post-and presynaptic signals, τ± are the time constants and A± are the parameters determined by the synaptic weights. The upper part of the formula (the 0 t ∆ ≥ case) described the potentiation mode (i.e. an increase of synaptic weight as a consequence of the decreased time interval between events), whereas the lower one (the 0 t ∆ < case) the depression mode. In the described case only the potentiation mode has been observed, therefore the response function can be simplified to (4): 47 where α1,2 and Τ1,2 are relevant fitting parameters while β is only a scale factor, which is irrelevant for the data interpretation. The result of the fitting procedure is presented in Figure The mechanism of the plastic processes observed in the CdS-MWCNT composite is relatively simple. Photoexcitation of the material within the fundamental absorption of cadmium results in the promotion of electrons from the valence to the conduction band (process 1 in Figure The equivalent electronic circuit employed to describe the ITO/MWCNTs/CdS photoelectrodes (a) and the simulated time-dependent response of the equivalent circuit to the pulsed stimulation characterized by various repetition intervals. Two cases were taken into consideration: in the first one the branch responsible for charge trapping/de-trapping events (related to the presence of MWCNTs) was introduced (b) and in the second one it was neglected (c). Reproduced from Ref. The SPICE model (Figure The application of change pulses results in trains of output potential of characteristics very close to the experimental ones (cf. Figure Human intelligence has the remarkable power of handling both accurate and vague information. Vague information is coded through the words of our natural languages. We have the remarkable capability to reason, speak, discuss, and make rational decisions without any quantitative measurement and any numerical computation, in an environment of uncertainty, partiality, and relativity of truth. A major challenge is the design of neuromimetic devices that have the capabilities of human intelligence to compute with words. Fuzzy logic has been defined as a rigorous logic of vague and approximate reasoning. The "If..." part is called the antecedent and involves the labels chosen for the input fuzzy sets. The "Then..." part is called the consequent and involves the labels chosen for the output fuzzy sets. When we have multiple inputs, these are connected through the AND, OR, NOT operators. Every FLS is constituted by three components: A Fuzzifier, a Fuzzy Inference Engine, and a Defuzzifier. A Fuzzifier is based on the partition of all the input variables in fuzzy sets. It transforms the crisp values of the input variables in degrees of membership to the input fuzzy sets. The Fuzzy Inference Engine is based on fuzzy rules. It turns on all the rules that involve the fuzzy sets activated by the crisp input values. Finally, the Defuzzifier is based on the fuzzy sets of the output variables, and it transforms the collection of the output fuzzy sets, activated by the rules, in crisp output values. Fuzzy logic is a good model of the human ability to compute with words because there are some structural and functional analogies between any FLS and the Human Nervous System. The Human Nervous System (HNS) comprises three elements: (I) the sensory system; (II) the central nervous system; (III) the effectors' system. The sensory system catches physical and chemical signals and transduces them in electro-chemical information that is sent to the brain. In the brain, information is integrated, stored, and processed. The outputs of the cerebral computations are electro-chemical commands sent to the components of the effectors' system, i.e., glands and muscles. The power of distinguishing these features derives from the hierarchical structure of every sensory system. In fact, for each sensory system, we have, at the smallest level, a collection of distinct molecular switches. At an upper level, we have a set of distinct sensory cells: each cell contains many replicas of a specific molecular switch. Finally, at the highest level, we have many replicas of the different receptor cells that are organized in a tissue whose structure depends on the architecture of the sensory organ. For instance, in the case of the visual system, we have four types of photoreceptor proteins (each one absorbing a specific portion of the visible spectrum); four types of cells (one rod and three types of cones), each one having many replicas of one of the four types of photoreceptor proteins. Finally, we have many replicas of the different cells disposed on a photo-sensitive tissue, the retina, with the rods spread on the periphery, and the cones concentrated in the fovea. Consequently, the information of a stimulus is encoded hierarchically. The collection of four types of photoreceptor proteins plays like an ensemble of four distinct molecular fuzzy sets. The information regarding the modality of the stimulus is encoded as degrees of membership of the stimulus to the four molecular fuzzy sets; that is, it is encoded as fuzzy information at the molecular level (μμ̄MM MM ). The four types of cells play like cellular fuzzy sets. The information regarding the intensity is encoded as degrees of membership of the stimulus to the cellular fuzzy sets, that is, as fuzzy information at the cellular level (μμCC MM ). Finally, the array of the many replicas of the receptive cells plays like an array of cellular fuzzy sets, and the information regarding the spatial distribution of the stimulus is encoded as degrees of membership to the array of cells, that is, as fuzzy information at the organ level (μμŌO MM ). The total information of the stimulus will be the composition of the fuzzy information encoded at the three levels. For instance, in the case of the photoreceptor system, the total information will be a matrix of data reproducing the array of cells on the retina. Each element of the matrix will be the product of two terms: the fuzzy information encoded at the molecular level times that encoded at the cellular level. The sensory cells produce graded potentials that are analog signals. The information of such signals is usually converted into the firing rate of the action potential trains. Often, the action potentials are produced by an architecture of afferent neurons that integrate the information regarding the spatial distribution of the stimuli. Every afferent neuron has a receptive field that works as a fuzzy set encompassing specific receptor cells. In electronics, the best implementations of FLSs have been achieved through analog circuits, although fuzzy logic is routinely processed in digital electronic circuits. More recently, fuzzy logic has also been processed by using molecules, macromolecules, and chemical transformations. All the methods proposed for processing fuzzy logic can be sorted out in three main strategies. As we have seen in paragraph 3.2, the human visual system grounds on four photoreceptor proteins: three for daily vision in color and one for night vision in black and white. All of them have 11-cis retinal as the chromophore. However, the four photoreceptors have different absorption spectra in the visible region, because they differ in the amino-acidic composition. The absorption spectra of the four photoreceptor proteins behave as "molecular fuzzy sets". The spectral composition of a light stimulus is encoded as degrees of membership of the light to these "molecular fuzzy sets". Moreover, the millions of replicas of the three photoreceptor proteins within each photoreceptor cell allow determining the intensity of the signals at every wavelength. The imitation of the way we distinguish colors has allowed devising chemical systems that extend human vision to the UV. at the wavelength irr λ , to the absorption band of the i-th compound is given by ( In equation ( is the photochemical quantum yield of photo-coloration, , Un i ε the absorption coefficient at irr λ for the i-th photochromic species, and C0,i is its analytical concentration. Finally, the equation expressing the activation of the i-th output fuzzy sets is (6): Figure In equation ( The imitation of other sensory subsystems, described as hierarchical fuzzy systems, wherein distinct molecular and cellular fuzzy sets work in parallel, will allow the design of new artificial sensory systems. These new artificial sensory systems will have the power to extract the essential features of stimuli and will contribute to the recognition of variable patterns. Every molecular or macromolecular compound that exists as an ensemble of conformers works as a fuzzy set. wherein nn is the number of conformers and μμ ii is the relative weight of the i-th conformer. The fuzziness of a macromolecule is usually more pronounced than that of a simpler molecule. Among proteins, those completely or partially disordered are the fuzziest. The elementary unit of quantum information is the qubit. The qubit, |Ψ⟩, is a quantum system that has two accessible states, labeled as |0⟩ and |1⟩, and it exists as a superposition of them ( In equation ( The two states, |0⟩ and |1⟩, work as two fuzzy sets. The |Ψ⟩ state belongs to both |0⟩ and |1⟩ with degrees that are |aa| 2 and |bb| 2 , respectively. Any logic operation on a qubit manipulates both states, simultaneously. If a molecular system is a superposition of n qubits, any operation on it manipulates 2 aa states, simultaneously. Therefore, it is evident the alluring parallelism of quantum logic. However, deleterious interactions between the quantum system and the surrounding environment can cause the decoherence of the quantum states. All materials based real devices operating at realistic conditions ae best described by fractional differential equations, as it was demonstrated in the case of a capacitor by Svante Westerlund in 1991 in a seminal paper with a mind-twisting title "Dead matter has memory!". The second harmonic generation (SHG) involves generating signals (e.g. optical or electrical) the frequencies of which are twice as high as the fundamental frequency, hence often this effect is called frequency doubling. The generation of higher harmonics is observed in non-linear resistors, but in this case, the largest spectral weight falls on the fundamental frequency. Literature describing research on SHG present in hardware memristive structures is sparse. Majzoub et. al. performed an analysis of the influence of higher harmonic components of the recorded current on the pinched hysteresis loop. The amplitude discrimination of voltage is the inherent property of memristors. Only pulses with sufficient amplitude can affect the resistive state of the memristive device. In general, the resistive state is dependent on the history applied current and voltage, enabling storage and adjustable changes of the device's conductance. Specific voltage pulse can transfer the memristor from one state (e.g. high resistance state) to another (e.g. low resistance state). Memristors employed in reservoir system can act as a simple amplitude classifier. In general, the resistive state of the memristive device is dependent on the history of the applied current and voltage. Furthermore, exploiting the non-linear I-V dependence, one can gradually switch the resistance to the other state with the pulses of sufficient amplitude and proper polarity. These inherent properties of memristors can be utilized for the amplitude classification with employing the memristor in the feedback loop. It has been reported that lead(II) iodide (PbI2) incorporated in a single echo-state network with delayed feedback loop can efficiently discriminate input voltage pulses based on their amplitude. Most basic frequency discrimination for neuromorphic memristor-based devices is spike-rate dependent plasticity (SRDP) learning strategy. If the frequency of spike train exceeds the threshold value, the short term effects, such as signal intensity decay can be overcome and each next spike has increased intensity, until reaching plateau level. This way of frequency processing has its instant limits -a range of frequencies between threshold and plateau values. The resolution of frequency detection is also associated with individual pulse length. The realization of these ideas is possible with the incorporation of several memristive materials, for example, organolead trihalide perovskites (or organic-inorganic perovskites). Advancement of the above methodology would be to use STP or LTP (short-and long-time plasticity) effects associated with threshold frequency. Experimentally this behavior was shown by He in 2014 Simulation results from the memristor model using experimental parameters (d). Reprinted from Ref. The learning/forgetting effect with the frequency threshold was also reported for ZnO memristive devices. Discrimination of periodic signals of various waveforms according to their frequency should be also possible. It is an obvious fact that due to the switching dynamics memristors are frequency-sensitive elements. At sufficiently high frequencies they may behave like linear memristors, whereas their nonlinear features emerge as low-frequency range. Therefore, it should be possible to build a reservoir system similar to the previously described, which selectively amplifies signals of frequencies lower than the threshold value and attenuates signal of higher frequencies (or vice versa). Such behavior is not a unique feature in classical analog electronics: any bandpass filter (active or passive) can perform similarly. The expected advantage of reservoir memristive devices in comparison to analog filters is a very high slope of their frequency characteristics, especially if they are embedded in a single node echo state machine Dynamics of resistance changes in memristors as well as their highly nonlinear characteristics seem to be key features in their application is signal processing and classification. Furthermore, they can be incorporated into feedback loops yielding single-node echo state machines (or other types of reservoir computers) with a superb performance in signal classification. In the case of reservoir computing training of the reservoir is not required, the classification of the input signal relies on the internal dynamics of the reservoir. The only point that requires training is a readout layer --simple artificial neural network (software-based), single layer perceptron or a simple signal processing circuit. Despite obvious utility of memristive elements in such computational tasks the reports on experimental verification of memristor applicability in signal classification/processing are scarce, however, the number of theoretical works, including numerical simulations, is increasing. The reason is purely technological -analog memristors (vide infra) are an emerging class of devices and require a lot of fundamental and technological studies. There are two principal categories of memristors, which can be tentatively called analog and digital ones. The concept of signal classification based on the dynamic behavior of memristor was reported by Tanaka et al. Such a system computes an output potential at each node and these values are fed into two nodes of a perceptron. The input of a perceptron node hi (i = 1, 2) is a weighted sum of inputs from reservoir node (9): ( ) ( ) Sigmoidal activation function was used to compute the output state of the perceptron nodes (10): ( ) ( ) Training of the reservoir involves optimization of weights to achieve the (0,1) output state for sine wave input and the (1,0) for the triangular one. The systems provided good separability of the waveforms at a sufficiently high number of reservoir nodes coupled with the perceptron: 2 in the case of ring topology and 5 in the case of small-world topology. On the other hand, the ring topology works efficiently only in the case of identical elements, even a small variation in memristor characteristics significantly reduces the performance of the system. The introduction of additional connectivities in the circuit (small-world topology) results in a variability-tolerant system, however, a larger number of readout connections (blue arrows in Figure Similar capabilities, even without the trained readout layer should be also observed in a single node echo state machine with a non-linear node of appropriate characteristics. Composite waveforms, with Fourier spectra covering a significantly large range of frequencies, should yield a complex dynamic behavior: some spectral components should be amplified, whereas some others attenuated. This may lead to a binary classification of waveform shapes. It can be further extended by an appropriate readout layer. Music is the most ubiquitous human activity independently on any social and cultural attributes or intellectual abilities, however, according to some opinions, it does not convey any biologically-relevant information. . Adapted from Ref. Photoelectrochemical reservoir systems, based on wide bandgap semiconductors (neat or modified with simple coordination compounds) cannot compete with photonic devices in terms of speed or efficiency. They operate, however, in a frequency domain corresponding to the audible range. Therefore, we have turned our attention to the classification of acoustic signals. There are a plethora of different data sets that require advanced processing techniques, including ECG and EEG signals, automated speech analysis or the classification of music. We have found the latter as the most suitable one to be addressed in the photoelectrochemical system due to its internal, well-defined structure based on the Pythagorean geometry. Speech recognition is a fundamental yet complex problem for AI systems of the modern era. Speech is the most common means of communication among the human race, therefore the automated speech recognition system finds numerous applications. Verbal communication is a trivial task in everyday life, but this becomes a complex phenomenon when ported to the machines. The complexity of this task originates from an extremely reach vocabulary of a single language (hundreds of thousands of words), variations of the pronunciations and dialects of the same words, and variations in a timbre, rhythm of speech and personal characteristics. The speech of children and non-native speakers adds additional complications to this already very complicated task. The performance of this system was compared with a multilayer perceptron trained to use 12 formant frequencies. The software-based speech recognition tool, with ca. 100 trained weights yields a recognition rate of 97%. In comparison, the oscillatory network with four oscillators yields a recognition rate of 84% with 30 training parameters. This is an impressive result taking into account a small number of control parameters, energy efficiency and a small footprint of the device: each of the spin oscillators has a diameter of ca. 375 nm. These results demonstrate, how oscillatory dynamics can improve pattern recognition, especially in the case of dynamic patterns. These types of behaviour have been previously observed in other coupled oscillatory systems operating at the edge of chaos. 136, 137 Signal and information processing involves significant security issues. From Ancient times information was considered as a high value, therefore a lot of efforts were paid to protect sensitive information. The big branch of information science is devoted to information security issues. Cryptography (from Greek κρυπτός "hidden, secret" and γράφειν "to write") is the science and technology of secure communication in the presence of adversaries trying to prevent the users from achieving privacy, integrity, and availability of data. More generally, cryptography is about constructing and analyzing protocols that prevent third parties or the public from reading private messages. Various aspects in information security such as data confidentiality, data integrity, and authentication, are central to modern cryptography. The generation of random numbers is essential for many areas of economic importance. This type of numbers is a fundamental building block of many areas of science and technologycryptography, stochastic modeling and probabilistic computation (Monte Carlo) as well as e-commerce, gambling, and finance-related areas. Generally, random numbers used in various applications are pseudo-random. They are generated through software programs based on some mathematical formula that, if run again with the same "seed", would give the same determined output. It's clear that this is an issue, especially from the point of view of cryptography, therefore, it is important to have a reliable random number generator that will produce unique sequences in each run. Compared to software solutions, a hardware approach poses a more secure option that can act as a cryptographic key. Hardware systems for generation of random numbers are referred to as True Random Number Generators (TRNG). In the era of Internet of Things, one of the main challenges is to provide safe and reliable verification methods. During the recent decade, smartphones have become a universal and ubiquitous tool for a plethora of tasks, from mail and social media communication, through storage of secure information to financial operations. Since these devices often function as an authentication token for the user, the development of reliable authentication methods remains a challenging task that needs to be addressed. A promising, less expensive alternative for authentication and key generation are Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs). In principle, PUFs can be regarded as a black-box challenge-response system which returns a response r = f(c) upon inquiry of an input challenge c. For a given challenge, PUF generates a unique response. Such challenge-response pairs (CRPs) are stored in a secure database. In general, to be considered practical for hardware security applications, PUFs have to meet a few requirements. Secondly, the response must be impossible to predict (or even completely random) and unique. The first demand can be satisfied with the manufacturing variability or with the innate variability of physical parameters of the devices: due to uncontrollable parameter variance during the production, the probability of producing two devices with identical authentication fingerprint is very low. Thereby, two different, but identically manufactured PUFs, while being inquired by the identical challenge will produce distinguishable responses, thus satisfying the requirement for the uniqueness. Moreover, even with the complete knowledge of the PUF architecture, it should be impossible to reproduce the device. The "unclonability" of the function relies on the concept that it is impractical -both in the terms of costs and time -to reproduce the response of the device. Since the response function originates from the physical characteristics of the device, the out-of-control manufacturing variabilities guarantee that it is impossible to recreate the characteristics of the device even if the adversary could gain access to the device and get to know the space of CRPs. Finally, the f(c) and r should not be bound with any trivial mathematical relationship. This prevents the adversary from predicting the functionality of the PUFs based on the known response. PUF devices have already been implemented with the use of non-volatile memories (NVMs) and memristors. In the latter devices, the information is written by changing the resistance of the memory from one state with given conductance to another. One of the mechanisms responsible for the resistive switching phenomena relies on the creation and rupture of conducting filaments (CFs). The large concentration of defects, for example, oxygen vacancies or metallic ions injected from the active electrode, can migrate in the electric field. The generation and rupture of CFs that governs the transition between states are, to some extent, stochastic. Therefore, the voltage at which the switching occurs can differ between the devices and the switching cycles. It is noteworthy that this variability does not originate solely from the manufacturing process, but is inherent in the resistive switching mechanism. The idea for cross-point array PUFs exploits the sneak-path currents, which are a result of an indirect biasing of the array elements. A hash function is a cryptographic primitive, an algorithm that maps any message of arbitrary size into a fixed size (in the terms of a number of bits) number. The hash function should be a one-way function, i.e. a function which is practically infeasible to invert. The ideal cryptographic hash function has the following main properties: (i) it is deterministic, meaning that the same message always results in the same hash; (ii) it is quick to compute the hash value for any given message; (iii) it is infeasible to generate a message that yields a given hash value; (iv) it is infeasible to find two different messages with the same hash value and finally (v) a small change to a message should change the hash value so extensively that the new hash value appears uncorrelated with the old hash value. A similar hashing protocol, yet much simpler, can be implemented in dynamic photoelectrochemical devices showing short time memory features and (preferably) nonlinear light-intensity photocurrent response. In the absence of a short memory feature, the photocurrent intensity generates at a semiconducting photoelectrode can be expressed as a function of a light flux (11): where 0 0 , A C i i are saturation currents for anodic and cathodic components (which in turn strongly and nonlinearly depend on electrode potential, and kA, kC are materials-dependent constants. In the simplest case saturation photocurrent intensity at applied potential U can be formulated for both cathodic and anodic component as ( ( ) ( ) where ND is the doping density, α is the absorption coefficient and VFB is the flat band potential of the material. Application of additional charge trapping centers (e.g. carbon nanotubes, nanoparticles of different semiconducting material or conductive polymer coating) contributes to the fading memory feature with characteristic quenching constant (kq) and corresponding memory persistence time (t0). This leads to the final expression of the form (13): where i0 is given by the expression above. This makes the hashing unidirectional, due to the properties of the definite integral. In common language scrambling and encryption are sometimes used as synonyms, yet one should distinguish that the latter is usually connected with digital signal processing. Analog signals data scrambler possesses intrinsic high entropy and thus generates fully random, or at least pseudo-random, outputs. As for the actual realization of the scrambling process -the original signal is modified -usually, some of its components are transposed or inverted. For the above reasons scramblers are frequently called "randomizers". The idea behind the hardware-based implementation is to exchange numerically expensive hashing functions (vide cryptocurrencies and the whole electrical/numerical consumptions) to generator based on the intrinsic discrepancies between each individual memristive pixels/cells. Such applications have been intensively studied, yet so far theoretically. 168 Data scrambling, despite being designed for analog signal, is also used in digitized information -consisting of many following 0s and 1s. Data scrambler effectively truncates the number of similar bits, making the information more lightweight. In current IT systems data scrambling functions/algorithms/concepts are also used for removing or truncating most sensitive data. Such processes are principle irreversible. Chaotic systems can be exploited to generate apparently random sequences that serve as a basis for various cryptographic techniques. ( ) ( ) ( ) s t m t c t = + (14) Other operations convoluting messages with chaotic keys can be also used. Any unauthorized adversary can detect only a chaotic signal, which sounds/looks like meaningless noise. With an appropriate, synchronized source of a chaotic signal, it is possible, however, to recover the initial message. Chaotic Chua oscillator and related memristive circuits generate truly chaotic time series, 8, 172-175 therefore they are proposed as novel cryptographic engines that can operate with analog (e.g. acoustic) and digital messages in real-time. The software implementation of this approach works spectacularly, especially on graphical data. By drawing a simple comparison between the ability to process information in silico and that by biological neuronal structures, faster does not necessarily mean better. The emergence of extraordinary performance in the pattern recognition resulting from the high complexity of the nervous system and its operation at the edge of chaos 178 maximized our chances of survival and enabled the rise of the civilization as we know today. It seems to be a natural step to draw inspiration from the neural structures and transfer their functionalities into artificial systems. The imitation of human intelligence can be achieved by pursuing the idea of implementing fuzzy logic and a complex dynamic behavior with molecules and nanoscale systems and by boosting the research line of neuromorphic engineering. The examples presented in this paper demonstrate that both wetware and memristive hardware enable efficient computation within dynamic systems with memory. This approach seems to circumvent the problem of a von Neumann bottleneck. In classical computational systems information is stored in the memory and all calculations are done within a microprocessor, therefore constant data flow slows down computation and consumes a lot of energy. Dynamic systems (both solid-state and wetware) provide a unique opportunity of computation within memory -a novel computational paradigm, which however requires new algorithms and new system architectures. In the field of neuromorphic engineering, the exploitation of exhaustible, slow and bulky oscillatory reactions has strong limitations compared to much faster and easily scalable traditional electronic components and memristors. By implementing neuromimetic devices through unconventional chemical systems and materials, we intend to promote the development of the Chemical Artificial Intelligence (CAI). As a far-fetched vision, we may predict that other oscillatory chemical reactions besides the BZ and the Orbán oscillators, 179 and after miniaturizing them by micro-beads, microcapsules, and compartmentalization through micelles, liposomes, and micro-emulsions, 180-182 the use of a wetware (i.e., solutions) rather than a hardware (solid state devices), and of electromagnetic radiation instead of chemicals or electrons, will bring two great benefits. First, in biological multicellular systems, which are complex out-of-equilibrium "soups" of chemicals, the phenomena of long-range coupling, mediated by diffusive chemicals, exist. Such long-range coupling phenomena, not possible in the solid state, enlarge the computing power of the whole system because they originate collective oscillations and waves. Finally, the encoding of information by UV-visible radiation will guarantee very fast propagation of messages, easy tunability of their content, and a wealthy code for futuristic brain-like computing machines. Finally, Chemical Artificial Intelligence will boost the development of soft robotics. Soft robots, also called "chemical robots", will be easily miniaturized and implanted in living beings. Authors thank Ewelina Wlaźlak, Andrew Adamatzky and Zoran Konkoli for numerous stimulating discussions on reservoir computing, memristive systems, unconventional computing, and signal processing. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Polish National Science Centre within the MAESTRO project (grant agreement No. UMO-2015/18/A/ST4/00058). DP and PZ have been partly supported by the EU Project POWR.03.02.00-00-I004/16.