We show that a supercurrent carried by spinless singlet Cooper pairs can induce a spin accumulation in the normal metal interlayer of a Josephson junction. This phenomenon occurs when a nonequilibrium spin-energy mode is excited in the normal metal, for instance by an applied temperature gradient between ferromagnetic electrodes. Without supercurrent, the spin accumulation vanishes in the Josephson junction. With supercurrent, a spatially antisymmetric spin accumulation is generated that can be measured by tunneling to a polarized detector electrode. We explain the physical origin of the induced spin accumulation by the combined effect of a Doppler shift induced by a flow of singlet Cooper pairs, and the spin-energy mode excited in the normal metal. This effect shows that spin control is possible even with singlet Cooper pairs in conventional superconductors, a finding which could open new perspectives in superconducting spintronics. Introduction.-. Using superconductors to achieve interesting spin-dependent quantum effects is the central goal in the growing field of superconducting spintronics A key component of superconducting spintronics has traditionally been to find ways to generate polarized triplet Cooper pairs which can transport spin without resistance. In contrast, conventional superconductors described by Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory Here, we show that supercurrents carried by singlet Cooper pairs can induce a spin accumulation in a normal metal despite the fact that they have no spin. This phenomenon occurs when a nonequilibrium spin-energy mode is excited in the normal metal. We show that the induced spin accumulation can be understood physically from the combined effect of a Doppler shift induced by the supercurrent and the existence of a spin-energy excitation in the normal metal. The fact that the spin accumulation can be controlled by a superflow of spinless Cooper pairs opens up for a different way in which conventional superconductors can merge with spintronics. Results.-. The proposed setup for measuring this effect is shown in Fig. FIG. The physical mechanism behind this result can then be understood by the following simplified picture. Consider a ferromagnet -normal metal -ferromagnet (FNF) spin valve, with an antiparallel orientation of the magnetization in the ferromagnets. We increase the temperature of the right F by a certain amount ∆T relative to the temperature T 0 of the left F. The tunnelling amplitude of particles at the F-N metal interfaces is higher when their spin is parallel to the magnetization than if it is antiparallel. The former is therefore influenced by a temperature increase in the F reservoir to a greater degree than the latter, leading to a temperature difference between particles arXiv:2002.08367v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 19 Feb 2020 of opposite spin. The temperature on the right and left side of the normal metal for spin j, T j R and T j L , respectively, are then given as where the polarization P ∈ [0, 1] takes into account the spin dependence of the tunnelling. For P = 0, both sides are given the temperature of their respective reservoir, regardless of spin. For P = 1, T ↓ R and T ↑ L are completely insulated from the adjacent interface, and thus equilibrate to the temperature of the reservoir at the opposite end. The temperature distribution throughout the normal metal is simply given by where L is the distance between the ferromagnets and x ∈ (-L/2, L/2). The temperature difference T s between spin up and spin down electrons then becomes In other words, a spin valve in the antiparallel configuration gives a spatially constant temperature difference between electrons of opposite spin. When the superconducting leads are added to the spin valve as shown in Fig. Illustration of how a phase gradient in a superconductor leads to a spin imbalance when there is a gradient in the temperature difference between spin up and spin down particles, The energy band of the superconductor when there is no phase gradient. b) The same energy band when ∇φ > 0. The resulting Doppler shift leads to a net spin imbalance. We show here for simplicity an extreme example of a case where ∇T s < 0, in which there are only left moving quasiparticle excitations. as shown in Fig. To summarize, the simplified analysis above implies the generation of a spin accumulation in the system shown in Fig. where D is the diffusion constant and ε is the quasiparticle energy. The Green function matrix has the structure ǧ = ĝR ĝK 0 ĝA , in Keldysh space, where ĝX are 4 × 4 matrices in particle-hole and spin space. Furthermore, we have ρ4 = diag ( ρ4 , ρ4 ), with ρ4 = diag (+1, +1, -1, -1). The retarded and advanced Green functions, ĝR and ĝA , determine the band structure of the system, and these components satisfy an equation which is identical in form to Eq. ( where ρ0 = Î, ρj = σj , and ρ4+j = ρ4 ρj for j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. The matrix Î is the identity, and σj = diag σ j , σ * j for Pauli matrix σ j . In the following, we assume that both ferromagnets are aligned in the z direction, in which case the only relevant distribution functions become h 0 , h 3 , h 4 and h 7 . Insertion into Eq. ( where a mn = DTr ρm ρnρm ĝR ρn ĝA /4, and b mn = ∇a mn + DTr ρn ρm ĝR ∇ ĝRρm ρn ĝA ∇ ĝA /4. The function h 0 is the energy mode, and gives the temperature distribution of the system, with h 0 = tanh ε 2k B T , where k B is the Boltzmann constant, being the only nonzero component of ĥ in equilibrium. h 3 is a spin-energy mode, and expresses an effective temperature difference between spin up and down quasiparticles. The charge h 4 gives the quasiparticle charge distribution in the system, and the spin mode h 7 gives the spin accumulation, through the relation In Eq. ( To describe the interfaces to the reservoirs, we use a generalization of the Kupriyanov-Lukichev tunnelling boundary conditions, which take spin polarization into account give the spin filtering at the interface, for a given polarization P. For interfaces to the ferromagnets, we set ζ = 3 and P = 0.6, whereas for the superconductors, we set ζ = 1 and P = 0. To generate a temperature gradient in the normal metal, we set the temperature in the left ferromagnetic reservoir, as well as in the two superconducting leads to be T l = 0.1T c , and the temperature in the right ferromagnetic reservoir to be T h = 0.5T c . The retarded and advanced components of Eq. ( A magnetization can also be generated due to the presence of the ferromagnets, which in proximity to a superconductor can produce triplet superconducting correlations It is interesting to investigate how the induced magnetization depends on the system parameters. In Fig. Finally, we remark that it is also possible to generate a spin dependent temperature difference by applying a voltage bias between the ferromagnets, rather than a temperature gradient. In this case, the largest average T s in the system would be obtained for a parallel alignment of the ferromagnets. A phase gradient between the superconducting leads will then produce a spin accumulation by the same mechanism as previously described. However, in addition to providing a T s , the injected quasiparticles lead to a spin imbalance, and thus directly contribute to the spin accumulation. This spin accumulation is independent of the phase gradient, and will likely dominate any measurement. Conclusion.-. We have shown that a supercurrent carried by spinless Cooper pairs can induce a spin accumulation in a normal metal. This is possible when a spin-energy distribution mode is excited in the normal metal out of equilibrium, which allows a spin accumulation to arise due to the Doppler shift caused by the supercurrent in the quasiparticle energies. Our finding shows that spin control is possible even with singlet Cooper pairs in conventional superconductors, which could open interesting avenues for further research in superconducting spintronics.