Optical and optoelectronic techniques for micro-and nano-object manipulation are becoming essential tools in nano-and bio-technology. A remarkable optoelectronic technique that has experimented a strong development in the last few years is the so called photovoltaic optoelectronic tweezers. It is based on the light-induced electric fields generated by the bulk photovoltaic effect in certain ferroelectrics such as LiNbO3. The technique is simple and versatile, enabling a successful manipulation of a large variety of micro-and nano-objects with only optical control, without the need of electrodes or power supplies. However, it is still a challenge for this tool, to handle objects immersed in aqueous solution due to the electric screening effects of polar liquids. This has hindered their application in biotechnology and biomedicine where most processes develop in aqueous solution. In this work, a new efficient route to overcome this problem has been proposed and demonstrated. It uses photovoltaic optoelectronic tweezers to manipulate aqueous droplets, immersed in a non-polar oil liquid, but hanging at the interface air-oil. In this singular configuration, the high electric fields generated in the photovoltaic substrate allow a simple and flexible manipulation of aqueous droplets controlled by the light. Droplet guiding, trapping, merging and splitting have been achieved and efficient operation with water and a variety of biodroplets (DNA, sperm, and PBS solutions) have been demonstrated. The reported results overcome a main limitation of these tweezers to handle bio-materials and promises a high potential for biotechnological and biochemistry applications including their implementation in optofluidic devices. Optical manipulation has become a key tool for nano-and bio-technology. Main optical techniques are optical In the last decade another optoelectronic technique, the so called photovoltaic optoelectronic tweezers (PVOT), has been introduced The technique is very efficient for massive manipulation and patterning of nano-objects immersed in a non-polar fluid such as air, tetradecane or hexane The novel strategy proposed in this paper consists in manipulating droplets of bio-aqueous solutions inside a nonpolar immiscible oil. Since recent trends in microfluidics use droplets to miniaturize the devices (droplet or digital microfluidics), our proposal open the door to its application in this vast and very active field Hence, in this work we have proposed and investigated the use of photovoltaic optoelectronic tweezers for manipulating water and aqueous bio-droplets inside a non-polar liquid medium. There has been only one previous interesting work that has attempted to handle water droplets in air PVOT are based on the bulk photovoltaic effect (BPE) presented by certain ferroelectric crystals (mainly lithium niobate doped with iron where, φ =I/hν, is the photon flux, α the absorption coefficient and lpv the photovoltaic effective drift length. Photo-excited electrons finally get trapped in acceptor impurities (usually [Fe 3+ ]). This charge transport produces a light-induced electric field Epv that, in steady state, writes: n being the steady-state density of photo-excited electrons, μ the electron mobility and jpv the current density given by Equation As already mentioned, we propose a strategy for the PVOT manipulation of biological material, by acting on aqueous bio-droplets as highly polarizable "microparticles", immersed in a nonpolar immiscible oil, thus avoiding direct screening of the photo-induced electric fields. Fig. , by the compensation of the apparent weight downward force with a net upward force. This latter force results from the sum of the air-water, water-paraffin and air-paraffin surface tension forces as it is explain in detail in Reference As mentioned, manipulation experiments pursue different kind of processes such as controlled droplet moving, trapping, merging and splitting. The two substrate geometries (z-and x-cut) for which the symmetry of the photo-induced electric fields is different have been tested finding the best configuration for each manipulation process. The first set of manipulation experiments has been developed with droplets from a variety of available aqueous liquids (water and DNA, sperm and PBS aqueous solutions) and using the perpendicular configuration (z-cut crystals). The droplet volumes ranged between 0.1 and 1 μL. A diode Gaussian laser beam (λ = 488nm) is focused on the substrate to a diameter of a 160 μm (4) and with a light intensity of 2.7×10 6 Wm -2 . An illustrative experiment with a droplet of an aqueous solution of fluorescein tagged DNA is shown in Fig. The process is shown in Fig. In the previous experiments, the attractive vertical component of the DEP force is high enough to produce droplet trapping on the substrate. However, for certain experiments it can be advantageous to immobilize the droplet at the interface without falling on the PV substrate. This kind of trapping at the interface has been achieved for lower light intensities (I ~ 7×10 5 Wm -2 ) and using water and aqueous bio-droplets. After travelling toward the light spot, the hanging droplet is fixed at the position of light illumination at the interface paraffin-air. An illustrative experiment is shown in Fig. Finally, the last kind of experiments have been devoted to attempt droplet splitting. To this end, we have used the parallel configuration (x-cut crystals) whose symmetry seems to be more appropriate, because it has a preferential direction (polar axis) on the active surface. Splitting is expected along this direction. In fact, although it was attempted no splitting results were obtained with the isotropic perpendicular configuration (z-cut crystals). In order to get the droplet splitting the substrate has been illuminated (I = 1.2×10 7 Wm - It is worthwhile remarking that in this experiment, before splitting, the droplet was moved and immobilize at the interface [Figs. 6(a) -6(c)] demonstrating that these processes are also possible in the parallel configuration of the substrate. In addition, merging has been also obtained for this parallel substrate geometry although the perpendicular configuration could be considered preferable because operation needs a lower light intensity. In order to make a first qualitative analysis of the experiments, simulations of the PV electric fields and the corresponding DEP force and potential, under Gaussian beam illumination, have been developed. The details of the theoretical model can be found in several previous papers A strategy to manipulate water-and bio-droplets by photovoltaic optoelectronic tweezers has been proposed and demonstrated, overcoming a main remaining challenge of these tweezers. Among optoeletronic methods, the technique presented here is simple and cheap. It uses a laser beam that generates the active electric fields in the photovoltaic substrate (LN:Fe) without electrodes or power supplies, and without any further processing of its surface. The method shows key valuable advantages: the droplet hanging at the interface can be manipulated easily and a variety of processes, guiding, trapping at the interface and on the substrate, merging of two droplets and splitting, can be realized. These functionalities stem from the peculiar behavior of the hanging droplet and the flexible manipulation capabilities presented by PVOT, including, those provided by the two crystal geometries (parallel and perpendicular) and, those arising by the operation under illumination or after it in the dark. Therefore, the main outcome of this work is removing the bottleneck existing for flexible manipulation of water and aqueous biodroplets by PVOT providing an efficient tool for optofluidic applications in bio-and nano-technology. Regarding applications for biotechnology devices, DNA aqueous droplets, diluted sperm and PBS (for cell culture) droplets have been manipulated and so, applications in genetics or cell biology are envisaged. Moreover, one can expect that the manipulation capabilities also extend for any other aqueous droplets with application in diverse areas of biology, physics or chemistry. In addition, the method is well adapted to be implemented in optofluidic devices. For instance, the ability of optically controlled droplet merging is a key capability for applications in chemical synthesis or biotechnological essays In fact, in some previous works using PVOT, the action on particles immersed in non-polar liquids, has been developed inside microfluidic chips 