Two dimensional materials are an emerging class of materials which is transforming the present day research activity on a phenomenal scale. Hexagonal boron nitride is a wide band gap 2D material which is an excellent substrate for graphene based electronics. To achieve the full potential of hBN scalable and high yield growth procedures are required. Here, we demonstrate the synthesis of hBN by reactive R.F magnetron sputtering over copper foil. Copper foil preparation conditions determines the phase selectivity of BN films. Deposition of hBN on non-electropolished Cu foils with predominant (100) orientation resulted in growth of BN islands with mixed cubic and hexagonal BN phase. On electropolished Cu foils with high symmetry hexagonal (111) surface termination we get growth of continuous hexagonal BN films, while on Cu foils having (100) and (110) orientation with lower symmetry growth of cubic BN films are observed. Boron Nitride (BN) is wide band gap semiconductor (Eg ~ 6eV) with exceptional thermochemical stability, structural, electronic, and thermal conductivity properties Large area hexagonal boron nitride thin films can be synthesized by number of methods-like chemical vapor deposition (CVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and radio frequency (RF) sputtering Unlike CVD where hBN films are synthesized on metallic substrates which acts as catalyst, with RF sputtering hBN films can be deposited on noncatalytic substrates also The as received copper foil (25 μm thick, 99.8% purity sourced from Alfa Aesar) was first cleaned in dilute nitric The electropolished Cu foils were annealed at 900°C in Ar:H2 (90:10) gas for 120 min. Method III The electropolished Cu foils were annealed at 1040°C in Ar:H2 (90:10) gas for 60 min. In the text, Cu foils processed using these methods are labelled as Cu M I, Cu M II and Cu M III respectively. Boron nitride films were synthesized on these copper foil with reactive radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering (25 W RF power, hBN target -2 inch diameter with 99.99% purity) in high purity Ar:N2 (10:1) gas mixtures with total pressure 10 -2 mBar. For all depositions these parameters were kept constant. During growth the deposition time (t) was varied from 30 min to 3 hours while substrate temperature (Ts) was varied from RT to 400°C respectively. After deposition the substrate was annealed at 800°C for 40 min. Single step and cyclic/multiple step (deposition alternated by post annealing at 800°C for 40 min) deposition were used for synthesizing hBN films. The crystallographic orientation of the copper foil was studied by X ray diffraction using XRD, PAN analytical:X'Pert 3 Powder with Cu Kα line (Kα1 and Kα2 with 2:1 ratio). Electron back scattered diffraction (EBSD) using AMETEK EBSD detector fitted to FEI NOVA NANO 460 FESEM, the imaging was done at 20 KeV, sample tilted at 70 o ). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was recorded using Axis Ultra system equipped with monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV). The energy resolution was set at 0.1 eV. For Raman and AFM measurements, the hBN film was transferred to SiO2/Si substrate using wet transfer method The as received cold rolled Cu foil is polycrystalline in nature with a dominant (200) texture. The presence of rolling lines in the as received Cu foil makes it very rough (roughness ~ 96 nm) (Figure To improve the surface texture and to reduce the roughness of the Cu foil, it was subjected to additional processing as mentioned in the Materials and Methods section. Cu foils prepared by Method I, still had mixed texture, however the average grain size had increased to ~50 μm and the roughness has also decreased to ~16 nm. (Figure The hBN film synthesized on Cu substrate MI at RT for 60 min is very discontinuous and with small grains nucleated all over the substrate (Figure The presence of these triangular shaped islands thus indicates the formation of hBN phase. Figure Figure To improve the surface roughness the Cu foils were electropolished and then annealed at high temperature. The EBSD map of electropolished Cu foil prepared by MII showed that the Cu foil is comprised mostly of large 100 μm sized grains with (001) and (110) orientation (Figure We have successfully synthesized multilayer hBN films from 2 nm to 7 nm thick films (6-20 layers) over copper foil by radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering. We have demonstrated how Cu foil preparation plays a role in phase selection of BN films. On non-electropolished Cu foil with (001) surface termination we get discontinuous BN with mixed phase. On electropolishing the copper foil, cubic BN film grows on Cu (001) surface while on Cu (111) surface termination we get continuous uniform hBN films. This present work should have an impact on the realistic application of h BN by making it's synthesis more economic and thus pave the way for industrial scale production.