Magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), with rotational misalignment close to 1.1°, features isolated flat electronic bands that host a rich phase diagram of correlated insulating, superconducting, ferromagnetic, and topological phases Strongly correlated electron systems often exhibit a variety of quantum phases with similar ground-state energies, separated by phase boundaries that depend sensitively on microscopic details. Twisted bilayer graphene, with twist angle close to the magic angle θ M ≈ 1.1°, has recently emerged as a highly tunable platform with an exceptionally rich phase diagram 1, 2 hosting correlated insulating states, superconductivity, and ferromagnetism Here, instead of the usual hBN-TBG-hBN structures, we investigate devices made from hBN-TBG-WSe 2 -hBN van der Waals stacks in which a monolayer of WSe 2 resides between the top hBN and TBG (Fig. We have studied three TBG-WSe 2 devices and show results for two of them in the main text (see Extended Data Fig. For the largest angle θ = 0.97°, a superconducting pocket emerges on the hole side near ν = -2 with a maximal transition temperature T c ≈ 0.8 K. To our knowledge, this already is the smallest angle for which superconductivity has been observed for hole doping. Careful inspection reveals another weak superconductivity pocket close to ν = +2 (the behavior at low fields is displayed in Extended Data Fig. Although superconductivity persists for all three angles, the correlated insulators are quickly suppressed as the twist angle is reduced. This suppression is not surprising, as for angles below θ M , the bandwidth increases rapidly and, moreover, the characteristic correlation energy scale e 2 /4π L m also diminishes due to an increase in the moiré periodicity L m = a/sin(θ/2) (a = 0.246 nm denotes the graphene lattice constant) At the smallest angle, θ = 0.79°, along with the lack of insulating states at any partial filling, the resistance at full filling is even more reduced (Fig. Both the disappearance of the correlated insulators and the vanishing gap between flat and dispersive bands for low angles suggest that the additional WSe 2 monolayer does not significantly change the magic angle. Since superconductivity survives to much lower angles compared to correlated insulating states, the two phenomena appear to have different origins Measurements in finite magnetic field reveal further insights into the physics of TBG-WSe 2 structures (Fig. The observed two-fold degeneracy is consistent with a scenario in which the TBG band structure is modified by the spin-orbit interaction (SOI) inherited from the WSe 2 monolayer (Fig. Induced SOI can additionally constrain the nature of the TBG phase diagram. In particular, the SOI acts as an explicit symmetry-breaking field that further promotes instabilities favoring compatible symmetry-breaking patterns while suppressing those that do not. The relative robustness of the ν = 2 correlated insulator in our θ = 0.97°device suggests that interactions favor re-populating bands 