The theory of triplet superconductivity in ferromagnetic metals based on electron-electron interaction by spin fluctuation exchange is developed. The equations for the upper critical field temperature dependence are derived. In contrast to the similar equations for the superconductivity in two band metals they contain the pairing amplitudes and the Fermi velocities depending on magnetic field. The critical field behaviour near the critical temperature and at T = 0 is established analytically. In the conventional superconductors the pairing interaction arises from the coupling between electrons and the lattice. The theory of superconductivity based on electron-phonon interaction formulated first by G.M.Eliashberg There are several theoretical approaches to the description of superconductivity mechanism in ferromagnetic metals. Some theoretical studies have used pairing interaction induced by the spin polarisation in itinerant ferromagnetic Fermi liquid similar to the interaction by paramagnon exchange widely accepted in the theory of superfluid 3 He The pairing mechanism determined only by transverse dynamics of magnetic degrees of freedom studied in Besides the transverse magnetisation dynamics one must take into account the longitudinal fluctuations of magnetisation According to the experiments and several other observations, in particular, the peculiar upward curvature of the upper critical field parallel to spontaneous magnetisation in UCoGe. Another important property of uranium ferromagnetic superconductors is that the critical temperature in these materials correlates with electron effective mass changes caused by pressure or external magnetic field Obviously, the mass renormalisation and the constant of pairing interaction must be derived in frame of the same theoretical approach. The corresponding theory of two band ferromagnetic superconductor with triplet pairing is developed in the present paper. The field dependence of effective mass and the pairing amplitudes are established in the next two Sections. In the fourth Section the equations for the upper critical field temperature dependence are derived. They are similar to the corresponding equations for an usual two band superconductor but differ from them by the field dependence of the Fermi velocities and the pairing interaction. The critical field behaviour near the critical temperature and at T = 0 is established analytically. In the conclusion I list the main results as well the principal simplifications made in the process of its derivation. Effective mass m of an electron in metal differs from the bare electron mass due to static and dynamic (electronphonon) interaction with crystal lattice. Here we will be interested in the additional contribution to electron effective mass arising due to electron-electron interaction through the spin fluctuations exchange. It can be calculated as where Σ a (p, ε) is electron self-energy function. In lowest order in interaction with longitudinal spin fluctuations the frequency dependent one-particle self energy is where g is the coupling constant, and χ zz (k, ω) is the longitudinal dynamical spin susceptibility which we will treat using the phenomenological formula For simplicity we will work with isotropic dispersion law γ z ij k i k j → γ z k 2 . The Green function of non-interacting electrons in spin-up, spin-down bands (a =↑, ↓) split by the magnetic field is where are the electron energy counted from the chemical potential μ, h is the exchange field, H is an external field parallel to it. Making use the spectral representation and performing integration over ω we obtain To find the self energy part at Fermi surface determined for quadratic electron spectrum by the equation we put where m is an electron effective mass determined by the crystal lattice effects, electron-phonon interaction but not by the spin fluctuation exchange. Owing to the condition ξ a (p -k) > 0 the upper limit of integration over cos θ in the first integrand term is k/2p a F . The same value serves as the lower limit in the second term. Performing the integration over solid angle we obtain Main contribution to integral at ε → 0 gives the first term ln ε-Ω ε+Ω ≈ -ε 2Ω . Substituting this expression one can easily calculate integral over Ω. Then, performing the integration over k from 0 to some cut-off k c we obtain Thus, via p a F and M z field dependence the electron effective mass is the magnetic field dependent quantity. In similar manner one can calculate the electron effective mass renormalisation due to transverse spin fluctuations. But they have smaller magnitude due to much smaller value of susceptibilities in direction perpendicular to the easy magnetisation axis. The low temperature specific heat of electron gas in two band ferromagnet is also decreased with magnetisations growth along the easy axis Near the Fermi surface the Green functions of interacting electrons are where is the Fermi velocity. It depends on magnetic field through the Fermi momentum and through the electrons effective mass. The logarithm dependence of the electrons effective mass from magnetisation originates from our assumptions about isotropy of the electron spectrum and the spin excitations spectrum made to perform of all calculations analytically. In case of realistic spectra with orthorhombic anisotropy the conclusion about suppression of electrons effective mass by the external magnetic field directed along spontaneous magnetisation is still valid. We will consider so called equal-spin pairing state that is taking in consideration just spin up-up ∆ ↑ and spin down-down ∆ ↓ components of the order parameter and ignoring zero spin projection component. If pairing occurs due to spin fluctuation exchange all the pairing amplitudes expressed through the corresponding components of susceptibility. As, this was already mentioned, in the temperature region where the superconducting state is realised one can neglect the frequency dependence of susceptibilities. This case the linear in respect of the order parameter component equations for determination of critical temperature (upper critical field) are where the Green functions products have the following arguments but unlike to the paper The pairing amplitudes are expressed through the odd part of spin susceptibilities xy not vanishing even in the case of tetragonal symmetry assumed in the paper Here, and what follows, pz is the z-component of the unit momentum vector p = p/|p|. The treatment of equal spin pairing A-state is much more cumbersome because its spin-up and spin-down pairing amplitudes present the linear combinations of k x and k y components and the system of equations for the critical temperature or the upper critical field determination inevitably consists of 4 equations. The Ginzburg-Landau theory for the state The internal field acting on the electron charges in uranium ferromagnet is small in comparison with the upper critical field at low enough temperatures. Hence, the formal determination of critical temperature of transition to the superconducting state in zero external field can be obtained by ignoring the coordinate (or q) dependence in the Eqs.( For the B-state χ u xy component of susceptibility plays no role, and Unlike the paper = 2γε0 π , ln γ = 0.577 is the Euler constant, and ε 0 is an energy cutoff for pairing interaction. We assume here that it has the same value for both bands. The zero of determinant of the system (19) yields the BCS-type formula where is the function of temperature and magnetic field. The Eq. ( In the case of a single-band (say spin-up) superconducting state, when G = G ↑ 1 , it is This formula reminds the known McMillan We have seen that λ ↑ decreases with magnetic field. N ↑ 0 = mp ↑ F /2π 2 increases with magnetic field. According to Eq.( The upper critical field problem for the B-state presents a two-band generalisation of the corresponding problem for the superconducting polar state Here, the operators where . By means the standard procedure where the integrals have the following property Hence, the equations (28) can be rewritten in the form eliminating of the logarithm divergency in the integrals where Equating the determinant of this system to zero we obtain the equation for the determination of the upper critical field (33) The solution of this equation at arbitrary temperature taking into account the field dependence of all the quantities G a i (H) and T sc (H) can be found only numerically. Here, we will obtain the analytic expressions at T = 0 and near the critical temperature. The condition h + H = 0 means that the external field in single-domain specimen completely compensates the internal field. At h + H = B > 0 the temperature dependence of B c2 (T ) corresponds to the temperature dependence of the upper critical field in poly-domain specimen at an external field exceeding the internal magnetisation At T → 0, according to Ref.27, where is the coherence length and φ 0 = π c e is the flux quantum. Hence, in the Eq.(33) the divergent term ln Tsc T drops out and we obtain the quadratic equation in respect of ln √ B c2 . The solution of it looks quite cumbersome. We write here the corresponding expression for the one band (spin-up) ferromagnet which coincides with the upper critical field for the polar phase The coherence length ξ ↑ 0 itself is the magnetic field function. Near the critical temperature when the Hence, we obtain in linear in Tsc-T Tsc approximation For single band (say spin-up) ferromagnet the expression for the upper critical field acquires much simpler form Here, ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function. The critical temperature T sc and the Fermi velocity v ↑ F are magnetic field dependent quantities. Hence, this expression presents an equation for the upper critical field determination. As it was shown in We have studied the magnetic field dependence of effective mass and derived the equations for the temperature dependence of the upper critical field in a two band ferromagnetic superconductor with triplet pairing. It was found that the low temperature specific heat is slowly decreasing function of magnetic field along the easy axis. This corresponds to the experimental observations Finally I would like to mention the principal simplifications made in the calculations. The derivation have been done for two band spin-up spin-down ferromagnetic superconductor with equal-spin pairing. The effective mass and the pairing coupling constants were derived by the field theoretical method but making use the phenomenological formulae for the spin susceptibility components. I have worked with isotropic electron and spin-fluctuation spectra. The latter assumptions allowing to perform calculation analytically are obviously inconsistent with orthorhombic structure of ferromagnetic compounds under consideration. The Coulomb electron-electron interaction has been neglected. Despite of the shortcomings the presented theory allows to establish the qualitative field dependence of measurable quantities such as the electron effective mass and the upper critical field in ferromagnetic superconductors.