Following the discovery of superconductivity in the cuprates 1 and the seminal work by Anderson 2 , the theoretical efforts to understand high-temperature superconductivity have been focusing to a large extent on a simple model: the one-band Hubbard model 3-5 . However, superconducting cuprates need to be doped, and the doped holes go into the oxygen orbitals 6-8 . This requires a more elaborate multi-band model such as the three-orbital Emery model 9 . 10 The recently discovered nickelate superconductors 11 appear, at first glance, to be even more complicated multi-orbital systems. Here, we analyse this multi-orbital system and find that it is instead the nickelates which can be described by a one-band Hubbard model, albeit with an additional electron reservoir and only around the superconducting regime. Our calculations of the critical temperature T C are in good agreement with experiment, and show that optimal doping is slightly below the 20% Sr-doping of Ref. 11. Even more promising than 3d nickelates are 4d palladates. The discovery of superconductivity in Sr 0.2 Nd 0.8 NiO 2 by Li et al. 11 marked the beginning of a new, a nickel age of superconductivity, ensuing a plethora of experimental and theoretical work; see, among others, Refs. 12-33. Similar as for the cuprates, the basic structural elements are NiO 2 planes on a square lattice, and Ni has the same formal 3d 9 electronic configuration. But at second glance, there are noteworthy differences, see Fig. Such bands or electron pockets have the intriguing effect that even for the parent compound NdNiO 2 , the Nid x 2 -y 2 orbital is hole doped, with the missing electrons in the Nd-5d pockets. In other words, the parent compound NdNiO 2 already behaves as the doped cuprates. First calculations 16, In the blue-shaded region, a one-band Hubbard model description is possible with its doping given on the upper x-axis. from a Fermi surface with both, the Nd-5d pockets and the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 Fermi surface. Such a multi-orbital nature of superconductivity has also been advocated in Refs. 18 and 29. There is further the Nd-4f orbital which in density functional theory (DFT) spuriously shows up just above the Fermi energy. But these 4f orbitals will be localised which can be mimicked by DFT+U or by putting them into the core, as has been done in Fig. A further striking difference is that the oxygen band is much further away from the Fermi level than for the cuprates, see Fig. Fig. Let us now discuss these results in more detail. We start with a DFT calculation [cf. Supplementary Information Section S.1] which puts the Nd-4f orbitals just above E F . But since their hybridisation with the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 orbital is weak 38 , |V x 2 -y 2 ,4f | = 25 meV, see Supplementary Information Section S.2, they will localise and not make a Kondo effect. This localisation can be described e.g. by the spin-splitting in DFT+U , or by including the Nd-4f states in the core. It leaves us with a well defined window with just five Nd-5d and five Ni-3d around the Fermi energy. For these remaining ten orbitals we do a Wannier function projection (see Supplementary Information Section S.2) and subsequent DMFT calculation with constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) calculated inter-orbital interaction U = 3.10 eV (2.00 eV) and Hund's exchange J = 0.65 eV (0.25 eV) for Ni (Nd) Hence we have two bands of predominately Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 and Nd-5d xy character. Their hybridisation is zero, see Supplementary Information Table If we study the doping dependence in Fig. At 30% Sr-doping we are in the situation that the other Ni-3d bands are now immediately below the Fermi energy. Hence around this doping it is no longer justified to employ a Ni-d x 2 -y 2 -band plus Nd-d xy -pocket around A picture to describe the low-energy physics. However below 30% doping, the other Ni-3d orbitals enter the stage. Because of the weak hybdization, the Nd-d xy -pocket only acts as an electron reservoir, which changes the doping of the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 -band from the lower x-axis in Fig. For this d x 2 -y 2 -band we have done a separate Wannier function projection which results in the aforementioned hopping parameters t = 395 meV, t = -95 meV, t = 47 meV between next-nearest and the two nextnext-nearest neighbours; a cRPA calculation for this single orbital yields U = 3.2 eV= 8t 39 . The hopping parameters in the z-direction are negligibly small t z = 34 meV, leaving us with a -to a good approximationtwo-dimensional one-band Hubbard model. This two-dimensional one-band Hubbard model with the properly translated doping according to Fig. At the temperatures of Fig. In Fig. Altogether, this leads to the superconducting dome of Fig. Besides a slight increase of T C by optimising the doping, and further room of improvement by adjusting t and t , our results especially show that a larger bandwidth and a somewhat smaller interaction-to-bandwidth ratio may substantially enhance T C , see Supplementary Information Fig. Note added: In an independent DFT+DMFT study Leonov et al. Second note added: Given that our phase diagram Fig. We mainly employ the wien2k program package The wien2k bandstructure around the Fermi energy is projected onto maximally localized Wannier functions 51 using wien2wannier We supplement the five Ni-3d plus five Nd-5d orbital Wannier Hamiltonian by a cRPA calculated Coulomb repulsions 28 U = 3.10 eV (2.00 eV) and Hund's exchange J = 0.65 eV (0.25 eV) for Ni (Nd or La). The resulting Kanamori Hamiltonian is solved in DMFT 35 at room temperature (300 K) using continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo simulations in the hybridisation expansions For calculating the superconducting T C , we employ the dynamical vertex approximation (DΓA), for a review see Ref. 36. We first calculate the particle-particle vertex with spin-fluctuations in the particle-hole and transversal-particle hole channel, and then the leading eigenvalues in the particle-particle channel, as done before in Ref. 40. This is like the first iteration for the particle-particle channel in a more complete parquet DΓA Here, we provide information supplementary to the main manuscript. Specifically, Section S.1 presents the orbital character of the three bands crossing the Fermi level for undoped LaNiO2 and NdNiO2 in density functional theory. Section S.2 discusses details of the Wannier function projections onto 1, 10 and 17 bands and tabulates the most important hopping parameters. Section S.3 shows the dependence of the doping of the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band and the quasiparticle mass on Sr-doping as calculated in dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT). Section S.4 supplements the main text by additional DMFT spectra at other doping levels for NdNiO2 as well as for LaNiO2. Section S.5 provides additional dynamical vertex approximation spectra and phase diagrams obtained for a somewhat smaller and larger interaction U than expected and employed in the main text. This hints that Nd(La)PdO2 with a larger bandwidth and slightly smaller interaction might host even larger critical temperatures. Section S.6 compares with the recently obtained experimental phase diagram. Starting point of our analysis is the density functional theory (DFT) bandstructure which we have calculated by wien2k 1,2 , VASP 3 , and FPLO 4 using the PBE 5 version of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). There are three relevant orbitals that cross the Fermi energy E F = 0 in DFT. We determine their orbital character in FPLO 4 version 18-00.55, using a k-mesh of 19 × 19 × 22 points for the scalar relativistic calculations. For NdNiO 3 , the Nd-4f states were put into the core ("open core"), their occupation is fixed to three electrons. At high-symmetry points, some orbitals may belong to the same two-dimensional irreducible representation. As a result, the respective orbital characters can show a seeming discontinuity in the band structure plot. The results are presented in Fig. The band in the second row forms a Fermi surface pocket around the Γ-pocket. It is mainly of Nd(La)-5d 3z 2 -r 2 character, but with much more admixture from the other orbitals, in particular, the Ni-3d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital. In case of LaNiO 2 it is difficult to disentangle this band from the the La-4f orbitals above 2 eV, but this only concerns the less relevant upper band edge. In case of NdNiO 2 , these Nd-4f have been removed by treating them as part of the open core. An important observation is that the Γ-pocket is only slightly below E F for LaNiO 2 but extends noticeable below E F for NdNiO 2 . This is however, possibly an artifact of the open core treatment. In a plain GGA calculation with Nd-4f states as valance states (not shown), the distance between the bottom of the Nd-5d 3z 2 -r 2 pocket and E F is more similar to that in LaNiO 2 . In a DFT+U treatment this pocket is spin-split due to a ferromagnetic interaction with the Nd-4f magnetic moment Finally, there is the pocket around the A-point in Fig. -0.0300 0.0300 0.0000 -0.0851 -0.0851 -0.0203 -0.0000 -0.0215 0.0215 0.0000 -0.0612 -0.0612 0.0160 -0.0000 TABLE S.II. Hybridization (hopping amplitude in eV) between the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 and the Nd(La)-4f orbitals, as obtained from Wannier projections onto 17-bands (La/Nd-4f +La/Nd-5d+Ni-3d) including the 4f as valence states in DFT(GGA). La-dxy La-dyz La-dxz La-d 0.0000 0.0811 -0.0811 -0.0239 0.0000 TABLE S.III. Hybridization (hopping amplitude in eV) between the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 and the La/Nd-5d orbitals. The results are obtained from Wannier projections onto 17-bands (La/Nd-4f +La/Nd-5d+Ni-3d) and 10-bands (La/Nd-5d+Ni-3d). The Nd-4f bands are treated as core states in "GGA with opencore" and as valence states in "GGA". t z = -t 001 the hopping in the z-direction perpendicular to the NiO 2 plane. The hopping parameters are surprisingly similar for LaNiO 2 and NdNiO 2 and the different Wannier projections, considering the fact that e.g. the 4f orbitals are at very different energies for the three DFT calculations in Table A further relevant result of the Wannier projection is the hybridization with the 4f orbitals which is shown in Table Next we turn to the hybridization between the relevant Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band and the La/Nd-5d orbitals. The important observation is that the hybridization between the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band and the Nd(La)-5d xy and the Nd(La)-5d z 2 is zero. These are the most important hybridizations since these two Nd(La) orbitals form the basis of the A-and Γ-pocket, respectively. Hence we can, to a very good approximation, indeed consider these pockets to be independent of the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band, except for that they may serve as an electron reservoir. Part of the holes, induced by e.g. Sr-doping will go into the Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 band, and part into the A-and Γ-pocket. The latter is completely depopulated in the superconducting regime. In Fig. In this section, we show the dependence of our DΓA results within a reasonable range of U values above the cRPA value In Fig. S.6, we show the momentum dependence of the k-resolved spectrum and the superconducting eigenvalue (λ SC ) vs. temperature (T ), which are the same plot as the Fig. We also show the phase diagram for these three U values in Fig. S.7. As discussed in the main paper the phase diagrams are obtained from λ SC → 1, which for higher T C 's is interpolated and for lower T C 's extrapolated with a fit function arXiv:2002.12230v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 22 Aug 2020