In this paper we study a Darcy-scale mathematical model for biofilm formation in porous media. The pores in the core are divided into three phases: water, oil, and biofilm. The water and oil flow are modeled by an extended version of Darcy's law and the substrate is transported by diffusion and convection in the water phase. Initially there is biofilm on the pore walls. The biofilm consumes substrate for production of biomass and modifies the pore space which changes the rock permeability. The model includes detachment of biomass due to water flux and death of bacteria, and is implemented in MRST. We discuss the capability of the numerical simulator to capture results from laboratory experiments. We perform a novel sensitivity analysis based on sparse-grid interpolation and multi-wavelet expansion to identify the critical model parameters. Numerical experiments using diverse injection strategies are performed to study the impact of different porosity-permeability relations in a core saturated with water and oil. After primary and secondary production, up to 85% of the oil remains in the reservoir Experiments in microsystems allow us to observe processes in more detail, which leads to improvement of the experimental methods in core-scale experiments. For example, in Mathematical models of bioplug technology are important as they help to predict the applicability of this MIEOR strategy and to optimize the benefits. In Sensitivity studies of mathematical models are of great interest because they provide estimates of the influence of physical parameters on a quantity of interest, e.g., biofilm formation. In The mathematical model consists of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations. Two-point flux approximation (TPFA) and backward Euler (BE) are used for the space and time discretization respectively. To solve the resulting nonlinear algebraic system, Newton's method is used. The scheme is implemented in the MATLAB reservoir simulation tool (MRST), a free open-source software for reservoir modeling and simulation To summarize, the new contributions of this work are: • The comparison of experimental results to numerical simulations of a core-scale porous medium including biofilm formation. • Performing a novel global sensitivity analysis of the model parameters to identify the critical parameters. • Performing numerical simulations for different porosity-permeability relations to study their impact on the predicted oil recovery. • The study of diverse substrate injection strategies for the bioplug technology. The paper is structured as follows. Firstly, we introduce and describe the implementation of the core-scale mathematical model for two-phase flow including the effects of biofilm formation. Secondly, we present a comparison of numerical simulations to laboratory experiments of this core-scale model. Thirdly, we introduce a novel method for global sensitivity analysis and apply it to the mathematical core-scale model. Diverse numerical experiments for different porosity-permeability relations and injection strategies are also explained. Finally, we present the conclusions. We consider a core sample of radius r and length L initially filled with oil and water and a given biofilm distribution. Fig. The mass conservation and extended Darcy's law for the oil phase are given by and for the water phase where φ f is the porosity outside the biofilm, v α the flow velocity, k r,α the relative permeability, ρ α the fluid density, k the absolute rock permeability, g the gravity, μ α the viscosity, φ b the volume fraction of biofilm in the REV, θ w the biofilm water content, and Q α source/sink terms. The minimum value of φ b is zero while the maximum value of φ b is equal to the initial porosity of the rock φ 0 , corresponding to the case when the pores are filled with biofilm. In this work, we assume that there are no fluid sources/sinks, neglect the gravity effects, set to zero the residual oil saturation and irreducible water saturation, assume oil cannot penetrate into the biofilm, and neglect the capillary pressure (p w = p o ). The previous assumptions are commonly used to reduce the complexity and number of parameters of mathematical models for porous media. Consider the mass conservation for the water in Eq. 2. The first term gives the changes on time for the total water mass in the REV, i.e., the water outside the biofilm (ρ w φ f S w ) plus the water inside the biofilm (ρ w φ b θ w ). The Brook-Corey relations are commonly used to model the relative permeability relations. These relations are given as a function of the water saturation and experimental parameters such as exponents for the saturation, values for the endpoint relative permeabilities, and residual phase saturations. Simplified expressions of these relations are given by where γ and β are experimentally fitted factors. We assume that water can flow inside the biofilm even when there is only oil outside the biofilm (S w = 0). Then, the previous relation is not a good model because for S w = 0 it results in k r,w (0) = 0 which leads to zero water velocity. Recalling that the relative permeabilities are used to extend Darcy's law to multiphase flow, we look for relationships which account for the water saturation and volume fraction of biofilm. These relationships need to fulfill the following criteria: when there is only oil outside the biofilm, then k r,w (S w = 0, φ b ) = 1; when there is only biofilm in the REV, then k r,w (S w , φ b = φ 0 ) = 1. Then, we propose the following two relative permeability relations: To describe the movement of substrate, we consider the following convection-diffusion-reaction transport equations: In the previous equations, C n is the substrate concentration in the water, j n the substrate flux in water, and D n the substrate dispersion coefficient which includes mechanical dispersion plus diffusion. The reaction term R n is given by where μ n is the maximum rate of substrate utilization, ρ b the biomass density, and K n is the Monod half-velocity coefficient. The following equation describes the biofilm evolution: Here, we assumed that all consumed substrate is used to produce biomass, a linear death of bacteria given by K d , and erosion of bacteria given by the magnitude of the pressure gradient times a constant depending on the biofilm K str . After biomass has been detached, in this model we assume that the detached biomass flows out of the core and does not affect the rock properties; therefore, we do not include a transport equation for the detached biomass. Diverse porosity-permeability relations have been proposed for the last decades. We refer to The first one is called the power law where k b is the biofilm permeability, B r is a relative porosity given by B r = 1 -φ f /φ 0 , and B c is the critical point where biofilm begins to detach and form plugs. Thullner et al. The porosity in the porous medium changes in time as a function of the biofilm volume fraction φ b (t). When there is no biofilm, the porosity φ f (t) is equal to the initial porosity. In the case when the porous medium is filled with biofilm (φ f (t) = 0), the porosity in the REV is equal to the biofilm porosity θ w . The porosity-permeability relations (9-10) are given as a function of the rock porosity and do not include the biofilm porosity. The porositypermeability relations k c and k t do include the biofilm porosity. Using the definitions of φ f (t) and φ b (t), we have the following relation for the void space outside the biofilm This mathematical model is implemented in a 3D domain with a uniform cell-centered grid. The TPFA is used for the spatial discretization, while BE for the time discretization. The Newton's method is used as linearization scheme. The implementation of this core-scale mathematical model is done in MRST, based on the modification of the polymer example in the module ad-eor (see Core-scale experiments under controlled conditions are performed in the laboratory for studying the effect on biofilm growth in porous media. These experiments aim to provide a better understanding of different features, i.e., the relation between biofilm composition and growth conditions, the plugging potential of different bacteria, and the adaptability of biofilm at diverse substrate flux. Fig. In the previous section we introduced the model equations for biofilm growth and two-phase flow in porous media. We simplify the mathematical model to compare to the experiment. This experiment can be modeled as a 1D single-phase flow system, where in addition we consider that the biofilm is impermeable and only diffusion for the substrate to reduce the number of parameters. Table Table Nine parameters are needed to solve the mathematical model in Table We keep the exposition on sensitivity analysis general to emphasize that the methodology is not restricted to the problems presented in this paper. Let q( y) be a scalar multidimensional function with y = (y 1 , . . . , y n ) ∈ Ω ⊂ R n , defined by a range of independent parameters, i.e. Ω = (a 1 , b 1 ) ⊗ ... ⊗ (a n , b n ). We associate a nonnegative weight w j (y j ) = 1/(b j -a j ) with each parameter y j ∈ [a j , b j ] for j = 1, . . . , n, and use the product measure w = n j=1 w j . More general weight functions are possible, including non-product measures corresponding to inter-dependence between the parameters To determine the relative effect of each of the n input parameters on the output quantity of interest q, we perform a global sensitivity analysis in terms of a Sobol decomposition q {i,j} (y i , y j ) + . . . + q {1,...,n} ( y), . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Directly computing global sensitivities of a computationally complex function, e.g., a computer model, over a domain of only moderately high dimensionality is often infeasible due to the computational cost. As an additional challenge, we are interested in nonsmooth q, excluding the use of Sobol decomposition based on generalized polynomial chaos for smooth problems Multi-Linear Collocation. The outline of multi-linear collocation closely follows the exposition in In this work we employ the piecewise linear 'hat' functions for level > 1 supplemented with the unit function (level = 1). The collocation nodes are nested, i.e., Y ⊂ Y +1 . Rather than expressing the interpolant as a function of the nodes in some sufficiently refined set Y , it can be expressed as a sum of hierarchical surpluses, i.e., differences between the interpolants at successive levels, ∆ (q) = I (q) -I -1 (q), I 0 (q) ≡ 0. Then, Eq. ( q(y j )ψ where the superscript (j) is used to emphasize that the basis functions are level specific. Using this construction, one may use the local difference between the interpolant and the true function as a measure to determine where further refinement in terms of more nodes are needed. In multiple dimensions (n > 1), a tensor-product formula would lead to very large sets of nodes even for moderate n. As a remedy, a sparse grid based on Smolyak's construction For more details on the multi-linear collocation method we refer to Sobol Indices via Multi-Wavelet Expansions. An alternative representation of q is via a spectral expansion in a set of multidimensional orthogonal basis functions {φ j }, where the infinite sum is truncated to some finite set in practical application. This is known as generalized polynomial chaos expansion if the basis functions are orthogonal polynomials Nonsmooth functions can be represented by means of multi-resolution analysis where the basis functions are piecewise polynomial multi-wavelets Let {φ k ( y)} k∈IMW be a finite-dimensional basis of multi-wavelets indexed by some set of nonnegative integers Ideally, the number of basis functions should be limited but chosen in order to be a good approximation of the interpolant I p,n (q) of the function of interest. The approximation properties of the multi-wavelet basis are determined by the order of the piecewise polynomial multi-wavelets, and the resolution level that governs the localization in parameter space. Analogous to the hierarchical surplus defined for the multi-linear interpolant, the hierarchical surplus of the multi-wavelet expansion is given by the contribution captured by the finest resolution level. The multi-wavelet basis is hierarchical, and can be enriched by adding multi-wavelets to regions labeled important due to large surpluses. We may now either project the interpolant I p,n (q) onto the basis {φ k ( y)} k∈IMW , or interpolate the product qφ k , and then perform the projection by computing the expected value. The latter is simpler, as it only involves integration of a piecewise linear function to compute each multi-wavelet coefficient. However, we do not know a priori what multi-wavelets should be included in the truncated basis, and will therefore settle for a simple strategy that also admits adaptivity. Unlike q itself, the interpolant I p,n (q) can be sampled repeatedly at moderate computational cost. Given N random samples of the parameters y, and a tentative multi-wavelet basis of size P , we form the linear system for the P -vector of multi-wavelet coefficients c where the matrix Φ ∈ R N ×P is defined by [Φ] k,j = φ j ( y (k) ), and q ∈ R N contains the evaluations of I p,n (q) in the samples y j , j = 1, . . . , N . The ordinary least squares solution to For the numerical experiments, we consider a core-sample saturated with water and oil. We impose a more permeable zone (10 2 k 0 ) in the middle of the core, as shown in Fig. Notation Values Reference Bacterial death rate Impact of Porosity-Permeability Relations. We compare the oil recovery for four porosity-permeability relations: Vandevivere k v (9), Thullner k th relationships. Fig. We observe that after one day of water injection, the Vandevivere porosity-permeability relation predicts larger oil recovery than the tube relation. In addition, the channel relation predicts slightly more oil recovery than the Thullner relation. These results are expected from Fig. Injection Strategies. The study of injection strategies is important for the optimization of the bioplug technology. Comparison of oil recovery for different injection techniques is possible through numerical experiments. In this work, we compare the oil recovery for different substrate injection strategies for the same initial conditions. For this study, we use the k c porosity-permeability relation. Fig. From the previous plot we observe that Strategy E predicts the largest oil recovery. Changing the flow direction at half of the injection (Strategy C) does not result in an improvement on the oil recovery in comparison to Strategy B. Strategies C and D give similar predictions of oil recovery. Fig. Case I: Mean Permeability with Variability in Seven Parameters. We consider the single-phase corescale mathematical model in Table Case II: Two-Phase Flow with Three Variable Parameters. We now consider the case of two-phase flow (oil and water). The injected water velocity changes after 8 hours from v i = 1 m/day to a higher velocity of v i = 50 m/day. Along the length of the core, we discretize with 30 elements, while on the transversal section we discretize with 9 times 9 elements. Due to the computational complexity, only three parameters are considered in the sensitivity study: initial volume fraction, position, and length of the biofilm, as presented in Table In this work we discuss a core-scale mathematical model for single-and two-phase flow including the transport of substrate and changes on the permeability due to formation of biomass. The single-phase laboratory experiment shows that the substrate input changes the plug-potential. The single-phase mathematical model captured the observed response of permeability to changes in the substrate flux. For the two-phase mathematical model, we investigated the effects on the simulated oil recovery for different empirical and upscaled porosity-permeability relations. These results show that the predicted oil recovery could be over-or underestimated depending on the assumed porosity-permeability relation in the mathematical model. Numerical simulations are performed for different injection strategies to study the oil recovery. After simulations, injecting substrate and stopping the water flow to let the bacteria consume the substrate and after reactivating the flow at a higher rate results in the largest oil recovery prediction. The sensitivity analysis for the single-phase core-scale model shows that two parameters are responsible for almost all variability in the mean permeability: maximum growth rate and bacterial death rate. Both parameters need to be estimated in the laboratory with sufficient accuracy to lead to a reliable estimate of the permeability changes. The sensitivity analysis for the two-phase core-scale model demonstrates less impact on the total variability in oil extraction from the initial position of biofilm as compared to the initial volume fraction and length of the biofilm. Thus, the amount of initial biofilm has a higher impact on the oil recovery in comparison to the initial position of biofilm in the thief zone. 