Lensless microscopy with coherent or partially coherent light sources is a well known imaging technique, commonly referred as digital in-line holographic microscopy. In the established methods, both the spatial and temporal coherence of light play a crucial role in determining the resolution of reconstructed object. We report lensless microscopy with a spatially extended white LED, a light source of low spatial and very low temporal coherence. The wave-field propagation between two parallel planes can be obtained using a convolution operation, where the convolution kernel depends on the objectsensor distance and the characteristics of the light source. For a light source of unknown characteristics, this kernel is an unknown function. In the proposed reconstruction method, we decompose an unknown convolution kernel of very large size (128 × 128) into a small unknown light-source-specific kernel (size 9 × 9) and a known light-source-independent kernel (size 128 × 128). This drastically reduces the number of parameters to be estimated at the system identification step, which has been performed here by one time imaging of the known microscopic objects. Final unknown object estimation has been performed using the upper-bound constrained deconvolution. A lateral resolution of ∼1-2 m has been demonstrated. Lensless microscopy has gained its popularity due to its simple, compact, portable and cost-effective hardware. Large field of view images at the sub-micron resolution can be obtained Recorded fringe pattern on the image sensor is optionally passed through a denoising where x = ( , ) is the lateral coordinate vector and denotes the unwanted terms in holography. Wave-field propagation between two parallel planes is obtained by solving scalar diffraction integral equations such as Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction formula or Fresnel-kirchoff diffraction formula where ⊗ denotes the convolution operator, is the wavelength, 0 = 2 is the wave-number, = √ 2 + 2 + 2 , is the distance from the object to observation plane and is called the obliquity factor. Here is the angle between the unit normal vector and the distance vector . Under the paraxial approximation, ≈ 1 where, v = ( , ) is the frequency coordinate vector. Wave-field backpropagation is obtained as where and denote the inverse fourier transform and fourier transform respectively. Since it is difficult to accurately record the value of while capturing fringe patterns, an iterative assessment is required to estimate the value of z which provides the sharpest object reconstruction. Finally, an iterative phase retrieval step is used to suppress the twin image artifact (ringing artifact around the features) contributed by the conjugate scattered field * (x) in equation 1. Either some prior information about the object Limited pixel-pitch of the sensor, signal-to-noise ratio and the coherence of light are major factors that influence the resolution of the reconstructed object. Nowadays, image sensors with a pixel-pitch ∼ 1 m are commercially available. Signal-to-noise ratio is improved by using the statistical methods of object reconstruction, such as optimization of an appropriate cost function Here is the cost function, ̂ is an estimate of object, ‖(.)‖ denotes -2 norm, is the recorded fringe pattern, (.) is the function to transform object into fringe pattern, commonly referred as the known forward problem, is the regularization parameter and (.) is the regularization function. In this paper, we focus our main discussion on the resolution deteriorated due to the reduced coherence of the light source. Low spatial and/or temporal coherence lead to observation of highly blurred fringes with reduced contrast and hence loss of resolution in the final reconstructed image. In other words, it reduces the limit of the maximum fringe frequency which can be detected (at a given working distance), which, in turn, limits the maximum resolution in the reconstructed object [9] used a spatially extended, narrow band LED (center wavelength = 470 nm) in lensless microscopy and demonstrated that the resolution reduced due to low spatial coherence can be improved by an additional deconvolution step before image reconstruction. They reported a lateral resolution of 3.1 m. For the weakly scattering objects, | (x)| << | | and the equation 1 takes the following form: Now, we show that where (x) = all ones. Now the equation 12 becomes, where is the scaled form of the true object (x). From equation 17 we get: subscripts (.) and (.) denote the real and imaginary parts of the respective quantity (.). We assume that the phase shift introduced by our object is negligible i.e. (x) = 0 and (x) = (x). Now the equation 18 becomes: In the previously established holographic in-line microscopy methods, the forward problem is designed on the assumption that a monochromatic point source of light at a finite or infinite distance (in the case a collimator lens is used) is illuminating the sample. A spatially extended light source can be considered to contain many point sources, which are incoherent to each other. The observed fringe pattern in such a case is the superposition of individual fringe patterns produced by each point source, weighted by the scale factor , proportional to the intensities of these sources. where h denotes the real part of impulse response function for th monochromatic point source (based on equation 19). Similarly, in case of a polychromatic light source, observed fringe pattern can be approximated as the superposition of fringe patterns produced by discrete wavelengths, weighted by the spectral distribution function where h denotes the real part impulse response function for th monochromatic point source of wavelength . Using the distributivity property of convolution, equation 21 can be re-expressed with a single convolution operation as: where Note that in this paper, we consider that the properties of the light source are not completely known. So the function h (x) is an unknown function. Now we rewrite equation 23 as: where (x) is the fringe pattern in the case of monochromatic point source and h (x) denotes the inverse of convolution kernel h (x) shown in equation 19. Now using the ) Fringe pattern for the same object recorded with the lensless microscopy setup with a spatially extended white LED, (c.) Reconstruction using angular spectrum method and (d.) Deconvolution using h shows improvement in variance of gradient (VoG); Testing: (e.) Photolithography sample captured in a bright field microscope with 10x objective lens, (f.) Fringe pattern for the same object recorded with the same lensless microscopy setup, (g.) Reconstruction using angular spectrum method, (h.) Deconvolution using h and (i.)Deconvolution using h with the upper-bound constraint. associativity property of convolution, equation 25 becomes: Equation 27 shows that the fringe pattern in case of a low spatio-temporal coherence light source is related to the fringe pattern corresponding to a monochromatic point source by a linear convolution operation. As mentioned for h (x), h (x) is again an unknown function, which we estimate using the imaging of a known object in our lensless imaging setup. The advantage of estimating h (x) instead of h (x) is that the number of unknown parameters to be estimated reduce drastically. A lensless imaging setup is prepared with a white LED with center wavelength 0 = 550 nm and line-width Δ =∼ 250 nm as the light source (without any spatial or temporal filtering). An image sensor of pixel pitch 1.12 m × 1.12 m and physical size 3.68 mm × 2.76 mm is fixed at a distance of ∼ 20 cm from the light source. Sample is fixed on a micrometer stage at submillimeter distance from the image sensor (see fig. Photolithography sample of features ∼3 m and red blood cells of diameter ∼6-7 m have been used as unknown objects. The object to sensor distance should be same as the value during the known sample imaging step. Since this may be difficult to achieve experimentally, distance becomes ± Δ . In our imaging experiment, Δ was ∼-30 m for photolithography sample and Δ was ∼-10 m for red blood cells. h (x) is estimated by solving the following optimization problem: (x) and (x) denote the th fringe pattern and ground truth image from the set. is the regularization parameter. We obtained this minimization using interior point algorithm For computing an unknown object from the recorded fringe pattern, we have modified well known Richardson-Lucy deconvolution algorithm where denotes the iteration number, and h (x) is obtained by combining h (x) (estimated in previous section) and h (x, ± Δ ) as: All ones is used as the first estimate of ̂ (x). Without any regularization, this algorithm is strongly susceptible to noise overfitting problem. To avoid the noise overfitting and to suppress the ringing artifacts in the reconstruction, we have used the following additional constraint at every iteration: where is a parameter with value between 0 and 1, is a parameter close to 1 and UB(x) is reference illumination, i.e. image without any object but with same illumination and exposure time of sensor. Figure Variance of gradient (VoG) is a well-known measure of focus level because a well-focussed image is expected to have sharper edges Figure In the previously established methods of lensless microscopy, backprojection is performed using the free space optical transfer function which is obtained from the scalar diffraction theory for monochromatic light. We have demonstrated that when a light source of low coherence like spatially extended white LED is used, this monochromatic free space transfer function does not give the best image reconstruction, specifically in terms of resolution and ringing artifacts. In the proposed method, using the imaging of known microscopic objects and principle of optimization, a suitable light-source-specific kernel has been estimated. Using this kernel and upper-bound constrained deconvolution algorithm, an image reconstruction with improved resolution (resolution ∼1-2 m) and reduced ringing artifacts has been obtained. * SSIM w.r.t. image captured in a bright field microscope with 10X objective lens.