THz technologies are a powerful tool for label-free detection of biomolecules. However, significant reduction of the lower detection limit is required to apply THz-sensors in biomedical diagnosis. This paper reports an ultrasensitive THz-biosensor based on asymmetric double split ring resonators (aDSRR) for the direct label-and PCR-free detection of DNA at physiologically relevant concentrations. We introduce selective functionalization and localized electric field concentration to enhance aDSRR sensitivity and specificity. The sensor characteristics are demonstrated using the human tumor marker MIA in cDNA samples produced from total RNA without PCR-amplification. Measurements of DNA samples with concentrations as low as 1.55 × 10 -12 mol/l are presented. Recent substantial developments in genomic technologies have provided possibilities for widespread future health applications, e.g., predictive, preventive, and personalized medicine. These advances are closely coupled with the development of powerful, reliable, and efficient methods that can detect, analyze, and identify biomolecules, and assess their complex interactions in biological networks. Standard bioanalytical techniques for DNA analysis still rely on amplification techniques like polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in order to obtain higher detectable quantities and on fluorescently labeled DNA targets. Although sensitive and established, these techniques are time consuming and require extreme caution during preparation and analysis. There have been many attempts to develop biosensors using the so-called Lab-on-Chip technology as it promises to be a powerful, fast, and simple tool for DNA analysis Since resonances related to both macro-and bio-molecular interactions lie in the Terahertz (THz) frequency range, THz sensing and analysis of biomolecules has become an attractive alternative detection method. Vibration, torsion, and libration modes, as well as binding states cause resonant absorptions in the THz frequency range that result in characteristic material-specific spectral fingerprints, allowing for label-free THz analysis of biomolecules The relatively large wavelength of THz waves (300 μm at 1 THz) compared to the size of biomolecules (typically < 100 nm) strongly limits its sensitivity in terms of the minimum number of biomolecules that can be detected by a spectroscopic THz sensing approach. Frequencyselective surfaces (FSS) with a resonance frequency in the THz range may significantly enhance THz sensitivity However, despite of such advances, the sensitivity of THz sensing techniques is still several orders of magnitude lower than state-of-the-art bioanalytical sensing techniques. THz techniques still require significant improvements in order to reach relevant detection sensitivities needed for real-world applications. Numerous publications on THz analyses have measured biomolecules with comparable molecular weights (MW) in aqueous solution and found that the sensitivity is strongly dependent on MW: as MW increases, the minimum detectable concentration decreases because heavier and larger biomolecules are detected more easily. DNA composed of four 16-mer sequences with an MW of approx. 19527 g/mol, and a concentration of 4 × 10 -6 mol/l can be measured in aqueous solution using THz spectroscopy In this paper, we present a newly developed highly sensitive THz biosensor based on selectively functionalized FSS for the detection of DNA and an experimental evaluation of its detection capabilities. The FSS sensing structure has been carefully designed to maximize sensitivity to enable measurements at physiologically relevant scales. Specificity to the target biomolecule is achieved by selective hybridization of complementary DNA (cDNA) strands. Selective functionalization of the FSS structure is used to chemically bind single-stranded (ss) oligo-or polynucleotide probe molecules to the biosensor surface. High frequency excitation of the biosensor exhibits a strong concentration of the electric field at selectively functionalized resonant structures of the FSS. We measure synthetic and human DNA samples on our THz biosensor in ambient air using an all-electronic room temperature THz system. We provide experimental evidence of the high sensitivity of the THz biosensor using tumor markers produced from human RNA samples without requiring labeling nor a PCR amplification procedure. The design of the biosensor is based on asymmetric double split ring resonator (aDSRR) arrays (Fig. Similar structures of gold aDSRRs on glass substrates were presented previously The aDSRRs are arranged in groups of 5x5 and 7x7 elements in separated areas (query fields) (Fig. The metallization of the aDSRR structures are fabricated on top of a 500 μm quartz substrate (Fused Silica UV grade). The THz refractive index of fused silica is n ≈ 1.96 and remains constant in the THz range To evaluate and optimize the properties of the aDSRR, we used the Maxwell solver ANSYS HFSS for electromagnetic modeling. The aDSRR unit cell was simulated as a repetitive element with periodicity p and periodic boundary conditions. Gold was modeled with a dielectric constant ε r = -1.12 × 10 5 and conductivity σ = 4.01 × 10 7 S/m. These parameters were calculated from the complex dielectric function of the Drude model Few attempts have been made to determine the physical properties of DNA in the THz frequency range. In Traditional THz measurement systems for material analysis and characterization typically use time domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) consisting of photoconductive antennas for THz generation and electro-optical sampling We used a robust and frequency-stable all-electronic THz spectroscopy system in transmission mode for our biosensor measurements, therefore. This system provides a signal-to-noise ratio over 40 dB and can detect small frequency shifts below 6 MHz. The biosensor was positioned by motorized stages with 5 μm position repeatability in all three directions, allowing a very high measurement reproducibility for consecutive measurements after different biochemical procedures. The all-electronic measurement scheme is based on quasi-heterodyne detection: a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), modulated by a continuous saw-tooth signal, generating a local oscillator (LO) frequency of 12 -18 GHz. The LO signal is multiplied by a factor of 18 in a frequency multiplier chain, which results in an operating frequency range of 220 -320 GHz. Consequently, measuring one query field takes 110 ms, including signal processing. A more detailed description of the setup is provided in Two kinds of measurements were performed: (1) using ex-situ hybridized synthetic DNA to test functionalization dependencies, and (2) using total RNA derived from pathological samples of human origin (including melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) mRNA) in an on-chip hybridization to mimic typical biosensor applications. Initially, the chips were cleaned of residues, especially organics, with piranha solution (H 2 SO 4 : H 2 O 2 , 3:1) for 2 h at 75 • C. After cleaning, the remaining piranha solution was washed away by intensive rinsing with deionized (DI) water. The chip was dried in a nitrogen flow and placed in an oven at 50 • C for 45 min. The functionalization of the capture oligonucleotides is based on thiol-gold binding Each functionalization and hybridization steps involved manually pipetting 3 μl sample volumes, forming a droplet, which was left for 45 min on the biosensor at room temperature to ensure functionalization and hybridization were successful. After, the biosensor was rinsed with DI water to remove residues. In the last step the biosensor was dried with nitrogen and tempered at 50 • C for 45 min, followed by biosensor measurement. All measurements were performed in dry state to prevent distortion caused by water molecules. The drying process of the double-stranded (ds) DNA does not affect the bound cDNA, having no influence on results. For the unequivocal identification of frequency shifts in a query field, each biochemical process step was followed by a complete measurement of the biosensor. The frequency shift of each query field was determined by comparing the positions of the resonance feature of two measurements. The frequency shift on unloaded query fields were used as reference. Reference measurements are vital to control and monitor shifts, which may result from unwanted chemical or mechanical effects. Ex-situ, in this context, is the hybridization process of capture and target DNA in buffer solution. The hybridization process was performed in a tube filled with buffer solution in a thermoshaker for 8 h at 50 • C, below the melting temperature for this dsDNA (67.8 • C). Once hybridization was complete, separated sulfides were removed in Bio-Spin®P-6 Gel Columns centrifuged at 1000 g for 4 min with hybridization buffer (1 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, and NaOH to adjust to pH 7.5). Denaturation of dsDNA was performed with 8 M solution of CO(NH 2 ) 2 (UREA) for 45 min. The 25 bp DNA sequence derived from beta-actin mRNA is: 5 -THI-TGG-CAC-CAC-ACC-TTC-TAC-AAT-GAG-C-3 for the capture and 5 -G-CTC-ATT-GTA-GAA-GGT-GTG-GTG-CCA-FLU-3 for target probes, hereinafter referred to as SYN1. The 24 bp DNA sequence derived from MIA mRNA is: 5 -THI-GGT-CCT-ATG-CCC-AAG-CTG-GCT-GAC-3 for the capture and 5 -GTC-AGC-CAG-CTT-GGG-CAT-AGG-ACC-FLU-3 for target probes, hereinafter referred to as SYN2. The fluorescence marker at the 3 -end of the target probe enables further analysis without affecting THz measurements. The oligonucleotides were ordered from Eurofins Genomics GmbH. On-chip hybridization is the process of cDNA strands hybridizing to the biosensor surface. Functionalization was performed with the thiol modified synthetic capture probe SYN2, described above. This sequence is able to capture one specific cDNA, MIA, of the total cDNA sequences prepared from total RNA isolated from the human melanoma cell line (with the share of MIA cDNA being as low as 0.000048%). The specific detection of one of these cDNA molecules covers the typical case of application of medical diagnosis. To measure endogenous DNA molecules, aliquots of 100 μl containing cDNA from the melanoma cell line Mel Im were produced. Isolation of the total RNA was carried out after pelleting the melanoma cells cultured in vitro (∼ 3 million cells per pellet). To perform the isolation, the manufacturer's protocol of the E.Z.N.A. ® Total RNA Kit I (Omega Bio-tek) was followed. Subsequently, 500 ng RNA was reverse transcribed in a volume of 20 μl following the manufacturer's protocol of reverse transcriptase SuperScriptTM II (Invitrogen AG) at 37 • C for 45 min using dN 6 primer. The reverse transcriptase reaction buffer system contains 1 μl reverse transcriptase II, 4 μl First-Strand Buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 375 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl 2 ), 2 μl 0.1 M DTT, 1 μl 10 μM dNTPs (Genaxxon bioscience GmbH), 1 μl random primer dN 6 (Roche Deutschland Holding GmbH) and H 2 O bidest. adding up to 20 μl. Subsequently, the remaining RNA was digested by adding 1 μl RNase and incubating for 30 min at 37 • C. No additional PCR amplification was performed in this study, therefore the generated amount of cDNA reflects 1:1 the endogenous amount of RNA. The functionalization and measurement process begins with the initial functionalization of the query fields with 20 μM ssDNA of the synthetic capture SYN2 sequence. The measurement fields were subsequently treated with 1 mM MCH for 45 min to remove unspecific bound ssDNA. Next, 8 M UREA was pipetted on query fields which were initially functionalized with dsDNA (data not shown). Finally, the on-chip hybridization occurred by adding the complementary ssDNA sequence of 3 μl cDNA generated as described above. Each process step was followed by cleaning: DI water rinse, nitrogen drying, and tempering at 50 • C for 45 min. Measurement of the biosensor followed each step. To verify functionalization and hybridization processes, the biosensor was tested with the ex-situ hybridized dsDNA sequences SYN1 and SYN2. Ex-situ dsDNA is particularly convenient because hybridization efficiency in solution is high compared to on-chip hybridization. Additionally, it is an established preparation step prior to on-chip hybridization. Prior to the experiment, the biosensor was cleaned with piranha solution. The first measurement is the reference for all measurements, referred to as "Clean Ref. Field" and "Clean Meas. Field", see the transmission spectra in Figure The second experiment was a series of measurements using the 24 bp dsDNA sequence SYN2 derived from MIA with concentrations varying between 20 μM and 0.1 μM. Figure On-chip hybridization experiments were performed to demonstrate the application relevant levels for dsDNA detection. Experiments with the synthetic DNA sequence SYN2 and with human The transmission spectra of simulation and experimental results are consistent. The peak-to-peak transmission intensity differences of the measured aDSRR structure is 10 dB over a frequency range of 7 GHz. Compared to simulations, the peak-to-peak transmission intensity is lower, as a result of the finite array, the losses from the materials and limited conductivity of gold and chromium. However, the width and relative frequency shift of the resonance feature are in agreement with model results. The first experiments are performed to verify the efficiency of the functionalization procedures. Experimental functionalization dependencies with the ex-situ hybridized 25 bp dsDNA SYN1 and the 24 bp dsDNA SYN2 sequence, show a distinct frequency shift, while the simultaneously measured reference field displays no significant shift. The correlation between frequency shift and dsDNA concentration clearly demonstrates the capability of the biosensor to detect short dsDNA strands at various concentrations, down to a limit of 1 μM for ex-situ hybridized dsDNA. The efficiency of ex-situ hybridization in these experiments is at its maximum due to the long interaction time span, controlled temperature, and mixture with buffer solution. The detectable frequency shift is therefore only limited by the number of functionalized capture DNA molecules, which are bound to the gold surface and is directly proportional to dsDNA concentration. Higher absolute shift levels would be expected. The reason for the limitation in the functionalization process is not fully understood since the query fields are loaded with similar probes and processed consecutively. Conceivable reasons are that the single query fields were not fully cleaned of residues from the fabrication. Furthermore, the efficiency of the functionalization process is unknown, since the gold surface on the bottom of the freestanding metal is hard to access for the thiol-modified DNA. We also assume that the texture of the gold surface reduces the functionalization density and the efficiency of the process. Therefore, the functionalization process needs to be optimized for improved reproducibility. However, the experiments verify the functionalization and hybridization capability of the sensor fabrication process and demonstrate the selective functionalization efficiency of our biosensor. The second experiment represents an application evaluation with pathological samples produced from the human melanoma cell line Mel Im. The on-chip hybridization experiment was performed with the synthetic DNA SYN2 and the MIA cDNA as target probes, hybridized on the biosensor surface. The shift caused by the on-chip hybridization with MIA cDNA is remarkable, since the MIA cDNA shift reaches 62% in comparison to the synthetic SYN2 results. This is particularly notable in view of future THz biosensor applications since the concentration of MIA cDNA is seven orders of magnitude smaller than the one of the synthetic SYN2 sequence. This clearly indicates a close to perfect on-chip hybridization efficiency (on the order of 62%) and a limited efficiency of the functionalization process. The absolute number of capture DNA molecules, which are available for the on-chip hybridization process, is equivalent to the number of dsDNA molecules during the ex-situ hybridization experiments. The results indicate that we reached a saturation level in the measurements with ex-situ hybridized synthetic SYN2, whereas in the on-chip hybridization, the ratio of available capture molecules to applied MIA cDNA allows for an almost equivalent frequency shift. The number of hybridized molecules of MIA cDNA and synthetic SYN2 is therefore almost the same despite the lower concentration of MIA cDNA (1.55 × 10 -12 mol/l). In comparison to state-of-the-art research results of biosensing in the THz range, the detection of MIA cDNA at a PCR-free concentration of 1.55 × 10 -12 mol/l is remarkable. The total amount of molecules is as low as 4.64 × 10 -18 mol of MIA cDNA, with a droplet size of 3 μl. Fig. Our result for PCR-free MIA cDNA reaches a sensitivity roughly six orders of magnitude better than existing approaches for biomolecules with comparable MW. On top of the high sensitivity, our approach is highly specific to the target DNA by utilizing the highly selective hybridization process of cDNA strands. Specificity, achieved by functionalization of the sensor surface using capture probe molecules (i.e. ss oligonucleotides), which are chemically bound to the biosensor surface, is a second key feature for bioanalytical applications addressed with our biosensor. In this work, we present the development, fabrication, and practical use of a THz biosensor for the tumor-related analysis of DNA samples. Based on electromagnetic field simulations, the design was optimized to maximize sensitivity through selective functionalization, undercut etched structures, and resonance of the split ring resonators. The resonance frequency was determined with an accuracy of 6 MHz in an all-electronic spectroscopic system at a center frequency of 280 GHz. The use of the biosensor for the detection of synthetic and human DNA samples was experimentally verified by ex-situ and on-chip hybridization in different concentrations which were reproduced in model simulations. We detected a frequency shift of 230 MHz for MIA cDNA and 270 MHz for a synthetically produced DNA sequence. Highly specific hybridization of MIA cDNA enables the detection out of a vast number of various DNA molecules, which mimics the typical case of real-world applications for medical diagnosis. Most importantly, the experimentally determined lower detection limit is 1.55 × 10 -12 mol/l for MIA cDNA without PCR amplification, equal to 4.64 × 10 -18 mol of molecules. These results are by six orders of magnitude better than published THz results. With the demonstrated exceptionally high PCR-free sensitivity combined with a very high specificity, achieved by biochemical sensor functionalization, we addressed two key features for biosensor application. Our biosensor outperforms existing approaches in two essential aspects: PCR-free sensitivity and specificity, paving the way for a broader implementation and use of THz biosensing techniques. Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (BO 1573/27-1, BO 1573/27-2, HA 3022/8-1, HA 3022/8-2, SCH 1970/1-1, WI 5209/1-2).