Two graphene-based T-shaped multifunctional components for THz and Far-Infrared regions are proposed and analyzed. The first component can serve as a divider, a switch and a dynamically controllable filter. This T-junction presents a circular graphene resonator and three graphene waveguides with surface plasmon-polariton waves connected frontally to the resonator. The resonator can be adjusted to work with dipole, quadrupole or hexapole modes. The graphene elements are deposited on a SiO 2 (silica) and Si (silicon) two-layer substrate. The dynamical control and switching of the component is provided by the electrostatic field which defines the graphene Fermi energy. Numerical simulations show that the first component in the division regime (which is also the regime ON) has the transmission coefficient -4.3 dB at the central frequency for every of the two output ports and the FWHM is 9.5%. In the OFF regime, the isolation of the two output ports from the input one is about -30 dB. The second component is a T-junction without resonator which fulfils the function of the divider-switch in more than octave frequency band. Switch is a key component of modern digital technology. Frequently, it is also used as a modulator. The power divider (splitter) is another important component in the wave-guiding systems. In THz and infrared regions, several types of the switches and dividers have been described in literature Excitation of plasmon resonances in graphene, generating surface plasmon polariton (SPP) waves, provides a better performance compared to the noble metals, making graphene an excellent material for many waveguiding components Further reduction of losses and dimensions of the systems can be achieved by combination of several functions in one device. In this work, we suggest a multifunctional component based on a graphene resonator and three waveguides. The circular resonator provides dipole, quadrupole or hexapole resonant modes The geometries of the components are shown in Fig. From the point of view of circuit theory, the input waveguide is connected to the two output ones which are in parallel. Therefore, we choose the width w 2 different from w 1 , and this difference was used to improve the impedance matching of the input and the output guides. This allows one to obtain good results for reflection and transmission coefficients For the frequencies from THz to mid-infrared, the Drude model for the local conductivity of graphene mono-layer is frequently used. It is given by the following expression where D = 2σ 0 F / is the Drude weight, σ 0 is the universal conductivity, is the reduced Planck constant, e is the electron charge, τ = 0.9 ps is the relaxation time and ω is the frequency of the incident wave. In the following we shall use the Fermi energy of graphene F1 = 0.8 eV for the waveguides and F2 = 0.6 eV for the disk resonator and F2 = 0.8 eV for the central region of the T-shaped device without resonator. Notice, that by electrostatic doping, graphene Fermi level F = 1.2 eV can be reached The simulations were fulfilled using the commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics version 5.2.a [28], which is based on the method of finite elements. Graphene is a 2D material with the atomic order thickness. However, in our numerical calculus we will consider a graphene monolayer with finite thickness ∆ and conductivity of graphene given by is is the surface conductivity of graphene An infinite graphene layer placed on a dielectric substrate supports transverse-magnetic (TM) SPP waves with the dispersion relation given by where β spp is SPP propagation constant, α = e 2 /(4πε 0 c) ≈ 0.007 is the fine-structure constant and ε 1 is the dielectric constant of the substrate. It is known where A = 8.3 × 10 40 (kg.m) -1 , F is Fermi energy (given in J) and a n is the correction coefficient for n mode, a 1 = 1.03, a 2 = 0.97, a 3 = 0.96 for the dipole, quadrupole or hexapole mode, respectively. One can see that the radius of the resonator R (given in m) depends on the central frequency of the component ω c (in rad/s), on F and ε 1 . The central frequencies of the components for the modes are increased with decreasing the radius R in accordance with the relation ω c ∝ 1/ √ R as it follows from Eq.5. Fig. Temporal Coupled Mode Theory (TCMT) The transmission and reflection spectrum of the component can be obtained from the following equations where 1 τwj = γ wj are decay rates due to coupling of the resonator with waveguides, 1 τrj = γ rj is the internal losses of the resonator and ω j is the resonance frequency of the dipole, quadrupole and hexapole modes with j = 1, 2, 3, respectively. The transmission coefficients of the component are defined by Summing equations Eq.( (10) For the reflection coefficients, one comes to 6 Multifunctional Component with Resonator The plane of symmetry σ provides in the discussed T-junctions frequency independent equal division of the input power, i.e. S 31 = S 21 , see Eq.2. Below, we consider also filtering properties of the junction with a resonator and, on this basis, we discuss different possibilities of realization of switching function. The component bandwidth is defined by the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the transmission coefficient curve. The input electromagnetic wave in port 1 produces a dipole, or quadrupole or hexapole resonance in the circular graphene resonator (Fig. The frequency response for the resonant modes are shown in Fig. The influence of the Fermi energy on the resonance frequencies of the structure was investigated. Fermi energy the waveguide was fixed at F1 = 0.8 eV and F2 of the resonator was varied from 0.2 eV to 1 eV. The corresponding frequency responses are plotted in Fig. The multifunctional component is shown in Fig. To use the resonator component as a switch, we have three possibilities, namely, to move the dipole mode resonance to the quadrupole mode region ((D+Q) switching), to move the hexapole mode to the quadrupole mode region ((Q+H) switching), or to put the the Fermi energy of graphene resonator equals to zero. The frequency changes of resonant modes can be fulfilled by applying an external voltage to the graphene disc layer, changing its Fermi energy and shifting the quadrupole resonant mode to higher ((D+Q) switching) or the hexapole resonant mode to lower frequencies ((Q+H) switching). Note that for the ON state of the configuration (D+Q), we have the losses of -4.3 dB for ports 2 and 3, and the switch operating region is 9.5%. The reflection coefficient at the central frequency is about -35 dB. For the OFF state, we have the losses about -35 dB in port 2 and in port 3 at the central frequency (see Fig. For configuration (D+H) in ON state, we have the losses -4.3 dB for ports 2 and 3, and the reflection coefficient of -35 dB. For the OFF state, we have the losses of -35.5 dB for ports 2 and -34.3 dB for port 3 and the reflection coefficient of -6.5 dB, with 9.5% bandwidth (see Fig. For the OFF state, one can also choose F2 = 0. In this case, the conductivity of the graphene is very small, and the SPP modes are not excited in the resonator. The most part of the incident power is reflected from the resonator. The reflection is on the level of -1 dB and the isolation of ports 2 and 3 is -43 dB. For the ON state, the results are the same as those of the (D+Q). The frequency responses for the switch are shown in Fig. For TCMT calculus of the resonance frequencies and the decay rates were obtained from Comsol simulations. The calculated parameters are as follows: ω 1 = 67.86 10 12 rad/s, ω 2 = 91.73 10 12 rad/s, ω 3 = 109.95 10 12 rad/s, 1 0 γ w1 ∼ = 1.5 THz, γ i1 ∼ = 0.9 THz, γ w2 ∼ = 1.303 THz, γ i2 ∼ = 2.997 THz, γ w3 ∼ = 0.58621 THz, γ i3 ∼ = 0.26379 THz to the dipole, quadrupole and hexapole modes, respectively. Fig. Finally, we shall discuss a T-shaped component without resonator shown in Fig. We choose the Fermi energy of the waveguides F1 = 0.8 eV. If we put the Fermi energy in the central region equal to F2 = 0 eV (OFF state), the reflection coefficient is -1 dB and the losses at -36 dB level for ports 2 and 3. Changing the Fermi energy of the central region of T-junction to F2 = 0.8 eV, one comes to the state ON. In this case, the losses for ports 2 and 3 are the level of -3.5 dB and the reflection coefficient around -20 dB. Fig. In the discussed above two components, their control (switching and dislocation of the frequency band) is provided by Fermi energy by application of a DC voltage (i.e. by external electric field normal to the graphene plane). As a result, this leads to a change of the graphene conductivity. We have shown in Fig. We have analyzed two graphene-based components for THz and far-infrared regions. Both of them have T-shaped geometry. The first one can substitute three common elements. It contains a circular resonator. The other component is without resonator. The resonator component can work with one of the three resonant modes: dipole, quadrupole and hexapole ones. It can function as a dynamically controllable filter, power divider and a switch, thus, substituting three common elements. Besides it permits a very wideband control of its central frequency. We have analyzed dependence of the resonant frequencies on the resonator radius. Our analysis demonstrates also that the resonant frequencies of the component can be adjusted by changing graphene Fermi energy, which enables the dynamical control of the central frequency in a broad frequency region. The component without resonator can function as a broadband divider and a switch. The presented components are very simple and compact. They have a relatively low insertion loss and good matching in the regime ON and high isolation of the output ports in the regime OFF. The suggested components can be used in future THz and far-infrared devices and systems. F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) 