The pairing symmetry of the hexagonal pnictide superconductor SrPtAs is discussed with taking into account its multiband structure. The topological chiral d-wave state with time-reversal-symmetry breaking has been anticipated from the spontaneous magnetization observed by the muon-spinrelaxation experiment. We point out in this paper that the recent experimental reports on the nuclearspin-lattice relaxation rate T -1 1 and superfluid density n s (T ), which seemingly support the conventional s-wave pairing, are also consistent with the chiral d-wave state. The compatibility of the gap and multiband structures is crucial in this argument. We propose that the measurement of the bulk quasiparticle density of states would be useful for the distinction between two pairing states. The first hexagonal pnictide superconductor SrPtAs On the other hand, there are still some controversies on the chiral d-wave state of SrPtAs. The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate T -1 1 measured by the nuclear quadrupole resonance shows the Hebel-Slichter (HS) peak near T c and exponential decay in the low temperature region Using the multiband quasiclassical theory The normal-state energy spectrum of SrPtAs is where β(= 1, 2, 3) indicates the unsplit band, γ = ± is the band splitting parameter, a (β) † klσ and a (β) klσ are the creation and annihilation operators of an electron with the wave vector k and spin σ = ±1 in the l-th layer of the unit cell, ǫ , -a/2, 0), and T 3 = (-√ 3a/2, -a/2, 0) the in-plane nearest-neighbor bond vectors (a and c are in-plane and inter-layer lattice constants). We use the tight-binding parameters suggested by the LDA calculation We adopt the quasiclassical formalism for the multiband superconductor , where ǫ n = (2n + 1)πk B T is the fermionic Matsubara energy, k βγ F denotes the Fermi wave vector, and ∆ k βγ F denotes the gap function. We simply assume the gap function as with δ = 1.05, and φ k βγ shown in Table , where • • • F βγ denotes the average on the βγ th Fermi surface. The abbreviations 3 ± (H) th and 3 ± (H ′ ) th mean the disconnected Fermi pockets of 3± th band enclosing H and H ′ points, respectively. Note that all the Fermi surfaces are quasi-2D, except for the 3D 3-th one. Here, k = k/|k|, and δk = k βγ and δq ′ = k βγ Fq ′ 0 refer to the deviations from the centers of the long-wavelength expansions, and k 0 = (0, 0, k βγ Fz ), ), and q ′ 0 = (0, 4π/3, π/c) the centers of the expansions. Let us introduce phenomenologically the quasiparticle damping (the smearing factor of the quasiparticle DOS) η via the analytic continuation to obtain the retarded and advanced Green's functions Here we have neglected the band dependence of η. Thus, there are two fitting parameters, ∆ 0 /k B T c and η, in the following calculations. The relaxation rate is given by where f (ǫ) denotes the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and Ns (ǫ) and Ms (ǫ) denote DOS and anomalous DOS of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle normalized by the bulk normal DOS at the Fermi level N(0). For the multiband spin-singlet superconductor, Ns (ǫ) and Ms (ǫ) are where and • • • F is the Fermi surface average with the Fermi velocity The results for the three pairing states are shown in Fig. It is renown that Ms (ǫ) from the coherence effect appears only for the s-wave pairing and contributes to the HS peak significantly Superfluid density normalized by its zero-temperature value n s (0) is where Y k (T ) is Yosida function The parameter is taken as ∆ 0 /k B T c = 1.5 for all states We have shown based on the multiband quasiclassical theory 