Composite materials where magnetic micrometer-sized particles are embedded into a compliant polymer matrix are known as magnetorheological or magnetoactive elastomers (MAEs). They are distinguished by huge variations of their physical properties in a magnetic field, which is commonly attributed to the restructuring of the filler. The process of the magnetic-field-induced restructuring in a magnetorheological elastomer is interpreted as progression towards percolation. Such a physical model was previously used to explain the dependence of the magnetic permeability and dielectric permittivity of MAEs on the magnetic field strength. Based on this hypothesis, the magnetorheological effect in MAEs is considered theoretically. The theoretical approach is built upon a self-consistent effective-medium theory for the elastic properties, extended to the variable (field dependent) percolation threshold. The proposed model allows one to describe the large variations (over several orders of magnitude) of the effective elastic moduli of these composite materials, known as the giant magnetorheological (MR) and field-stiffening effects. An existence of a giant magnetic Poisson effect is predicted. The relation of the proposed model to the existing theories of the MR effect in MAEs is discussed. The results can be useful for applications of MAEs in magnetic-field controlled vibration dampers and isolators. Magnetoactive elastomers (MAEs) are a class of composite materials where significant changes of physical properties are observed in moderate (several hundred mT) dc magnetic fields Large theoretical efforts have been made for explaining the giant As an example, a 20-fold field-induced increase of the moduli has been calculated in Hitherto, the existing theoretical approaches concentrate on the magnetic interactions between the inclusions and the self-interaction of a magnetized particle with a magnetic field and largely disregard the effect of the change in the composite's microstructure (i.e. mutual arrangement of filler particles) on its elastic properties. However, it has to be expected that the change in the microstructure should alter the effective elastic properties of a composite material. For example, in The purpose of this paper is to propose a complementary physical model based on the idea that the restructuring (RS) of the filler When a magnetic field (designated by an arrow) is applied to the composite, a significant part of the magnetic flux passes through the pre-cluster (shaded region). In Figure The ferromagnetic particles in a vicinity of the pre-cluster are "sucked" towards pre-cluster by magnetic forces. A visual representation of such an effect, obtained by means of X-ray tomography, was presented in Given that the concept of progression towards percolation Recall that in analogy to MR fluids, MR effect in MAEs is often ascribed to the formation of chainlike aggregates along the magnetic field lines. This simplified physical picture for high concentrations of magnetic particles was recently questioned by Romeis et al. The paper is organized as follows: In the next Section the two-phase composite material of interest is described and a modified self-consistent EMT for the elastic properties of two-phase composite materials, with the included concept of a moveable percolation threshold Conclusions are drawn in the final section. In the following, we consider random heterogeneous two-phase composites. The selfconsistent EMT approximation considers inclusions of the spherical shape embedded into a fictitious homogeneous medium with the effective elastic properties searched. The concentration of the first phase is p, the concentration of the second phase is (1 -p). The mechanical properties of both phases and the effective medium are isotropic. ee , G  denote the effective shear modulus and the Poisson's ratio, respectively, while , , , GG are the values of these moduli in the first and second phases. To be specific, we assume iron ( in the absence of a magnetic field is e (0) . The material is isotropic (unstructured) in the absence of a magnetic field. The system of equations of the classical self-consistent EMT Very recently, it was proposed to modify the equations of EMT for the elasticity problem in the following way Similar modification was established for galvanomagnetic phenomena in The term c ( , ) It allows one to set the PT of the first phase c p to c p . In where H is the magnetic field inside the composite material, Hc is the characteristic magnetic field strength, ... 1/ ... V dV   , V is the averaging volume, wherein the characteristic dimensions of the averaging region should be much larger than the correlation length. In the following, we denote H as H. The order of magnitude of Hc was found to be 10 5 -10 6 A/m In The concept of a moveable percolation threshold has been extended to the elastic properties of composite materials in The system of transcendental equations ( , , , GG and Hc. Figure , corresponds to the value obtained in In the region , the model ( The results presented in Figure Moreover, the model predicts a giant variation of the Poisson's ratio with the applied magnetic field (Figure It is worth noting that, for a given critical magnetic field Hc the field dependence of the effective shear modulus can be reduced approximately to a single "master curve". This is demonstrated in Figure ), the value of e G  3.7•10 7 Pa is reached. In zero magnetic field, at a given filler concentration, the composite material has a specific shear modulus, which grows with the increasing concentration p. This is the other limiting point in Figure Why is the observed maximal value of the magnetic-field induced shear modulus typically few times less than the value predicted by the EMT just below the percolation threshold? We see one reason in the inaccuracy of the EMT approximation. In the EMT or the percolation theory for electro-conductive (or dielectric) properties, the touching of well conductive particles in a badly conductive means formation of the well conductive path. In real situation, when measuring the shear modulus of a composite material, the particles do not form a rigid mechanical bond to each other (they can slip relative to each other). This would result into a reduction of an effective shear modulus. Typically B a 0.3 T Previously, it has been shown that the EMT with moveable percolation threshold is capable of describing the magnetic and magnetodielectric effects in MAEs qualitatively and quantitatively In elastic measurements, an additional effect on the microstructure occurs because of external mechanical forces. During magnetorheological measurements, the specimen is mechanically deformed in order to probe the material rigidity. Obviously, such a mechanical loading tries to "tear off" the particle network and the magnetic interactions become important. A prominent example is the magnetic-field-enhanced Payne effect, which can be observed in MAEs Hitherto, the concept of the field-dependent percolation threshold allowed one to describe the magnetodielectric effect and the non-monotonous field dependence of the magnetic permeability in MAEs Therefore, it has to be taken into account when considering the MR effect in MAEs. This model predicts a significant change in a Poisson's ratio of compliant MAEs in external magnetic fields. It is proposed to use the measurement of a Poisson's ratio as a verification test for this theoretical model. Our model does not exclude alternative mechanisms, which may be present simultaneously and should also contribute to the field-stiffening or magnetorheological effects (by further enhancement). The application of an external constant magnetic field should induce anisotropy, which has to be taken into account in the calculation of effective elastic properties. For magnetic properties, the presence of the uniaxial anisotropy was proven experimentally in The advantage of the proposed model is that it allows one to describe in a unified manner magnetic properties, magnetodielectric effect 