Hexagonally deformed Fermi surfaces and strong nesting, found in topological insulators (TIs) such as Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 , have led to several predictions of the existence of Density Wave order in these systems. Recent evidence for strong Fermi surface nesting in superconducting Cu-Bi2Se3 and Nb-Bi2Se3 has further led to speculation about the importance of charge order in the context of unconventional superconductivity. Here, we report the first observation of a novel anomaly in Bi 2 Se 3 at 140K, which may be associated with a Charge Density Wave (CDW)-like transition. This transition was identified from both structural and electronic measurements, where: a) a periodic lattice distortion at above room temperature was characterized as a diffuse charge order in Bi2Se3 between k ⃗ and k ⃗ ± Δk ⃗ from electron diffraction; and b) an opening of energy gap signatured with metal-to-insulator like transition at 140K was identified from resistivity vs temperature measurement. This is further corroborated by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of the spin-lattice relaxation (1/T1) rate of the 209 Bi nucleus, which also displays a transition at 140K associated with an opening of an energy gap of ~8meV. Additionally, we also observe another anomaly in 1/T1 near 200K, which appears to display anisotropy with the direction of the applied magnetic field. The 2D layered chalcogenide Bi2Se3 and its intercalated versions continue to elicit significant interest due to the presence of non-trivial topological surface states protected by time-reversal symmetry, along with fascinating properties of nematic order and superconductivity Angle-resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES) studies on Bi2Se3 have confirmed that natural electron-doped Bi2Se3 has a hexagonally deformed Fermi Surface. The ground state of a charge density wave (CDW), observed mostly in low-dimensional materials, is characterized by spontaneously broken translational symmetry. In more complex systems, the phase transition to a CDW ground state is mostly observed together with commensurate/incommensurate Periodic Lattice Distortions (PLD) concomitant with the opening of an energy gap at the Fermi level, resulting in a metal-to-insulator like transition as a function of temperature We report here a combination of resistivity, Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) studies to argue that Bi2Se3 undergoes a transition to a possible CDW state at 140K. We observe a 140K metal-to-insulator like transition in resistivity as a function of temperature. Our measurements of the NMR spin-lattice relaxation (1/T1) rate of the 209 Bi nucleus also shows an anomaly at 140K, which can be fitted to an energy gap of approximately 8meV. Additionally, electron diffraction reveals a periodic lattice distortion (PLD) in Bi2Se3 as well as diffuse charge order between k ⃗ and k ⃗ ± Δk ⃗ , as described in the previous paragraph. We argue that this diffuse scattering arises from an incommensurate charge density wave (I-CDW) at a higher temperature, foreshadowing a transition to CDW order, into which the I-CDW locks upon cooling below ~140K. We also identify evidence of another anomaly in NMR 1/T1 near 200K which is anisotropic with applied magnetic field. Comparison of relaxation rates ∆1/T1 from H||c to Hꓕc, with ∆1/T1=1/T1(||)-1/T1(ꓕ), again signifies this transition indicating that a stronger lattice vibration (phonons) is present in the H||c-axis measurements. Therefore, it is likely that the transition at 200K is a phonon-mediated structural phase transition. Single crystals of Bi2Se3 were prepared by melting high-purity (99.999%) powders of Bi and Se. Stoichiometric mixtures of 2.5 g were sealed into high-quality quartz tubes in vacuum after being weighed and sealed in an inert glove box, taking extreme care never to expose to air. The mixtures sealed in quartz tubes were heated up to 850 C and Journal XX (XXXX) XXXXXX Y Li et al held for 20 hours. They were then cooled to 650 C at 0.1 C/min, followed by quenching from high temperature into ice water. This yielded large, shiny single crystals which were easily cleaved along the ab plane. Powder X-ray diffraction data were collected from pieces of single crystals powdered inside an inert glove box. Rietveld refinement was performed using GSAS (General Structure Analysis System) and the EXPGUI interface. Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) was performed at room temperature with a Hitachi H-9000NAR highresolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) operated at 300 kV. Four-probe resistivity measurements were performed with a rate of 1K/step at varying temperatures and magnetic fields using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). Pulsed 209 Bi NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) measurements were performed on a Bi2Se3 single crystal of crystal size ~0.94 x 0.58 x 0.41 cm placed inside a home-built probe in an 11-Tesla Helium cryostat. The single crystal of Bi2Se3 was studied with the magnetic field oriented in two directions, Hꓕc and H||c. Field sweep spectrums were performed at frequency f=67.875MHz. Spin-echo signals for 209 Bi NMR spectra were processed using the summed Fourier transform method, with the field swept from 9.7T to 10.5T. Spin Lattice relaxation time T1 measurements in both H||C and HꓕC (H=9.86T) directions were performed at stabilized temperature points varying between 1.6K and 300K. We employed a train of RF pulses on the central transition to saturate the magnetization followed by variable delays and integrate the spinechoes to map the magnetization recovery. The magnetization recovery M(t) is fitted with a stretched single exponential, appropriate for the initial condition where the quadrupolar satellites are completely saturated where the parameter β allows for a distribution of T1. Magnetization recovery M(t) can either be fitted by a master equation or a stretched exponential equation Figure The process of self-intercalation has previously been discussed by other authors Four-probe DC resistivity measurements, shown in Figure Heating and cooling cycles performed on the second piece of Bi2Se3 shown in Figure To provide microscopic information about the nature of these transitions, we performed NMR relaxation measurements. The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1 measures the recovery of the longitudinal nuclear magnetization following an external perturbation such as an RF field. The magnetization recovery M(t) is fitted with a stretched single exponential (see methods). However, we find that the fits with and without the stretch parameter give similar T1 results, giving stretched component β values close to 1. The results of this fit are shown in Figure In Figure The exact nature of Fermi surface distortion, nesting, and density wave instability in a system such as Bi2Se3 is critically dependent upon the details of its fermiology. Correlated electron systems typically exhibit intertwined electron ordered states resulting from several degrees of freedom such as lattice, charge, dimensionality, nematicity, and spin, all of which, in turn, tend to be strongly materials-dependent. Many properties of chalcogenides such as Bi2Se3 arise from the nature of fluctuations, or overlaps in order parameter, among such intertwined orders. The severity of the overlap tends to be materials-dependent as well. Below, we discuss how material aspects of Bi2Se3, specifically, can lead to multiple ground states such as that of a charge density wave (CDW). Further, the proximity of superconductivity and density wave orders in many materials begs a discussion of the observed CDW in the context of superconductivity in Bi2Se3, which we think is critical to understand the charge order, superconductivity, as well as nematicity in these families Nuclear relaxation measurements, in Figure Below 140K, the CDW gap may be determined from the relaxation rate, as follows where we shall use the form of a T-dependent BCS gap equation: Here, TC = TCDW is the CDW transition temperature, and a and c are fitting constants. The fit (Figure Previous relaxation measurements show a large variation in magnitudes and temperature dependences across samples prepared using various methods Further, a comparison of the resistivity data (Figure The NMR anomaly near 200K merits further discussion in light of the fact that the Debye temperature is ΘD ≈ 182K for Bi2Se3 Note in Figure To analyze this further, let us suppose that the relaxation rates can be separated into electronic and phonon contributions where k= ||, ⊥ are the magnetic field directions with respect to the crystal c-axis. The electronic contribution is magnetic in nature and is due to the spin scattering of the conduction electrons. On the other hand, the phonon contribution is driven by changes in the lattice which works its way to the nuclear relaxation via quadrupolar effects. Since the CDW energy gap we obtained below 140K is isotropic, it is reasonable to assume that the conduction band electronic contribution 1/T1 el (k) is also isotropic, as well as the temperature dependence of 1/T1 el (k) itself. We plot in the inset of Figure The positive value of ∆1/T1 reveals that a stronger lattice vibration (phonons) is present in the H || caxis measurements. This can be understood from the 2D layered structure of this material, where Bi-Bi bonds within the ab planes have stronger electron-phonon coupling effects than the ones along the c-axis Most CDW occurs in quasi-1D or quasi-2D; our current understanding of CDW only includes some of the complexities involved in the 3D case, where electron correlations are thought to play a primary role The somewhat elusive nature of superconductivity in single crystals of Cu-Bi2Se3, especially the variability of superconducting fraction and Tc to quenching temperature In addition to the discussion of Figure To conclude, we show a phase transition at 140K in high-temperature quenched Bi2Se3. We suggest that it is compatible with a possible charge density wave (CDW) order in Bi2Se3. Diffuse streaks in SAED measurements indicate the presence of an incommensurate periodic lattice distortion at room temperature, reminiscent of an incommensurate charge density wave (I-CDW). A metal-toinsulator-like transition at 140K in resistivity measurements indicates the opening of a CDW-like energy gap. NMR spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T1 measurements further confirm the presence of the 140K transition with an energy gap of about 8meV. Using this, together with thermal hysteresis studies of resistivity, we conclude that Bi2Se3 displays a possible unconventional second-order quasi-1D CDW transition temperature at 140K. 1/T1 also reveals another anomaly near 200K, which shows an anisotropy in comparison of H||c to Hꓕc measurements.