A graphene field effect transistor, where the active area is made of monolayer large-area graphene, is simulated including a full 2D Poisson equation and a driftdiffusion model with mobilities deduced by a direct numerical solution of the semiclassical Boltzmann equations for charge transport by a suitable discontinuous Galerkin approach. The critical issue in a graphene field effect transistor is the difficulty of fixing the off state which requires an accurate calibration of the gate voltages. In the present paper we propose and simulate a graphene field effect transistor structure which has well-behaved characteristic curves similar to those of conventional (with gap) semiconductor materials. The introduced device has a clear off region and can be the prototype of devices suited for post-silicon nanoscale electron technology. The specific geometry overcomes the problems of triggering the minority charge current and gives a viable way for the design of electron devices based on large area monolayer graphene as substitute of standard semiconductors in the active area. The good field effect transistor behavior of the current versus the gate voltage makes the simulated device very promising and a challenging case for experimentalists. The Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor (MOSFET) is the backbone of the modern integrated circuits. In the case the active area is made of traditional materials like, for example, silicon or gallium arsenide, a lot of analysis and simulations have been performed in order to optimize the design. Lately a great attention has been devoted to graphene on account of its peculiar features, and in particular, from the point of view of nano-electronics, for the high electrical conductivity. It is highly tempting to try to replace the traditional semiconductors with graphene in the active area of electron devices like the MOSFETs Scaling theory predicts that a FET with a thin barrier and a thin gate-controlled region will be robust against short-channel effects down to very short gate lengths. The possibility of having channels that are just one atomic layer thick is perhaps the most attractive feature of graphene for its use in transistors. Main drawbacks of a large-area single monolayer graphene are the zero gap and, for graphene on substrate, the degradation of the mobility. Therefore accurate simulation are warranted for the set up of a viable graphene field effect transistor. The standard mathematical model is given by the drift-diffusion-Poisson system. Usually the GFETs are investigated by adopting reduced one dimensional models of the Poisson equation with some averaging procedure A crucial point is the determination of the mobilities entering the drift-diffusion equations. A rather popular model is that proposed in From the numerical solutions of the semiclassical Boltzmann equation a model for the mobility functions has been deduced, similarly to what already done in In the present paper we propose a slight different geometry of GFET which leads to a clear and sizable off region, avoiding the problem of triggering the minority charge carriers and producing characteristic curves which seem very promising for the use of large-area graphene in electron devices. The plan of the paper is as follows. In Sec. 2 the structure of the proposed device is presented along with the mathematical model. In Sec. 3 the mobilities are sketched and in Sec. 4 the numerical simulations of the proposed GFET are shown. We propose the device with the geometry depicted in Fig. We solve a 2D Poisson equation for the electrostatic potential, assuming that the charge is concentrated on the volume occupied by the atoms composing the graphene layer. Accordingly, the surface charge density of graphene is supposed to be spanned on its thickness which experimental measurements refer between 0.4 nm and 1.7 nm where n(t, x), p(t, x) are the electron and hole densities in graphene respectively, at time t and position x, U T = k B T /e is the thermal voltage, being e the positive elementary charge, k B is the Boltzmann constant, T is the lattice temperature (kept constant). The functions μ n and μ p are the mobilities for electrons and holes respectively and φ(x, y) is the electric potential, here evaluated on y = y gr , y gr being the average y-coordinate of the graphene sheet (see Fig. The system is solved in the interval [x 1 , x 4 ] augmented with Dirichlet boundary conditions for electron and hole densities as will be explained below. The electric potential solves the 2D Poisson equation where h(x, y) = e(n(x) -p(x))/t gr if (x, y) ∈ [x 1 , x 4 ] × [y 2 , y 3 ] and h(x, y) = 0 otherwise, and is given by gr if y ∈ [y 2 , y 3 ] and ox otherwise. Here gr = 3.3 0 and ox 3.6 0 are the dielectric constants of the graphene and oxide (SiO 2 ) respectively, 0 being the dielectric constant in the vacuum; t gr is the width of the graphene layer which is assumed to be 1 nm (values between 0.4 and 1.7 nm are reported in at the remaining part of the boundary. Here V b is the bias voltage, V S is the source potential, V D is the source potential, V Gu is the upper gate potential, V Gd is the down gate potential. V G is the gate bias potential which is considered equal at both the gate contacts. ∇ ν denotes the normal derivative. In graphene a sort of doping is induced by the electrostatic potential , where ε F is the Fermi level (in pristine graphene ε F = 0), ε(k) = v F |k| is the graphene dispersion relation (strictly valid around the Dirac points), which is the same for electrons and holes (see Altogether, in order to get the initial density profile as function of the electric potential, we must solve the following nonlinear Poisson equation augmented with the boundary conditions ( We adopt the mobilities deduced in The behaviour is the same for holes on account of the symmetry between the hole and electron distributions. The low field mobility has the expression where the fitting parameters have been estimated by the least squares method as follows μ0 = 0.2978 μm 2 /V ps , μ1 = 4.223 μm 2 /V ps, n ref = 376.9 μm -2 , m = -0.2838, σ = 2.216, a = 4.820, b = 68.34 and c = 2.372. The complete mobility model is given by (see also where E ref , μ, β 1 , β 2 , β 3 and γ are fitting parameters. We have calculated the coefficients E ref , β 1 , β 2 , β 3 , γ and μ by means of least square method for several value of the electron density n i , obtaining the data reported in Tab. 1. The values of the density correspond to the Fermi energies 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 eV. In each interval [n i , n i+1 ] a third degree polynomial interpolation has been adopted for the parameters E ref , β 1 , β 2 , β 3 , γ and μ The GFET of Fig. 