Based on first-principles simulations and calculations, we explore the evolutions of crystal structure, electronic structure and transport properties of quasi 2D layered PdS2 under compression by uniaxial stress and hydrostatic pressure. An interesting ferroelastic phase transition with lattice reorientation is revealed under uniaxial compressive stress, which originates from the bond reconstructions of the unusual PdS4 square-planar coordination. By contrast, the layered structure transforms to a 3D cubic pyrite-type structure under hydrostatic pressure. In contrary to the experimental proposed coexistence of layered PdS2-type structure with cubic pyrite-type structure at intermediate pressure range, we predict that the compression-induced intermediate phase showing the same structure symmetry with the ambient phase, except of sharply shrinking interlayer-distances. The coordination of the Pd ions not only plays crucial roles in the structural transition, but also lead to electronic structure and transport properties variations, which changes from square-planar to distorted octahedron in the intermediate phase, resulting in bandwidth broaden and orbital-selective metallization. In addition, the superconductivity in the cubic pyrite-type structure comes from the strong electron-phonon coupling in presence of topological nodal-line states. The strong interplay between structural transition, metallization and superconductivity in PdS2 provide a good platform to study the fundamental physics of the interactions between crystal structure and transport behavior, and the competition or cooperation between diverse phases. Layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) MX2 (M and X denote transition metal cation and chalcogen anion, respectively) have been studied intensively for several decades due to their widely technological applications and fundamental importance. Most of the bulk of MX2 materials are quasi two-dimensional (2D) and consist of 2D layers bonded through van der Waals (vdW) interlayer interactions. According to the pressure homology principle, similar ferroelastic structural transition can also be expected in PdS2 under uniaxial stress. More interestingly, the transport behaviors of bulk PdSe2 and PdS2 are similar to each other under high pressure. Electrical resistivity experiments demonstrate that application of hydrostatic pressure can tune the transport behavior of PdSe2 (PdS2) from semiconducting to metallic at pressures above 3 (7) GPa. Therefore, the structural instability of the (X2) 2-dumbbells is not the necessary condition for the emergence of superconductivity in the high-pressure pyrite-type compounds. The Dirac and nodal-line fermions around the Fermi level and strong electron-lattice coupling might be viewed as the origin triggering the emergence of superconductivity in the high-pressure pyrite phases PdX2. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. II briefly describes the computational methodology. In Sec. III, we reveal ferroelastic transition under uniaxial compressive stress and study on structural transition from PdS2-type to pyrite-type structure under hydrostatic pressure, then present analyses of the metallization of PdS2-type phase under compression and superconductivity in the cubic pyrite phase. Finally, Sec. IV offers conclusions. Geometry optimization and electronic structure calculations are carried out using firstprinciples methods based on density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in CASTEP The phonon spectra of the bulk PdS2 calculated by using a 2×2×2 supercell with the PHONOPY code on the basis of density functional perturbation theory. In order to simulate the experimentally mechanical loading process, we specify an external stress tensor along the layer stacking direction (c axis) to probe the response of the crystal structure under uniaxial compression. The internal stress tensor is iterated until it becomes equal to the applied external stress, and the lattice constants gradually relax along with the iteration. Here, the produced deformation is defined as strain, ε = (a -a0)/a0, where a and a0 are the lattice constants along one axis direction for the deformed and undeformed cell, respectively. It is noteworthy that the simulation method in presented work is different from the conventional technique used in 2D materials, where the strain is independent variable, and is simulated by predesignated lattice constants rather than the stress. Attributing to the layered structure and interlayer vdW interactions in PdS2, the semiempirical dispersion interaction correction methods (DFT-D) (Grimme scheme) Fig. Due to potential applications in nonvolatile memory devices, two-dimensional (2D) ferroelastic/ferroelectric materials have been widely explored recently. As shown in Fig. The nature of the structural transition of PdSe2 from the PdS2-type to cubic pyrite-type has been proposed to be displacive. , where R i and R ̅ denote individual interatomic Pd-S distance and average distance, respectively. Under ambient conditions, the orthorhombic PdS2 exhibits semimetallic behavior at the DFT level (Fig. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. In addition, conventional superconductivity is closely associated with electron-phonon coupling. Further theoretical analyses of the electron-phonon coupling interactions are necessary to understand the superconducting behavior of the high pressure pyrite-type PdX2. As shown in the left of Fig. where the Coulomb pseudopotential  * is assumed to 0.1, and the electron-phonon coupling constant  is defined as and ω log is the logarithmic average frequency: where  2 F() is the Eliashberg spectral function defined as where N(Ef) is Fermi level and q is the phonon linewidth. Calculated results show that there are strong electron-phonon interactions in pyrite-type PdX2, the electron-phonon coupling constant  of the pyrite-type PdS2 (PdSe2) at 4 (10) GPa is evaluated to 0.6 (0.9), and the corresponding superconducting transition temperature Tc is 4.9 (7.6) K. Present theoretically calculated superconducting temperatures are consistent well with previous experimental results. is the S-S bond lengths in the (S2) Exp. 