Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been the subject of sustained research interest due to their extraordinary electronic and optical properties. They also exhibit a wide range of structural phases because of the different orientations that the atoms can have within a single layer, or due to the ways that different layers can stack. Here we report the first study of direct-visualization of structural transformations in atomicallythin layers under highly non-equilibrium thermodynamic conditions. We probe these transformations at the atomic scale using real-time, aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy and observe strong dependence of the resulting structures and phases on both heating rate and temperature. A fast heating rate (25 °C/sec) yields highly ordered crystalline hexagonal islands of sizes of less than 20 nm which are composed of a mixture of 2H and 3R phases. However, a slow heating rate (25 °C/min) yields nanocrystalline and sub-stoichiometric amorphous regions. These differences are explained by different rates of sulfur evaporation and redeposition. The use of non-equilibrium heating rates to achieve highly crystalline and quantum-confined features from 2D atomic layers present a new route to synthesize atomically-thin, laterally confined nanostrucutres and opens new avenues for investigating fundamental electronic phenomena in confined dimensions. Two-dimensional nanomaterials have received significant attention due the wide range of exciting properties that they exhibit Direct observation of atomic level diffusion indicates the different crystalline states across the entire thermal diffusion process. Lateral heterophase formation along with statistical observation of particle evolution provides a new pathway for materials engineering in the quantum mechanically-relevant size regime Phase transformation processes in equilibrium vs non-equilibrium heating conditions: Schematics presented in Figure While studies of phase evolution through heating or beam induced transformation have been previously carried out on 2D layered chalcogenides, those studies have been limited to small area, atomic scale investigations which offer limited insight into dynamic phenomena. Large area analysis and observations at different length scales using electron microscopy has been lacking. For the case of fast heating, we show this in Figure The above discussion describes the structure of the disintegrated phase upon rapid heating. While this provides new insight into the structural evolution, the dynamics of the transformation are difficult to capture in real-time measurements. This is particularly challenging since, upon reaching the desired temperature, layer disintegration is very rapid and occurs over the acquisition time of only two or three STEM images. We have therefore collected a sequence of bright field TEM images at different times (Figure It is noteworthy that this thermally driven spontaneous disintegration into nanoscale islands occurs in both free standing as well as substrate supported crystals, as seen in Figure Epitaxy and lattice matching are not often discussed in the context of layered 2D material growth and synthesis, primarily because weak van der Waals (vdW) interlayer interactions generally preclude any significant influence by the substrates on subsequent layer orientation and growth. However, we see here that the van der Waals interactions, though weak in nature, can influence growth and epitaxial alignment of the nanoscale islands. Similar van der Waals epitaxy has been exploited for aligned growth of heterostructures on 2D layered materials, as a well as TMDC growth on standard substrates Our large area, in-situ analysis allows for shape characterization of the population of nanocrystalline islands which form after rapid heating and annealing at 650 ̊C. The ADF STEM images such as Figure 2xxμμ 2 ) with a shape factor μμ of 2.1. A non-normal distribution like this is expected due to the energetic preference for specific edge configurations Triangular flakes tend to form in extremums of the chemical potential since the edges are either all chalcogen or have a metal-rich zig-zag structure The above sections discuss the structural changes that occur during the rapid heating of 2D MoS2. To isolate the specific effects of the heating rate, we performed a comparative analysis with ex-situ, slow heating of the MoS 2 layers on SiNx membranes. A few prior studies have suggested that slow formation of vacancies due to chalcogen removal and migration at elevated temperatures that ultimately leads to the formation of voids. Our observations agree with these earlier reports in monolayer to few-layer MoS 2. Figure Since there is a net loss of S from the lattice due to its lower energy for vacancy formation, this results in a non-stoichiometric decomposition which leads to the formation of nanocrystalline to amorphous MoS 2 or Mo nanocrystals. This can be clearly seen in the atomically resolved HAADF-STEM images as well as the corresponding Fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern analyses (Figure Random nucleation of these additional layers can lead to a mixture of 2H and 3R stackings, but as voids become larger and multilayer islands become thicker, we expect a shift toward the 3R morphology below 1000 ̊C, consistent with the bulk phase diagram In conclusion, we have performed a detailed analysis of thermal decomposition and disintegration of atomically thin MoS 2 via electron microscopy and spectroscopic analysis. We observe that high heating rates lead to spontaneous disintegration of MoS2 single crystalline flakes into highly crystalline, nanosized crystals down to 5 nm in diameter, which is in the regime of strong electronic quantum confinement Mechanically exfoliated 2D MoS2 layers were prepared using the conventional scotch tape method, as described elsewhere Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) has been used to measure and analyse all the samples made for in-situ and ex-situ heating experiments. In-situ experiments at various temperatures have been done in a specialised TEM holder from Hummingbird Scientific, where a uniquely designed microfabricated heating chip was used. An embedded heating element provides robust stability to perform in-situ thermal diffusion analysis at elevated temperatures. Heating calibration was received from the manufacturer to achieve controlled heating based on resistance measurements. Two different TEM/STEM systems were used: a JEOL F200 S/TEM, and probe-corrected JEOL NEOARM STEM, both operated at 200 KV accelerating voltage. For the JEOL NEOARM STEM, the condenser lens aperture was 40 μm with a camera length of 4 mm for imaging and 2 mm for EELS. The probe current was 120 pA. A Gatan imaging filter (GIF) aperture of 2.5 mm was also used for EELS with a collection semi-angle β of 41.7 mrad. All of the captured TEM images were collected on GATAN IS One View (JEOL F200) and Ultra-scan cameras (JEOL NEO ARM), and the STEM images were recorded on the integrated JEOL bright-field and annular dark field detectors. In-situ TEM videos were acquired on the JEOL F200 using GATAN OneView IS camera at 50 fps with 2k x 2k resolution. Corresponding elemental identification has been performed using dual detector EDX on the F200 system. Experimentally acquired STEM images are smoothed using the adaptive gaussian blur function (with radius of 1-2 pixels) available in ImageJ. Image simulation has been performed using QSTEM software 