The fundamental issue in the energetic performance of power plants, working both as traditional fuel engines and as combined cycle turbine (gas-steam), lies in quantifying the internal irreversibilities which are associated with the working substance operating in cycles. The purpose of several irreversible energy converter models is to find objective thermodynamic functions that determine operation modes for real thermal engines and at the same time study the trade off between energy losses per cycle and the useful energy. As those objective functions, we focus our attention on a generalization of the so-called ecological function in terms of an -parameter that depends on the particular heat transfer law used in the irreversible heat engine model. In this work, we mathematically describe the configuration space of an irreversible Curzon-Ahlborn type model. The above allows to determine the optimal relations between the model parameters so that a power plant operates in physically accessible regions, taking into account internal irreversibilities, introduced in two different ways (additively and multiplicatively). In addition, we establish the conditions that theparameter must fulfill for the energy converter works in an optimal region between maximum power output and maximum efficiency points. In recent decades, various areas of the knowledge related to production of non fossil fuels and sustainable generation of energy have invested efforts in combining innovative operation cycles with waste recovery heat systems There are several branches of non equilibrium thermodynamics In 1994, as an extension to the CA model In a recent paper In this work, we consider a CA heat engine model with a heat leak and considering two different internal irreversibilities (the CA-like case with R-internal irreversibility and the CA-like case with r-internal irreversibility). By means of a generalization of the ecological function In this section, we present a thermodynamic analysis of a Curzon-Ahlborn-like irreversible engine extended as shown in Fig. From Fig. and where γ = α/β, τ = T c /T h (0 < τ < 1); a h = T hw /T h is defined as the high reduced temperature and a c = T c /T cw as the low reduced temperature. It is well known that the performance in several types of energy converters has become a topic of general interest, and its study has been carried out within different contexts and Where to the input and output heat flows respectively. While σ T is the total entropy production of the heat engine plus its surroundings; that is, σ T = σ e + σ w , where σ e is the entropy produced by the surroundings, given by: and σ w is the entropy produced by the heat engine, In the above equation, σ i represents the entropy production of the working substance due to different dissipative processes such as: turbulence, friction, viscosity, etc. This term represents the irreversibilities within the working substance. In the following sections, we will study two optimization cases of a type Curzon-Ahborn model taking into account two ways to quantify the irreversibilities. The first irreversible case is studied in terms of a lumped parameter R. This R parameter, which comes from Clausius's inequality, can be seen as a measure of the departure from the endoreversible regime. The second one includes the r-irreversible parameter that comes directly from the Clausius uncompensated heat. Hereinafter, we will name both of the studied cases as CA-R case and CA-r case, respectively. We point out the first irreversible case, without the heat leak term, does not reproduce the characteristic loops of real heat engines in the power output versus efficiency space. On the other hand, the second one reproduces the mentioned loops without the inclusion the heat leak term. In this case, the parameter of non-reversibility R quantifies the irreversibilities of the working substance and is related through a heat flux as every thermal engine operating in cycles satisfies that σ w = 0, then by substituting Eq. 9 into Eq. 8 leads us for this model to the relationship between the reduced temperatures (high and low), Thus, the heat flow Q c can be rewritten as: On the other hand, the process functions obtained by substituting the heat fluxes given by Eqs. 1, 3 and 11 into Eqs. 4, 5 and 6 remain in function of R. In particular, for a heat engine, it is required that all the process functions are positive defined. To guarantee the above, it is necessary that the parameters R, δ and a h fulfilled with certain restrictions. Firstly, a h must be bounded by Since in those points, the values of P and η are zero. Because of a h > 0 then τ < R ≤ 1. In this CA-R case, the parameters that allow to establish the configuration space and Power output and efficiency have a value of high reduced temperature which maximizes them and therefore, this allows to characterize both the maximum power output and maximum efficiency regimes, respectively. The a h optimal value for M P and M η regimes are given by: and with ρ ηR of the form: The mathematical expressions 16 and 17 are the results of a derivative of power output and efficiency (obtained by substituting Eqs. 1, 3 and 11 into 4 and 5) with respect to a h , in order to find the reduced temperatures that cancel the derivatives. Maximum power output regime is completely defined within the CA-R case (δ = 0). However, the heat leak term inclusion is needed to reach the maximum efficiency regime In this case, the parameter associated with internal irreversibilities is the Clausius uncompensated heat. So σ i can be expressed in the form where r is defined as the quotient between σ S and α which represents in some way the irreversibility degree of the working substance For CA-r case, the relationship between internal and external reduced temperatures is obtained by substituting Eq. 19 into Eq. 8, due to that the working substance operates in cycles, in such a way, the heat flux Q c is given by, Besides, the mathematical expressions for the process functions: power output (P ), efficiency (η) and dissipation (Φ), can be obtained replacing Eqs. 1, 21 and 3 into Eqs. 4, 5 and 6; that is, and As in the previous section, both power output and efficiency have a maximum, and both are zero at the same high reduced temperature values. While, dissipation function is a decreasing function with respect to the a h variable. Analogously, the zeros of P and η functions define the interval of values for a h that allow the energy converter to work as a heat engine, where n i is given by, because of τ is related to the thermal gradient that promotes the heat flow inside the converter and therefore, it limits the available energy in the system to access certain operation modes. Likewise, in order to a h satisfy the Ineq. 25, the following condition must be fulfilled simultaneously On the other hand, it is always desirable that δ to be lower than the α value, so that a greater entering heat flux to the system is guaranteed, i.e, a inequality must be kept 0 ≤ δ < α. In this scheme, as in the CA-R case, there are high reduced temperature values that allow us to obtain both the maximum power output and maximum efficiency regimes. These reduced temperatures are given by, and Figura 2: a) Parametric curves of power output vs efficiency and b) power output vs dissipation, which show the operating characteristic zones for a heat engine. In c), the parametric graph of power output vs efficiency shows how an energy converter can achieve a power output value P i with two different efficiency values (η i and η j ) at the same time, an efficiency value (η j ) has associated two different power output values (P i and P j ). with ρ ηr given by: The a h optimal values given by Eqs. 28 and 29 are obtained by replacing Eqs. 1, 3 and 21 into 4 and 5. In this case, it is important to note that the maximum efficiency regime exists without the need to consider a heat leak (see Fig. During the operation of several thermal engines a great number of parameters associated with the exchange of energy are taken into account, all of them give rise to a configuration space. In this space, there is an infinity of compatible operation modes with the performance of every energy converter When the behavior of the P vs η curves in the CA-R and CA-r cases is analyzed, a particular curve (loop) can be observed and three operating zones are well distinguished (see Figs. where a M η h is the high reduced temperature value of the maximum efficiency regime. In this zone, the converter performance reaches high power output (HP ), good efficiency (HE) and a moderate dissipation. On the other hand, when the operation is performed in zone III (ZIII), we get an a h ∈ a M η h , a h1 , where a h1 is the upper bound for the high reduced temperature that restricts every energy converter to operate as a heat engine. The operation modes in ZIII have low dissipation and low power output (LD and LP ). It is understood by HE an efficiency greater than the efficiency of maximum power output regime. In HD, the highest dissipation values remain bounded by the maximum power output regime, while LD refers to dissipation values lower than the dissipation at maximum efficiency regime. Every power output value greater than the power output at maximum efficiency regime can be considered in HP , all of the above is shown in Figs. 600 290 838 298 1573 303 In Table When energetic performance of different power plants under CA-R and CA-r cases is analyzed, it is needed more information than the provided in Table In this case, we determine the parameters δ, R and a h require extra-thermodynamic constraints to fully characterize a compatible point with an operation mode in the configuration space. As R quantifies to some degree the internal irreversibilities within the working substance during the operation of a heat engine, it can also be associated with the energy dissipated by operation cycle. δ-parameter modulates the amount of energy that leaks from the system and therefore plays no role in the operation of the converter. With the inclusion of these irreversibilities, it is guaranteed the parametric curves P vs η form the well-known loop. Figs. 3a and 3b reflect the use of a h (η) as the parametric variable. Since it is always possible to isolate a h from the expression for efficiency (Eq. 14). The parametric variable a h (η) is substituted in the expression for power output (Eq. 13) and we have two equations in terms of efficiency, given by With ρ pR , and From Eq. 31 + sign describes the points located in zones I and II, whilesign allows to plot the points situated in zone III (as shown in Fig. The CA-R case allows us to get some relationships between the parameters related to the main sources of irreversibilities (δ and R) and the variables that modulate the energy input to the system (α, γ and T h ). The mathematical expressions for the process functions (P , η and Φ) can modify the performance of a converter. In Figs. To make evident all of the above, a direct relationship between R and δ with P and η is established. With the Eq. 31, it is guaranteed a specific curve contains the corresponding operation mode with the power and efficiency reported by the analyzed plants. Moreover, if P ≥ 0 (Eq. 31) for any operation zone, the parameter δ has two possible expressions: The value of δ (ZI) , given by thesign, associates the reported operation mode by any of the power plants with a particular energy configuration in ZI. Therefore, α-parameter must be bounded as follows: with this condition, it is guaranteed that δ is non-negative. Ineq. 35 is positive when the parameter R fulfill, Likewise, to be physically consistent this condition must be satisfied: For the possible δ (ZII,III) values provided by Eq. 34 (+ sign), which relate a characteristic operation regime to a configuration in ZII or ZIII (δ (ZII,III) > 0), then α parameter must be, since these α values make the parameter δ (ZII,III) equal to zero. In addition, to ensure that Eq. 38 must be positive, the R parameter will be bounded by, we note the lower bound of R is an asymptotic point, this makes α tends to infinity. Therefore, R must satisfy the Ineq. 39 and so, Although Eq. 37 is contained in Eq. 40, when the relationship between τ and η satisfy exclusively the constraint in Eq. 37, some configurations show up for reported operation modes in ZI. In this model, we define once again the constraints for the parameters a h , r and δ in such a way they allow the construction of a curve in the configuration space, and compatible with a particular operation model. In this case, r reflects the internal irreversibilities of the system and therefore, is associated with the dissipated energy during the operation of the heat engine. Although r is the only parameter that allows the model to characterize the loops in the P vs η plane, δ-parameter affects the maximum value that the efficiency can reach (Fig. wheresign locates the operation modes in I and II zones. While in Zone III the modes are described by + sign (see Fig. with Analogous to the CA-R case, we found a curve (loop) compatible with the reported efficiency and power output values in the power plants data. The δ parameter has two cases according to the operation zone, wheresign refers to ZI and + sign corresponds to ZII and ZIII, besides: To ensure that δ ZI and δ (ZII,III) are positive, α and r parameters must be constrained. All of the operation modes in ZI must fulfill: this condition guarantees that δ Z1 > 0. As long as, and at the same time α Z1 > 0. In the same way, for every operation mode in ZII or ZIII, since δ Z2,3 > 0 then by transitivity: and In the CA-R and CA-r cases, three particular operation zones are characterized. Although there are thermal engines that can operate in ZI or ZIII, it is desirable they operate within ZII. In the following section, we will show that from a specific parametric variable, it is possible to find conditions to project operation modes outside of ZII to modes within it. Within the context of the FTT it has been possible to define certain objective functions, this type of functions are connected to the performance of an energy converter with a particular operation mode. Power output this -parameter generates a family of convex ecological functions. Each of them with a value of a h that maximizes themselves (see Fig. access. All of the above allows us to establish the so-called "improvement condition" The purpose of energetic restructuring lies in finding conditions of certain elements (heat exchangers) for different power plants, so that they operate in ZII. In Fig. The other conditions arise from evaluating the efficiency function at the point of maximum efficiency (replacing Eq. 17 into Eq. 5) and after solving for δ we get, By solving the equations system formed by Eqs. 51 and 52, we obtain the values of α=α M η R and δ= δ M η R that would represent the operation mode of WT plant under the maximum efficiency regime. Thus, there exists a particular value of α * = α(R, P, η) for any α bounded between α ZII,ZIII (see Eq. 38). The operation mode reported in Almaraz II plant will always be stayed in ZII. However, if α > α ηR then it will be located in ZIII. Analogously, there are conditions for α and δ, so that the reported operation mode during the running of the power plants, represent the maximum power output regime. Thus, by replacing Eq. 16 in Eq. 4, we get a new mathematical expression for δ: Figura 6: Characteristics loops for West Thurrock plant. In a) the loops exemplify two configurations, one of them lies in ZII (solid line). The other one (dotted line) represents a configuration whose operation mode is in ZIII. In b) it is shown a configuration (solid line) in which, the reported mode for WT plant represents the maximum efficiency. In dotted line, the same operation mode is located in ZIII with new features. In c) a specific configuration is sketched, in which the operation mode under new conditions for WT plant represents the maximum efficiency point (solid line). The other configuration contains the same operation mode is in ZIII (dotted line) with new features. in the same way, by replacing Eq. 16 in Eq. 5, we have, The lack of information, in the reported data during the operation of power plants, restricts the number of energetic favorable configurations, i.e, there are plants that operate in energetically unprofitable zones (ZI and ZIII). To identify the operation zone of each analyzed plant, we use the generalization parameter of the ecological function (Eq. 50) as the parametric variable that allows to establish a relation between the height reduced temperature, power output and efficiency. By using Eqs. 13 and 15 in the expression for ecological function (Eq. 50) and by taking the derivative with respect to the high reduced temperature, we get: This optimal high reduced temperature is related to an -parameter, which maximize the compromise function, as we can see in Fig. this inequality guarantees the operation mode is located in ZI. In the analogous way, by using Eqs. 16 and 17, we get This inequality guarantees that the operation mode is now in ZII. Finally, by solving with Eq. 17 and replacing Eq. 55 into upper bound of Ineq. 12, we get Figura 7: Curves that exemplify a configuration (blue) which contains the operation mode reported by each plant, every orange loops give an account of a specific configuration obtained from the improvement conditions under CA-R case, this condition allows the plants to operate at ZII. In a) it is shown that Almaraz II plant can go from operating in ZIII ( ηR2 > M P O ) to a point ηR1 that represents its performance in ZII maintaining the same efficiency and improving its power output. In b), Larderello plant works in ZI ( P R1 < M P O ) and the point P R2 symbolizes its operation in ZII, which has the same power output and improve its efficiency. In c) Toshiba's plant operation is schematized in ZIII ( ηR2 < M P O ) and the point P R2 shows its performance in ZII improving both the power as efficiency. as in the previous Ineqs. On the other hand, when the characteristic curve between power vs efficiency is analized, we get for a given power there are two values of the parameter. When these values are used in Eqs. 13 and 14, we get particular values for the processes variables P and η. By replacing Eq. 55 in the expression for power output (see Eq. 13) and by solving for , we obtain: where P R1 is associated to + sign and P R2 tosign, besides In analogous way, after replacing Eq. 55 into Eq. 14 for efficiency and solving for , we obtain with ηR1 is associated tosign and ηR2 to + sign. Where n η1 and ρ η1 are given by: and Then, the operating modes that lie within a configuration curve can be specified via the -parameter (see Fig. In order to obtain the new configuration of those power plants that are not initially working in ZII, for example, Almaraz II and Larderello (see Table where T hw = T * hw is assumed. In Table Another way to find the restructuring conditions for the "optimal" operation of power plants is through the CA-r case. Similarly, as in the previous section and considering the new set of variables α, γ, r and δ, we have two different configurations for West Thurrock plant (Fig. and In analogous way by replacing Eq. 28 into 5 (M η regime), the system of equations to solve is: and, where, and After solving them (Eqs. 67 and 68), we obtain the values: α=α M η r and δ= δ M η r , which allow certain power plants to achieve the maximum efficiency regime. It is a fact not all of the power plants have the same conditions to work in the "optimal" operation zone (ZII). The optimal conditions is found again through the ecological function's generalization parameter (Eq. 50), which establishes two functional relations ( (P r,ηr)1 and (P r,ηr)2 ) between a M E G h value and the control parameters (τ , γ and r). Now, by using Eqs. 22 and 24 in the expression for ecological function (Eq. 50) and by taking the derivative with respect to the high reduced temperature, we get: which can be obtained analogously to the CA-R case. Analogously to the CA-R case, but now these limits for the values of -parameter are obtained with the help of Eqs. 25, 16 and 29. Therefore, in this case, the conditions to identify the operation zones ZI, ZII and ZIII are given by: and where II is: Likewise, to get the parametric relations = (P, r), we replaced Eq. 28 into Eqs. 4 and 5, in order to get (see Fig. Figura 9: Curves that exemplify a configuration (red) which contains the operation mode reported by each plant, every black loops give an account of a specific configuration obtained from the improvement conditions under CA-r case, this condition allows the plants to operate at ZII. In a) it is shown that Almaraz II can go from operating in ZIII ( ηr2 > M P O ) to a point ηr1 that represents its performance in ZII maintaining the same efficiency and improving its power output. In b), Larderello works in ZI ( P r1 < M P O ) and the point P r2 symbolizes its operation in ZII, which has the same power output and improve its efficiency. In c) Toshiba's operation is schematized in ZIII ( ηr2 < M P O ) and the point P r2 shows its performance in ZII improving both the power and efficiency. As is well known, the characteristic loops of performance of a real thermal engines are not produced in the analysis of the power output versus efficiency curves of an endoreversible engine model. To emulate one of these loops, it is necessary to incorporate within the CA-R case, not only the irreversibility parameter R but also a heat leak term between the two temperature external reservoirs. However, in the CA-r case these loops arise without the need to incorporate this heat leakage, due to the exchange of energy and its surroundings. Therefore, a more complete model must incorporate such a dissipative element. In this work, we characterize the restrictions of the different parameters involved in the irreversible cases that permit the physical configuration achievable for the energy converter. Likewise, we have shown that a particular mode of operation corresponds to a set of configurations that can be found from two different ways. The parameters α and δ generate a greater effect on the behavior of the converter, due to their relationship with heat exchangers that allow the heat flows with the surroundings. In addition, the constraints on R and r parameters were analyzed. These parameters can roughly estimate a certain irreversibility degree of each energy converter here studied. Besides, we obtain the relationship between the parameters associated with the design and construction of the energy converter model and their internal irreversibility degrees. On the other hand, we show the importance of the -parameter to improve conditions in the performance of some power plants in both CA-R and CA-r cases. Besides, by using the -parameter in both maximum power output and maximum efficiency regimes allow us to classify the operation mode along the characteristic loops in the configuration space. In addition, through -parameter we can obtain the achievable conditions in order to an energy converter can operate in the optimal performance region; that is, at ZII (see Figs. 