We present several recently synthesized nanocomposites consisting of liquid crystals as well as an organic molecular crystal embedded into the nanochannels of mesoporous alumina and silica. As liquid-crystalline mesogens achiral, nematogen and chiral cholesteric guest molecules infiltrated into nanochannels by spontaneous imbibition were chosen. The molecular ordering inside the nanochannels, which can be tailored by modifying the surface anchoring, was characterized by optical polarimetry (linear and/or circular birefringence) in combination with X-ray diffraction. For the synthesis of the solid crystalline nanocomposites ferroelectric triglycine sulfate (TGS) nanocrystals were deposited into the nanochannels by slow evaporation of saturated water solutions imbibed into the porous hosts. Their textural and physicochemical properties were explored by xray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and dielectric techniques. Mesoporous alumina (pAl 2 O 3, anodized aluminium oxide -AAO) and silica (pSiO 2 ) represent nanoporous host templates for a variety of nanoscale technologies. In particular liquid-and solid crystalline-filled templates of these materials appear as prominent candidates for prospective optoelectronic and photonic applications. The unidirectional tubular structure of such matrices results in a macroscopic anisotropy of many materials properties. Moreover, it is characterized by a remarkable flexibility and modularity: it is possible to tailor the properties of these nanocomposites according to specific needs by varying geometrical characteristics of the pore network (channel diameters and/or porosity), by choosing suitable guest components, by modifying the interface anchoring or nanocrystals growth conditions Mesoporous AAO membranes were fabricated by electrochemical two stage etching using oxalic acid (0.3 M water solution) as electrolyte. Nanoporous silica, pSiO 2 , was synthesized by oxidation of mesoporous silicon obtained by electrochemical etching of p-doped 100 Si-wafer in an electrolyte composed of a mixture of HF and ethanol with a volume ratio 2:3. Liquid-crystal based nanocomposites were obtained by embedding liquid crystals into tubular pore networks of mesoporous alumina or silica membranes by capillarity-driven imbibition. The surface anchoring at the pore walls is crucial for the molecular ordering in pore space and thus defines the optical anisotropy of liquid crystal nanocomposites. Untreated (native) surfaces of alumina or silica pore walls are hydrophilic. They can be made hydrophobic surface by silanization resulting in changed molecular anchoring at the pore walls. Similarly, polymer coatings, SE130 or SE1211, enhance tangential or normal molecular anchoring. The anisotropy of nanocomposite materials are characterized with optical polarimetry by measuring linear birefringence, associated with an optical retardation R, and/or circular birefringence, associated with optical activity . Temperature changes of these quantities (see Fig. Fig. This pore-surface grafting leads in the case of confined achiral nematics to either escaped radial or polar molecular configurations, see sketches (b') and (c), respectively, in Fig. A cholesteric liquid crystal (CE6) embedded into the polymer treated nanochannels with tangential anchoring (SE130) reorganizes at cooling from an isotropic phase to a so-called cholesteric double-twist structure and then to a smectic A structure, see sketches in Fig. Nanocomposites with embedded solid crystalline materials, e.g. nanocrystals, represent an alternative approach to achieve materials with tailorable physical properties. We followed this strategy by the deposition of guest ferroelectric crystals TGS into the nanochannels via slow evaporation of TGS-saturated water solutions imbibed into the pore network. The textural properties of the resulting soft-hard hybrid materials, which turn out to be strongly dependent on the host/guest components and channels size, we explore by X-ray and SEM techniques. In Fig. The nanocomposites with the most homogeneous content and uniform orientation of TGS nanocrystals with ferroelectric axes parallel to the long channel axis, particularly pSiO 2 (12 nm):TGS, may be of particular practical interest. One must emphasize that bulk TGS at room temperature is a ferroelectric crystal and along the polar axis it exhibits piezoelectricity, piroelectricity and a large dielectric response. The dielectric constant is characterized by a Curie-Weiss temperature behaviour, i.e. it anomalously diverges in the vicinity of the Curie point (T C =322 K) We have presented several examples of nanocomposite materials consisting of host mesoporous tubular alumina or silica membranes with embedded achiral as well as chiral liquid crystals and ferroelectric nanocrystals. In the case of the liquid crystal based nanocomposites the molecular ordering inside the nanochannels can be controlled by the surface anchoring. Thus the optical anisotropy and likewise other physicochemical properties can be tailored. In the developed solid crystalline nanocomposites the guest TGS ferroelectric nanocrystals have been deposited into the nanochannels of mesoporous silica and alumina by slow evaporation of their saturated water solution imbibed by the pore network. Their physicochemical and textural properties, which turn out to be strongly dependent on the host/guest components and channel size, are explored by X-ray, SEM and dielectric spectroscopy techniques. For the future alternative guest materials, particularly, ferroelectric liquid crystals, achiral and chiral discotics and twist-bend nematics as well as other water soluble classic ferroelectric crystals, like e.g. KDP 