While reversibility is a fundamental concept in thermodynamics, most reactions are not readily reversible, especially in solid state physics. For example, thermal diffusion is a widely known concept, used among others to inject dopant atoms into the substitutional positions in the matrix and improve the device properties. Typically, such a diffusion process will create a concentration gradient extending over increasingly large regions, without possibility to reverse this effect. On the other hand, while the bottom up growth of semiconducting nanowires is interesting, it can still be difficult to fabricate axial heterostructures with high control. In this paper, we report a reversible thermal diffusion process occurring in the solid-state exchange reaction between an Al metal pad and a SixGe1-x alloy nanowire observed by in-situ transmission electron microscopy. The thermally assisted reaction results in the creation of a Si-rich region sandwiched between the reacted Al and unreacted SixGe1-x part, forming an axial Al/Si/SixGe1-x heterostructure. Upon heating or (slow) cooling, the Al metal can repeatably move in and out of the SixGe1-x alloy nanowire while maintaining the rod-like geometry and crystallinity, allowing to fabricate and contact nanowire heterostructures in a reversible way in a single process step, compatible with current Si based technology. This interesting system is promising for various applications, such as phase change memories in an all crystalline system with integrated contacts, as well as Si/SixGe1-x/Si heterostructures for near-infrared sensing applications. Group-IV semiconducting nanowires (NWs) are widely studied both by top down as well as bottom up approaches The diffusion behavior of Si/Al and Ge/Al binary systems in bulk and thin film materials has been studied for a long period resulting in a large amount of publications. In the Si/Al couple, due to the low solubility limit of Si in Al (about 1.62%) In this paper, we report in situ real time transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations of a thermally assisted solid-state exchange reaction between an Al metal pad and a SixGe1-x alloy nanowire where we observe a reversible diffusion process, allowing to fabricate axial heterostructures starting from an initial homogeneous alloy NW. On heating, a reaction interface progresses in the NW where the Al metal replaces the original SixGe1-x NW. On controlled cooling, a Si rich region is progressively extending backwards inside the just converted Al NW section, going from the interface with the original NW toward the Al contact pad. The crystallographic and compositional analyses on the created NW heterostructures are carried out using geometrical phase analysis (GPA) In-Situ TEM Observation of Al/Si0.67Ge0.33 NW Thermal Exchange Reaction When two materials are brought in contact, depending on the thermal equilibrium of the system, inter-diffusion can take place at the contact interface due to the thermal vibration of atoms. Normally, ex-situ heating via rapid thermal annealing technique (RTA) is used to initiate and accelerate the exchange reaction benefiting from its simplicity. However, using such an ex-situ approach, no information is obtained on the mechanism and kinetics of the exchange reaction. In-situ heating experiments are therefore of high interest for a real time observation of the exchange reaction. In this study, as-grown NWs were dispersed on TEM temperature calibrated heater chips, aiming for a direct observation of the Al metal protruding in Si0.67Ge0.33 NWs. Fig. Fig. Figure When the reaction interface had extended from the left to the right over a distance of 6.4 μm (at 580 o C), the heating temperature was slowly reduced down to room temperature. At some points (i.e., 560, 550 and 530 o C), the temperature was kept constant to investigate the evolution of the reaction interfaces (see Fig. To understand the mechanism of the exchange reaction, it is necessary to characterize the distribution of elements within the created structure. For these analyses, geometrical phase analysis (GPA) and quantitative EDX with a 3D reconstruction on different reacted parts were performed. For the experiments, as-grown Si0.67Ge0.33 NWs were contacted on the 200 nm thick Si3N4 membrane and annealed ex-situ via RTA at 400 o C for 20 s and then rapidly cooled down to room temperature during 4 min. The HAADF STEM image of a contacted NW crossing over a 2 μm x 8 μm hole after the thermal treatment is presented in the supporting information SI S1a. Analysis of the lattice spacing using GPA indicated that the formed segment with intermediate contrast between the created Al part and original Si0.67Ge0.33 NW contains mostly Si. To obtain more precise chemical characterization, Fig. Figure We have seen a clear influence of the NW diameter on the Si0.67Ge0.33 interface shape, see SI S3. Particularly, small NWs with diameters ranging from 60 to 100 nm show the formation of a clean Si-rich/Si0.67Ge0.33 interface with a straight or more often observed, convex shape (Fig. For device applications, it is of crucial importance to investigate the electrical transport property of the created heterostructures. We have therefore performed electrical measurements on the Si0.67Ge0.33 NWs before and after the thermal diffusion. Fig. The diffusion behavior of this ternary system combined with the change in resistivity may be promising for phase change memory applications Based on above observations of the thermal diffusion behavior, we propose some hypotheses to interpret the kinetics of the thermal reaction forming Al/Si/Si0.67Ge0.33 heterostructures. Recalling the diffusion behavior shown in the SI M1, the two interfaces moved forward catching up with each other after a certain time, and then the Si0.67Ge0.33 interface suddenly stopped while the Si rich interface moved backward to generate a new Si rich region. Firstly, the step-wise propagation of the Si0.67Ge0.33 interface may be explained due to the presence of defects or roughness on the NW surface. Since as-grown NWs were exposed to air, the NW surface was strongly oxidized resulting in the formation of surface defects. The EDX quantification has shown the presence of an about 1 -2 nm thick SiO2 shell around the NW. Therefore, the trapping and detrapping of the reaction interface at these defects may cause the discontinuous propagation of the Si0.67Ge0.33 interface and the presence of several facets. This hypothesis was corroborated by the formation of a clean and sharp Si0.67Ge0.33 interface when passivating the NWs by a 20 nm Al2O3 shell. Then, the Si rich interface moved in the reverse direction after the Si0.67Ge0.33 interface had stopped. From Fig. From the SI M2, when the temperature was slowly reduced, the Si rich interface was observed to move in the reverse direction toward the Al contact pad, consequently extending the Si rich region. Since the interface with the original Si0.67Ge0.33 NW didn't show any change during extension of the Si rich region, it is expected that Si atoms that previously moved out of the NW and into the grain boundaries or surface of the Al reservoir are now defusing back and reconstitute the NW cross-section. From literature Unlike the diffusion behavior in large NW diameters (≥ 150 nm) resulting in the formation of a rough Si0.67Ge0.33 interface, the created Si0.67Ge0.33 interfaces in small NW diameters (≤ 100 nm) are typically clean with a convex shape. Fig. In summary, the Al-(Si, Ge) NW thermal exchange reaction was investigated in detail via ex-situ and in situ heating techniques. The incorporation of Al metal in Si0.67Ge0.33 alloy NWs results in the formation of a Si-rich region (≥90%), sandwiched between the reacted and unreacted part of the NW. When reducing the heating temperature, we have observed a linear extension of the Si rich segment length in the reverse direction back to the Al contact pad. In small NW diameters, the interfacial energy between the core and oxide shell on both sides of the reaction interface becomes more significant and governs the exchange reaction. The clean-convex Si0.67Ge0.33 interface results from the deceleration of the diffusion rate from the center to the edge of the NW due to the lower interfacial energy of the SiO2/Si0.67Ge0.33 interface compared to that of the Al2O3/Al interface. With a pre-deposited Al2O3 shell, the interfacial energies on both sides of the reaction interface are reduced significantly, which results in the formation of flat atomically abrupt Si0.67Ge0.33 and Si rich interfaces and much smoother advancement of the reaction interface. Then during the cooling process, the linear extension of the Si and Ge atoms are explained by the solidification process of Al-(Si, Ge) ternary system. Slowly decreasing the temperature induces the precipitation of first Si and then Ge atoms, starting at the unreacted Si0.67Ge0.33 part. Current-voltage characteristics without (on-state) and with the presence of the Si/SixGe1-x/Si heterostructure (off-state), show a current drop of two orders of magnitudes (Ion/Ioff =10 2 ), respectively. This ratio is expected to be improved when employing doped SixGe1-x alloy nanowires to raise the on-state current. In summary, these findings show the possibility to produce tunable Al/Si/SixGe1-x axial heterostructures with integrated contacts, created in a single fabrication step. These structures may show a great potential for phase change memories as well as near infrared (NIR) sensing applications since SixGe1-x alloys show an interesting flexible bandgap that can be tuned in the 1.3 μm to 1.55 μm telecommunication window, all in a system compatible with current silicon-based technology. Moreover, the observed reversible thermal diffusion of the metal, certainly due to the NW system confining semiconductor and metal in an oxidized shell, may be a concept that can be extended to other material couples. In this work, we have conducted the thermal diffusion of Al metal into three different SixGe1-x alloy stoichiometries (i.e. x= 0.05, 0.12 and 0.67). However, for Al diffusion in low composition Si NWs (x= 0.05 and 0.12) no clear difference with the pure Ge NW system was observed, and a strikingly different behavior was observed in the NWs with x= 0.67. Therefore, we decided to focus on the SixGe1-x NWs (x= 0.67) in our experiments. The growth of Si0.67Ge0.33 NWs was performed by chemical vapor deposition method (CVD) via the VLS growth mode, using silane and GeH4 gasses as precursors and gold as catalyst on a Si(111) substrate. The NWs were growth along the [111] direction. The fabricated NWs have a strong variation in diameter, ranging from 60 to 250 nm. For the experiments, as-grown NWs were either being used directly to perform metal contacts or a surface passivation was applied by cleaning the NW surface by dipping in diluted hydriodic acid (HI) for 5 s and immediately passivating by a 20 nm Al2O3 shell (using atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 250 o C). Aiming for in-situ heating experiments, Si0.67Ge0.33 NWs were dispersed on calibrated heater chips from DENSsolution company 