Alternate stacking of the highly conducting metallic layers with the magnetic triangular layers found in the delafossite PdCrO2 is an excellent platform for discovering intriguing correlated quantum phenomena. Thin film growth of this material may enable not only tuning the basic physical properties beyond what bulk materials can exhibit, but also developing novel hybrid materials by enabling interfacing dissimilar materials, yet this has proven to be extremely challenging. Here, we report the epitaxial growth of metallic delafossite PdCrO2 films by pulsed laser epitaxy (PLE). The fundamental role the growth conditions, epitaxial strain, and chemical and structural characteristics of the substrate are investigated by growing under various growth conditions and on various types of substrates. While strain plays a large role in improving the crystallinity, the direct growth of epitaxial PdCrO2 films without impurity phases was not successful. We attribute this difficulty to both the chemical and structural dissimilarities between the substrates and volatile nature of PdO layer, which inhibit nucleation of the delafossite phase. This difficulty was overcome by growing CuCrO2 buffer layers before PdCrO2 were grown. Unlike PdCrO2, CuCrO2 films were grown across a wide range of conditions. It was found that a single monolayer of CuCrO2 was sufficient to grow the correct PdCrO2 phase. This result indicates that the epitaxy of Pd-based delafossites is extremely sensitive to the chemistry and structure of the interface, necessitating near perfect substrate materials. The resulting films are commensurately strained, highly metallic, and show antiferromagnetism that emerges at 37 K and persists down to as thin as 3.6 nm in thickness. This work provides key insights into advancing the epitaxial growth of the broader class of metallic delafossites for both studying the basic physical properties and new technologies. Key Words: Delafossite, PdCrO2, Transport, Magnetism, Thin film, Epitaxy This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally spons ored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan). ABO2 delafossites are a class of materials offering a wide range of physical properties due to the combination of electronic conduction and magnetism Here, we have systematically studied the epitaxial synthesis of the delafossite PdCrO2 by pulsed laser epitaxy (PLE) on various substrates. By systematically tuning the growth conditions, growth temperature (T), oxygen partial pressure (PO2), and laser fluence (J), it was found that the formation of highquality, phase-pure PdCrO2 epitaxial films requires a delicate balance of the growth conditions. Although the conditions that favor the growth of PdCrO2 are nominally independent of the substrate, the highest quality PdCrO2 was found to grow on low-lattice-mismatched delafossite buffer layers, which significantly reduced the appearance of impurity phases. The quality of the buffer layer was found to be the limiting factor for the growth of PdCrO2. This indicates that a new generation of bulk crystals will ultimately enable synthesis of high quality PdCrO2 epitaxial thin films. The pulsed-laser epitaxy of PdCrO2 films used a sintered polycrystalline target. Based on previous reports on bulk synthesis High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images were collected with a 5 th order aberration-corrected NION UltraSTEM 200 operated at 200kV using a 30 mrad convergence semi-angle. The transport properties were measured using the van der Pauw configuration with a 14 T Quantum Design PPMS using aluminum wires directly wire-bonded to PdCrO2 films. Optical properties of PdCrO2 thin films, PdCrO2 single crystal, and SrTiO3 substrate were measured using spectroscopic ellipsometry for UV-visible range (M-2000, J. A. Woollam Co.) with photon energies between 0.74 and 5.86 eV at an incident angle of 65°. For both the films and the substrate infrared ellipsometry (IR-VASE, J.A. Woollam) was used for energy below 0.74 eV. The spectra were fitted using a two-layer model (film/substrate) to obtain physically reasonable dielectric functions. For single crystal, the complex optical conductivity was extracted using Kramers-Kronig analysis after measuring nearnormal reflectance (Vertex 80v FT-IR spectrometer, Bruker). PdCrO2 has a rhombohedral structure (space group R-3m) with lattice parameters of a = b = 2.930 Å, and c = 18.087 Å (α = β = 90°, γ = 120°) To understand the role of the substrate in nucleation of both the delafossite and impurity phases, PdCrO2 films were grown on the substrates mentioned earlier, as well as on an additional buffer layer i.e., single-monolayer PLE-grown CuCrO2 (δ = 1.3%) (~0.6 nm in thickness) on (0001) Al2O3. Initial growth parameters were optimized for PdCrO2 films grown on Al2O3, i.e. PO2 = 100 mTorr, T = 700 °C, and J = 1.5 J/cm 2 . XRD 2- scans for ~30 nm thick PdCrO2 films grown under the same optimum condition on all of the substrates and buffer layers are shown in Fig. The role the substrate plays in nucleation can be additionally seen by comparing the relative intensity of secondary phases. Specifically, in Fig. In general, for heteroepitaxy, the closer the film and the substrate crystal structures to one another, the higher the film quality. For example, PdCoO2 films grown on Al2O3 have shown epitaxial twins due to equivalent ways to crystallographically connect the delafossite structure to the corundum structure Thin film of CuCrO2 was grown using PLE on Al2O3 at T = 700 C, PO2 = 10 mTorr, and J = 1.5 J/cm 2 . An XRD scan is shown in Fig. The insulating nature was found to be due to islands formation which were not fully connected. The rocking curve width ( = 0.1°) is nominally the same as the underlying CuCrO2, which indicates that the structural quality is largely limited by the underlying buffer layer. Finally, it is important to point out that these growth conditions are nominally identical to those found for PdCrO2 directly grown on Al2O3, which confirms that formation of the impurities is driven by the character of the surface. In addition, as shown in Fig. Figure Finally, optical conductivity spectra (σ1(ω)) of PdCrO2 thin films and a single crystal at the room temperature are shown in Fig. The difference observed in γi is consistent with the higher resistivity of thin films. The Drude parameters were converted into relaxation time of τ  3.65 × 10 -15 s, carrier density of n3D opt ≈ 1.3 × 10 22 cm -3 , mobility of μ opt ≈ 5.27 ± 0.5 cm 2 /V•s, and DC conductivity of σ opt ≈ 9000 Ω -1 •cm -1 , corresponding to ρ opt ≈ 110 μΩ•cm. This was consistent with the values from transport measurements. The data were found to be nominally thickness independent, which indicates that the broad electronic properties are preserved down to the thinnest sample. The Drude parameters, however, show clear thickness dependence, as listed in Table The scattering rate γi was larger for small film thickness. This finding implies that disorder may play a dominant role in the ultrathin limit. It is also noted that the optical conductivity, σ1(0), and DC conductivity, σDC, show significant difference for the 3.6 nm-thick sample. This difference is attributed to potential inhomogeneity, e.g., twin boundaries and Cr2O3 impurity phases in the vicinity of the interface. In summary, we have shown that, albeit on the border of instability, PdCrO2 can be grown epitaxially by pulsed laser epitaxy. Epitaxial strain and the chemical and structural characteristics of the substrate are of key importance to the phase purity of PdCrO2. However, substrates that are at low strain states yet closely match impurity phases strongly enhance formation of these secondary phases. As such, achieving epitaxial PdCrO2 films required a different approach. It is found that the use of a CuCrO2 buffer layer as thin as a single monolayer not only helped reduce the impurity phases, but also improved the crystalline quality of the films in comparison to films grown directly on Al2O3. PdCrO2 epitaxial thin films exhibited a clear magnetic transition down to a thickness of 3.6 nm. Overall, these results show that overcoming significant growth challenges for delafossite family is the first step toward a new generation of complex oxide thin films and creation of novel quantum heterostructures. ωp [cm -1 ] γi [cm -1 ] σ1(0) [Ω -1 •cm -1 ] σDC [Ω - 