We demonstrate saturated internal detection efficiency at 1550 nm wavelengths for meander-shaped superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors made of 3 nm thick MoSi films with widths of 1 and 3 μm, and active areas up to 400 by 400 μm 2 . Despite hairpin turns and a large number of squares (up to 10 4 ) in the device, the dark count rate was measured to be ∼10 3 cps at 99% of the switching current. This value is about two orders of magnitude lower than results reported recently for short MoSi devices with shunt resistors. We also found that 5 nm thick MoSi detectors with the same geometry were insensitive to single near-infrared photons, which may be associated with different levels of suppression of the superconducting order parameter. However, our results obtained on 3 nm thick MoSi devices are in a good agreement with predictions in the frame of a kinetic-equation approach. The superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) is an ideal detector for a broad range of applications such as space communication Although the saturation of the internal detection efficiency for wide wires was not achieved at telecom wavelengths, which are of special interest, these results terms of the quality of the microstructure edges, the noise and electrical characteristics should be comparable with devices made by electron-beam lithography. This is a great help in scaling up the active area of detectors which is, for example, required for dark-matter detection by superconducting nanowires The film uniformity remains a decisive factor in scaling up the detectors. As noted by Gaudio and co-authors As alternative materials for SNSPDs, amorphous WSi 12 and MoSi In this work, we report on the fabrication and testing of large-area MoSi microwire single-photon detectors that exhibit saturation of the internal detection efficiency at 1550 nm wavelength. The morphological structure of thin MoSi films has been studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. We compare our obtained experimental results with previous reports and theoretical predictions. The fabrication process begins with magnetron sputtering of MoSi films onto silicon substrates with a 300 nm thermally oxidized SiO 2 layer. Films were co-sputtered from Mo (99.95% purity, supplier: Kurt J Lesker Company Ltd) and Si (99.999% purity, supplier: Kurt J Lesker Company Ltd) targets in an argon atmosphere. The molybdenum was sputtered using a DC power supply in constant current mode and the silicon with an impedance matched radio frequency (RF) power supply. The depositions were carried out without intentional heating while rotating the substrate holder at a speed of 20 rotations per minute during deposition for better uniformity of the film growth. Prior to deposition, both targets were pre-sputtered at an argon pressure of P(Ar) = 2.5 mTorr for 5 minutes to stabilize the plasma and clean the surface. At first, the discharge current of the Mo target was fixed at 130 mA. The RF power applied to the Si target was then varied keeping other conditions unchanged in order to tune the composition of the MoSi films. Fig. To study the morphological structure of sputtered films we performed transmission electron dark-field imaging and diffraction on 7 nm thick MoSi film sputtered at conditions corresponding to the highest measured T C (73 W) using a field emission TEM (JEOL 2010F) at 200 kV. Additionally, we imaged Mo-rich film with the same thickness sputtered at 50 W of silicon-target power. Results of examination by TEM are presented in Fig. Based on the results of the film characterization, we decided to fabricate devices from MoSi film sputtered at 73 W. Superconducting MoSi films with thicknesses of 3 and 5 nm have been prepared for fabrication of single-photon detectors. Additionally, a 2 nm-thick Si layer was deposited in-situ on top of the MoSi films to prevent oxidation of the superconductor. Fig. We used electron-beam lithography with high-resolution positive electron-beam resist (ZEP 520 A) to pattern microwires. The resist was spin coated onto the chip at 5000 rpm which ensured a thickness of 335 nm. The resist was exposed to a 125 keV electron beam with an area dose density of 500 μC/cm 2 . After exposure, the resist was developed by submerging the chip in O-xylene at 0 • C for 90 s with subsequent rinsing in 2-propanol. The ZEP 520 A pattern was then transferred to the MoSi by reactive ion etching in CF 4 at 50 W for 6 minutes. ∼700 0.85-0.9 4.3-4.7 0.5 5 To electrically and optically characterize the fabricated device, we used an experimental setup in a single shot type He-3 cryostat with base temperature of 300 mK. The device was mounted on the sample holder using a contact glue (GE Varnish). The holder was screwed down to the cold stage. A low-temperature bias tee decoupled the high-frequency path from the DC bias path. The high-frequency signal was carried out of the cryostat by stainless-steel rigid coaxial cables, while DC bias was provided via a pair of twisted wires connected to a low-noise voltage source. The signal was amplified at room temperature by a low-noise amplifier LNA-2500 and then sent to a pulse counter. A single mode optical fiber guided light from a 1550 nm CW laser into the cryogenic apparatus through a vacuum feedthrough and was mounted on a stage above the sample surface. The single-photon counting regime was confirmed by measuring the count rate from the detectors, which was linear as a function of the applied laser power. We first characterized our devices in terms of their superconducting properties. Fig. To calculate j dep C , we used a diffusion coefficient D = 0.47 cm 2 s -1 , experimentally obtained for MoSi film with similar thickness and critical temperature We then performed optical measurements on both 3 and 5 nm chips. Fig. Despite j C / j dep C ratio of devices is similar on both chips, we did not observe optical response in devices of same nominal geometry made of 5 nm MoSi film. The formation of a normal hot-spot with sufficient size after absorption of the photon is crucial for the emergence of a normal belt in wide wires. From a theoretical point of view C , where N(0) -the total density of electronic states at the Fermi level; E ph -the energy of the photon. Assuming that the specific resistivity and diffusivity are similar for 3 and 5 nm MoSi films, the hot-spot radius size is depends on the critical temperature and the thickness for the same photon energy. The estimated R NS for 5 nm MoSi is ∼ 50% smaller than the hot-spot radius for thinner films. Taking into account the fact that the calculated depairing current is similar for samples of both thicknesses, single-photon sensitivity is expected in 5 nm MoSi wide devices for higher photon energies. The absence of a photoresponse in 5 nm MoSi wide devices indicates possible issues in the realization of large-area wide detectors made of high-T C superconductors at telecom wavelength. Candidate materials for SNSPDs summarized in a recent overview In conclusion, we fabricated and characterized 3 and 5 nm MoSi single-photon detectors with wire widths of 1 and 3 μm and surface area up to 400 by 400 μm 2 at 1550 nm wavelength. These detectors show saturated internal detection efficiency at a measurement temperature of 300 mK. The dark count rate was found to be two orders of magnitude lower than was measured on short devices with a shunt. Obtained results open new perspectives for scaling the detectors to masses large enough to probe new territory in the direct detection of sub-GeV dark matter by superconducting wires. Additionally, scaling the detector area up to the millimeter range allows collection of photons from resonant absorption targets The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.