In neutron star matter, there exist 1 S0 superfluids in lower density in the crust while 3 P2 superfluids are believed to exist at higher density deep inside the core. In the latter, depending on the temperature and magnetic field, either the uniaxial nematic phase, the D2-biaxial nematic phase, or the D4-biaxial nematic phase appears. In this paper, we discuss a mixture of the 1 S0 and 3 P2 superfluids and find their coexistence. Adopting the loop expansion and the weak-coupling approximation for the interaction between two neutrons, we obtain the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy in which both of the 1 S0 and 3 P2 condensates are taken into account by including the coupling terms between them. We analyze the GL free energy and obtain the phase diagram for the temperature and magnetic field. We find that the 1 S0 superfluid excludes the 3 P2 superfluid completely in the absence of magnetic field, they can coexist for weak magnetic fields, and the 1 S0 superfluid is expelled by the 3 P2 superfluid at strong magnetic fields, thereby proving the robustness of 3 P2 superfluid against the magnetic field. We further show that the D4-BN phase covers the whole region of the 3 P2 superfluidity as a result of the coupling term, in contrast to the case of a pure 3 P2 superfluid studied before in which the D4-BN phase is realized only under strong magnetic fields. Thus, the D4-BN phase is topologically the most interesting phase, e.g., admitting half-quantized non-Abelian vortices relevant not only in magnetars but also in ordinary neutron stars. Neutron stars are compact stars under extraordinary conditions, providing astrophysical laboratories to study exotic phases of nuclear matter at high density, under rapid rotation and with a strong magnetic field (see Refs. The superfluid and superconducting components can alter excitation modes, affecting several properties in neutron stars, e.g., neutrino emissivities and specific heats relevant, respectively, to the thermal evolution of neutron stars and to a long relaxation time after sudden speed-up events (glitches) of neutron stars It was also proposed that glitches of pulsars may be explained by quantized vortices in superfluids The neutron superfluids are induced by the attractive forces between two neutrons in several different channels in the low-density regime around the crust Recently, the fluctuation effects on the neutron 1 S 0 pairing were studied in the framework of the Nozières and Schmitt-Rink scheme Although the 1 S 0 channel is the most dominant attraction in the low-density regime, it becomes repulsive in the high-density regime inside the neutron star core. 2 In such higher densities, the attraction is provided by the spin-orbit (LS) force in which the angular momentum and the sum of two neutron spins are coupled to each other, and neutron pairs with the total angular momentum J = 2 with spin triplet and P wave are energetically favored. The LS force induces the neutron 3 P 2 superfluids as the relevant phase in the ground state Among them, the nematic phase is the ground state in the weak-coupling limit of 3 P 2 superfluids The GL equation is expressed by a series of the power terms of the order parameter in the 3 P 2 superfluids. Usually the GL expansion up to the fourth order is enough to determine the ground state. However, in the case of 3 P 2 superfluids, the expansion up to the fourth order cannot determine the ground state uniquely, due to a continuous degeneracy among the UN, D 2 -BN, and D 4 -BN phases. 6 This degeneracy can be resolved by including the sixth-order terms in the GL expansion, and the ground state is determined uniquely The GL equation is easily applied to describe nonuniform condensations. In Ref. As presented so far, the 1 S 0 superfluids are dominated at the lower-density regime and the 3 P 2 superfluids are dominated at the higher-density regime, because the interaction strength changes according to the scattering energy of two neutrons. Due to the fact that the 3 P 2 channel is always attractive from the low density to the high density, we should reasonably expect that there can be the intermediate-density regime in which the attraction in the 3 P 2 channel becomes comparable to the attraction in the 1 S 0 channel before the 1 S 0 channel becomes repulsive. In such a density region, we can consider the situation that the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids coexist for given temperature and magnetic field. In the context of the condensed-matter physics, the mixture of S-wave and P -wave condensates is discussed in non-centrosymmetric superconductors The purpose of the present paper is to reveal the possibility of the coexistence of the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids when the coupling between both the superfluids is taken into account. Such information will be important for the study of internal structures of neutron stars. We first introduce the Lagrangian for the interacting neutrons in the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 channels and derive the GL free energy by adopting the loop expansion and the weak-coupling approximation for the neutrons. We then analyze the GL free energy and show the phase diagram that the 1 S 0 superfluid completely excludes the 3 P 2 superfluid with zero magnetic field, both the phases can coexist in the weak-magnetic field region, 6 At the fourth order, in fact, an SO(5) symmetry happens to exist in the potential term as an extended symmetry absent in the original Hamiltonian. It is known that, in this case, the spontaneous breaking of such extended symmetry eventually generates a quasi-Nambu-Goldstone mode and the 1 S 0 superfluid is expelled by the 3 P 2 superfluid in the strong-magnetic field region. We also find that the D 4 -BN phase covers the whole region of the 3 P 2 superfluidity as a result of the coupling term, in contrast to the case of a pure 3 P 2 superfluid in which the D 4 -BN phase is realized only under strong magnetic fields. These results can be understood from the fact that ↑↓ pairs exist and are broken by the Zeeman effects for the 1 S 0 superfluid, and the UN and D 2 -BN phases in the 3 P 2 superfluid, while all the neutrons form ↑↑ or ↓↓ pairs, which are robust against the magnetic field, with equal fraction in the D 4 -BN phase. We thus can expect that the D 4 -BN phase is relevant not only in magnetars but also in ordinary neutron stars. This is phenomenologically interesting because the D 4 -BN phase is topologically rich, admitting, for instance, non-Abelian vortices The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we derive the GL free energy of the mixture of 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids. In Sec. III, we present the phase diagram in terms of the temperature and magnetic field. The final section is devoted to our conclusion and outlook. In this section, we derive the GL theory for the mixture of 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids by integrating out fermion fields. To this end, for the neutron two-component spinor field φ(t, x), we consider the Lagrangian where the free part of the Lagrangian is given by and the interaction part is given by for the scalar interaction, the LS interaction, and the magnetic term. Here m is the neutron mass and μ is the chemical potential. In the following, we consider the momentum space, in which the scalar potential term is given by where V Scalar ijkl = g 0 δ ij δ kl + g 1 σ a ij σ a kl with the coupling constants g 0 and g 1 for the spin-independent and spindependent terms, respectively, i, j, k, l =↑, ↓ are the spin of a neutron, and σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ) are the Pauli matrices. We take the summation for the repeated indices, a = 1, 2, 3. p and q denote the three-dimensional momenta in the center-of-mass system for the two neutrons. The LS potential term is given by where V LS ijkl = -ig LS (S) ijkl • p × q with the coupling constant g LS , the total spin (S) ijkl = (s and the spin operator s = σ/2 for a neutron. The interaction term between the neutron and a magnetic field (B) is given by with the magnetic moment of the neutron m n = -γ n σ/2 with the gyromagnetic ratio γ n = 1.20423637941 × 10 -13 MeV T -1 . To study the possibility of the coexistence of the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids, we apply the bosonization techniques, i.e., the Stratonovich-Hubbard transformation, both for the 1 S 0 -and the 3 P 2 -pairing channels. Here we introduce the 1 S 0 condensate σ = G S φ t iσ 2 φ with G S = -g 0 + 3g 1 /2, and the 3 P 2 condensate A = G T T ab with G T = g LS /2, T ab = φ ab + φ ba /2 -δ ab φ cc /3, and φ ab = -φ t Σ a (∇ b x φ) where Σ a = iσ a σ 2 and a, b, c = 1, 2, 3. Note that T ab denotes the traceless and symmetric tensor. φ t denotes the transpose of φ, and ∇ a x is defined by ∇ a x = ∂/∂x a . The brackets mean the thermal expectation values. For convenience, we use the dimensionless quantities defined by for the 1 S 0 condensate, the 3 P 2 condensate, the length scale, and the magnetic field, respectively, with the Fermi momentum p F and the temperature T . F a 0 is the Landau parameter in the Fermi liquid theory introduced as a correction by the effect of the Hartree-Fock approximation. This correction is necessary because the Hartree-Fock approximation is not covered in the present calculation for the particle-particle interaction at the one-loop level. We adopt the one-loop approximation for the effective potential and perform the quasiclassical approximation in the momentum integrals. Using the abbreviations σ = σ(x) and Ã = Ã(x), we obtain the GL free energy where N (0) = mp F /2π 2 is the density of states at the Fermi surface. The dimensionless GL free energy f [σ, Ã] consists of the three terms as where each term is defined by for the 1 S 0 condensate, for the 3 P 2 condensate, and for the coupling between the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 condensates. Notice ). The GL coefficients can be calculated as To derive the above equations, we have adopted the following approximations: ln(T /T c0 ) ≈ (T -T c0 )/T c0 with T being close to the critical temperature T c0 . We assume that the critical temperatures T Sc0 and T P c0 for the neutron 1 S 0 superfluid (σ) and the neutron 3 P 2 superfluid ( Ã), respectively, coincide: T c0 = T Sc0 = T P c0 . We define t = T /T c0 as a dimensionless quantity. This condition guarantees that the GL expansion is applicable because both σ and Ã are small quantities. This situation can be realized in the neutron stars by the following reason. As the number density of the neutron matter increases the interaction strength in the 1 S 0 channel decreases, and the attraction at the lower density turns to a repulsion at the higher density. On the other hand, the interaction strength in the 3 P 2 channel increases from the lower density to the higher density. Therefore, there should exist the baryon number density where the superfluid transitions in the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 channels occur at the same critical temperature. We emphasize that the coupling term, Eq. ( We leave some comments for each term in the GL free energy On the other hand, the situation in the 3 P 2 condensate is more complex. The second-order term with α(0) P induces the nonzero condensate for t < 1 and the fourth-order term with β(0) P supports the stability of the ground state. However, the ground state is not uniquely determined at the fourth order, and there remains the continuous degeneracy among the UN, D 2 -BN, and D 4 -BN phases. This degeneracy can be resolved by the sixth-order term with γ(0) P , which, however, gives only a local minimum for the ground state, yielding the instability for large values of the condensate. The global stability of the ground state is provided by the eighth-order term with δ(0) P In the present paper, we consider that the critical temperature of the 1 S 0 superfluids is tuned in a way independent from the 3 P 2 superfluids and assume that they coincide with each other at a certain baryon number density. We comment, however, that there is a possibility that those critical temperatures are different from each other when the coupling between the 1 S 0 pairing and the 3 P 2 pairing is taken into account microscopically. This study is left for future work. In this section, based on the GL free energy by applying the appropriate SO(3) transformation to the original Ã. Here Ã0 ( Ã0 ≥ 0) is the amplitude and a real parameter r (-1 ≤ r ≤ -1/2) characterizing the ground state. According to the value of r, the ground state has the following symmetries: the O(2) symmetry for r = -1/2 (the UN phase), the D 2 symmetry for -1 < r < -1/2 (the D 2 -BN phase), and the D 4 symmetry for r = -1 (the D 4 -BN phase). The values of σ, Ã0 and r are determined to minimize the GL free energy In the absence of the magnetic field, only the 1 S 0 superfluid is realized and the 3 P 2 superfluid is excluded ( Ã0 = 0). This can be analytically proved as follows. We consider the dimensionless GL free energy up to the fourth-order term given by FIG. where Ã2 4 = (1+r+r 2 ) Ã2 0 . It is sufficient for us to neglect the higher-order terms, because the existence or nonexistence ( Ã0 = 0 or Ã0 = 0, i.e., Ã4 = 0 or Ã4 = 0) of the 3 P 2 superfluid is determined by the fourth-order expansion. 7 From the stationary condition of Eq. ( In the presence of the magnetic fields, however, the situation of the (non)coexistence of the two superfluid phases changes qualitatively. As for the 1 S 0 superfluid, the value of σ tends to decrease as the magnetic field becomes stronger due to the pair breaking associated with the Zeeman effects, and it eventually vanishes at a critical value of b. Contrary to this, as for the 3 P 2 superfluid, the value of Ã0 is much suppressed in the weak magnetic-field regime, and it becomes enhanced as the magnetic field increases. The internal order parameter (r) indicates that the D 4 -BN phase is always stable for the 3 P 2 superfluid. In this way, we find that the 1 S 0 superfluid and the 3 P 2 superfluid with the D 4 -BN phase coexist at the intermediate strengths of magnetic fields. It is reasonable that the 1 S 0 superfluid disappears at the strong magnetic fields, while the 3 P 2 superfluid survives, because the spin-antiparallel pairing of two neutrons, ↑↓, in the 1 S 0 superfluid is destroyed by the strong magnetic fields, while the spin-parallel pairing of two neutrons, ↑↑ or ↓↓, in the 3 P 2 superfluid with the D 4 -BN phase remains to be unchanged. Thus, the D 4 -BN phase (r = -1) is favored in the 3 P 2 superfluid in the presence of a magnetic field no matter how small it is. In the GL free energy (8), a possible coexistence of the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids is determined by the coupling term in Eq. We have discussed the coexistence of the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids in neutron stars. Starting from the interaction between two neutrons, we have adopted the weak-coupling limit and obtained the GL free energy with the coupling term between the two superfluids. We have analyzed the phase diagram and shown that the 1 S 0 superfluid completely excludes the 3 P 2 superfluid at zero magnetic field and both the superfluids can coexist at weak magnetic fields, and the 1 S 0 superfluid is expelled by the 3 P 2 superfluid at strong magnetic fields. Remarkably it has been shown that the region of the D 4 -BN phase is extended to the whole range of nonzero magnetic fields because of the coupling between the two superfluids. This result is in contrast to the case without the 1 S 0 superfluid, where the D 4 -BN phase is stable only in the strong magnetic-field region. Our result indicates that the D 4 -BN phase is realized not only in magnetars with strong magnetic fields but also in normal neutron stars with weak magnetic fields, indicating the importance of studies of various topological phenomena in the D 4 -BN phase. In the present paper, we have concentrated on the bosonic excitations within the GL equation. More fundamentally, we can solve the BdG equation self-consistently to obtain the phases of the 3 P 2 superfluid Because topological objects can also exist in quark matter, a connection between the hadronic phase and the quark phase should be studied in detail. Then, it is an interesting question how vortices in the hadronic phase, such as those in the coexistence phase of the 1 S 0 and 3 P 2 superfluids, interact with other topological defects in the quark phase 