Self-field imaging of current distribution in Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 superconductor is used to study the effect of drive on the low-field vortex solid to liquid melting phase transformation. At low fields, the current induced drive on the vortices aids in thermally destabilizing the vortex state thereby shifting the low field melting phase boundary. We show that the current induced drive shifts solid-liquid boundaries and prepones the vortex melting phenomenon compared to the equilibrium situation. The analysis shows that for currents above 50 mA, Joule heating effects shift the melting line while below 50 mA, an effective temperature concept for driven system viz., a drive dependent shaking temperature, explains the shift. The observation of a transformation from inhomogeneous to homogeneous current flow in the sample at low fields as a function of the driving force is reconciled via an inverse dependence of the shaking temperature on vortex velocity, which is incorporated in our analysis. Interacting particles driven across a random pinning media result in different non-equilibrium (NEQ) phases In realistic superconductors the vortices are pinned and they depin at a critical threshold current value Ic when FL exceeds the pinning force. At different drives the vortex flow can organize into different moving phases, like, the elastic, plastic moving Bragg glass phase, and the driven jammed phase Studies on driven vortex matter show that the pinning excites topological defects It may be mentioned here that in a static vortex lattice, loss of spatial correlations in an ordered vortex lattice precipitated either by, enhanced thermal fluctuations or enhanced pinning effects, leads to the formation of a vortex liquid Theoretically, thermal fluctuations produce vortex melting at both high and low fields This occurs due to a weakening of the elastic moduli of the vortex lattice near the upper critical field (a 0 < λ), as well as in the weakly interacting regime near the lower critical field, where a 0 > λ. Recent experiments have found evidence for a low-field vortex liquid and a glassy phase in the static vortex matter of Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 single crystals [Ref. We see that at low Ba the current distribution across the sample is non-uniform. The inhomogeneous flow arises because of the circulation of currents preferentially around a dilute vortex liquid-solid boundary formed as the vortex state melts with lower current in the liquid. With varying I, we see a shift of the low field melting phase boundary to lower temperatures and fields. We show that in the presence of I, vortex melting can be observed at very low fields, which was not possible when I = 0. This observation suggests that currents aid in thermally destabilizing the low-field glassy phase into a vortex liquid phase [Ref. For our study, we use a high-quality optimally doped single crystal of Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 with dimensions 1.7 × 1.2 × 0.025 mm 3 and Tc = 38 K , (usually, we choose N = M = 10). The MOISF images [Fig. vs I Ic plot where red (dashed) curve, and black (dotted) line are fit for I > 50 mA and I < 50 mA region, respectively. In all the plots, we have chosen the symbol size comparable to the size of the error bars. It may be noted that the current densities j used in our experiment ranges from 33 to 167 A.cm -2 , which is lower than the sample bulk critical current Jc ~ 10 4 A.cm -2 , shows the bright melted patch has already occurred for a Ba as low as 5 G at 33 K i.e., T/Tc ~ 0.87 with I = 30 mA. Thus, with a current switched on, the vortex state begins to melt from very low fields. We see in Fig. In Fig. Using Δt = 300 s, C ~ 18 J. mole -1 K -1 Figure , where c 0 is a constant and T sh (v) ∝ v -1 for low drives We see that below 50 mA the data in Fig. Some of these studies pave the way for more detailed theoretical and experimental investigations into the study of non-equilibrium condensed matter systems. and hence in these regions the local vortex density has changed more in comparison to other neighbouring grey regions. In all the images, left edge show a zigzag pattern. This zigzag pattern is due to well-known Bloch walls seen on the magneto-optical film 