We show that a magnetically levitated microsphere in high vacuum can be used as an accelerometer by comparing its response to that of a commercially available geophone. This system shows great promise for ultrahigh acceleration sensitivities without the need for large masses or cryogenics. With feedback cooling, the transient decay time is reduced and the center-of-mass motion is cooled to 9 K or less. Remarkably, the levitated particle accelerometer has a sensitivity down to 3.6 × 10 -8 g/ √ Hz and gives measurements similar to those of the commercial geophone at frequencies up to 14 Hz despite a test mass that is four billion times smaller. With no free parameters in the calibration, the responses of the accelerometers match within 3% at 5 Hz. The system reaches this sensitivity due to a relatively large particle mass of 0.25 μg, a low center of mass oscillation frequency of 1.75 Hz, and a novel image analysis method that can measure the displacement with an uncertainty of 1.6 nm in a single image. High sensitivity accelerometry has myriad applications in fundamental and practical fields of physics and engineering. The ability to measure extremely small accelerations and forces has uses in absolute gravimeters Typical accelerometers are based on clamped resonator systems In this paper, we demonstrate levitation of a diamagnetic borosilicate microsphere in a magneto-gravitational trap down to a pressure of ∼ 10 -7 Torr at room temperature. The relatively large mass of the 60 μm microsphere and low oscillation frequencies compared to optical trapping systems A critical component of the system is a new offline image analysis technique we have developed to determine the displacement of the trapped particle from photos recording its motion over time. In particular, we mitigate image background noise and avoid issues with fractional pixel translations by constructing a pixel-independent "eigenframe", against which we compute the cross correlation. The magneto-gravitational trap, designed with two samarium-cobalt (SmCo) permanent magnets and four iron-cobalt alloy (Hiperco-50A) pole pieces (see Fig. where B = | B| is the magnitude of the magnetic field, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and y is the vertical displacement of the material The four pole pieces are configured in a quadrupole arrangement surrounding the two permanent magnets. The quadrupole field lies in the transverse-vertical (x-y) plane. Symmetry is broken in the vertical-axial (y -z) plane by cutting the top pole pieces shorter along the axial direction. This asymmetry along with gravity forms the trapping potential in the axial (z) direction To reduce the effect of thermal noise while maintaining sensitivity to acceleration, larger trapped particles are preferred. A loading method has been developed to allow reliable trapping of large microspheres Note that Eq. 1 requires a large gradient in B 2 to balance gravity. The large dimensions of the magnetogravitational trap form an extremely weak potential. The Paul trap is much stronger, allowing particles to be successfully levitated near the center of the trap. A DC voltage, typically between 20 V and 40 V, is applied from the top to the bottom pole pieces to help counter gravity and center large particles in the trap. The DC voltage across the top and bottom pole pieces is supplied from a 1-ppm digital-to-analog converter (DAC, Analog Devices AD5791). The DAC is floated to a voltage between -300 V and 0 V using a modified stacking of Texas Instruments REF5010 high-voltage references After the particle is loaded into the hybrid Paulmagneto-gravitational trap, the Paul trap is turned off before pumping down the system to high vacuum. The AC voltage is slowly decreased while adjusting the DC voltage to keep the particle centered vertically in the magneto-gravitational trap. When the Paul trap is completely off, jumpers, indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. A mechanical roughing pump along with a turbomolecular pump achieve a pressure of 10 -7 Torr in the vacuum chamber. To eliminate vibrations from these pumps, they are closed off from the chamber and turned off while pumping continues with an ion-sputter pump. A pressure of ∼ 10 -7 Torr was maintained for all measurements reported. Changes in the tilt of the optical table cause the equilibrium position of the levitated particle to shift. In the weak direction of the trap, very small changes in tilt can have a significant effect on the equilibrium position. For small tilts, the shift in equilibrium position is described by To avoid any large shifts in the equilibrium position, a method has been developed to feedback stabilize the relative tilt of the optical table in real time. The tilt of the table is measured with an ultra-high sensitivity tiltmeter (Jewell Instruments A603-C) and read on a computer. Using two mass flow controllers, air is added or removed from one side of the floating table to keep it level. Without stabilization, the relative tilt of the table can change by ±150 μrad or more. For a levitated particle with an axial oscillation frequency ω 0 /(2π) = 2 Hz, this corresponds to a ±9.5 μm shift in equilibrium, which is much larger than the typical oscillation amplitudes due to environmental vibrations. With feedback stabilization, this value can be 200 times smaller, resulting in only negligible shifts in equilibrium position. Light from a pulsed 660 nm LED illuminates a slit which is imaged onto the particle, as indicated by the red path. The control laser, indicated by the green path, utilizes a 520 nm diode laser. Radiation pressure from the laser applies a force that heats or cools the center-of-mass motion of the particle, depending on the phase of the drive relative to the motion of the particle. The scattered green light is blocked by a long-pass filter, while the scattered illumination light is collected and imaged onto a CMOS camera. The images are analyzed in real time to apply the feedback drive to the particle. The particle is stroboscopically illuminated using a 660 nm LED with a repetition rate of 100 Hz and a pulse duration of 1 ms. As shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. The images from the CMOS camera are analyzed in real time to track the motion of the particle. Each image is thresholded to isolate the particle, and the apparent center-of-mass is calculated. The movement from frame to frame is used to calculate the velocity of the particle, which is then passed through a second order infinite impulse response (IIR) peak bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 1.0 Hz centered at 1.5 Hz to eliminate high frequency noise. The measured and filtered velocity of the particle is used to damp and cool the center-of mass motion of the particle via algorithmic feedback If limited to a resolution of one pixel, we could only track the microsphere's position to about 1 μm. Sophisticated image analysis techniques exist, however, that measure displacement versus some reference frame to a small fraction of a pixel by incorporating all pixel data from each frame. While the image analysis for feedback must be completed in real time, a more accurate but more computationally intensive algorithm can be used for offline analysis of the data. As our first approach, we adopted the cross-correlation function register translation() available in the scikit-image Python package We attributed these discontinuities to noise in the zeroth eigenframe. As this frame was chosen arbitrarily, we anticipated that any other choice of reference frame would result in similar displacement discontinuities. To minimize the effects of this noise we devised a new "eigenframe" approach, which proceeds as follows: we first compute the translation in z and y of each frame against the zeroth eigenframe in the spatial domain using register translation(). Using these translations, we line up all frames to their inferred displacement with respect to the zeroth eigenframe and construct a globally averaged frame. We refer to the resulting averaged frame as the "first eigenframe". Specifically, the translations and averaging are performed using the two-dimensional discrete Fourier transforms of the images so that the choice of pixel alignment in the spatial domain does not result in loss of information. The averaging smears out the noise present in the zeroth eigenframe and smooths the displacement data (as illustrated in Fig. To further refine our position resolution, we modified register translation() to fit a slice of the correlation surface through the peak in the z-direction to a quadratic function using SciPy's optimize.curve fit() function. Locating the peak of this quadratic gives another estimate of the particle translation between each frame and the eigenframe. To demonstrate that the translation values converge with eigenframe number, denote by d n (t i ) the axial displacement of the microsphere at time t i when correlated against eigenframe n (n = 1, 2, . . . , 5). We computed the standard deviation of d n (t i ) -d n-1 (t i ) over all t i (see Fig. We measure the acceleration sensitivity of the trapped particle by examining the effect of movement of the pneumatically isolated optical table (on which the trap and optics are mounted) on the particle. In the frame of the laboratory, consider the displacement of the particle in the axial direction, z, and the displacement of the camera, z 0 . The camera directly measures z = z -z 0 . The equation of motion for the particle in the laboratory frame is then where Γ is the damping rate and ω 0 is the resonant angular frequency of the particle. The displacement of the optical table, for example, from vibrations, can be written as an integral over all frequencies, where A 0 is the strength of the drive as a function of frequency. After substituting Eq. 4 into Eq. 3, we can take the Fourier transform of Eq. 3. Simplifying the resulting expression, we find that the magnitude of the transfer function is where Z (ω) is the Fourier transform of the particle's motion with respect to the camera. The minimum acceleration that can be detected for an oscillator in thermal equilibrium at temperature T is where k B is Boltzmann's constant, m is the mass, and Γ is the damping rate of the oscillator. Feedback cooling at best keeps ΓT constant, damping out potentially long-lived transients without a significant impact on sensitivity A borosilicate microsphere was levitated with a DC bias across the vertical gap of the magneto-gravitational trap of -37.2313 V. Throughout the measurements, a vacuum pressure of 10 -7 Torr was maintained and the tilt of the optical table was stabilized to within ±0.75 μrad. With the measured resonant frequency of the microsphere, Eq. 2 gives that the equilibrium position of the particle was stabilized to within ±60 nm. Before acquiring acceleration data, the system magnification, a critical calibration parameter, is measured. By analyzing the recorded image of a USAF1951 calibration target (Edmund Optics #58-198) through the system optics, the scaling factor S c = 1.15 μm/pixel was determined. For frequency calibration, the digital delay generator used to control all of the timing in the experiment is tied to a rubidium frequency standard (Stanford Research Systems, Inc. FS725). In order to eliminate any free parameters of the system, the transient response of the microsphere was measured after a small excitation in the axial direction, shown in Fig. For comparison, we also place an L-4C geophone (Sercel, Inc. [47]) on the optical table. The sensitivity of this instrument and other critical parameters are given by the manufacturer. We added an additional amplification circuit with a gain of approximately 180 to boost the signal before digitization (modeled after that in The response of the particle to movement of the optical table is tested by applying 5 Hz sinusoidal drive with a surface transducer, oriented to push the table in the axial direction. While applying this external drive, a set of five 60 s measurements were recorded. Each measurement consists of 6000 images from the CMOS camera, which are analyzed with the algorithm described above. The averaged spectra of the resulting particle acceleration over five data sets is shown in Fig. To calculate the acceleration of the optical table from the acceleration of the particle and geophone test masses, the harmonic oscillator response of each is divided out of the raw data, resulting in the table acceleration shown in Fig. The noise contributions for both the geophone and particle are plotted in Fig. The noise of the L-4C geophone and its accompanying amplification circuit can be broken down into four terms The thermal noise of the damped harmonic oscillator is given by Eq. 7 where T is the temperature of the oscillator, m is the mass, ω 0 is the resonant angular frequency, and Q is the quality factor. part of the complex impedance of the coil given by and where R c is the resistance of the coil, S g is the sensitivity of the oscillator, and Γ is the damping rate of the oscillator. The harmonic oscillator response G is given by The input voltage and current noise of the amplification circuit is given by Eq. 9 and Eq. 10, respectively. N V is the input-referred voltage noise of the OPA188 operational amplifier The second noise source is readout noise from the camera and image analysis which is expected to be dominated by shot noise of the light and camera noise. To place a lower bound on the readout noise, we consider the precision to which a diffraction limited spot can be determined in the presence of shot noise. This is described by where σ PSD is the standard deviation of the point spread function (PSF) of the imaging optics and N is the number of photons collected, or in our case, blocked, by the particle. For the lower bound on the noise, the PSF is calculated for a diffraction limited spot. The standard deviation is σ PSD = 0.225λ/NA where λ is the wavelength of the scattered light and NA is the numerical aperture of the collection objective. For our system, σ PSD = 1.65 μm. The number of photons is estimated from the brightness of the illumination in the CMOS camera and the number of pixels blocked by the 30 μm radius particle, resulting in an uncertainty in the location of the point of (∆z) 2 ≈ 0.4 nm. Given that the particle is much larger than the diffraction limit, the readout noise is expected to be significantly higher than this. From 14 Hz to 50 Hz, the levitated particle acceleration spectrum is not vibration limited. Instead, it follows the expected shape of readout noise, which is a white noise source (in displacement) with the harmonic oscillator response divided out. We fit the spectrum in the frequency range of 35 Hz to 50 Hz to find the apparent readout noise of ∆z = 1.6 nm per image or 160 pm/ √ Hz, reasonably above the point source diffraction limit. The two noise sources add in quadrature, so that the total noise of the particle response is V. DISCUSSION We have experimentally demonstrated levitation of a 2.5 × 10 -9 kg borosilicate microsphere in high vacuum. This system shows great promise for ultrahigh acceleration sensitivities without the need for large masses or cryogenics. Feedback cooling reduces the transient decay time of the system, while also cooling the center-of-mass motion. With no free parameters in the calibration, the acceleration determined from the apparent motion of the FIG. particle both follows that of a commercial geophone below 14 Hz and matches the response to an external drive within 3% at 5 Hz, despite the particle having a mass that is 4 × 10 9 times smaller than the test mass in the geophone. The sensitivity limit in the levitated particle accelerometer is estimated to be below 3.6 × 10 -8 g/ √ Hz at low frequencies, limited by either by the vibrations being measured or thermal noise associated with damping at 9 K; a quieter environment would be needed to unambiguously determine the limiting factor and the effective temperature. Much lower center-of-mass temperatures have been reached with trapped particles in other systems, so there is room for significant improvement. For example, feedback cooling to 140 μK in a magnetogravitational trap 