We propose a new class of oscillators by engineering the dispersion of two-coupled periodic waveguides to exhibit a degenerate band edge (DBE). The DBE is an exceptional point of degeneracy (EPD) of order four, i.e., representing the coalescence of four eigenmodes of a waveguide system without loss and gain. We present a distributed DBE oscillator realized in periodic coupled transmission lines with a unique mode selection scheme that leads to a stable single-frequency oscillation, even in the presence of load variation. The DBE oscillator potentially leads to a boost of the efficiency and performance of RF sources, due to the unique features associated to the EPD concept. This class of oscillators is promising for improving discrete-distributed coherent sources and can be extended to radiating structures to achieve a new class of active integrated antenna arrays. O SCILLATORS are one of the fundamental components that exist in any radio frequency (RF) system. Typically, an RF oscillator is an amplifier with positive feedback mechanism utilizing a gain device with a selective resonance circuit that generates a single tone frequency. The negative conductance, i.e., the gain component, required for positive feedback can be obtained using transistors as in cross-coupled transistor pair Generally, electromagnetic guiding structures or resonators are characterized by evolution equations that describe the spatial evolution of their eigenstates (eigenvalues and eigenvectors). We are interested in a very special degeneracy condition that occurs when two or more of these eigenstates coalesce into a single degenerate eigenmode at a certain point in the parameter space In this paper we focus on the degenerate band edge (DBE), which is a fourth-order EPD manifested at the band edge of a lossless structure. At the DBE four eigenstates coalesce into a degenerate one and the dispersion relation near the DBE is characterized by 4 where η e is a dimensionless flatness parameter. A finite-length waveguide made of a finite number N of unit cells forms a Fabry-Perot cavity (FPC) with a resonance very near the DBE frequency, see details in In this paper, we present an example of a DBE oscillator based on two periodic coupled transmission lines (CTLs) as in one of the configurations proposed in The passive waveguide (before the introduction of distributed gain) consists of two coupled microstrips over a grounded dielectric substrate engineered to exhibit a DBE, as shown in Fig. The formulation that describes the field evolution using a coupled transmission line approach is found in in the two lines. The first order differential equations that describe the spatial evolution of the state vector in a uniform segment of the CTL are written as where is the 4×4 CTL system matrix, and Z and Y are the distributed series impedance and shunt admittance 2×2 matrices describing the per unit length parameters of the two CTLs where T(z 1 , z 0 ) is the transfer matrix given by T(z 1 , z 0 ) = exp(-j(z 1 -z 0 )M). The periodic structure depicted in Fig. The CTL shown in Fig. The distributed DBE oscillator is realized by incorporating discrete active components in a cavity made of a finite-length CTL exhibiting a DBE. Each active component is arranged between two adjacent unit cells to balance small distributed losses and compensate for the two load terminations, and hence start the oscillation as shown in Fig. In general, active components are realized either as a singleended or differential topology. The most common single-ended realizations are based on two-terminal diodes such as the Gunn diode The following calculations and simulations are carried out using the time-domain transient solver implemented in Keysight Advanced Design System (ADS) software by means of scattering parameters obtained through full-wave simulation, where the excitation is modeled by thermal noise generation in the load resistors. The schematic of the proposed distributed oscillator is shown in Fig. To determine the oscillation threshold, which is the minimum value of the gain conductance g m to start oscillations, we tested the finite-length loaded cavity shown in Fig. Fig. An important advantage of the proposed DBE oscillator is the robustness of the oscillation frequency against a large variation in the load. This robustness is directly related to the strong DBE resonance associated to the cavity made of a finite-length CTL exhibiting a DBE To better understand the robustness of the oscillator to load variations, we add a capacitance C in parallel to each of the two load resistors R L = 50 Ω shown in Fig. 