A micro-pressure sensor with an isosceles trapezoidal beam-membrane (ITBM) is proposed in this paper, consisting of a square silicon membrane, four isosceles trapezoidal beams and four piezoresistors. To investigate how the elastic silicon membrane affects pressure sensitive characteristics, a simulation models based on ANSYS 15.0 software were used to analyze the effect of structural dimension on characteristics of pressure sensor. According to that, the chips of micro-pressure sensors were fabricated by micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) technology on a silicon wafer with <100> orientation. The experimental results show that the proposed sensor achieves a better sensitivity of 9.64 mV/kPa and an excellent linearity of 0.09%F.S. in the range of 0~3.0 kPa at room temperature and a supply voltage of 5.0 V, with a super temperature coefficient of sensitivity (TCS) about -2180 ppm/°C from -40 °C to 85 °C and low pressure measurement less than 3.0 kPa. Nowadays, silicon piezoresistive pressure sensor has been one of the most reported and used micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) devices to achieve high accuracy, with a wide range of applications for flexible pressure sensor, 1 medical, 2 automobile industries, introduced a shuriken-structured diaphragm to piezoresistive pressure sensor for monitoring the intraocular pressure (IOP) and the intracranial pressure (ICP), obtaining a sensitivity of 4.72 mV/kPa•V and a linearity of 0.18 %F.S. in the pressure range of 0~3.0 kPa. To further study the effect of elastic element on the performance of micro-pressure sensors, a sensor with an isosceles trapezoidal beam-membrane (ITBM) structure was proposed in this study. According to the piezoresistive effect and the theory of elastic mechanics, the operation principle of resulted micro-pressure sensor was analyzed. In order to investigate the effects of three types of elastic silicon membranes on the sensitivity of pressure sensor, a simulation models of sensor established based on ANSYS 15.0 software were utilized to make comparative analysis. According to that, the isosceles trapezoidal beam-membrane structural dimension was optimized. On the basis of that, a micro-pressure sensor with optimizing structure size was fabricated on a n-type silicon wafer with <100> orientation by micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) technology and its relative characteristics were researched in detail. The micro-pressure sensor with an ITBM structure is given in Figure where R1, R2, R3 and R4 are the resistances of four piezoresistors, ∆R1, ∆R2, ∆R3 and ∆R4 are the variations of R1, R2, R3 and R4, respectively. In ideal conditions, R1=R2=R3=R4=R, and ∆R1=-∆R2=∆R3=-∆R4. Under no external pressure as shown in Figure According to piezoresistive effect, the relative change of resistances can be expressed as: where ll  and   are the longitudinal and the transverse piezoresistive coefficients, ll  and   are the longitudinal and the transverse stresses, respectively. According to the calculation equations of longitudinal and transverse piezoresistive coefficients in arbitrary orientations, the longitudinal and the transverse piezoresistive coefficients of p-type silicon along <011> orientation on a (100) n-type silicon wafer are: where 44  is shear piezoresistive coefficient of silicon. So the Vout can be obtained from Eq. ( To study how the structures affect the characteristics of the pressure sensor, i.e. the square silicon membrane (structure I ), the beam-membrane (structure II ) and the isosceles trapezoidal beam-membrane (proposed structure III ), the input-output characteristics corresponding to the three structures were investigated. On the basis of Mechanical APDL 15.0 module in the ANSYS 15.0 software, the pressure sensor models corresponding to the above mentioned structures were established, with the relative simulation parameters in Table Figure To analyze the effects of the topline length d on the characteristics of ITBM pressure sensors, the simulation models of ITBM pressure sensors with different d (including 280 μm, 300 μm, 320 μm and 340 μm) were established and their input-output characteristics were investigated as well. At VDD= 5.0 V and in the pressure ranges of 0~3.0 kPa with a step 0.5 kPa, the input-output characteristic curves of the sensors are shown in Figure The proposed sensor is fabricated on a double-side polished silicon substrate with <100> orientation, as shown in To analyze static characteristics of fabricated pressure sensors, the relative tests were carried out by utilizing a pressure calibration system (Meson CPC 6000) in the pressure range of 0~3.0 kPa with a step 0.5 kPa, at room temperature and relative humidity (RH) of 43 %. When applying a voltage supply (RIGOL DP832A) to the sensors, the output voltages can be measured by using multimeter (Agilent 34401A). In addition, the temperature characteristics of the sensor are investigated by adopting a high-low temperature experiment chamber (GDJS-100LG-G) from -40°C to 85°C. When VDD = 5.0 V, the relationship curves between the output voltages of the sensors with structures I , II and III and the applied pressures were plotted in Figure where the thicknesses of elastic elements for the sensors are 97 μm, 98 μm and 98 μm, and both of the beam thicknesses of the structures II and III are 7 μm, respectively. It can be seen that all of the output voltages for the sensors linearly increase with the pressures from 0 to 3.0 kPa. However, the ITBM pressure sensor presents a highest output voltage compared with that of the other structures at a pressure of 3.0 kPa, consisting with the previous simulation results. According to Eq.( Through thinning the thickness of the ITBM pressure sensor with d = 280 μm, the final thicknesses of elastic element and beam are 42 μm and 7 μm, respectively. When exerting a supply voltage from 0 to 5.0 V with a step 1.0 V, the input-output characteristic curves of the ITBM pressure sensors were obtained as shown in Figure The sensitivities of the sensor under 1.0 V, 2.0 V, 3.0 V, 4.0 V and 5.0 V are 1.93mV/kPa, 3.85 mV/kPa, 5.79 mV/kPa, 7.75 mV/kP and 9.64 mV/kPa, respectively. When VDD= 5.0 V, the sensor was repeatedly measured for three cycles in the pressure range of 0~3.0 kPa. Figure In summary, a pressure sensor with an ITBM structure was proposed in this study, where the ITBM structure consists of a square silicon membrane, four isosceles trapezoidal beams and four piezoresistors. To investigate the effects of the elastic silicon membrane on pressure sensitive characteristics, a simulation models based on ANSYS 15.0 software were installed. According to that, a micro-pressure sensor chips with different topline lengths were fabricated by micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) technology on a silicon wafer with <100> orientation. The test results show that comparing with the other structure sensors, the resulted sensor with the ITBM structure can achieve a better sensitivity of 9.64 mV/kPa and an excellent linearity of 0.09 %F.S in the range of 0~3.0 kPa at room temperature and a supply voltage of 5.0 V. In addition, it has a low pressure measurement less than 3.0 kPa and a super temperature coefficient of sensitivity (TCS) about -2180 ppm/°C from -40 °C to 85 °C. The study on the micro-pressure sensor with the ITBM structure provides a possibility to further improve the performance of micro-pressure sensors. 6. Acknowledgments:This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61971180, 61471159, 61006057).