Large capacitance enhancement is useful for increasing the gate capacitance of field-effect transistors (FETs) to produce low-energy-consuming devices with improved gate controllability. We report strong capacitance enhancement effects in a newly emerged two-dimensional channel material, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). The enhancement effects are due to strong electron-electron interaction at the low carrier density regime in MoS2. We achieve about 50% capacitance enhancement in monolayer devices and 10% capacitance enhancement in bilayer devices. However, the enhancement effect is not obvious in multilayer (layer number >3) devices. Using the Hartree-Fock approximation, we illustrate the same trend in our inverse compressibility data. Negative compressibility occurs in a strong electron-electron interaction electronic system. When increasing the carrier density of the system, the chemical potential of the system will be lowered. This effect can be reflected in the enhancement of capacitance Atomically thin MoS2 capacitors were fabricated based on hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) encapsulated device structure. The employment of a dry-transfer method offers a valid precondition for producing an ultraclean interface and polymer-free environment on the BN-MoS2-BN capacitance heterostructures. This method has also be used for investigating the quantum Hall effect The devices were measured in vacuum, and the excitation frequency was from 100kHz to 1MHz. Figure After the depletion region, the large capacitance enhancement occurs in the low carrier density region. For the capacitance measurement in MoS2 samples, the frequency should be carefully chosen. The capacitor may not be fully charged if the frequency is f > where R is the lateral resistance which needs to be considered Large enhancement of capacitance can only be observed in the relatively low frequency measurements since high frequency measurement may lead to the vanishing of some states and the result of experiments indicates a relatively low capacitance. , where V is the threshold voltage. For a monolayer device, the sample becomes conductive when the top gate reaches Vg= -0.15 V. The capacitance enhancement happens when the frequency is lower than 500kHz as indicated by the peak near the depletion region (Fig. We did not detect any capacitance enhancement near the depletion in multilayer (>3) MoS2 capacitance samples as shown in Fig. Actually, the charge traps can be easily induced by impurities and defects in the channel material and could be excited at relatively low frequencies. In our multilayer samples, the traps' induced capacitance difference is less than 10fF which is much small than the capacitance enhancement in the monolayer samples. However, Chen, et. al., reported that the resonant scattering that is caused by impurities could enhance negative compressibility The geometric capacitance and quantum capacitance models yield the total capacitance which normally could not be larger than the geometric capacitance. However, if the compressibility is negative in the system, this kind of large enhancement could happen. Here, we use inverse compressibility to describe the strong electron-electron interaction in the 2-D system. In an ideal 2-D electron gas system, the ground state energy consists mainly of two parts. One is the average kinetic energy E = ħ * , the other is the electron exchange energy E = -(2/π) / n ⁄ , where m * is effective mass and ε is the relative dielectric constant of the electron system. The total energy per unit area is E = E + E n , where n is the carrier density. By definition, the inverse compressibility is K = n = n , hence = . Thus, for a homogeneous 2-D electron gas, the inverse compressibility is given by 21 The exchange energy could strongly affect the electron compressibility when the carrier density is low enough, and if the carrier density approaches zero, the compressibility could reach negative infinity theoretically. However, when the carrier density increases, the compressibility will approach a constant value. In our samples, we observe that the compressibility curve drops sharply through zero when the channel material becomes conductive. The compressibility is negative through a large region of carrier density. The positive sign of carrier density indicates the nature of electron carrier. As the frequency increases, the negative compressibility is suppressed, and the data show a normal value approaching zero when the electron gas forms. At the lowest point of compressibility, the corresponding carrier density is 0.95 × 10 cm -2 and the mean interparticle distance is r = 30 . However, for multilayer devices (more than 3 layers), no negative compressibility is observed. The Fermi energy EF can be calculated from E = eV , where V is the surface potential of MoS2, which can be extracted from V = ∫ (1 -)dV . There is an upturn showing in the Fermi energy curve in monolayer samples, which indicates the signature of negative compressibility. After all, the simple Hartree-Fock approximation shows us the right trend of change of compressibility versus carrier density, which indicates there are strong electron-electron interactions in our 2-D electron system. In conclusion, we successfully fabricated FETs with atomically thin MoS2 as the channel material and h-BN as the dielectric layer. These FETs show extremely large capacitance enhancement near the depletion region at low frequency. We investigated the strong electron-electron interaction mechanism in the FETs using the Hartree-Fock approximation explain the inverse compressibility data we observed. The negative capacitance effect is much weaker in bilayer samples and disappears in multilayer samples because the electron motions are not strictly 2-D with non-zero thickness are not ideal 2D electron gas. Strong electron-electron interaction in low carrier density cannot be maintained when the layer number is larger than 3. 