We present a new cavity-based polarimetric scheme for highly sensitive and time-resolved measurements of birefringence and dichroism, linear and circular, that employs rapidly-pulsed single-frequency CW laser sources and extends current cavity-based spectropolarimetric techniques. We demonstrate how the use of a CW laser source allows for gains in spectral resolution, signal intensity and data acquisition rate compared to traditional pulsed-based cavity ring-down polarimetry (CRDP). We discuss a particular CW-CRDP modality that is different from intensity-based cavity-enhanced polarimetric schemes as it relies on the determination of the polarization-rotation frequency during a ring-down event generated by large intracavity polarization anisotropies. We present the principles of CW-CRDP and validate the applicability of this technique for measurement of the non-resonant Faraday effect in solid SiO 2 and CeF 3 and gaseous butane. We give a general analysis of the fundamental sensitivity limits for CRDP techniques and show how the presented frequency-based methodology alleviates the requirement for high finesse cavities to achieve high polarimetric sensitivities, and, thus, allows for the extension of cavity-based polarimetric schemes into different spectral regimes but most importantly renders the CW-CRDP methodology particularly suitable for robust portable polarimetric instrumentations. I. Introduction 1 II. Theory 3 A. Jones matrices for polarization optics 3 B. Frequencies and polarizations of the cavity spectrum 4 C. Principles of a CRDP measurement: pulsed vs. CW 4 III. Experiment 7 A. CW-CRDP apparatus 7 B. Data acquisition and signal analysis 8 IV. Results 8 A. SiO 2 Faraday effect measurement 8 B. CeF 3 Faraday effect measurement 9 C. Gaseous butane Faraday effect measurement 10 V. Sensitivity 10 A. Cramér-Rao Lower Bound: fundamental sensitivity limit in CRDP 10 B. CW-CRDP experimental sensitivity limits 11 C. Alternative modalities for CW-CRDP 12 VI. Conclusions 13 VII. Polarimetry is one of the oldest research tools available to characterize the optical properties of a substance, and has been essential in scientific developments, such as, for identifying a molecule's structure Different techniques have been developed to push optical polarimetry to its limits that, in principle, are fundamentally constrained by the photon shot-noise of the light source used for the measurements, which for a ∼ 1 mW of visible radiation are at the ∼ 10 -8 rad/ √ Hz levels There exist several cavity-based polarimetric designs for the measurement of linear and circular, birefringence and dichroism. Although there are fundamental symmetry considerations for which type of cavity one employs for the measurement of reciprocal or non-reciprocal birefringent effects In the case of using short laser pulses, cavity-based polarimetric techniques build upon the inherent sensitivity of cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) The second approach, alternative to PD-CRDS, relies on the use of an intracavity "bias" polarization anisotropy that introduces a large background polarization rotation and results in a rapid oscillating signal superimposed upon the ring-down signal as detected in a polarization-sensitive analysis stage. This polarization bias rotation offers two critical advantages. The first one is to provide an easily measured polarization beat frequency that is altered with the addition of an incremental anisotropy (i.e. an effect under investigation), transforming the polarimetric measurement into a frequency-based one. For this reason, we categorize these techniques under the general term of cavity ring-down polarimetry (CRDP). The second advantage is that the large bias polarization rotation can suppress intracavity anisotropies of opposite symmetry that might otherwise affect the desired measurement. This advantage becomes apparent in the case of chiral sensing, where CRDP approaches have been implemented for highly sensitive chiral polarimetry Most of the PD-CRDS demonstrations have employed CW laser sources, while all CRDP demonstrations have employed thus far only pulsed laser sources. The extension in using CW laser sources in CRDS was first shown by Romanini and co-workers, who demonstrated how CW-based CRDS allows for gains in spectral resolution, signal intensity, and data acquisition rates In this article, we present the technique of CW-CRDP, a methodology that combines the strengths of all the aforementioned techniques and alleviates their weaknesses, and which we consider to be the ideal modality for highly sensitive, cost-effective, polarimetry, particularly suitable for portable and robust spectro-polarimetric instrumentation. CW-CRDP extends the operational principles of pulsed-based CRDP by employing CW-laser sources, enabling time-resolved shot-noise limited spectropolarimetric sensitivities. We start by presenting the general principles of operation of CW-CRDP and discuss how these can be generally adapted for measurements of birefringence and dichroism, both circular and linear. Our proposed methodology relies on the practice of using a bias intracavity polarization anisotropy as a means of protection of weak polarimetric signals under investigation, and while this approach has already been applied several times in cavitybased polarimetry, particularly in the case of studying chirality In particular, in Sec. II we present the theory behind CW-CRD polarimetry, and its operational principles. In Sec. III, we present the details of a prototype setup that we employ for measurements of non-resonant Faraday optical rotation from solid and gaseous systems using CW-CRDP. In Sec. IV we present results for the Faraday effect in solid SiO 2 and CeF 3 , and in gaseous butane, where we measure their Verdet constants to quantitatively validate our method. Finally, in Sec. V we discuss the fundamental sensitivity limits for any CW-CRDbased polarimetric scheme, which we employ to analyze the stability of our experimental results. Most importantly, we demonstrate how the introduction of an intracavity bias anisotropy, which enables frequency-based polarimetric measurements and is adaptable in all CRDbased polarimetric schemes, can effectively alleviate the necessity for high finesse optical cavities and, therefore, the need of ultrahigh-quality optics, which can be costly and not available at all optical spectral regions, a crucially important aspect for robust and versatile portable spectropolarimetric instrumentations. We start by discussing the theory of CW-CRDP. Although several extended analyses of the theory behind CW-based cavity-enhanced polarimetric schemes exist in the literature To examine the principles of operation of a CW-CRD polarimetric protocol we focus, for simplicity and without loss of generality, on linear optical cavities, consisting of two mirrors and, as a bias intracavity polarization anisotropy, a non-reciprocal circular birefringent effect (e.g. Faraday effect). However, we emphasize that the general theoretical approach we present here can be similarly applied for the case of reciprocal circular birefringence (e.g. for a four-mirror cavity for the study of chirality We present an eigenpolarization theory for the cavitybased polarimeter based on the Jones matrix calculus that allows us to describe the full optical system and to incorporate a CW laser source and the ability to switch it on and off rapidly. Here, the full optical system includes the polarization-control optics before the cavity, the optical cavity including the intracavity anisotropy, and the polarization-analysis (detection) stage. In the Jones matrix formalism, the effect of any optical element on the polarization state vector of the laser light is described as a linear operator expressed by a 2 × 2 matrix whose elements are in general complex. We denote each of these matrices by boldface letters J. Most importantly, the direct incorporation of amplitude and phase information in the Jones matrices allows for the investigation of coherent phenomena. The Jones matrix representation of a mirror with a finite reflectivity R (0 R < 1) is given as: where the index i denotes each cavity mirror (in our case i={1, 2}). Since we focus on two-mirror cavities, with normal angle-of-incidence reflections, we set the Fresnel amplitude reflection coefficients for the s and p polarizations to be equal in magnitude (an assumption expressed by the common factor √ R i ). The differential s-p phase shift δ i ≡ δ i p -δ i s , represents the linear birefringence obtained upon mirror reflection. For normal incidence these s-p phase shifts can be of the order of 10 -7 -10 -5 rad at a specific design wavelength In the presence of a longitudinal magnetic field a medium becomes circular birefringent, an effect otherwise know as the Faraday effect The physical direction of the polarization rotation is defined by the magnetic field orientation. Due to the nonreciprocal nature of the Faraday effect, when either the magnetic field or the direction of propagation of the light reverses, the sign of rotation reverses. This directional symmetry breaking, induced by the Faraday effect, has been essential for the implementation of crucial signal reversals in chiral cavity-based polarimetry The Jones matrix representation of a round-trip in the optical cavity is obtained by the ordered multiplication of Jones matrices representing the independent optical elements (see Fig. where, again for simplicity, we assume that mirrors M 1 and M 2 have the same characteristics, i.e. R 1 = R 2 ≡ R and δ 1 = δ 2 ≡ δ. Using Eq. 3 we can determine the allowed polarizations of the cavity modes (eigenpolarizations) along with their respective frequencies. Considering that the Jones matrices are unitary matrices of rank two, each matrix has two eigenvalues and two eigenvectors; the eigenvectors ν ± are orthogonal, in general complex, vectors and represent the eigenpolarizations of each cavity mode. The eigenvalues can be written in the general form λ ± = e ±iα , and the phase of each eigenvalue, α, is the round-trip optical phase shift obtained during light propagation, which, thus, yields the frequency splittings of the eigenmodes. In the simple case of an isotropic cavity (θ F = 0 & δ = 0), the two eigenmodes are degenerate and any polarization state can couple into the cavity (i.e. J cav becomes proportional to the identity matrix; Fig. that this mode structure can be resolved in the case of a frequency splitting much larger than the cavity linewidth, which is the case when the polarization anisotropy (here a Faraday effect), obeys the relationship θ F π/F, where F is the finesse of the optical cavity. In the case of intracavity linear birefringence (θ F = 0 & δ = 0), which can also originate from thermal or mechanical stress in all intracavity optics apart from mirror-reflection-related phase shifts, the path-lengthrelated enhancement of circular birefringence is inhibited through the transformation of the circularly polarized eigenmodes into linear ones. The equivalent time-domain explanation is that an incident linearly polarized light beam will oscillate between linear and circular polarization states, reducing the effective path-length enhancement and the sensitivity of the measurement. However, as long as the bias intracavity circular birefringence is much larger than linear birefringence, i.e. here θ F δ, then the effects of linear birefringence will be averaged out and the cavity modes will maintain the circular polarization character. The physics behind this process has been extensively discussed within the context of chiralsensitive CRDP Finally, in the case of circular dichroism, the linewidths of the two cavity eigenpolarization modes become different, since the cavity finesse depends on the intracavity losses, which are in this case different for the two circular polarization states. In traditional CRDP, laser pulses with linewidths much larger than a cavity FSR are used [Fig. In the case of CW-CRDP, the measurement principle is different. Incident radiation from a CW laser source with a linewidth that is significantly smaller than that of a cavity, can couple into and build-up within that cavity by exciting only one particular cavity mode at a time [Fig. As in pulsed-CRDP, in CW-CRDP one analyzes the polarization state of the transmitted radiation using a FIG. linearly-sensitive balanced polarimeter, which appropriately mixes the circular polarization components of the transmitted radiation to produce two orthogonal, linearly polarized (S and P ) waves incident upon separate photodetectors [Fig. In Fig. Here, we wish to emphasize a critical difference between pulsed-based and CW-based CRDP. In the case of CW-CRDP the initial signal amplitude is defined by the cavity transmission on resonance, which in theory can reach unity, so detected optical powers of 1-100 mW can be achieved, whereas for pulsed-CRDP typical detected optical powers are at the μW levels at best Finally, although this discussion focuses on measurements of circular birefringence, the same measurement principles are applicable in studies of linear birefringence. Moreover, the case of linear (circular) dichroism is studied by measuring the ring-down times as recorded by a linear (circular) balanced polarimeter. In Fig. The ring-down cavity we use has a total length of 0.60 m and consists of two highly reflective concave mirrors with radii of curvature of 1 m (FiveNine Optics; specified reflectivity R∼99.9% at 408 nm). The mirrors and intracavity optics are mounted on kinematic mounts. To be able to perform Faraday effect measurements of gaseous samples, we install an intracavity, 40 cm long, solenoid that generates uniform magnetic fields (with strengths of 40 G per ampere). The solenoid is driven by a DC power supply, and we switch the magnetic field using a relay circuit controlled with a digital-to-analog device (Labjack, U6). The whole cavity is housed within a custom stainless-steel enclosure, sealed with a Plexiglas lid. Anti-reflection (AR) coated flange viewports (Thorlabs, VPCH42-A) are mounted on the enclosure and allow for laser-light access into the cavity and for collecting the cavity reflection required for frequency locking. A rotary vane pump (Kurt J. Lesker, RV224) is connected to the enclosure and is used to pump down the system for measurements, and we monitor the pressure inside the enclosure using a vacuum gauge. We control the injection of gases into the cavity using a needle valve, which is connected directly to the enclosure. The laser source is an external cavity diode laser with a center wavelength of λ = 408 nm (Toptica DL-PRO), and we use a set of lenses to achieve spatial mode-matching of the laser beam to the fundamental transverse cavity mode. Our primary focus in this work is the study of non-resonant Faraday effects and, for this reason, we do not pre-stabilize the frequency of our laser to be resonant with a specific transition frequency. However, to establish a CW-CRDP protocol we lock the frequency of the laser to the cavity resonance using a Pound-Drever-Hall (PDH) scheme to a photodetector (Thorlabs, PDA10A-EC) for PDHlocking, we use an optical isolator that has side exit ports equipped with polarizing beam splitters (Thorlabs, IO-5-405-LP) followed by a half-wave plate. We generate the error signal using direct current modulation and a PDH module (Toptica, PDD 110). The error signal is then input to an analog PID controller (Toptica FALC 110) to provide a fast feedback to the laser-diode current, and to a second analog PID (SRS, SIM960) that creates a slower feedback that acts on the grating of the ECDL through a piezoactuator. The gain and bandwidths of the PID loops are different for low frequencies (<10 Hz) to prevent accumulation of DC-offsets in the error signals that would otherwise prevent a stable lock. To initiate a ringdown event, we use an acousto-optic modulator (AOM; Gooch and Housego 3200-125) driven with a homebuilt AOM-driver, whose RF output can be controlled though a high-bandwidth switch. We analyze the light transmitted through the cavity using two balanced polarimeters: a linearly and a circularly sensitive one, which consist of a half-wave plate (Thorlabs, WPH10ME-405) followed by a Wollaston prism (Thorlabs, WP10), and a quarter-wave plate (Thorlabs, WPQ10ME-405) followed by a Wollaston prism, respectively. All wave-plates and prism are placed within rotation mounts. In each balanced polarimeter, we use short lenses (f = 50 mm) to focus the emerging radiation on separate silicon amplified photodetectors (Thorlabs, PDA8A). In Fig. To initiate a ring-down event, the incident radiation, which is frequency locked to the top of a cavity fringe (see Fig. We record and digitize the ring-down traces (photodetector signals) using two different acqusition modules: an oscilloscope (LeCroy, Wavesurfer 510), which has a maximum acquisition rate of approximately 200 Hz, an 8-bit resolution per channel, and permits on-board signal averaging; and a 14-bit digitizer (Teledyne, ADQ14DC-2X-PCIE, dual channel DC-coupled operation; sample rates of 2 GS/s per channel), which has a maximum acquisition rate of approximately 100 kHz (mainly limited by the data transfer rate), 14-bit resolution per channel, and permits on-board signal averaging. All collected data are transferred into a personal computer, and are processed by a custom Python program (SciPy 45 ). In this work we use time-domain analysis, based on nonlinear least-squares regression of the recorded timetraces, and all the data we present are the result of such an analysis. In particular, we record signals [I(t)] from both polarization channels (Fig. where A is the amplitude of the trace, τ is the ring-down time, f is the polarization beat frequency, φ represents a global phase offset, parameter B takes into account any reduction in modulation depth, and C is a global signal offset. With our acquisition systems and analysis process we can record and monitor in real-time the signal amplitude, ring-down time, frequency, and phase of both polarization channels independently. The subtraction of the signals, which yields a damped sinusoid, is performed through our computer-analysis software. We wish to emphasize here that for CRDP-based portable spectropolarimetric instrumentations and, especially, experiments studying dynamics As a proof-of-principle demonstration of the CW-CRDP technique we choose to study the non-resonant Faraday effect from a gaseous species, particularly butane. CW-CRDP relies on the implementation of a large intracavity bias anisotropy that assists in the measurement of the weak Faraday effect of butane (from studies in the literature we know that the expected Verdet constant of butane at 408 nm is approximately 30 nrad G -1 cm -1 bar -1 , at 408 nm). For this reason, we start by investigating different optical materials that can allow for the generation of a large enough intracavity bias circular birefringence while having as low as possible absorption. We are interested in measurements at 408 nm where typical magneto-optic crystals are expected to have significant absorption losses ( 1 cm -1 ). We focus our efforts on two optical elements, a SiO 2 substrate and a CeF 3 crystal, to investigate their magnetooptic response and the possibility of employing them for gas-phase measurements. From studies available in the literature we find that the absorption coefficient for SiO 2 is estimated to be < 10 -5 cm -1 47 , while its Verdet constant is 10 μrad G -1 cm -1 48,49 , at 408 nm. Therefore, we expect that high quality SiO 2 substrates and AR-coatings can allow for ultra high-finesse cavities, and the Verdet constant is large enough to allow for a sufficiently large R-L mode-splitting for applied magnetic fields of approximately a few ∼kG (possible with the use of permanent magnets). In Fig. Garnet single crystals, such as yttrium-iron-garnet (YIG) and terbium-gallium-garnet (TGG), are magnetooptic materials typically used in Faraday rotators, due to their transparency in the visible and NIR optical ranges and their high Verdet-constant values. However, all these materials exhibit significant losses at wavelengths < 600 nm. Recent studies have reported on alternative materials suitable for Faraday rotators at near-UV optical wavelengths, such as CeF 3 and PrF 3 ity bias anisotropy for CW-CRDP at 408 nm (and similar wavelengths), we use a 1.20(1) mm thick, AR-coated CeF 3 crystal (E-Crystal Co., Ltd.; AR-coated by E-Crystal Co., Ltd. with specified R< 0.2%). In Fig. For the measurement of the Faraday effect in gaseous butane we induce an intracavity bias anisotropy with the SiO 2 substrate (Fig. In Fig. butane's vapor pressure, and we measure its Verdet constant to be V C4H10 = 29.0(7) nrad G -1 cm -1 bar -1 , at 408 nm and 21 • C [Fig. A. Cramér-Rao Lower Bound: fundamental sensitivity limit in CRDP The noise in any CRDP-based polarimetric measurement will contain contributions from both technical and intrinsic (fundamental) sources. For typical experimental setups, similar to the one we use for the measurements, technical noise sources are predominantly of mechanical and acoustic nature with non-white power noise spectral densities, and their associated frequency/phase drifts will effectively be the major limiting factor influencing highsensitivity measurements. However, we wish to consider here the fundamental sensitivity of any CRDP scheme that is directly related to the measurement sensitivity of the polarization beat frequency. While we generally focus on time-domain analysis of the CRDP signals, nothing precludes us from using alternative analysis schemes, such as frequency-domain approaches. Notwithstanding, independent of which analysis methodology we choose, the fundamental limit for the statistical uncertainty of determining the beat frequency from a given CRDP trace will be given by the Cramér-Rao lower bound (CRLB) where SNR is the measured signal-to-noise ratio, which is defined as the ratio between the signal amplitude and the standard deviation of the noise (effectively the electronic noise of the acquisition system); f BW is the samplingrate-limited bandwidth of the measurement; T meas is the measurement time window; and χ(r) is a corrective factor that takes into account the signal decay that is given by, χ(r) = e 2/r -1 3r 3 cosh(2/r) -3r (r 2 + 2) . The factor χ (τ /T meas ) in Eq. 5 is a compensation factor that penalizes measurement of the tails of the exponential decay when the signal has effectively died out. Importantly, Eq. 5 assumes that the period of the oscillation is much shorter than the decay constant of the envelope and that a sufficient number of oscillations occurs in the signal, without limiting the estimation accuracy. We emphasize here that Eq. 5 dictates that any noise sources affecting the experimental measurements are contributing to the fundamental CRLB limit through their effect on the SNR of the CRDP signal. To test the validity of Eq. 5 as the appropriate estimator of the fundamental sensitivity for a frequencybased CRDP measurement, we use an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG; Tektronix AWG7122C, 10-bit resolution) to simulate CRDP signals and determine the sensitivity in measuring their beat frequency. In particular, we simulate CRDP signals with a constant beat frequency of 2 MHz and variable signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) and ring-down times. We use the 14-bit digitizer (Teledyne, ADQ14DC-2X-PCIE) to record (over a fixed time window of approximately ∼ 7τ ) and integrate AWGgenerated CRDP traces, which are analyzed using a timedomain approach to obtain their amplitude, frequency and respective SNR. Although we vary the SNR of the simulated signals by the introduction of white gaussian noise through the AWG, we use the time domain analysis for the estimation of the SNR value we use in Eq. 5. In Fig. We confirm that the frequency estimation errors coincide with the CRLB limit (Eq. 5) for a wide range of ringdown decay times and SNRs (for f BW = 500 MHz). Most importantly, we simulate a CRDP trace with τ = 15 μs, and confirm that the CRLB limit for a CRDP frequency measurement of such a trace with an SNR=3000 to be at the sub-Hz levels, corresponding to sub-ppm fractional uncertainties (i.e. a ∼ 100 mHz uncertainty on a measurement of a 2 MHz beating frequency). We also verify that for CRDP signals with short ring-down times, e.g. 0.5 μs, where one observes only a limited number of oscillations within the whole acquisition window of the ring-down signal, the results start to deviate from the CRLB limit. Equation 5 sets the frequency detection limit and, therefore, the CRLB-related optical rotation sensitivity limit, σ θ , is equal to, Thus, the CRLB limit can used as a guide for designing CW-CRDP experiments (i.e. choosing the appropriate finesse, the strength of intracavity anisotropy, the electronics and acquisition system), for a particular polarimetric application. We proceed by analysing the sensitivity and stability of the experimental apparatus using an Allan-variance methodology, which allows us to study the temporal characteristics of the frequency measurements. In Fig. To demonstrate the merits of CW-CRDP, in Fig. In the theory section (Sec. II) we discuss the principles of CW-CRDP for the case of a CW laser source with a linewidth that is significantly smaller than that of the optical cavity and of an intracavity anisotropy that results in a substantial overlap between the R-L cavity modes. Under these conditions we show how the incident radiation can couple into and build-up within that cavity by exciting only one particular cavity polarization eigenmode at a time, and how this in turn defines the amplitude, phase, and modulation depth of the resulting CW-CRDP signals. From Fig. A possible solution towards highly sensitive CW-CRDP instrumentation that does not require complicated electronics and resolves the above-mentioned issues, is to use a single-frequency laser with a linewidth that is significantly broader than that of the cavity R-L mode-splitting. In this case, the incident radiation excites both modes coherently and the frequencystabilization scheme can be replaced by an intensity threshold comparator-circuit that switches off the laser radiation once a transmission threshold is recorded, similarly to what has been done in CW-CRDS demonstrations An alternative option is to implement an opticalfeedback technique, whereby the circulating wave within the cavity is allowed to return to the laser source to injection-seed it, inducing, thus, a direct frequencylocking without the need for the generation of an error signal and the associated feedback electronics. This is the principle behind optical feedback cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy (OF-CEAS) In this paper, we present the general principles of CW-CRDP, a CRD-based polarimetric scheme that employs CW laser sources and benefits from the use of large intracavity polarization anisotropies for highly sensitive polarimetric measurements. Contrary to PD-CRDS polarimetric approaches that are effectively intensity-based measurement schemes (since these monitor changes in the ring-down decay time), CRDP schemes are frequencybased measurements where sensitive detection of shifts in their induced polarization beat frequency enables highly sensitive polarimetric measurements. CW-CRDP builds upon the measurement methodologies that have been developed within the context of chiral pulsed-CRDP In conclusion, CW-CRDP is a powerful and versatile technique suitable for the measurement of reciprocal and non-reciprocal birefringence and dichroism, linear and circular. We believe that CW-CRDP is the ideal modality for portable spectropolarimetric instrumentations as it allows for time-resolved, highly sensitive, and costeffective operation at a broad spectral region. Future work will focus on improvements in system design and sensitivity, and on the possibility of coupling CW-CRDP with chromatographic techniques, towards the development of a portable instrument suitable for breath analysis and monitoring in clinical settings 