This paper presents a classical thermodynamic calculation of a Greens function that describes the declining rate of entropy growth as protons move under an applied electric field, through an amorphous SiO 2 layer in a MOS field-effect device gate oxide. The analysis builds on work by The goal of this paper is to show how thermodynamics might be applied to the study of the dispersive transport of charges released by radiation damage of thick amorphous silica such as those found in powerMOS parts in a space radiation environment. There are four aspects to this goal. The first, and possibly most important aspect is that dispersive transport of charges released by radiation damage is a thermallyactivated tunneling phenomenon G(Z) = (Aθ/y 0 )(1 + BZ) α-1/2 e -Z for Z >0 and G(Z) = 0 for <0. This work mainly builds on two prior works, that of F. Barry McLean and George A. Ausman, Jr.: Simple approximate solutions to continuous-time random-walk transport (1977) (dB/dα)*(α)*(1-α) = -0.0125347 -0.2345602α 1 + 4.3930191α 2 -8.0764062α 3 + 7.0601918α 4 -3.0268655α 5 Brown and Saks present a solution for the parameter B in their Appendix A by defining B=10 dB/dα developing a polynomial solution for the derivative dB/dα. However, the parameter B in Table The polynomial solution was obtained by seeking a solution on a 6x6 matrix using Excel, which corresponds to a degree 5 polynomial. The sampled values from McLean and Ausman Table The plotted values of y 0 from TABLE I of McLean and Ausman are quite close to forming an open-downward parabola, to within 6%. Also, the plotted values of A/y 0 calculated from our extended Table Only B had been treated with polynomials until now. The power series terms for B and for the following conic-section residuals alternate in sign. This implies that the results involve differences that cancel many significant digits in the sum. Thus, many more significant digits must be retained in the polynomial sums in order that a sufficient number of significant digits survive after the differences are taken. The parameters in the extended McLean and Ausman Table This paper is intended to point out that nonequilibrium thermodynamics might be brought to bear in the study of ionizing radiation damage to the gate oxides of silicon powerMOS devices. In addition, this paper also attempts to provide polynomial approximations to model parameters that can be used to approximate the moment equations introduced by McLean and Ausman for similar purposes. The new polynomial models for parameters B, y 0 and A/y 0 constitute most of the discussion in this paper. This paper therefore augments the masterful work of Brown and Saks through the new polynomial treatments of y 0 and A/y 0 presented here. The author applies the word masterful to that work because the experiment was successfully designed to monitor only proton transport. An important part of the paper by Brown and Saks was their presentation of measurements of the accumulation of interface damage at a declining rate, following a brief ionizing irradiation of the part. As the interface damage increased at a declining rate, so it would also follow that the rate of entropy increase would be at a declining rate, as fewer and fewer of the released protons remained in transit as more of the protons were captured at interface traps. This relation is represented in the equation at the head of the Discussion section, where dS p /dt is the classical declining rate of proton transport entropy increase, excluding proton release by holes or proton chemical reactions, V g is the gate voltage, I g is the proton current in the gate oxide, and T is the absolute temperature, and no useful work is done by proton transport. The protons were released by holes that encountered passivating hydrogen atoms on non-bridging oxygen atoms, following the irradiation pulse. The declining proton current might be inferred from a measurement of the time evolution of the interface trap charge as measured by Brown and Saks. There are a few additional references that closely bear on the work of Brown and Saks. The work of The author thanks the JPL Library staff for their diligent efforts for over a year, to obtain journal articles during the background research phase, as the author learned about the field of nonequilibrium thermodynamics. The author is grateful for the interest of program managers and line managers during the research. The author thanks Laura for reviewing the paper with a type setter's eye. The author thanks Jean-Pierre Fleurial for agreeing to be the principal investigator, as contractors may not be a PI at JPL. Jean-Pierre and the author collaborated to obtain funding, but conducted their own research separately. The author considers this research to possibly constitute a new subfield (although other similar applications of thermodynamics exist). The author chose an open access journal in the hope that open access might allow physicists, chemists, engineers, mathematicians, and materials scientists an opportunity to collaborate in advancing the understanding of dispersive tunneling transport of charge carriers due to radia-tion damage in power-control-device amorphous SiO2 in the gate and other high-field insulating regions, in support of long-term presence and distant travel in space. What is more, in addition to this thermodynamic work possibly constituting a new subfield within radiation damage, it also represents a departure from the vast majority of works on dispersive charge transport, which are nearly all based on Brownian motion models. That is, dispersive transport by means of tunneling rather than by particle collisions itself constitutes a relatively unexplored subject outside the field of radiation damage of microelectronic part oxides. The author hopes that this, too, might attract researchers in a broad range of fields for this reason as well.