It is shown theoretically that ferromagnetic superconductors, UGe2, URhGe, and UCoGe can be described in terms of the A-phase like triplet pairing similar to superfluid 3 He in a unified way, including peculiar reentrant, S-shape, or L-shape Hc2 curves. The associated double transition inevitable between the A1 and A2-phases in the H-T plane is predicted, both of which are characterized by non-unitary state with broken time reversal symmetry and the half-gap. UTe2, which has been discovered quite recently to be a spin-polarized superconductor, is analyzed successively in the same view point, pointing out that the expected A1-A2 transition is indeed emerging experimentally. Thus the four heavy Fermion compounds all together are entitled to be topologically rich solid state materials worth further investigating together with superfluid 3 He A-phase. Much attention has been focused on ferromagnetic superconductors 1 , such as UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe. Recently a new member of a superconductor UTe 2 with T c =1.6K 2,3 is discovered, which is almost ferromagnetic, and attracts much excitement. Many researchers start devoting to UTe 2 experimentally To understand those four spin-polarized superconductors in a unified way, here we develop a phenomenological theory based on the assumption that the four compounds are commonly described in terms of the triplet pairing symmetry analogous to the superfluid 3 He-A phase There exist prominent SC properties observed commonly in those superconductors: (1) Above T c the ferromagnetic transition (FM) occurs in the first three compounds. Thus the SC state survives under a strong internal field coming through an exchange interaction. However, in UTe 2 "static" FM is not detected so far although FM fluctuations are probed In order to address those seemingly "complicated and mutually conflicting", but quite intriguing experimental facts, we postulate the A phase like triplet pair symmetry which responds to the spontaneous FM moment under perpendicular external fields to yield the A 1 -A 2 double transitions. This scenario coherently explains the observed reentrant H c2 in URhGe, an S-shape in UCoGe, and L-shape in UTe 2 in a unified way. As mentioned, the A 1 -A 2 phase transition in 3 He Aphase Under D 2h symmetry GL free energy functional is given by The last invariant (κ > 0) comes from the non-unitarity of the pairing function in the presence of the spontaneous moment M (H), which responds to external field directions differently. Since the fourth order term are written as Note that the weak coupling estimate leads to β1 β2 = -2, thus we assume the strong coupling effects in the following arguments. The quasi-particle spectra are given by where the gap functions for two branches are ∆ It is convenient to consider η = (0, η b , η c ) or η ± = 1 √ 2 (η b ± iη c ) for M = (M a , 0, 0). Then we see from eq. ( with T c↑,↓ = T c0 ± κ α0 M a . The actual second transition temperature is modified to T c↓ = T c0 -κMa α0 • β1-β2 2β2 , which could be larger or smaller than the original c↓ . This remark becomes important to understand the asymmetric L-shape H b c2 observed in UTe 2 β1+β2 . The jump at T c↓ can be quite small for T c↑ ≫ T c↓ which is the case for UTe 2 since T c↑ =1.6K, T c↓ =0.2K, and the second factor is an order of one, anticipating the difficulty to observe the second transition thermodynamically. The FM moment M a acts to shift the original transition temperature T c0 and split it into T c↑ and T c↓ . The external field H comes in through M a (H) in addition to usual vector potential which gives rise to orbital depairing. The magnetic coupling is estimated N (0) ln(1.14ω/T c ) where N ′ (0) is energy derivative of the normal DOS and ω energy cutoff. This term arises from the electron-hole asymmetry near the Fermi level. κ indicates the degree of this asymmetry, which can be substantial for a narrow band, thus the Kondo coherent band in heavy Fermion material of our cases is expected to be important. We can estimate N ′ (0)/N (0) ∼ 1/E F with the Fermi energy E F . Since T c =2mK and E F =1K in Let us now consider the action of external field H b applied to the hard axis b on the FM moment M a , pointing parallel to the a-axis. The a-axis component of the moment M a (H b ) generally decreases by rotating it toward the b-axis as shown in Fig. Within the GL scheme it is easy to estimate H b c2 as follows. We start with the H b c2 expression: and Φ 0 quantum unit flux. Here T c depends on H though M a (H) as described above. Thus the initial slope of The slope H ′ c2 (T ) is always negative. However, it is easily written as The condition for attaining the positive slope, . This is a necessary condition to achieve an S-shaped or L-shaped H c2 curves. This is fulfilled when |H ′0 c2 | is large enough, that is, the orbital depairing is small or | dTc dH | at H c2 is large, or the T c rise is strong enough. It is to be noted that when 1-A 0 ( dTc dHc2 ) = 0, the H c2 (T ) curve has a divergent part, which is indeed observed in UCoGe as a part of the S-shape. It is clear from the above that when dT c /dH < 0, c2 | as expected. When the magnetic field is applied to the magnetic easy a-axis, the spontaneous moment M a (H a ) increases monotonically as shown in Fig. There could be several types of the H b c2 curves depending on the magnitude of the spontaneous moment M a , and its growth rate against H b , the coupling constant κ, T c0 , and etc. Possible representative H b c2 curves are displayed in Fig. When the hypothetical T c0 is situated in the negative temperature side, the realized phase is the A 1 -phase only at H b = 0. In the high field regions, T c↓ (H b ) appears by increasing M b (H b ) as the A 2 -phase, which is shown in Fig. In Fig. T because beyond that field the first order meta-magnetic transition completely alters the background electronic state, so that the SC state is abruptly wiped out. However, note that the field direction is appropriately chosen away from the b-axis, H c2 is greatly enhanced by avoiding the meta-magnetic transition at H b, reaching ∼60T Therefore, it is possible to reproduce the essential features associated with H c2 for all compounds in terms of the A 1 -A 2 transitions. To confirm our scenario, we now examine possible signatures of the double transition. The recent NMR experiment Under P in UT 2 the successive double transitions are indeed discovered As for UCoGe, thermal conductivity experiment 34 indicates an anomaly at T ∼ 0.2K, which coincides roughly with our prediction shown in Fig. In summary, we have discussed the SC properties of UGe 2 , URhGe, UCoGe, and UTe 2 in depth in terms of a non-unitary triplet pairing state in a unified way. The FM moment governs and produces the various types of the H c2 curves observed. The possible pairing function is described by the complex d-vector whose direction is perpendicular to the magnetic easy axis. The orbital part φ(k) of the order parameter could be line nodes allowed group-theoretically As for UTe 2 , the specific heat experiments 2,3,8 exhibit C/T ∼ T 2 , suggesting the gap structure with point nodes, which is also consistent with microwave measurement 