We present a physics-based circuit-compatible model for double-gated two-dimensional semiconductor-based field-effect transistors, which provides explicit expressions for the drain current, terminal charges, and intrinsic capacitances. The drain current model is based on the drift-diffusion mechanism for the carrier transport and considers Fermi-Dirac statistics coupled with an appropriate field-effect approach. The terminal charge and intrinsic capacitance models are calculated adopting a Ward-Dutton linear charge partition scheme that guarantees charge conservation. It has been implemented in Verilog-A to make it compatible with standard circuit simulators. In order to benchmark the proposed modeling framework we also present experimental DC and high-frequency measurements of a purposely fabricated monolayer MoS 2 -FET showing excellent agreement between the model and the experiment and thus demonstrating the capabilities of the combined approach to predict the performance of 2DFETs. Since the emergence of graphene, over a surprisingly short period of time, an entire new family of two-dimensional materials (2DMs) has been discovered. Several compact models for three-terminal FETs based on graphene and related 2D materials (GRMs) have been recently published encompassing both static and dynamic regimes. We first deal with the development of the large-signal model of 4T 2DFETs by the sequential formulation of the electrostatics, the drain current equation, the terminal charge model, and the corresponding intrinsic capacitance description. The cross-section of the considered dual-gated 2DFET is depicted in Fig. where Q net (x) = q(p(x)n(x)) is the overall net mobile sheet charge density and q is the elementary charge. 2D crystals are far from perfect and suffer from diverse nonidealities. In particular, interface traps are unavoidable in FETs, even for those processed by state-of-the-art CMOS technology, where V th = k B T/q is the thermal voltage, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The term C it adds to the quantum capacitance C q , as shown in Fig. where C dq = q 2 D 0 is defined as the degenerated-quantum capacitance, which corresponds to the upper-limit achievable when the 2D carrier density becomes heavily degenerated. 17 is the 2D density of states, with ħ being the reduced Planck's constant, g K (g Q ) the degeneracy factor and m K (m Q ) the conduction band effective mass at the K (Q) band valley. In most TMDs, the second conduction valley, labeled as Q valley, is non-negligible since the energy separation between the K and Q conduction valleys, ΔE 2 , is only around 2k B T. The quantum capacitance of the 2DM can be computed by evaluating C q = dQ net /dV c resulting in: Due to the complexity of Eq. ( In the diffusive regime, the drain current of a 2DFET can be accurately computed by the following compact expression where u s = u(V cs ) and W and L are the device width and length, respectively; and μ is the carrier mobility which has been assumed to be dependent of the applied electric field, carrier density, and temperature as in ref. where k stands for g, d, s, and b, i.e. top gate, drain, source and back-gate, respectively. The terminal currents, thus, can be obtained by either computing the time derivative of the corresponding terminal charge or by the weighted sum of the time derivative of the terminal voltages, where the weights are given by the intrinsic capacitances. The intrinsic capacitances of FETs are modeled in terms of the terminal charges. Specifically, from the electrostatics given in Eq. ( where The charge controlled by both the drain and source terminals is computed based on the Ward-Dutton's linear charge partition scheme, The above expressions can be conveniently written using u as the integration variable, as it was done to model the drain current in Eq. ( Replacing Eq. ( where Q 2D = WLC dq V th . Equation ( Once the terminal charges are evaluated, a four-terminal FET can be modeled with 4 self-capacitances and 12 intrinsic transcapacitances given by: where C ij describes the dependence of the charge at terminal i with respect to a varying voltage applied to terminal j assuming that the voltage at any other terminal remains constant. Due to charge conservation and considering a reference-independent model, only nine independent capacitances are needed to describe the 4T device. In addition, taking advantage of the relations between the top-and back-gate capacitances, We first test our model by comparing the DC transfer characteristics (TCs) obtained at two different drain voltages. A good agreement between both, measurements and simulations, has been achieved as shown in Fig. The trends in the intrinsic capacitances can be better understood looking at the overdrive gate and drain bias dependences of both gate (Q g ) and drain (Q d ) charges, which are depicted in Fig. Subthreshold regime (OFF operation): If both V cd and V cs > 10V th , then Q g , Q d ∼ 0 (see Fig. Saturation regime (ON operation): On the other hand, when V cd > 10V th while V cs < 10V th , the pinch-off is originated at the drain side. This situation is produced for overdrive gate biases between V A and V B in Fig. Linear (ohmic) regime (ON operation): This regime takes place when both V cd and V cs < 10V th . This situation is produced for gate overdrive voltages higher than V B in Fig. A physics-based large-signal compact model of four-terminal 2D semiconductor-based FETs, implemented in Verilog-A, has been presented. The model captures the terminal charges and capacitances covering all the operation regimes, so accurate time domain simulations and frequency response studies at the circuit level are feasible within the validity of the quasi-static approximation. The model can be incorporated to existing commercial circuit simulators enabling the simulation of digital and RF applications based on emerging 2D technologies. We have checked that the Fig. Fig. Fig. The MoS 2 FET reported in this paper belongs to the same batch as the devices published in ref. , The electrical DC characterization was done on a Cascade Microtech Summit 11000B-AP probe-station using an Agilent B1500A parameter analyzer. Microwave performance was characterized using an Agilent twoport vector network analyzer (VNA-E8361C). All measurements were taken at room temperature, in ambient atmosphere, and in the dark. The intrinsic microwave performance is obtained after de-embedding the measured data using OPEN and SHORT structures. The OPEN de-embedding was performed on the as-measured device-under-test by etching away the MoS 2 in the active regions. The SHORT de-embedding is subsequently carried out by depositing a strip of metal across the channel region, shorting out all pads. The developed large-signal model of 4T 2DFETs is implemented in Verilog-A and included as a separate module in Keysight© Advanced Design System (ADS), a popular electronic design automation software for RF and microwave applications. It calculates the electrostatics by iteratively solving Eqs. ( This simplified charge model uses an empirical function of the drain bias, η, to provide a continuum between the different regions of the transistor operation [4]- [6] going from the linear regime η = 1 to the saturation regime η = 0. It also assumes that the net charge density is linear along the channel (Qn0), being this approach accurate only when either a low drain bias is applied or if the device is operated in the subthreshold regime [5], which in turn is in agreement with the comparison shown in FIG. comparison of the OCs of the E-mode bilayer MoS2 FET. In the saturation region, a mismatch between the model prediction and the dc measurements is detected which we attribute to a channel-length modulation effect [5], not considered in our model. In spite of these small mismatches the model captures to a very good degree large-signal operation. In particular, Fig. npj 2D Materials and Applications (2019) 47 Published in partnership with FCT NOVA with the support of E-MRS 1234567890():,; Published in partnership with FCT NOVA with the support of E-MRS npj 2D Materials and Applications (2019) 47 npj 2D Materials and Applications (2019) 47Published in partnership with FCT NOVA with the support of E-MRS