Very recently, there has been significant progress with establishing a common phenomenology of the superconducting cuprates in terms of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) shift and relaxation. Different from the old interpretation, it was shown that the shifts demand two coupled spin components with different temperature dependencies. One spin component couples isotropically to the planar Cu nucleus and is likely to reside at planar O, while the other, anisotropic component has its origin in the planar copper 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) orbital. Nuclear relaxation, on the other hand, was found to be rather ubiquitous and Fermi liquid-like for planar Cu, i.e., it is independent of doping and material, apart from the sudden drop at the superconducting transition temperature, Tc. However, there is a doping and material dependent anisotropy that is independent on temperature, above and below Tc. Here we present a slightly different analysis of the shifts that fits all planar Cu shift data. In addition we are able to derive a simple model that explains nuclear relaxation based on these two spin components. In particular, the only outlier so far, La2-xSrxCuO4, can be understood, as well. While this concerns predominantly planar Cu, it is argued that the two component model should fit all cuprate shift and relaxation data. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful local, bulk probe of material properties Not surprisingly, after the discovery of cuprate superconductivity Over the last decade, it was shown with various NMR experiments on La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 In the most simple extension of the model, a twocomponent description was introduced with a = χ 11 B 0 , b = χ 22 B 0 , and c = χ 12 B 0 , and the magnetic field parallel and perpendicular to the crystal c-axis. With this expression for the shifts, the above mentioned experiments could be explained, with uncertainties arising only from the unknown orbital shift contributions since spin singlet pairing should lead to the disappearance of the spin term as one approaches the lowest temperatures, i.e. K n ,⊥ (T → 0) ≈ 0, to a good approximation. However, as was pointed out in early experiments is strongly temperature dependent. In the single spin component view this was explained by assuming H 63 ≡ A + 4B ≈ 0, where A ,⊥ is the anisotropic hyperfine coefficient expected for a spin in the Cu 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) orbital, while B is an isotropic transferred term from the 4 neighboring Cu atoms in a single band picture. Very recently, by plotting all magnetic shift data available in the literature , indicative of special relationships. This more or less generic behavior of all cuprates was observed for all systems, with the exception of the family of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 Another important, very recent observation followed from gathering and plotting all available literature Cu relaxation data La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . All the other cuprates have rather similar relaxation rates, 1/T 1⊥ , i.e. if measured with the magnetic field perpendicular to the crystal c-axis, c⊥B 0 , cf. Fig. Interestingly, the La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 family of materials is the only outlier to this phenomenology, cf. Fig. The total magnetic shift for planar Cu, K ,⊥ , is the sum of an orbital and spin shift component, and we have for the two orientations (c B 0 , c⊥B 0 ) of the magnetic field B 0 with respect to the crystal c-axis, It is of particular use to plot the total shifts K⊥ (T ) vs. K⊥ (T ) A sketch of such a plot is presented in Fig. A fundamental assumption is since all cuprates show a rather similar low temperature shift for c⊥B 0 with K⊥ (T → 0) ≈ 0.30%. Therefore, this value appears to be reliable. It is the same assumption made early on For symmetry reasons we take (b j + c j ) from each of the 4 neighbors to be the same, i.e. from spin in the planar O 2p σ orbitals, cf. Fig. This is a different notation from before A zero spin shift, our first, fundamental assumption means that j (b j + c j ) = 0, and we have for the other orientation, In order to estimate the orbital shift, K L , for this orientation of the field, as before Note that this value could vary between families, but since the orbital shift for c⊥B 0 does not change significantly between families, we do not expect a large effect for c B 0 , as well. This is important as it means that most cuprates have a non-vanishing spin shift for c B 0 from a negative spin polarization in the 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) orbital, even at the lowest tempeartures. As mentioned earlier, a few special slopes govern the shift-shift plot presented in their figure With this assumption that c j causes κ ≈ ∞, we note that ( and we have with ( Note that in this approximation, c effectively acts only for c⊥B 0 . Then, the slope of κ ≈ 2.5 is given by a concomitant change of b j and c j , e.g. ∆b j = 1.5∆c j if both terms change proportionally. To summarize, in the above model the individual changes of a, b j , and c j correspond to slopes of κ = 0, 1, and ∞, respectively, in Fig. With these results in mind we can look at the data for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 again. The high temperature shifts for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , K ⊥ , are much larger than what we expect from its K = B(4b j -a) values. In one scenario, a larger a and larger b j could position this family at larger K ⊥ (for given c j ). The action of a temperature dependent c j then leads to the κ ≈ ∞ slope. Alternatively, c j could be much larger for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , i.e. much more positive, at high temperatures. This also leads to a much larger B(b j + c j ). Again, a drop in c j then makes (b j + c j ) disappear. To conclude, while La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 is an outlier in the shifts, the position in Fig. The nuclear relaxation rate 1/T 1 measures the in-plane fluctuating magnetic fields, h 2 ⊥ , from electronic spin fluctuations, while 1/T 1⊥ is affected by both, in-plane, h 2 ⊥ , as well as out-of-plane, h 2 , fields (only fluctuating field components perpendicular to the nuclear quantization axis lead to nuclear spin flips, required for spinlattice relaxation). Phonons will cause nuclear relaxation for quadrupolar nuclei (I > 1/2, like Cu and O) as they modulate the electric field gradient, but it has been shown that the magnetic fluctuations dominate in most situations [20, 21], and the recent analysis of all Cu relaxation data shows that a simple magnetic mechanism appears to capture the overall behavior quite well In a straightforward approach one would assume nearly isotropic spin fluctuations filtered by the nuclear hyperfine coefficients, which can then lead to a relaxation anisotropy. The electronic correlation time (τ 0 ) of electronic spin fluctuations is expected to be very fast compared to the slow precession of the nuclei. Thus, the nuclear relaxation rates can be written as 1 from which the relaxation anisotropy follows, Given that the shifts demand two different electronic spin components coupled to the nuclei through an anisotropic constant A ,⊥ and an isotropic constant B, one should allow for two different fluctuating spin densities α and β = j β j , as well. Furthermore, since the fluctuations are caused by rapid exchange, the correlation time τ 0 should be the same for both components. We thus write, where we introduced With these expressions for the fluctuating field components we seek to explain a rather doping and material independent 1/T 1⊥ (it only increases marginally with decreasing doping) and a material and doping dependent 1/T 1 that explains the temperature independent anisotropy In a first scenario one might be interested to see what would be the consequences of totally uncorrelated spin fluctuations for the 5 spin components, i.e. β i β j = β 2 0 δ ij , and β j α = 0, cf. Fig. and if follows for the anisotropy, Clearly, for α 2 < ∼ β 2 0 we find near isotropic relaxation, and in order to explain the largest anisotropy of about 3.3 In a second scenario we assume that all spins are aligned, i.e. the 5 fluctuating spin components are correlated, with β i β j = β 2 0 and β j α = ±αβ 0 . We note that the field fluctuations h 2 ⊥ ≈ B 2 ( j β j + f α) 2 that enter (13) and h 2 ≈ B 2 ( j β j -α) 2 that determine ( Furthermore, an increase of α by a factor of about 1.3, at an anisotropy ratio of 2.3, increases the relaxation rates in both directions by about a factor of two, cf. Fig. La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . We thus conclude that the two component β 0 and α are crucial for the cuprates, but appear to be very similar for most of the materials. It seems out of question that a two-component scenario describes the shifts and relaxation in the cuprates quite well. It has spin density located in the Cu 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) orbital, which couples to the nucleus through the rather anisotropic hyperfine constant A ,⊥ , and, most likely, the planar O 2p σ orbital, leading to an isotropic hyperfine interaction given by The spin density α is much larger than β 0 , as one expects from the overall material properties, however, the uniform response of both spins is quite different, also due to the coupling term c j . The special slopes observed in the shift-shift plot, cf. Fig. Looking again at Fig. The earlier conclusion In terms of a simple fluctuating field model we can explain the cuprate relaxation rather well. Fast electronic, Fermi liquid-like spin fluctuations act through two different hyperfine coefficients with two different electronic spin densities on the Cu nucleus (or, these densities are part of that ubiquitous fluid). The corresponding fluctuations from the 5 locations must be correlated, as one might have guessed due to the close proximity. The onsite 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) spin (α) is about 10 times as large as that due to one O neighbor (β 0 ). The spin density α appears to be the same for all cuprates, except for the La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 family it is 30% larger. The spin β 0 varies with doping and between materials and leads to the change in 1/T 1 observed in the data. For large doping the relaxation anisotropy that is about 1 and it increases to about 3.3 for YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 (corresponding to a change in β 0 of about 3). For La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 the anisotropy is 2.3 and thus also β 0 is about a factor of two larger. Since the 63 Cu relaxation begins to disappear only at T c , for all cuprates, the electronic, Fermi liquid-like spin fluctuations freeze out and the relaxation disappears. Thus, the pseudogap in the relaxation is just due to the correlations that for planar Cu do not change α and β 0 spin alignment. For planar O the situation is different as the nucleus couples to two α spins at adjacent Cu nuclei and their coupling changes, which leads to the pseudogap in the relaxation for nuclei that are affected by different a spins The relation between the spin densities α, β 0 and the uniform response of the system in terms of a, b j , and c j is not known. It appears that the response of α is rather small compared to that of β, which may not be surprising since different a should favor antiferromagnetic alignment (that is somehow affected by β). It appears that the doping dependent spread in K varies among the cuprates. This reminds us of the way the charge carriers enter the CuO 2 plane Two spin densities were shown to reside in the planar Cu 3d(x 2 -y 2 ) and likely the planar O 2p σ orbitals, respectively, with hyperfine constants A ,⊥ and B ≈ -A . They connect the Cu nuclear spins with a rather ubiquitous Fermi liquid-like bath. The relaxation anisotropy is predominantly due to changes in the planar O spin density that increases with doping. Near T c these electronic fluctuations freeze out and the relaxation disappears. The uniform response a and b j of the two electronic spins on Cu and O is special in the sense that a is negative while b j points along the field. The coupling term c j between a and b j sets the temperature dependence of the shift above (NMR pseudogap) and below T c . Interestingly, at the lowest temperatures 4(b j +c j ) approaches the same value for all cuprates, probably zero, but a remains and most of b j , as well, resulting in a non-vanishing spin shift for c B 0 , K ≈ (4b j -a) = 0. The coupling term c j must be related to a coupling between different spin components a i on different Cu nuclei, and it is argued that the pseudogap phenomenon for planar O nuclear relaxation and that of Y is just a consequence of the temperature dependence of c j , an effect that cannot be there in the Cu relaxation data. This simple two-component scenario appears to fit all cuprates, in particular also the only outlier family so far, La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , which must make it a reliable framework for theory.