We demonstrate spectrally-tunable Fabry-Perot bandpass filters operating across the MWIR by utilizing the phasechange material GeSbTe (GST) as a tunable cavity medium between two (Ge:Si) distributed Bragg reflectors. The induced refractive index modulation of GST increases the cavity's optical path length, red-shifting the passband. Our filters have spectral-tunability of ~300 nm, transmission efficiencies of 60-75% and narrowband FWHMs of 50-65 nm (Q-factor ~70-90). We further show multispectral thermal imaging and gas sensing. By matching the filter's initial passband to a CO2 vibrational-absorption mode (~4.25 μm), tunable atmospheric CO2 sensing and dynamic plume visualization of added CO2 is realized. The mid-wave infrared (MWIR) waveband (~3-5 μm) is invaluable for sensing and imaging systems, from probing molecular vibrations in chemical species to detecting radiant thermal signatures The majority of wide-field visible-MWIR imaging systems contain passive Fabry-Perot (FP)-based bandpass filters comprising multi-layer dielectric, or metal-dielectric, thin-film stacks, either spatially encompassing the entire image sensor /focal plane array For 'active' spectral tunability, two operating mechanisms are generally utilized: (1) modifying the physicaloptical properties of constituent material/s, or (2) mechanically altering the device design /system setup For 'real-world' wide-field multispectral imaging applications -such as remote sensing and thermal (IR) imaging -motorized filter wheels are widely utilized Recently, phase change materials (PCMs) have gained interest as a new platform for tunable optical devices due to their pronounced refractive index contrast (between disordered-amorphous and ordered-crystalline states), fast switching speeds, and good thermal stability In this work, we utilize GST as a phase-change cavity embedded between Ge:Si DBRs to enable spectrally-tunable (bi-stable) all solid-state FP-bandpass filters operating across the MWIR waveband. The optical path length of the GST cavity, hence resultant passband CWL, is spectrally red-shifted under phase transformation due to GSTs induced refractive index modulation. Therefore, through external stimuli, our filter's CWL can be spectrally switched to two different states (passbands); a reversible process. Our 1-inch diameter filters have narrowband FWHMs of 50-65 nm (with Q-factor ~70-90) and high transmission efficiencies of 60-75%. We further show multispectral thermal (IR) imaging capability by integrating our filters with a commercial thermal camera and imaging two separate wavelengths. Moreover, by designing the GST-BP filter's CWL to correspond to a molecular vibration mode of CO2 (~4.25 μm), we demonstrate gas sensing (imaging) of both atmospheric (native) CO2 and externally added CO2 gas; imaging the dynamic plume for the latter. Our GST-based thin-film filters have wide applicability for IR imaging and sensing applications which require compact, cost-effective tunable spectral filters. The simplest thin-film optical bandpass filters are composed of a single-spacer (resonant cavity) between two multilayer dielectric mirrors As our bandpass filters are designed for operation across the MWIR, Ge (H -high index) and Si (L -low index) are chosen as the DBR materials, with CaF2 as the substrate. GST is then utilized as a tunable spacer material, with capability to operate in either its amorphous (a-GST) or crystalline (c-GST) state (induced through external stimuli). Our tunable resonant cavity design concept is shown schematically in Double-side polished 1.5 x 25.4 mm (1-inch optics) CaF2 wafers (Esco Optics, Inc) were sonicated in acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water sequentially, twice, followed by ultra-high purity compressed nitrogen (N2) blow dry, before deposition. All thin-films were deposited via 50W RF magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 2.6 x 10 -6 Torr and a deposition pressure of 7 mTorr (10 sccm Ar flow, research-grade, 99.9999% purity). Three separate sputtering targets were used for the high-index, low-index and cavity (spacer) layers: Ge (99.999% purity), Si (99.999% purity) and Ge2Sb2Te5 target (14.3 wt% Ge, 23.8 wt% Sb, 61.9 wt% Te, Mitsubishi materials, Inc.). The chemical composition of as-deposited GST thin-films was determined by DCP-AES (Direct Current Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy, Luvak, Inc.). The composition was measured as 22 at% Ge, 23.5 at% Sb, and 54.5 at% Te, which is close to a nominal composition of bulk Ge22.2Sb22.2Te55.6 Recursive propagation matrices (transfer matrix method, implemented in MATLAB A hotplate, with a NASA insignia logo (milled from a 15 cm x 15 cm x 3 mm aluminum plate) placed in front, was used to mimic a spatially-variant blackbody thermal source. The hotplate (thermal source) was heated from 320K to 486K and an IR camera (FLIR SC8300HD, 0.02 Wm -2 minimum pixel sensitivity) connected to a PC, was used to capture the images. A field stop was used in order to eliminate unwanted signal from polluting the measurement data. Our GST-based FP bandpass filters were mounted and positioned between the IR camera and thermal source. . This proof-of-concept filter design can be further improved through incorporation of multiple-cavity GST-cavities and optimization of additional layers which will suppress out-of-band ripples Our GST-FP bandpass filter design (Fig 1d ), with CWL(a-GST) ~ 4.5 μm and CWL(c-GST) ~ 4.75 μm, is now duplicated with each set to one of the two GST crystallinities. i.e. filter 1: a-GST spacer, filter 2: c-GST spacer. A hotplate, with Al NASA Insignia logo transmission mask placed in front, is used as a spatially varying thermal-IR object (blackbody source). Between 320K to 486K, the blackbody emissive spectral peak power blue shifts; from ~9 μm to 5.8 μm, with total integrated power increasing in the MWIR band As the temperature increases, the intensity captured through the longer wavelength filter is greater than that of the shorter wavelength filter. Note, due to the increased extinction coefficient for the c-GST state, thus longer wavelength filter, the difference in intensity is slightly less than expected if the two filters had the same CWL transmission efficiency. The performance of our filters is further demonstrated through the imaging (resolving) of a metallic ruler (Fig 4 The transmittance of electromagnetic radiation through the atmosphere is dependent on the relative amount of constituent gases, hence amounts of radiation-absorbing molecules The MWIR (3-5 μm) waveband is of significant interest across different sensing and imaging applications, from FTIR chemical spectroscopy to remote sensing. Tunable all-solid state spectral filtering is highly desirable for maximizing the detectable spatial-spectral information. Widely utilized optical bandpass filters based on multi-layer Fabry-Perot thin-films still provide 'best-in-class' narrowband and high transmission performance in comparison to alternative methodologies such as LC-based or plasmonic /nanophotonic approaches. Nonetheless, actively tunable all solid-state spectral filtering in a single compact device still remains challenging, with bulky filter wheels and expensive MEMSbased devices providing sub-optimal (mechanical) solutions. Here, we utilize phase-change alloy GeSbTe (GST) thin-films which enable tunable all solid-state FP-bandpass filters operating across the MWIR waveband. GST-a cost-effective, readily available alloy-is used as a tunable single-cavity (spacer) between two (Ge:Si) 6 DBR mirrors. Because GST exhibits a significant refractive index modulation (~2.4) in the MWIR between its amorphous and crystalline states, the optical path length of the cavity, hence resultant passband, is spectrally shifted under phase transformation. Therefore, through external stimuli, our filter's CWL is spectrally switched; a reversible process. We experimentally demonstrate two tunable bandpass filter designs: the first, with CWLs ~4.5 μm and 4.75 μm, and the second; CWLs ~4.25 μm and 4.55 μm. The filterswhich are 1-inch in diameter -have FWHMs of 50-65 nm (with Q-factor ~70-90) and transmission efficiencies of 60-75%. We further show 'real-world' applicability by performing multispectral thermal (IR) imaging with our filters in front of a commercial wideband MWIR camera. A NASA Insignia logo, in front of a blackbody thermal source (hotplate) is imaged through our filters. In addition, the second filter is designed to have its initial CWL (amorphous GST state) matched to a molecular (vibrational) absorption mode of CO2 and demonstrate gas sensing (imaging) of both atmospheric (native) CO2 and externally added CO2 gas. For the latter, the dynamic gas plumes are captured through the intensity contrast between atmospheric and added gas, indicating that the filter has the ability to both detect and resolve the variation in concentration of CO2 gas. Filter operation is purely bi-stable in this paper -with the GST-spacer in either is fully-amorphous or fullycrystalline states -yet continuous CWL tuning across the stopband should be possible by utilizing the partialcrystallinity states of GST Our tunable all solid-state GST-FP bandpass filters (which can be modified to operate across other wavebands) are straightforward to manufacture-requiring no lithographic step and use cheap materials-and provide narrowband high transmission optical performance. Therefore, they have wide applicability for imaging and sensing applications requiring compact cost-effective tunable filtering, which include DIAL and CubeSat based LIDAR optical subsystems.