We present a quantitative study of the current-voltage characteristics (CVC) of SFIFS Josephson junctions (S denotes bulk superconductor, F -metallic ferromagnet, I -insulating barrier) with weak ferromagnetic interlayers in the diffusive limit. The problem is solved in the framework of the nonlinear Usadel equations. We consider the case of a strong tunnel barrier such that the left SF and the right FS bilayers are decoupled. We calculate the density of states (DOS) in SF bilayers using a self-consistent numerical method. Then we obtain the CVC of corresponding SFIFS junctions, and discuss their properties for different set of parameters including the thicknesses of ferromagnetic layers, the exchange field, and the magnetic scattering time. We observe the anomalous nonmonotonic CVC behavior in case of weak ferromagnetic interlayers, which we ascribe by DOS energy dependencies in case of small exchange fields in F layers. A. Density of states in SF bilayers for h ∆ It is well known that superconductivity and ferromagnetism are two competing antagonistic orders. In superconductors (S) electrons form Cooper pairs with opposite spins and momenta, while in ferromagnetic metals (F) electron spins tend to align in parallel. Nevertheless, it is possible to combine in one hybrid structure the S and F layers, which leads to observation of many striking phenomena. The reason is the superconducting proximity effect, i.e. the superconducting correlations leakage into a ferromagnetic metal due to the Andreev reflection processes. The existence of such phenomena makes possible the creation of so-called Josephson π junctions with a negative critical current. However, junctions with a ferromagnetic interlayer as well as other normal metal junctions (for example, SFNFS), proposed as elements of novel superconducting nanoelectronics, have limited applicability since such junctions have low resistance values. In this paper we study the current-voltage characteristics of SFIFS Josephson junctions with two ferromagnetic interlayers. SFIFS structures were also pro- posed for various applications in memory elements, In this section we present the theoretical model we use in our studies. The geometry of the considered system is depicted in Fig. (1) where N f 1,2 (E) is the density of states (DOS) in the corresponding ferromagnetic layer at x = 0, f (E) = [1 + e E/T ] -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, and R = R B0 is the resistance across the F-I-F interface. Both densities of states N f 1,2 (E) are normalized to their values in the normal state. In order to obtain the densities of states in ferromagnetic layers, N f 1,2 (E), we use a self-consistent two-step iterative procedure, described below. As far as γ B0 ≫ 1, we can neglect the influence of right F layer on the density of states in the left S/F bilayer and vice versa (see Fig. where the positive and negative signs correspond to the spin-up ("↑") and spin-down ("↓") states, respectively. In terms of the electron fermionic operators ψ ↑(↓) the spin-up state corresponds to the anomalous Green's function F ↑ ∼ ψ ↑ ψ ↓ , while spin-down state corresponds to 2 ) are the Matsubara frequencies, where n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . ., and h is the exchange field in the ferromagnet. The scattering times are labeled here as τ z , τ x , and τ so , where τ z(x) corresponds to the magnetic scattering parallel (perpendicular) to the quantization axis, and τ so is the spin-orbit scattering time. x ∼ 0). Moreover we also assume the ferromagnets with weak spin-orbit coupling and thus neglect spin-orbit scattering time τ so . After taking into account all the assumptions mentioned above the Usadel equations in the ferromagnetic layers for different spin states can be written as where τ m ≡ τ z is the magnetic scattering time. In the superconducting layer S the Usadel equation read 90 Here D s is the diffusion coefficient in the S layer and ∆(x) is the pair potential in the superconductor. We note that ∆(x) vanishes in the F layer. Eqs. ( Similar equations can be written at the right S/F interface at x = d f 2 . Here γ = ξ s σ n /ξ n σ s , where σ s is the conductivity of the S layer and ξ s = D s /2πT c is the superconducting coherence length. The parameter γ defines the strength of the inverse proximity effect, i.e. suppression of superconductivity in the adjacent S layer by the ferromagnetic layer F. We consider the parameter γ to be relatively small γ ≪ 1, which corresponds to rather weak suppression. To calculate the density of states in the S/F bilayer we should set the boundary conditions at the outer boundary of the ferromagnet (x = 0), To complete the boundary problem we also set a boundary condition at x = ±∞, where the Green's functions acquire the well-known bulk BCS form. We notice that the density of states at x = ±∞ is given by standard BCS equation, where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. Finally the self-consistency equation for the superconducting order parameter takes the form, The equations ( (11) To obtain N f 1,2 , we use a self-consistent two-step iterative procedure. The characteristic lengths of the decay and oscillations of the real part of the pair wave function in the ferromagnetic layer at the Fermi energy, ξ f 1,2 , are given in our model by, We see from these equations that with increase of the magnetic scattering rate α m = 1/τ m ∆ the length of decay ξ f 1 decreases, while the length of oscillations ξ f 2 increases. In the absence of magnetic scattering In this section we present the results of the DOS energy dependencies in SF bilayers at free boundary of the F layer for h ∆ [Sec. III A]. The densities of states for h ∆ were thoroughly discussed in Ref. 43. Then we calculate corresponding CVC of the SFIFS junction using the Werthamer formula, Eq. (1). In case of h ∆ we obtain interesting nonmonotonic behavior of the quasiparticle current, presented in Sec. III B. At large exchange fields the decay length ξ f 2 of the real part of the pair wave function in the F layer became small [see Eqs. (12)] and the amplitude of DOS variations tends to zero. In this case the CVC of SFIFS junction tends to Ohm's law for h ≫ ∆. The ferromagnetic materials with small exchange fields can be fabricated as discussed in Ref. 99. We also note that the DOS at the end of an SF bilayer in case of the domain wall in the ferromagnetic layer was studied in Ref. 100. Figures where E T h is the Thouless energy and d f is the thickness of the F layer in the SF bilayer [d f 1 or d f 2 for the left or right SF bilayer in Fig. Finally, we present plots for spin-resolved densities of states given by Eqs. (11) in Fig. Using the densities of states N f 1,2 (E) obtained in Sec. III A, we calculate a set of quasiparticle current curves using Eq. ( Fig. Fig. Using this expression, the origin of nonmonotonic behavior of the CVC can be explained. At eV = 0 the upper limit of the integral in Eq. ( Based on the properties of the density of states in FS bilayers we can see that even the tiny exchange field h can modify the current dramatically introducing anomalous nonmonotonic behavior in case of thick enough F layers [see Figs. We can compare these results with the I-V characteristics of SIFS Josephson junctions. We also notice that in recent experiments on SFIFS junctions as injectors of superconductor-ferromagnetic transistors (SFT) some fine structures of the subgap quasiparticle current was observed, In this work we have presented the results of CVC calculations of a SFIFS junction for different set of parameters including the thicknesses of ferromagnetic layers d f 1 , d f 2 , the exchange field, and the magnetic scattering time α m = 1/τ m ∆. We considered the case of a strong insulating barrier such that the left SF and the right FS bilayers are decoupled. In order to obtain the currentvoltage characteristics we first calculated the densities of states (DOS) on the free boundary of the F layer in each SF bilayer utilizing the iterative self-consistent approach. Using the numerically calculated DOS we have derived the quasiparticle current of a SFIFS junction in the case of symmetric (d f 1 = d f 2 ) and asymmetric (d f 1 = d f 2 ) structures. We have paid much attention to the case of SFIFS junction with weak ferromagnetic interlayers with exchange fields h ∆. It was demonstrated that the CVC possess interesting and unusual features in this case, which can be ascribed by typical DOS behavior. We have provided simple physical explanation of the CVC with such anomalous behavior. We have also illustrated how the CVC shape evolves as one increases the exchange field h introducing. It should be emphasized that taking into account finite magnetic scattering leads to the smearing of characteristic features and in particular cases leads to a "triple kink" shape of the current.