The basic reproductive number -R 0 -is one of the most common and most commonly misapplied numbers in public health. Although often used to compare outbreaks and forecast pandemic risk, this single number belies the complexity that two different pathogens can exhibit, even when they have the same R 0 In 1918, a typical individual infected with influenza transmitted the virus to between one and two of their social contacts The basic reproduction number of an epidemic, R 0 , is the expected number of secondary cases (note, we use the word "case" in a generic sense to represent any infection, even if too mild to meet the clinical case definition) produced by a primary case over the course of their infectious period in a completely susceptible population Almost 100 years ago, work from first demonstrated how to estimate the final size of an epidemic. Specifically, they considered a scenario such that: (i) the disease results in complete immunity or death, (ii) all individuals are equally susceptible, (iii) the disease is transmitted in a closed population, (iv) contacts occur according to the law of mass-action, (v) and the population is large enough to justify a deterministic analysis. Under these assumptions, This solution describes a final outbreak size equal to 0 when R 0 ≤ 1 and increasing roughly as 1exp(-R 0 ) when R 0 > 1. Therefore, a larger R 0 leads to a larger outbreak which infects the entire population in the limit R 0 → ∞. This direct relationship between R 0 and the final epidemic size is at the core of the conventional wisdom that a larger R 0 will cause a larger outbreak. Unfortunately, the equation relating R 0 to final outbreak size from Kermack and McKendrick is only valid when all the above assumptions hold, which is rarely the case in practice. As a result, relying on R 0 alone is often misleading when comparing different pathogens or outbreaks of the same pathogen in different settings Random network theory allows us to relax some of assumptions made by Kermack and McKendrick, mainly to account for heterogeneity and stochasticity in the number of secondary infections caused by a given individual. We first follow the analysis of Ref. as the probability generating function (PGF) of the distribution of the number on contacts {p k } individuals have (the degree distribution). When following a random contact (an edge), we define the excess degree as the number of other edges around that node reached via one of its edges. Because an edge is k times more likely to reach a node of degree k than a node of degree 1, the excess degree distribution is generated by where k is the average degree and acts as a normalisation constant, and G 0 (x) denotes the derivative of G 0 (x) with respect to x. We now assume that the network in question is the network of all edges that would transmit a disease if given the chance. Consequently, G 1 (x) generates the number of secondary infections that individual nodes would cause if infected. And, if we infect a random node as the patient zero, its entire connected component (a maximal subset of nodes between which paths exists between all pairs of nodes) will be infected. To calculate the largest possible epidemic, we thus look for the size of the giant connected component (GCC). To calculate the size of the GCC, we first look for the probability u that following a random edge leads to a node not part of the GCC. For that node to not be part of the GCC, all of its excess edges must also not lead to the GCC. This simple observation leads to the self-consistent equation The size of the GCC is a fraction of the full population N that we will denote R(∞) because it corresponds to the potential, macroscopic, outbreak size. Noting that a node of degree k is not in the GCC with probability u k , R(∞) can be calculated by counting all nodes except those with no edges leading to the GCC, When dealing with data on the distribution of secondary infections, G 0 (x) has one degree of freedom remaining, p 0 , which we set by assuring that the number of infections caused by patient zero is smaller or equal to R 0 but not greater (see Methods). The resulting solution for R(∞) is exact in the limit of infinite population size. The network approach naturally accounts for heterogeneity, meaning that some individuals will cause more infections than others. The network approach also accounts for stochasticity explicitly: Even with R 0 > 1, there is a probability 1 -R(∞) that patient zero lies outside of the giant outbreak and therefore only leads to a small outbreak that does not invade the population. However, the analysis in terms of PGFs is obviously more involved than simply assuming mass-action mixing and solving Eq. ( To clarify and potentially simplify the approach, we propose to reformulate the classic network model in terms of the cumulant generating function (CGF) of secondary cases. The CGF K(y) of a random variable X can be written as K(y) = κ n y n /n! where κ n are the cumulants of the distribution of secondary infections. These are useful because the cumulants are easier to interpret, i.e., κ 1 is simply the average number of secondary cases R 0 , κ 2 is the variance, κ 3 is related to the skewness and κ 4 to the kurtosis of the full distribution, etc. By definition, a PGF G(x) of a random variable is linked to K(y) through G(x) = exp [K (ln x)]. Therefore, we can replace the PGF G 1 (x) for the distribution of secondary infections by a function in terms of the cumulants of that distribution. We can easily derive Kermack and McKendrick's result from this framework since their solution assumes a well-mixed population, which corresponds to a Poisson distribution of secondary infections. We first re-write G 1 (x) in terms of the cumulants κ n as which is a particular convenient representation for a Poisson distribution because its cumulants κ n = R 0 for all n > 0. Moreover, since G 0 (x) = G 1 (x) in the Poisson case, the final outbreak size of the Kermack-McKendrick analysis will be set by u KM = G 1 (u KM ), or Taking the logarithm of the exponential term from this last equation yields For influenza (2009), we took data on school-aged children. For COVID-19, the proportion of infected was taken from a serosurvey in the municipality of Gangelt, Germany more general distributions, it is useful to rewrite Eq. ( to highlight its alternating nature because ln u is negative (u is a probability) such that its n-th power is positive when n is even and negative when n is odd. The alternating sign of contribution from high-order moments in Eq. ( Our re-interpretation already highlights a striking result: Higher moments of the distribution of secondary cases can lead a disease with a lower R 0 to invade more easily a population and to reach a larger final outbreak size than a disease with a higher R 0 . Taking into account the contribution of these higher moments also yields better estimates for the final size of outbreaks, as we now show. We now compare the final outbreak size estimates from Eq. ( From re-emerging pathogens like yellow fever and measles to emerging threats like Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus and Ebola, the World Health Organization monitored 119 different infectious disease outbreaks in 2019 alone Figure Second, viral genome sequences provide information on both the timing of the outbreak Third, early incidence data can be leveraged to infer parameters of the secondary case distribution through comparison with simulations. Comparing the output of agent-based simulations with reported incidence can be used to effectively sample a joint posterior distribution over R 0 and dispersion parameter k. This approach was used by most studies referenced in Table As for COVID-19, Fig. In conclusion, we reiterate that when accounting for the full distribution of secondary cases caused by an infected individual, there is no direct relationship between R 0 and the size of an outbreak. We also stress that both R 0 and the full secondary case distribution are not properties of the disease itself, but are instead set by properties of the pathogen, the host population and the context of the outbreak. Nevertheless, we provide a straightforward methodology for translating estimates of transmission heterogeneity into epidemic forecasts. Altogether, predicting outbreak size based on early data is an incredibly complex challenge but one that is increasingly within reach due to new mathematical analyses and faster communication of public health data. The results presented from our network model assume the number of secondary infections to be distributed according to a negative binomial distribution parametrized by its average R 0 and dispersion k The network theory formalism presented in the main text requires the specification of the PGF G 0 (x) whose related to G 1 (x) via where the prime ( ) denotes the first derivative with respect to x. Specifying G 1 (x) therefore fixes G 0 (x) up to a constant and to a multiplicative factor. Without loss of generality, we set G 0 (x) = p 0 + (1p 0 )g 0 (x) from which we compute g 0 (x) = g 0 (x)dx = g 0 (1) G 1 (x)dx = -kg 0 (1) with k 1, and where C and g 0 (1) are fixed by imposing g 0 (0) = 0 and g 1 (1) = 1. Rearranging the terms, we find that from which we finally obtain with k 1. The case k = 1 must be treated separately and yields From Eqs. ( if k 1, and if k = 1. The average number of secondary infections caused by patient zero can therefore be greater or smaller than R 0 . Since patient zero should not be expected to create more secondary cases than the next generation of infections, we set the value of p 0 ∈ [0, 1] such that G 0 (1) is as close as possible to R 0 whenever G 0 (1) > R 0 . A large-scale epidemic is predicted by this framework as in the analysis by . Its size, R(∞), is computed with G 0 (x) as where u is the solution of which we solve using the relaxation method 