Diamond, a well-known wide-bandgap insulator, becomes a low-temperature superconductor upon substitutional doping of carbon with boron. However, limited boron solubility and significant lattice disorder introduced by boron doping prevent attaining the theoretically-predicted high-temperature superconductivity. Here we present an alternative co-doping approach, based on the combination of ionic gating and boron substitution, in hydrogenated thin films epitaxially grown on (111)-and (110)-oriented single crystals. Gate-dependent electric transport measurements show that the effect of boron doping strongly depends on the crystal orientation. In the (111) surface, it strongly suppresses the charge-carrier mobility and moderately increases the gate-induced doping, while in the (110) surface it strongly increases the gate-induced doping with a moderate reduction in mobility. In both cases the maximum total carrier density remains below 2•10 14 cm -2 , three times lower than the value theoretically required for high-temperature superconductivity. Density-functional theory calculations show that this strongly orientation-dependent effect is due to the specific energydependence of the density of states in the two surfaces. Our results allow to determine the band filling and doping-dependence of the hole scattering lifetime in the two surfaces, showing the occurrence of a frustrated insulator-to-metal transition in the (110) surface and of a re-entrant insulator-to-metal transition in the (111) surface. Diamond, a band insulator with a wide band gap ∼ 5.5 eV, holds a great potential for both fundamental and applied science, thanks to its large thermal conductivity and intrinsic charge-carrier mobility, excellent electrochemical stability, high breakdown electric field, and biocompatibility In this work, we build upon our previous results and perform a doping-dependent characterization of the electric transport properties of H-terminated diamond thin films epitaxially grown on oriented single-crystal substrates by means of a co-doping approach, were ionic gating and B substitution are simultaneously employed to tune the free hole density in a thin surface layer. We focus our attention to (111)-and (110)-oriented facets for thin film growth, since these are the crystal orientations where field-induced superconductivity has been predicted to emerge at sufficently large values of hole density We selected commercial (111)-and (110)-oriented Ibtype single crystals grown by the high-temperature highpressure method (Sumitomo) as substrates for thin-film growth. Prior to the growth process, the substrates were thoroughly cleaned by the procedure detailed in Table After the growth, all substrate facets except the top one were etched and oxidized via argon/oxygen plasma, leaving only the top facet conductive. The surface morphology of the films was then inspected via Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). In Fig. 2.4 nm) is typical of polished Ib crystals Gate-dependent electric transport measurements were performed at the optimal operation temperature T 240 K, slightly above the glass transition temperature of the PES, to minimize the chance of activating electrochemical reactions at the H-terminated surface. The sheet resistance R s of the samples was measured by applying a small DC current I DS ∼ 1μA between the drain and source contacts and measuring the longitudinal voltage drop V xx across the voltage contacts. Common mode offsets such as thermoelectric voltages and (small) contributions from the gate current were removed by measuring R s with both signs of I DS and taking the average Each gate-dependent measurement was performed according to the procedure detailed in Refs. 33, 38-41. Briefly, the selected value of V G was applied and removed in a step-like fashion, and the resulting transients on σ 2D , I G and V ref were acquired. After each step-like application/removal, the ion dynamics were allowed to settle for at least ∼ 10 min. Each V G value was applied and removed multiple times to ensure the reproducibility of the measurements. Double-step chroconoulometry (DSCC), a well-established electrochemical technique This removes parasitic voltage drops across the gate/electrolyte interface, and is mandatory for a reliable estimation of the gate capacitance We first discuss the dependencies of ∆n 2D on ∆V ref in our ion-gated diamond films as shown in Fig. We now consider the dependencies of σ 2D on ∆n 2D in our ion-gated diamond films as shown in Fig. We assess this quantitatively in Fig. To obtain further insight in the orientation-dependent response to B doping of our ion-gated diamond films, we carried out ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO package Coreelectrons contributions of C atoms were modelled with a projector-augmented wave pseudopotential (PAW The oriented diamond surfaces were modelled following Refs. 19 and 20: We considered slab structures composed of 14 layers of C atoms, oriented either along the (111) or (110) directions, and terminated by a layer of H atoms on both sides. The (111)-and (110)-oriented slabs were composed by a total of 16 and 30 atoms per unit cell respectively. The in-plane lattice constant for the (111) orientation was set to a = 2.52224 Å, that for the (110) orientation to a = 3.56676 Å, i.e. the values computed for bulk diamond Overall, we performed electronic bandstructure and DOS calculations for seven different values of n 2D between 3 • 10 12 h + cm -2 and 2 • 10 14 h + cm -2 for both the H-terminated (111)-and (110)-oriented diamond slabs. Here we will focus our discussion on the two most emblematic cases of n 2D = 1 • 10 13 and 1 • 10 14 h + cm -2 , as shown in Fig. As a consequence, the band filling for increasing hole doping follows a very different behavior in the ( Our gate-dependent electric transport measurements and ab initio DFT calculations show that a clear analogy exists between the behavior of the gate capacitance and that of the DOS at the Fermi level in the H-terminated (111) and (110) diamond surfaces as a function of hole doping. In the (111) surface, both quantities weakly increase upon the large increase in n 2D associated to the inclusion of B dopants in the experimental samples. In the (110) surface, on the other hand, both quantities are significantly smaller for n 2D 1 • 10 13 h + cm -2 , in the   absence of B dopants, and exhibit a huge increase for n 2D 7 • 10 13 h + cm -2 , when B dopants are present in the experimental samples, eventually overcoming the corresponding values in the (111) surface. This can be quantified by plotting the doping-dependence of the ratios between the experimentally-measured values of C G in the (110)-and (111)-oriented films, together with the ratios of the theoretically-calculated values of DOS(E F ). As we show in Fig. where α is a dimensionless proportionality constant that takes into account the "cross-talk" in electrostatic screening between the ions in the EDL and the field-induced charge carriers at the surface of the gated material, as recently demonstrated in Ref. where v 2 F is the average squared in-plane Fermi velocity, which we compute from the ab initio bandstructure as follows. For each high-symmetry cut across the Brillouin zone j, we calculate the corresponding group velocity at the Fermi level for the i-th band ε i , v j,i = 1/ ∂ε i /∂k j | E=EF . The values of v j,i are then av-eraged over the different high-symmetry cuts and over the filled bands: where g i marks whether the i-th band is empty (g i = 0) or filled (g i = 1), and g j is the number of high-symmetry cuts [g j = 2 for the (111) surface and g j = 3 for the (110) surface]. For each value of n 2D , the maximum difference between v j,i measured along the different high-symmetry cuts is taken as the uncertainty. Thus, one obtains the n 2D -dependence of μ/τ by: which we plot in Fig. Finally, we combine the theoretical values of the chemical potential measured from the top of the valence band, E v -E F , with the values of τ to calculate the Ioffe-Regel parameter x = (E v -E F )τ / and directly assess the metallicity in our films. We show the resulting n 2D -dependence of x in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the impact of a hole co-doping approach, which combines ionic gating and standard B substitution, on the electric transport properties of H-terminated diamond films epitaxially grown on (111)-and (110)-oriented diamond substrates. By performing gate-dependent transport measurements at T = 240 K, we have shown that the effect of B doping is strongly dependent on the crystal orientation. In the (111) surface, it strongly suppresses the charge-carrier mobility and leads to a small increase in the gate capacitance. In the (110) surface, it strongly increases the gate capacitance with a moderate reduction in mobility. In both surfaces, the maximum capacitance is much smaller than that of B-doped, thick nanocrystalline films, suggesting that the thickness of B-doped diamond plays a significant role in determining the gate capacitance. Our ab initio DFT calculations of the electronic bandstructure indicate that the strongly orientation-dependent increase of the gate capacitance is due to the specific energy-dependence of the density of states in the two surfaces, resulting in very different doping dependencies of their quantum capacitances. Moreover, part of the reduction of mobility with increasing hole density stems from the doping-dependence of the bandstructure, as evidenced by the doping-dependence of the scattering lifetimes obtained combining the bandstructure calculations with the experimental values of the mobility. Additionally, our results indicate that, due to the orientationdependent sensitivity towards extrinsic disorder introduced by the B dopants, our co-doping approach leads to a frustrated insulator-to-metal transition in the (110) surface, and to a fully re-entrant insulator-to-metal transition in the (111) surface. Further improvements towards a robust metallicity could be achieved by optimizing the crystal growth 