Superconducting coplanar-waveguide (CPW) resonators are one of the key devices in circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED). Their performance can be limited by dielectric losses in the substrate and in the material interfaces. Reliable modeling is required to aid in the design of low-loss CPW structures for cQED. We analyze the geometric dependence of the dielectric losses in CPW structures using finite-element modeling of the participation ratios of the lossy regions. In a practical scenario, uncertainties in the the dielectric constants and loss tangents of these regions introduce uncertainties in the theoretically predicted participation ratios. We present a method for combining loss simulations with measurements of two-level-system-limited quality factors and resonance frequencies of CPW resonators. Namely, we solve an inverse problem to find model parameters producing the measured values. High quality factors are obtainable by properly designing the cross-sectional geometries of the CPW structures, but more accurate modeling and design methods for low-loss CPW resonators are called for major future improvements. Our nonlinear optimization methodology for solving the aforementioned inverse problem is a step in this direction. Defects that can be modeled as two-level systems (TLSs) are a central source of loss in circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED), in devices such as superconducting coplanarwaveguide (CPW) resonators and qubits Dielectric losses in CPW resonators and qubits have recently been studied in several works For computing Q TLS from participation ratio simulations, one also needs information about the loss tangents of the lossy regions. One option is to simply assume some literature values for the loss tangents and predict the resulting quality factors accordingly The participation ratios depend on the dielectric constants and on the thicknesses of the lossy interfaces. By considering infinitesimally thin interface layers, the electromagnetic boundary conditions imply a simple dependence between these values and participation ratios In this paper, we investigate the significant geometric features of CPW structures affecting the dielectric losses by carrying out 2D electrostatic finite-element simulations to compute the participation ratios of the lossy regions. Furthermore, we study how the dielectric constants of the lossy regions affect the resulting participation ratios, without making further simplifying assumptions, in addition to those arising from the discretization, about the field profile in the interfacial layers. In particular, our simulations indicate that the above-discussed proportionality relationships connecting participation ratios and dielectric constants do not hold in all cases for all interfacial regions. This serves as a motivation for developing a method to solve the dielectric constants of the lossy regions from resonance frequency measurement data. Combining quality factor measurement data with the resonance frequency data, we formulate an inverse problem to solve for the loss tangents and the dielectric constants. This is in contrast to recent works, where either feasible values for loss tangents and dielectric constants have been assumed In section 2, we briefly present the theoretical approach to obtain the participation ratios. In section 3, we carry out simulations on CPW resonator cross-sections to study the influence the geometric and material-specific features have on the dielectric losses. In section 4, we discuss how to computationally determine the dielectric constants and loss tangents of the different regions in a set of CPW resonators, and utilize the presented approaches in section 5 for a case study of four CPW resonator cross-sections, demonstrating their feasibility. Finally, in section 6, we summarize this work and draw conclusions. We model the 2D cross-sections of CPW resonators, assuming a field profile of a long waveguide. Following reference where E is the electric field intensity and D is the electric displacement field obtained from the static problem. That is, the participation ratio p i is the ratio of the electric field energy stored in the region Ω i to the total electric field energy in Ω. We assume linear and isotropic materials such that each material subdomain Ω i is characterized by a real-valued dielectric constant i , i.e., the real part of the relative permittivity. Since our modeling domains consist merely of the CPW cross-sections, the volume integrals in equation ( where is the real-valued subdomain-wise-constant spatially dependent dielectric constant. Along the lines of references where tan(δ i ) is the loss tangent associated with the region Ω i ; the complex-valued nature of permittivity is thus taken into account by the real-valued dielectric constant and loss tangent together. In this section, we first investigate the dependence of dielectric losses on the geometric properties of the cross-section of a CPW resonator. Then, we move on to simulate the effects of variations in the dielectric constants of the lossy regions. Here, we pick a set of experimentally feasible parameters and study the effects of uncertainties in these parameters in the following sections. We model the lossy dielectric interfaces as 5 nm thick flat regions at all the material interfaces: metal-to-air (MA), metal-to-substrate (MS) and substrate-to-air (SA). Because of these high-aspect-ratio structures, finite-element meshing needs to be carried out with extra care. To ensure the high quality of the mesh, we initially utilize a brief convergence analysis, refining the mesh until the relative changes in the participation ratios remain within approximately 1% from one mesh to another. With some geometry-to-geometry variation, our meshes result in roughly 10 6 degrees of freedom to be solved for a given problem. In this section, we use a dielectric constant i = 10 and a loss tangent tan(δ i ) = 0.002 for all thin interface regions Ω i . These are rather typical values used in the literature that the used values of the loss tangents are somewhat conservative. ‡ See figure We compute the participation ratios and the resulting Q TLS in a CPW structure with the center conductor width w = 10 μm, gap to ground plane g = 5 μm with varying trench depth d and sidewall angle φ (see figure Figure In figure In this section, we simulate the effect of the width of the center conductor w and of the gap to ground g together such that the ratio w/(w + 2g) is kept at a constant value of 5/11, resulting in an approximately constant characteristic impedance of roughly Z 0 = 50 Ω for the CPW Again, we observe that the deeper the trench, the lower the dielectric loss. Next, we turn our attention to the effect of the dielectric constants of the lossy interface regions on the resulting dielectric losses. Given participation ratios p sim i computed as results of a finite-element simulation with given dielectric constants of the interface regions nom i , the following assumption has been made in previous studies This assumption offers the opportunity to use the loss resulting from a simulation obtained using nom i to estimate the loss for any other value of i without additional simulations. For this assumption to hold, however, the loss contribution in one region has to be unaffected by the changes in loss contributions of the other regions. This is an approximation and does not hold exactly, but let us investigate the validity of this assumption in practice. To study how variations in the dielectric constants affects the dielectric losses, and to study the validity of equations ( The simulated participation ratios are shown in figure The results in figure Trenching into the substrate is an effective way to decrease the interfacial and bulk substrate participation ratios in CPW structures. Furthermore, widening the CPW structure while keeping the desired characteristic impedance can reduce losses. Sloped sidewalls with a sidewall angle φ < 90°seem to decrease the dielectric loss. Sloped sidewalls with φ > 90°in the trenched gap, however, not only increase losses, but seem to decrease the effectiveness of trenching. It is thus advantageous to control the slopes of the sidewalls in the fabrication phase. However, if the MA interface material is inherently much more lossy than the rest of the lossy regions, as seems to be the case in the devices analyzed in reference The dielectric constants affect the participation ratios of the lossy regions and thus the dielectric losses. The participation ratio of a given region is not independent of the dielectric constants of the other regions either. While simply scaling the losses of the SA and MS interfaces using equations ( Our observations in this paper thus far serve as a motivation for accurately finding the dielectric constants for the different regions, such that the finite-element models reproduce given measurement data. This is the topic of the following section. In this section, we present a method for solving for the dielectric constants and loss tangents of the different regions of CPW resonator samples utilizing typically accessible measurement data. This method serves as a tool for inferring these material parameters of the devices, and as motivated in section 3, this information is necessary for accurate estimation of the loss. We assume that the material properties are equal for a set of different samples. Whether this is a justified assumption, depends of course, for example, on the fabrication process. However, samples fabricated in the same batch or even on the same chip, have typically reasonably small variations in their material properties. Our techniques are similar to those utilized, e.g., in references Ignoring coupling with transmission line, the fundamental resonance frequency of a half-wave-length CPW resonator is given by where c is the speed of light in vacuum, l is the length of the resonator, and eff is the effective dielectric constant. While analytical expressions for eff exist in simple geometries where 0 is the permittivity of vacuum. Thus eff is the dielectric constant of a hypothetical homogeneous material filling the whole cross-section of the resonator and resulting in an electric field energy equal to that of the actual spatially distributed dielectric constant , under quasi-static approximation. With our assumptions of linear materials we may rewrite equation ( where we refer to F i as the filling factor. The definition of the filling factor resembles that of the participation ratio, but there is a distinctive difference on how the permittivity appears inside the integral. The terms filling factor and participation ratio are often used somewhat interchangeably in the literature. Here, however, we make this distinction to differentiate between p i and F i . Equations ( Assuming the dielectric constants of the SA, MS, and MA interfaces and of the substrate were unknown but equal from device to device, we can potentially solve for i given resonance frequency measurements for four CPW resonator samples, by solving the nonlinear matrix equation where each row of F, which depends on , represents the filling factors for all regions Ω i for the sample corresponding to the row, obtained from field solutions, is the vector of dielectric constants, with the dielectric constant of vacuum vac = 1 as one of the components, and the components of the vector eff are i eff = c 2 f i 0 2 4l 2 , and they are obtained from measured resonance frequencies f i 0 of the samples. Thus in the case of four samples and five regions with distinct dielectric constants, F is a 4-by-5 matrix, is a 5-by-1 vector and eff is a 4-by-1 vector. Since vac = 1 is known, this results in an equal number of unknowns as equations. In brief, given measurement data of quality factors for n -1 CPW resonators, one can find the loss tangents of n -1 lossy regions, in addition to the lossless vacuum, in a similar manner as solving for the dielectric constants. Assuming equal loss tangents for the different material regions from device to device, we can solve the matrix form of equation ( where P is the participation matrix obtained from field solutions, each of its rows representing the participation ratios for all regions Ω i for the corresponding sample, tan(δ δ δ) is the vector of loss tangents, and the components of the vector 1 Q Q Q TLS are obtained from the quality factor measurements for each sample. Thus, in the case of four samples and four lossy dielectric regions, the size of P is 4-by-4, and both tan(δ δ δ) and 1 Q Q Q TLS are 4by-1 vectors. In this work, we define all functional operations on vectors componentwise. As discussed above, given measurement data for f 0 and Q TLS for a set of CPW resonators, it is possible find the dielectric constants and loss tangents which reproduce such data from simulations. However, the matrices P and F depend on the field solutions and thus on the dielectric constants of the lossy regions. Hence, as the dielectric constants are generally unknown, solving for these values is not simply a matter of inverting P and F; we do not know their elements in advance. Consequently, we formulate the inverse problem of finding tan(δ δ δ) and for a set of CPW resonators, each of them having n -1 lossy dielectric regions, in two ways. We call these the series and parallel approaches to this problem. Inverse problem 1 (Series approach). Let eff and Q Q Q TLS be vectors of effective dielectric constants and quality factors for a set of CPW resonators, respectively, obtained as measurement data. Let sim eff and Q Q Q sim TLS be the corresponding vectors computed from the field solutions using equations ( Here, L i , U i , tan(δ i ) L and tan(δ i ) U denote the lower and upper bounds for each dielectric constant and loss tangent in the optimization, respectively. In this approach, part (i) is the time-consuming one, since one needs to solve the field problems at every objective function evaluation. Once part (i) has been solved, the objective function in part (ii) is much less computationally expensive, and thus the second step of the series approach is relatively fast, as only a single set of field solutions is required. Note that within the quasistatic approach employed here, the loss tangents do not affect the resonance frequencies and hence part (i) does not need input from part (ii). In experiments, the small losses do not either have a strong effect on the resonance frequencies. However, in essence we are dealing with a multi-objective optimization problem: we want to minimize the error with respect to quality factor measurements and resonance frequency measurements. Instead of minimizing the objectives in series, one can reformulate such a multi-objective optimization problem as a single-objective optimization problem by, e.g., minimizing the weighted sum of the two objectives. Another option is to reformulate the multi-objective optimization problem as a constrained single-objective problem Inverse problem 2 (Parallel approach). Let eff and Q Q Q TLS be vectors obtained as measurement data. Let Q Q Q sim TLS be computed from the field solution using equation where τ is a chosen tolerance for the constraints. Hence, in the parallel approach, the vector of optimization variables consists of the components of and tan(δ δ δ). This approach has the advantage of simultaneously requiring the dielectric constants to satisfy the quality factor data and the resonance frequency data, as they affect both these values through simulations. The disadvantage is that the number of optimization variables is increased compared to the individual steps of the series approach. Here not only the objective function evaluations require solving the field problem for the whole set of samples at every iteration, but also the evaluation of the constraint needs this information. Fortunately, since the objective function evaluation yields the field solutions for a given , they can be reused whenever the solutions corresponding to an indentical are required. Above, we presented the principle for solving the dielectric constants and loss tangents of the different lossy regions utilizing a set of CPW resonators. However, in practice, the matrices P and F can have very high condition numbers of the order of 10 5 to 10 6 if attention is not paid to this issue. This is the case, for example, for rather typical sets of anisotropically etched samples: the relative changes in the interface participation ratios are almost equal for changes in the device geometry, producing nearly linearly dependent rows for the participation matrix In practice, a high condition number κ (P) = P -1 P translates to outputs of the model being highly sensitive to the inputs. In terms of equation In this section, we present a case study and solve the above-formulated inverse problems for a set of CPW resonators. We design a set of cross-sections that produces P and F with relatively low condition numbers. Along the lines of reference 0.030 0.090 0.0064 58.0 Sample SA 0.080 0.058 0.0028 87.0 Sample MS 0.046 0.099 0.049 65.0 Sample MA 0.062 0.0096 0.0015 89.0 Sample Si , The optimization problems are solved using the interior-point optimization (IPOPT) algorithm To monitor how well we can reproduce the dielectric constants of the lossy interfaces, we assumed Si fixed at 11.6, by bounding it from above and below in the optimization. ¶ This is justified in the sense that the dielectric constant of the substrate is usually the one known with the least uncertainty (except for that of vacuum). With sufficiently low noise levels, both approaches yield satisfactory results. Hence, in this case study, we keep the noise related to the measurements high enough to observe differences in these approaches, yet at a reasonably low level to study whether we can still reproduce the noiseless values: table 2 describes the data we use as those for the measurements as opposed to the originally obtained simulation data. Identical data are used in the series and parallel approaches to ensure a fair comparison. Moreover, identical applicable solver settings, initial values, and tolerances are utilized in both cases. The results are shown in table 2 and table Comparing the data in table 3, one notices that the parallel approach performs better in terms of predicting the dielectric constants and loss tangents. Whereas the parallel approach overestimates MS and MA , the series approach underestimates them: especially MS is crudely underestimated by the series approach and MA overestimated by the parallel approach. Both approaches give a decent estimate for SA . The maximum absolute deviation from the dielectric constant values utilized to obtain the noiseless data Table These results highlight that the series approach is especially prone to errors arising from noisy resonance frequency data, and erroneous predictions of dielectric constants propagate to erroneous loss tangent predictions. Consequently, within these noise levels, only the parallel approach yields results accurate enough to serve as a starting point for further optimization of the cross-sectional geometries of this set of samples. In contrast, utilizing the same parameters in this case study, but decreasing the amplitude of noise in the resonance frequencies with a factor of 1/100, the series approach yields very good results. Decreasing the amplitude with only a factor of 1/10, the results are not quite as accurate, but already comparable to the results of the parallel approach for noisier data. This supports using the simpler series approach instead of the parallel approach for such resonance frequency noise levels. The samples utilizing isotropic etching in this case study reach quality factors between 10 6 and 2 × 10 6 . These relatively wide or deeply trenched structures guarantee reduced participation at the interfaces, in line with the trends of the geometric dependence observed in section 3. Moreover, the utilization of isotropic etching gives the trenched gap a rounder shape, eliminating sharp angles, such as those in figure Dielectric loss due to TLS excitations is a typical hindering factor for the operation of cQED devices. In particular, such losses in the thin dielectric layers at material interfaces and in the silicon substrate may limit the quality factors of CPW resonators, essential in cQED. We modeled the dielectric losses in CPW resonators using finite-element modeling by computing the electric-field participation ratios of the dielectric regions in such devices. We considered the effects of the geometric features of the CPW cross-section and of the dielectric constants of the different regions on the loss, and consequently, on the TLS-limited quality factors of the CPW resonators. The results support the view that increasing the physical footprint of the devices by trenching into the substrate and widening the structure mitigates dielectric losses. Furthermore, our systematic study indicates that designing optimally sloped sidewalls in the gap between the center conductor and the ground plane of the CPW can play a role in reaching high quality factors. Our results also show that variations in the dielectric constants of the lossy interface regions can significantly affect the predictions for the dielectric losses. The MA interface participation is particularly sensitive to uncertainties in the dielectric constants of the other interfaces. For example, our results indicate an 87% difference in p MA between MS = 5 and MS = 15 for two otherwise identical samples. To minimize the electric-field participation in the lossy regions of the resonators, it is essential to know the dielectric constants and loss tangents of the dielectrics with reasonable accuracy. We presented a nonlinear optimization method to find these quantities from quality factor and resonance frequency measurements. We considered two approaches, the series approach and the parallel approach to solve this inverse problem. In the series approach, the dielectric constants are first solved from resonance frequency data, and this solution is then used to solve the loss tangents using the measured quality factors. In the parallel approach, one finds the dielectric constants and the loss tangents simultaneously, minimizing the error with respect to quality factor data, whereas the resonance frequency data gives rise to a nonlinear constraint for the dielectric constants. Both approaches yielded reasonable estimates for the measured quality factors and resonance frequencies with reasonably noisy data, but the parallel approach was more accurate in terms of finding the right dielectric constants and loss tangents. In conclusion, for data with significant noise, e.g., with noise amplitude of 1 MHz for frequencies of the order of 1 to 5 GHz in the measured resonance frequencies, it is important to match the resonance frequency and quality factor data simultaneously to obtain reasonable estimates for dielectric constants and loss tangents. If the noise amplitude in the resonance frequency data is approximately 1/10th of this or less, the series approach is preferable due to its simplicity. Utilization of our inverse-problem approach requires a set of CPW resonators that result in well-conditioned participation and filling factor matrices. In general, the condition numbers of these matrices for a set of CPWs can be as high as of the order of 10 6 , if attention is not paid to this issue. In such cases, the uncertainties in the predictions for the loss tangent and for the dielectric constant are excessively high, and consequently the ability to predict dielectric losses and design low-loss cross-sectional CPW geometries is crippled. In line with reference Our nonlinear optimization approach complements and is in contrast to recent works, where, e.g., experimentally feasible values for loss tangents and dielectric constants have been assumed Accurate measurement data are required to further validate and develop our approach. To minimize the resulting uncertainties, multiple measurements on nominally identical devices should be carried out. To extend the methodology to situations where coupling to the transmission line is significant, appropriate correction terms should be considered MA ¶ This is not to say we could not solve for Si simultaneously with the others. Note, however, that as the Si filling factors are also considerably larger than those of the interfaces, eff is more sensitive to changes in Si .