We investigate a superconducting state irradiated by a laser beam with spin and orbital angular momentum. It is shown that superconducting vortices are created by the laser beam due to heating effect and transfer of angular momentum of light. Possible experiments to verify our prediction are also discussed. Interaction of light with condensed matter systems has offered a new approach to control and study them in an ultrafast manner. Light has spin and orbital angular momentum. The spin angular momentum is given by circular polarization. On the other hand, the orbital angular momentum is given by spatial structure of the light: the phase structure of the light is winding and hence the intensity is zero at the center of the beam (along the propagation axis), analogous to superconducting vortices. This type of light is dubbed optical vortices. In this paper, we investigate a superconducting state irradiated by a laser beam with spin and orbital angular momentum. It is shown that superconducting vortices are created by the laser beam due to heating effect and transfer of angular momentum of light. Possible experiments to verify our theory are also discussed. We consider a two dimensional superconductor irradiated by a laser beam with spin and orbital angular momentum as shown in Fig. T c is the transition temperature of the superconductor. Due to the heating effect of the laser beam, the temperature T depends on space and time. Here, T ∞ and ∆T (r, t) denote the temperature far from the laser beam and the variation of the temperature by the laser beam, respectively. The typical time scale of the TDGL equation is ps. The length is normalized by the superconducting coherence length ξ ∼ 1 μm. We consider a laser pulse of the form A = 2e i ω ξEδ(t). Here, ω is the frequency of the laser beam. We assume that the thermalization time due to energy dissipation is much shorter than the other characteristic times and the relaxation time for angular momentum is much longer than the other characteristic times. Thus, energy transfer is neglected but transfer of angular momentum is taken into account in the vector potential. We neglect the A 2 term since this term does not transfer angular momentum and hence does not change the results qualitatively. We also assume that the generated vortex is pinned by a defect or impurity. With the initial condition ψ(r, 0) = ψ b (constant), we then obtain We expand the order parameter in a Fourier series as ψ = n e inθ ψ n (r). We use two types of laser beams: left circularly polarized Gaussian and Bessel beams. The Bessel beam carrys orbital angular momentum. First, consider a left circularly polarized Gaussian beam with a constant E 0 and the radius of the beam σ, and ∆T (r, t) = T b exp -r 2 σ 2 δ(t). The variation of the temperature is assumed to be proportional to the intensity of the beam with a proportionality coefficient T b . Then, the TDGL equation becomes Therefore, we find ψ n = 0 for n = 0, 1. Next, consider a left circularly polarized Bessel beam of the form 29) and ∆T (r, t) = T b (J m (kr)) 2 δ(t). Here, J m is the Bessel function of the first kind and order m. k is the wave number of the beam. The TDGL equation reads We see ψ n = 0 for n = 0, m + 1. In the numerical calculation, we set δ(t) → 1 2t0 Θ(t 0 -|t|) with t 0 = 10 -3 , ψ b = 1, T ∞ /T c = 0.9, and 2eξE0 ω = 10 which corresponds to E 0 = 5kV/m, ω=0.25THz, and ξ=1μm. We also use σ = 1 for the Gaussian beam and k = 1, m = 1 for the Bessel beam.We have solved the TDGL equations with the boundary condition ψ n (r → ∞, t) = 0 by the Crank-Nicolson method numerically. In the following, the numerical results are shown at t = 2t 0 . Figure In general, for light with spin and orbital angular momenta s and l, the superconductor acquires the angular momentum s + l. The vortex created by a laser beam is characterized by vorticity or winding number. Thus, once created, it is topologically stable and does not vanish spontaneously. For time evolution of the order paremeters, see Supplemental Materials. Our results are also applicable to type I superconductors where vortices cannot be generated by magnetic field. Votices in chiral p-wave superconductors can host Majorana fermions. We have neglected the nonlinear terms with respect to the order parameter, which lead to couplings between different components of the order parameter (ψ n ). Thus, other components than those considered in this paper are also generated in the presence of the nonlinear terms. However, these components are less dominant. Finally, let us comment on experimental feasibility. One can use Al, a conventional superconductor with coherence length about 1 micron, as a superconductor. As a substrate, one can use sapphire which has a thermal conductivity much larger than that of the superconductor to minimize the hot spot size. In summary, we have investigated a superconducting state irradiated by a laser beam with spin and orbital angular momentum. We have shown that superconducting vortices are created by the laser beam due to heating effect and transfer of angular momentum of light. Experimental setups to verify our theory are also discussed. The author thanks N. Yoshikawa, S. Okuma, S. Kaneko, and K. Ienaga for discussions. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP30578216 and the JSPS-EPSRC Core-to-Core program "Oxide Superspin".