Despite the tremendous interest in halide perovskites in solar cells, the reason that the allinorganic perovskite CsPbI3 is unstable at room temperature remains mysterious. Here singlecrystal X-ray diffraction and powder pair distribution function (PDF) measurements characterize bulk perovskite CsPbI3 from 100 to 295 K to elucidate its thermodynamic instability. While Cs occupies a single site from 100 to 150 K, it splits between two sites from 175 to 295 K with the second site having a lower effective coordination number, which along with other structural parameters suggests that Cs rattles in its coordination polyhedron. PDF measurements reveal that on the length scale of the unit cell, the Pb-I octahedra concurrently become greatly distorted, with one of the I-Pb-I angles approaching 82° compared to the ideal 90°. The rattling of Cs, low number of Cs-I contacts, and high degree of octahedral distortion cause the instability of perovskite-phase CsPbI3. These results provide detailed structural information that may help to engineer greater stability of CsPbI3 and other all-inorganic perovskites for use in solar cells. Halide perovskites exhibit remarkably long carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths for a highly defective, solution-processable material, allowing for the creation of solar cells with certified efficiencies of 25.2%. Here, we use temperature-dependent single-crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) measurements as well as powder X-ray diffraction pair distribution function (PDF) measurements Like the long-range structure, the local structure on the length scale of the unit cell remains orthorhombic in the Pnma space group between 100 and 295 K. However, it exhibits additional structural distortion, which is most clearly seen through deformed Pb-I octahedra. The local distortion is similar to what has been found in organic-inorganic hybrid halide perovskites, Our study indicates that the rattling of the Cs cation, lower coordination of the second Cs site, and local octahedral distortion contribute to the thermodynamic instability of γ-CsPbI3. These results explain the metastability of perovskite-type γ-CsPbI3 and provide detailed structural information that may help to engineer greater stability of CsPbI3 and other allinorganic perovskites. As previously reported, The most noteworthy change is that as the temperature increases, Cs becomes disordered between two sites. Figure We find the residual density is minimized by splitting the Cs occupancy between two sites that are within about an angstrom of each other. We call the dominant site CsA and the other CsB. In the structure refinement, the atomic displacement parameters of CsA and CsB are constrained to be identical and the sum of the occupancies is fixed at 1. If the Cs atom is modeled without disorder, Ueq for Cs is significantly more superlinear at temperatures ≥ 200 K (Figure We hypothesize that in accordance with Goldschmidt's principle of maximum anion contact, where ] is the ith bond's weight, and l av is the weighted average bond length within the coordination polyhedron as defined in ref. which quantifies the normalized deviation from the average bond length within the polyhedron, where l mean is the unweighted average bond length within the coordination polyhedron. We find the ECoN of CsA to be 8.1 and of CsB to be 5.9, with D = 0.12 and 0.099 respectively. The standard deviation σ of Cs-I bond lengths for CsA is 0.61 Å and for CsB is 0.51 Å. In comparison, the ECoN of the Cs-I coordination polyhedron of non-perovskite δ-CsPbI3 (Figure At temperatures >600 K, δ-CsPbI3 spontaneously converts to the cubic perovskite α-CsPbI3, where Cs is in the middle of the iodine cavity. found that γ-CsPbI3 has a lower total energy than non-perovskite δ-CsPbI3, contrary to the observation that δ-CsPbI3 is what forms when CsPbI3 is synthesized at room temperature. CsPbI3 reveals the limitations of tolerance factor approaches to predicting perovskite stability, especially in systems like the current one. Using the ionic radii from Shannon's table, r X r B -n A (n A -r A /r B ln(r A /r B ) ) where nA is the oxidation state of the A-site cation (Cs in CsPbI3), and under their model, a perovskite structure is stable for τ < 4.18. In contrast to SCXRD and conventional powder diffraction measurements, PDF measurements take the diffuse scattering into account in addition to the Bragg reflections to generate a pair distribution function G(r), which quantifies the probability of finding two atoms separated by a distance r. A major advantage to PDF measurements is that they allow the local structure to be analyzed separately from the long-range average structure. Like the SCXRD data, we fit G(r) using a structural model with orthorhombic symmetry in the Pnma space group. Fitting the short-range local crystal structure separately, we find much better agreement between G(r) and the fit (Figure Like what we find here for perovskite-type γ-CsPbI3, PDF measurements on organicorganic hybrid perovskites such as methylammonium lead bromide and methylammonium lead iodide exhibit different local and long-range structures, PDF measurements show that the local structure of γ-CsPbI3 is more distorted than the global structure between 100 and 295 K, which suggests that the existence of differing local and longrange structures is common to halide perovskites and is not caused by the presence of an anisotropic organic cation. γ-CsPbI3 is crystallized from the melt using a previously published procedure. Single-crystal studies are performed on a Bruker Kappa Apex2 CCD Diffractometer using graphite-monochromated Mo-Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). An Oxford Cryostream 700 cryocooler flows dry nitrogen over the crystal. Background, polarization, Lorentz-factor, and multi-scan absorption corrections are used when processing the data. The initial structure solution is found using the intrinsic phasing method of the ShelXT program To perform X-ray PDF measurements, γ-CsPbI3 is ground using a mortar and pestle in an argon-filled glove box and sifted using a 200-mesh sieve. The powder is sealed in evacuated quartz capillaries under high vacuum (~10 -4 torr). Data are collected at beamline 28-ID-1 at NSLS-II at Brookhaven National Laboratory using 75 keV radiation and are analyzed using the Diffpy-CMI software suite. All symmetry-allowed positions and thermal parameters as well as the dataset scale factor are varied in this fit. After the long-range structure is determined, the peak sharpening parameter δ 1 used in the short-range fits is determined by fixing all parameters, extending the fit-range to r = 2.5 -50 Å, and fitting δ 1 , which is not varied in the short-range fits. The short-range structure is fit from r = 2.5 -8 Å. In the short-range fits, the dataset scale factor is fixed to the value determined from the long-range fit, and isotropic thermal parameters are used. 