Humid hydrophobic ionic liquids, widely used as electrolytes, have narrowed electrochemical windows, because their water, absorbed on the electrode surface, gets involved in electrolysis. In this work, we performed molecular dynamics simulations to explore effects of adding Li-salt in humid ionic liquids on the water adsorbed on the electrode surface. Results reveal that most of water molecules are pushed away from both cathode and anode, by adding salt. The water remained on the electrode is almost bound with Li + , which has significantly lowered activity. The Li + -bonding and re-arrangement of the surface-adsorbed water both facilitate the inhibition of water electrolysis, and thus prevent the reduction of electrochemical windows of humid hydrophobic ionic liquids. This finding is testified by cyclic voltammetry measurements where salt-in-humid ionic liquids exhibit enhanced electrochemical windows. Our work provides the underlying mechanism and a simple but practical approach for protection of humid ionic liquids from performance degradation. Driven by the demand for the efficient use of intermittent renewable energies and electrical vehicles, the development of electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices with outstanding performance has been at the forefront of energy technologies. Recently, in battery community, the electrochemical window of aqueous Li + -ion electrolytes is noticeably enlarged by the "water-in-salt" electrolyte. We begin our work by dissecting the electrical double layer (EDL) structure at the electrolyteelectrode interface. Figure [TFSI] -) and water molecules as a function of distance from the electrode surface with respect to the EDL potential, , which is defined as the potential across the EDL relative to the potential of zero charge (PZC). By comparing EDL structures in humid RTILs before and after adding Li-salt, it can be seen that RTIL cations and anions form alternating layers extending up to few nanometers from the electrode surfaces, and the added salt seems to have weak influence on their number densities (Supplementary Figures Although there are still some water molecules adsorbed on the electrode surface, especially, under large polarizations, such adsorbed water molecules are found to closely stay with the added Li + ions (contour lines in Fig. Switching the electrode potential from PZC to -1.5 V, the electrosorbed water is nearly eliminated, and thus unable to participate in the electrolysis. As the voltage becomes more negatively, owing to the strong electrostatic interaction with the charged electrode, the Li + ions could overcome the energy barrier by RTIL ion layer As the EDL potential increases from PZC to +1 V, there is always a layer of water molecules adsorbed on electrode, but they are all bound with Li + ions localized near to the first anion layer (~ 0.53 nm, Supplementary Figures Therefore, adding salt into humid RTIL could not only help the water to be repulsed from both the negative and positive electrode surfaces but also make the water remained in the interfacial region become bound, which could both potentially protect the humid RTIL from the electrolysis and thus avoid the reduction of electrochemical windows of RTILs due to the existence of water. To validate this, we carried out CV measurements for pure In order to understand the mechanism of the voltage window expansion by adding Li-salt, we first explore the fundamental underlying the Li + -bound water. MD simulations of bulk electrolytes were performed to analyze the vibration stretch of O-H of water molecules, which was deployed as the infrared spectroscopy (IR) reporter to monitor the structural change in humid IL electrolytes with adding salt; the spectrum of pure water was treated as the reference. The reduced water clusters (Supplementary Figure Consequently, the H-bond networks between water molecules and between water molecules and RTIL ions are disrupted, and the peak positions of O-H stretching vibrations of water are blueshifted, indicating the reinforced of O-H and then lowered water activity. Meanwhile, the fraction of free water is largely reduced, since water is bound with Li + . These phenomena arising from the addition of Li-salt are responsible for protection of water from electrolysis. We then focus on the origin of salt effect on water distributions at the electrode, by analyzing the free energy as a function of the distance to the electrode surface under different EDL potentials. The potential of mean force (PMF), which represents the variation of free energy, was evaluated by use of umbrella sampling method. Then, with adding Li-salt, where could be Li + -bound water? We calculated the free energy of a Li + -bound water molecule, as shown in Fig. The PMF curves have demonstrated where water, Li + and Li + -bound water would be predominantly distributed. Specifically, the humid RTIL exhibits water accumulation at polarized electrodes; with adding salt, water molecules could be largely excluded from the electrode under both negative and positive polarizations, compared with the humid RTILs. This different behavior is certainly arising from the strong association with Li + ions. With above analyses, the expansion of electrochemical window could be attributed to that the water is repulsed from the electrode surface and the water remained in the interfacial region becomes less active, both originating from the addition of Li-salt. To delve deeper into salt effect on activity of interfacial water, we evaluate the behavior of surface-adsorbed water in humid RTIL and in salt-in-humid RTILs at the electrodes. The atom density profile and the orientation distribution of water molecules are analyzed in Fig. These phenomena suggest that the water molecule adjusts its orientation, together with its hydrogen atoms pushed away from the electrode, making it more difficult for the hydrogen evolution reaction. Meanwhile, for humid RTILs at positive electrode side, the water adopts a configuration parallel to the electrode surface, evidenced by nearly the same peak location (0.3 nm) of the oxygen and hydrogen atom density profiles and the dipole orientation located at 90°; for water in salt-in-humid RTIL, although the position of hydrogen atoms changes little, the peak location of oxygen atoms shifts away from the electrode surface (0.3 to 0.34 nm), and the dipole orientation is changed to 110°. Such structural re-arrangement facilitates the inhibition of water oxidation at positive polarization. We further testify the generality of the conclusion that the adding salt expands the We have investigated the effect of adding salt in humid hydrophobic RTILs on the distributions of ion and water at the electrode surface. Combining MD simulations, DFT calculations and CV measurements, we found that the electrochemical stability window of salt-in-humid RTILs is indeed expanded compared with the humid one. MD simulations and DFT calculations provide a molecular understanding of how and why adding salt could dramatically enhance their electrochemical window of humid RTILs. Such enhancement is ascribed to the water repulsed from the electrode surface and the lowered activity of the water remained in the interfacial region, by adding Li-salt. The water is found to be strongly associated with Li + . Since Li + ions mostly prefer stay away from the electrode surface, water is intent to be pulled away from the electrode under both negative and positive polarizations, thus extremely reducing the fraction of free water in the interfacial region. For water molecules still adsorbed on the electrode surface, most of them are bound with Li + , resulting in significantly decreased activity, since the strength of O-H in bound water is reinforced due to the association with Li + . Meanwhile, the added Li + modifies the arrangement of adsorbed water. Explicitly, the position of hydrogen atom is adjusted, making it difficult for the hydrogen evolution to occur at negative electrode; the oxygen atom is pulled away from the positively charged electrode, protecting water from electrolysis. The lower HOMO level is a complementary mechanism for the thermodynamic manner to improve electrolyte oxidation stability under positive polarization. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were utilized to investigate the effect of added salt on the ion and water distributions in the EDL of humid RTIL. Specifically, we employed MD simulation of hydrophobic RTIL-water-salt mixtures confined between two atomically flat graphite electrode surfaces as shown in Supplementary Figure All simulations were performed in NVT ensemble with the MD package GROMACS. DFT calculations on the molecular orbital of water and water/Li + complexes were performed with the Gaussian 09 program (revision, D.01). [TFSI] were purchased from IoLiTec in the highest available quality (99%); LiTFSI (99.95%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Prior to each measurement, RTILs were purified through ultra-pure water (Milli-Q, 18.2 MΩ•cm) and then vacuum-dried for 24 hours at 80 °C in a glovebox filled with ultrapure Argon (Linde Industrial Gases, 99.999%) to remove water as much as possible, and then used as dry RTILs. Humid RTILs are prepared via adding ultra-pure water into RTILs. RTILs-LiTFSI-water mixtures were prepared by adding ultra-pure water and LiTFSI into RTILs, and then the mixtures were stirred up for 12 hours till homogeneous solutions were formed. Water contents were determined by Karl Fischer Coulometer (Metrohm, KF-831). Silver wire and platinum wire were used as reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) was used as working electrode. A piece of tape was pressed onto the flat surface and then pulled off to form a newly cleaved clean surface for electrochemical measurements. The electrochemical cell used for measurements was a sealed one, which was isolated from the environment, and the CV measurements were typically completed within half an hour, so that the change of water contents was negligible. Fouriertransform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements were conducted on a Nexus 870 spectrometer (Nicolet) equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled MCT-A detector. An unpolarized IR radiation sequentially passed through two CaF 2 windows with a thin-layer solution (25 μm). The IR transmission spectrum of the RTILs-LiTFSI-water mixture was taken from 1111 to 4000 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 and averaged 100 times. 