Specific strength (strength/density) is a crucial factor while designing high load-bearing architecture in areas of aerospace and defense. The strength of the material can be enhanced by blending it with high strength components and/or fillers, but both options have limitations such as at certain loads, the materials can still fail due to poor filler and matrix interactions. Therefore, there is a great interest in enhancing the strength of materials by playing with topology/geometry. In this work, we have investigated the mechanical properties of zeolite-templated carbon nanotube networks (CNTnets). The atomic models were used to generate macro models that were 3D printed. The mechanical properties of CNTnets were investigated through fully atomistic molecular dynamics simulations and load-bearing tests. Our results show that some aspects of 2 mechanical behavior proved to be scale-independent. The 3D printed structures were able to support high compressive loads without structural failure. Such complex architectures can be exploited for ultralight aerospace and automotive parts. Structures for load-bearing applications have been made of different materials, such as metals, ceramics, and polymers. For a large variety of applications, polymers are still the most preferred material due to its low density, high specific strength, extrudability, and cost. On the other hand, metals have higher density and ceramics are brittle and have poor processability The load-bearing capability of the pristine polymers can be enhanced by blends and/or with interpenetrating networks, but the compatibility among polymers can limit the candidate selection In this more topology-oriented approach, the pore geometry and size are essential aspects of the design, as they are key factors which will determine the mechanical strength of the structure. Pore shapes such as cubic, spherical, cylindrical, octahedral, tetrahedral contribute to the structural advantage under load There are many techniques available to fabricate porous structures such as gas foaming Effect of extruder temperature on the mechanical properties have been also studied, for instance, pristine PLA structure printed at 210 ̊C (0.12 GPa) has a higher elastic modulus than printed at 192 ̊C (0.11 GPa) temperature Recent studies have also shown that combining computational modeling with 3D printing technology is an effective way to generate new structures using geometric design principles Schwarzites are 3D porous carbon-based structures idealized by Mackay and Terrones Carbon-based nanostructures with complex geometries have been intensively studied. Depending on the architectural geometry of these structures, remarkable mechanical and electrical properties are obtained Recent studies have indicated that a feasible way to synthesize new carbon-based porous nanostructures is to use zeolites as templates In this work, 3D printing technique, in particular, fused deposition modeling, was used to fabricate zeolite-template carbon nanotube nets (CNTnets) structures for load-bearing function. The atomic models were used to generate macro models that were 3D printed using PLA. The compression strength of PLA porous structure was investigated experimentally. The effect of varying pore density on compression strength was also investigated, as well as, the effect of layer deposition orientation on the compression behavior. These experimental data were contrasted against the ones obtained from MD simulations. Here we will give a short description of how the zeolite-based CNTnets were obtained; a more complete description can be found in reference To build the CNTnets, we need to create (energetically favorable) junctions between the chosen CNT. Two CNT (6,0) were inserted into the adjacent BEA channels (along the y and z directions). Non-bonded carbon atoms were then added into the space between the CNT and using MD simulations with the reactive ReaxFF force field Deciding on which CNT and the junctions that would be employed to build the network structures, we have considered two different cases: one with partial filling of BEA channels (Structure 1 in Figure After obtaining the structures from MM/MD studies, we created structures to be printed and for the mechanical properties evaluation. Using VMD software The data of these carbon-based structures are presented in Table Then, the obtained structures were fed in the FDM printer as a G-Code program; front view and 3D view of the molecular structure are shown in Figure The commercial-grade of solid PLA filament was fed into the printer which is then subsequently heated in the extruder at 210 ̊C and extruded through a nozzle on the heated bed at 50 ̊C during printing. The paper tape was used for better adhesion of the structures to the printer bed, as fabricated structures have a single-layer thickness of 180 μm along the z-direction with 100% fill density. PLA filament (white) was provided by Flashforge 3DTechnology Co. Ltd. (Zhejiang, China) and has a diameter of 1.75 mm (with tolerance ±0.1), mass density of 1.210-1.430 gm/cm3 and melting point 190 ̊C to 220 ̊C. Due to the structures be equal along the y and z directions (see Figure For qualitative comparison, we also performed the compressive tests in the molecular Structures 1, 2 and 3 using MD simulations. To do so, the finite structures were placed atop on a fixed 12-6 Lennard-Jones wall (Ɛ = 0.07 kcal/mol and σ = 3.55 Å) and above them, another movable was placed. With the movable wall, a compressive uniaxial strain was applied to deform the structure and evaluate its mechanical response with a strain rate of -10-6fs-1. In order to decrease the thermal contribution in our deformation tests, these simulations were carried out at 10 K in an NVT ensemble. The stress-strain curves were obtained using the virial stress tensor component and the engineering strain at each compressive direction. In order to determine the spatially concentrated stress during simulations, we evaluated it through the von Mises stress, the second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor In order to discuss the mechanical behavior of the structures 1, 2 and 3, we will first present the MD results. In Figure In Figure GPa and 1.1 %, respectively, for structures 2 and 3. These values are lower than the corresponding ones for the x-direction. As for structure 1, a different behavior is seen in Figure In Figure In Figure The effect of the structural porosity on the Young's modulus and yield strength values are clear for both x and z-direction. The structure-1 has the highest porosity of 88.4% and therefore it has lower compression strength than structure 2 and 3. Young's modulus values of structure 1 along z-direction (89.3 MPa) is larger than structure-1 for the x-direction (9.8 MPa). For the xdirection, structure 3 (202.36 MPa) has a higher Young's modulus value than structure 2 (162.88 MPa); similarly, for the z-direction structure 3 (190.39 MPa) has a higher Young's modulus value than structure 2 (92.159 MPa), structure 2 (63.83%) has higher porosity than structure 3 (47.52%). Yield strength of structure 2, structure 3 for the x-direction and structure 2 and structure 3 for the z-direction are 7.60, 11.20, 3.82, 9.52 MPa, respectively. It was also observed that the relative structural tubular orientation has a significant effect on toughness, i.e., porous structures tested along the x-direction have 50% reduced toughness in comparison to the z-direction ones. The toughness of structure 2 (380KJ/m3) and structure 3 (1045 KJ/m3) for the z-direction are larger than the ones for structure 2 (200 KJ/m3) and 3 (540 J/m3) for the x-direction. As can be inferred from Table be regarded as a fused cylindrical structure, as shown in Figure The number of joints also determines the degree of freedom of the cylinders/nanotubes. Fewer number of joints implies that the more stress will be distributed along the structure due to the cylinders/nanotubes rolling and/or sliding. As can be seen in Figures When the compression is applied parallel to cylinders/nanotubes (z-direction), it is difficult for the cylinders/nanotubes to roll and slip, which leads to a stress accumulation at parallel portions to the compressive direction, i.e., in the cylinders/nanotubes. Initially, the joints concentrate more stress than the cylinders/nanotubes, since they are trying to roll (start a pull-push process at the junctions in a tentative to roll). Then, as seen in Figures In this work, we have investigated the mechanical properties of zeolite-templated carbon nanotube networks (CNTnets). The atomic models were used to generate macro models that were 3D printed. The mechanical properties of CNTnets were investigated through fully atomistic molecular dynamics simulations and load-bearing tests. There is a good qualitative agreement for the mechanical behavior of the atomic models and the corresponding 3D printed macro-scale ones. Some of the discrepancies are due to the intrinsic 3D printed layer-by-layer process. Our results also show that some aspects of mechanical behavior proved to be scale-independent. The 3D printed structures were able to support high compressive loads without structural failure. These conclusions are similar to other structures obtained with the same approach 