Magnetostrictive optomechanical cavities provide a new optically-readout approach to room temperature magnetometry. Here we report ultrasensitive and ultrahigh bandwidth cavity optomechanical magnetometers constructed by embedding a grain of the magnetostrictive material Terfenol-D within a high quality (Q) optical microcavity on a silicon chip. By engineering their physical structure, we achieve a peak sensitivity of 26 pT/ √ Hz comparable to the best cryogenic microscale magnetometers, along with a 3 dB bandwidth as high as 11.3 MHz. Two classes of magnetic response are observed, which we postulate arise from the crystallinity of the Terfenol-D. This allows single-and poly-crystalline grains to be distinguished at the level of a single particle. Our results may enable applications such as lab-on-chip nuclear magnetic spectroscopy and magnetic navigation. The resonant enhancement of both optical and mechanical response in a cavity optomechanical system This paper focuses on optimizing the sensitivity of magnetostrictive optomechanical magnetometers. We find that the sensitivity depends critically on the shape of the support that suspends the magnetometer above the silicon chip. This support both constrains the magnetostriction-induced mechanical motion and provides an avenue for thermal fluctuations to enter the system. By engineering its structure to increase both its compliance and the mechanical quality factor of the device, we demonstrate around an order of magnitude improvement in sensitivity compared to previous works, to The magnetic response as a function of magnetic field frequency is found to show two significantly different behaviors: a relatively smooth response modulated by the mechanical resonances of the structure; and a response that exhibits dramatic variations as a function of frequency, with these variations occurring under the envelope of the mechanical resonances. We refer to these two behaviors as Type I and Type II, respectively. The magnetic response of the Type II devices is observed to be highly sensitive to direct current (DC) magnetic fields. We find this behavior is consistent with interference of acoustic waves produced at multiple grain boundaries in a polycrystalline Terfenol-D particle. We therefore infer that the Type I and II responses arise when the particle is mono-and poly-crystalline, respectively. Our devices, therefore, provide a method to characterize the Terfenol-D crystal structure, a measurement which is generally challenging at the level of a single grain. The magnetometers show an ultra-broadband response. The working frequency ranges for both Type I and Type II magnetometers are more than 130 MHz, limited by the bandwidth of the photoreceivers we use in our experiment. Accumulated 3 dB bandwidths The magnetometers are fabricated by depositing Terfenol-D particles into holes etched into the center of silica microtoroids, following the approach in Ref. To measure the magnetic field sensitivity of the fabricated magentometers, we use a tapered fiber In our experiment, to achieve a uniform CO 2 laser reflow process, the silicon pedestal is left with a width of ∼5-10 μm after the XeF 2 etching. Here, in order to improve the mechanical compliance and thus improve the magnetic field sensitivity, we then further etch down the silicon pedestal by performing several runs of XeF 2 etching after the Terfenol-D deposition process is complete. The width of the pedestal can be directly measured from an optical microscope image, and is marked in the area between the two white dashed circles in Fig. We etch down the silicon pedestal by a few μm in each run of XeF 2 etching, and measure the sensitivity. In Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), we plot the noise power spectra and sensitivity of a magnetometer with W ped =4.5 μm (red curves), and W ped =0.5 μm (blue curves), respectively. We find that, as W ped decreases, the mechanical resonances move to lower frequency, due to the increased mechanical compliance and therefore decreased spring constant of the microtoroids. The sensitivity improves across almost the entire active frequency range. In Figs. In Fig. The peak sensitivity found for Type I magnetometers is ∼44 pT/ √ Hz at about 30 MHz. This frequency corresponds to the radial breathing mode of the magne- tometer, with its mode profile shown in the inset of Fig. 3(e)), obtained through finite element method simulation using COMSOL Multiphysics. Generally this mode has the largest spatial overlap with the magnetostriction of the Terfenol-D. For the Type II magnetometer, both the magnetic response and sensitivity vary significantly with small changes in the frequency of the magnetic field, as shown in both Figs. It can be seen that the magnetic response varies by more than 25 dB within a frequency range of 20 kHz. The peak sensitivity is ∼26 pT/ √ Hz, at ∼10.5 MHz, and is flat over a 74 kHz frequency band, which is comparable with other high precision magnetometers, such as atomic magnetometers All of the measured magnetometers were fabricated using the same method. The fact that magnetic domains in Terfenol-D can have a size similar to size of the grains This strong dependence of the magnetic response on the applied DC field observed in Type II magnetometers can be explained by interference between the magnetostrictive waves generated at each crystal grain, with destructive interference responsible for the observed antiresonance-like dips in the response. To explore this interference effect, we use a simple multi-wave interference model to simulate the process. Figures As can be seen in Figs. In summary, we have achieved an on-chip, roomtemperature magnetometer, with a peak sensitivity of 26 pT/ √ Hz. This is state-of-the-art for microoptomechanical magnetometers and is comparable to microscale SQUIDs. We have also found that our magnetometers exhibit two qualitatively different classes of magnetic response. The Type I magnetometers show a relatively smooth magnetic response as a function of the frequency, following the mechanical resonances of the device; while the magnetic response of the Type II magnetometers varies significantly over frequency ranges of 10 kHz, within the envelope of the mechanical resonances. We postulate that magnetometers with single crystalline Terfenol-D particles show a Type I magnetic response, and those with polycrystalline Terfenol-D particles show a Type II magnetic response, and that the dips in the magnetic response spectra of the Type II magnetometers arise due to the destructive interference of the magnetostrictive response from different crystal grains. Finally we show that the optomechanical magnetometers can have an ultra-broad accumulated bandwidth. The working bandwidth exceeds 130 MHz for both the Type I and Type II magnetometers. The 3 dB bandwidth where the sensitivity is within a factor of two of the peak sensitivity is found to be ∼11.3 MHz for a Type I magnetometer, and ∼120 kHz for a Type II magnetometer, respectively, considerably larger than other sensitive room temperature magnetometers. The high sensitivity and broad bandwidth open up new possibilities for applications such as on-chip microfluidic MRI. As discussed in the main text, we observed two types of magnetic responses as a function of the frequency of magnetic field, among different magnetometers fabricated using the same method. The Type I magnetometers exhibit relatively smooth magnetic response as a function of frequency, following the mechanical resonances. The magnetic response of the Type II magnetometers varies significantly within the frequency ranges of 10 kHz, within the envelope of the mechanical resonances. This Type II magnetic response has been observed in previous work The Terfenol-D particles we use in the experiment are typically around 20 μm to 30 μm in diameter. The commercial Terfenol-D particles are usually manufactured by grinding a larger-sized polycrystal into small pieces In order to quantitatively study the interference effect of magnetostriction from different crystal grains, we use a simple model to simulate the process. The total magnetostriction of one Terfenol-D particle is the interference of magnetostrictions from different crystal grains, and each grain contributes a different amplitude and phase to the total magnetostriction. This is very similar to the laser speckle effect, a result of the interference of many waves of the same frequency, having different amplitudes and phases, which add together to give a resultant wave whose amplitude and therefore intensity varies randomly. We therefore use a multi-wave model to simulate the process. The resultant wave from multi-wave interference can be expressed as A(ω) = N j=1 A j exp(iω(∆T j )). Here A(ω) is the resultant wave at frequency ω contributed from multiple sources, with N being the number of the sources. A j and ω∆T j are the amplitude and relative phase of the j-th source. The number of the sources N , representing the number of crystal grains in one Terfenol-D particle, could be random, depending on how that particular Terfenol-D particle is grinded. By assigning random numbers to A j and ω∆T j , we can reproduce the total response from multiple sources. In our model, we assume a source number N = 20, and obtain the total response, with the results shown in Figs. 