Broadband low loss and ultra-low crosstalk waveguide crossings are a crucial component for photonic integrated circuits to allow a higher integration density of functional components and an increased flexibility in the layout. We report the design of optimized silicon nitride waveguide crossings based on multimode interferometer structures for intersecting light paths of TE/TE-like, TM/TM-like and TE/TM-like polarized light in the near infrared wavelength region of 790 nm to 890 nm. The crossing design for diverse polarization modes facilitates dual polarization operation on a single chip. For all configurations the loss of a single crossing was measured to be ~0.05 dB at 840 nm. Within the 100 nm bandwidth losses stayed below 0.16 dB. The crosstalk was estimated to be on the order of -60 dB by means of 3D finite difference time domain simulations. Waveguide crossings are a key building block for the realization of photonic integrated circuits (PICs) with higher functional complexity e.g. in photonic networks Some of the earlier attempts to achieve low loss waveguide crossings use single mode waveguides with non orthogonal intersections Other designs rely on the expansion of modes in a mode expander to reduce the diffraction of the mode at the transition to the slab waveguide of the intersection. The expansion of the mode is done without excitation of higher order modes by an appropriate choice of the taper form e.g. parabolic MMI crossings are the most frequently used type because they can be easily fabricated and have the potential for high efficiency and broadband operation. In MMI crossings, higher order modes are excited in a multimode waveguide to achieve low loss intersections. To avoid excessive losses from the transition of the narrow single mode to the broader multimode waveguide section tapers are typically employed, which can be divided into standard single function tapers (single taper), e.g. linear and Gaussian tapers, and tapers with multiple expansion sections (multi section taper). More uncommon single taper MMI crossing designs are used for slot waveguides Non-planar waveguide crossings represent another type of waveguide crossing that rely on multiple waveguide layers to avoid directly intersecting waveguides. There have been approaches where light is transferred between waveguides made of either the same material The vast majority of the waveguide crossings described in literature have been realized on a silicon on insulator (SOI) waveguide platform and operate at the telecom wavelengths 1550 nm or 1310 nm. Recently, Yang et al. In our design we chose MMI type waveguide crossings because of their high performance and low fabrication requirements. We use PECVD SiN for the waveguide crossings to allow CMOS compatible fabrication and a wavelength operation window of 790 nm to 890 nm, which is to our knowledge shown for the first time. To facilitate different PIC designs in biological applications the MMI crossings in this work are designed for single polarization operation, i.e. only transverse electric (TE)-like or transverse magnetic (TM)-like polarization and in dual polarization operation by enabling intersections of waveguide modes with TE-like and TM-like polarization. A crossing for light with TE/TM-like polarization has been shown before with non orthogonal intersecting MMI sections Waveguide crossings consisting of MMIs rely on the self-imaging principle For the optimization of the crossing length a value for the beat length can be calculated by using the propagation constants from the MMI eigenmode simulations with L B = 2π/(β 0 -β 2 ) The different crossing configurations were then fabricated by ams AG on their SiN photonic platform In the case of multiple intersections on a single chip the crossing points can put in an array of crossings without the need of tapering down the MMI section to the single mode waveguide (see Fig. In conclusion we demonstrated low loss and low crosstalk silicon nitride waveguide crossings based on MMIs operating in the wavelength range of 790 nm to 890 nm. Across the wavelength range we observed losses below 0.16 dB, which is a significant improvement compared to a standard single mode waveguide crossing of up to 0.4 dB and 0.25 dB for TE-like and TM-like polarization, respectively. Losses can be further reduced to 0.05 dB and 0.02 dB over the observed wavelength range for TE-like and TM-like polarization, respectively, using multiple crossings in an arrayed configuration without tapering down the MMI section. The crosstalk was shown to be around -60 dB, which is an improvement of about 20 dB compared to standard single mode waveguide crossings. The crosstalk was evaluated via 3D-FDTD simulations due to the low crosstalk level and the resulting difficulty to differentiate it from light scattered from other positions on the PIC. With these results the presented crossing designs provide extended design freedom in on-chip routing for the corresponding silicon nitride waveguide PIC platform. The optimized TE/TM crossing design further shows that dual polarization operation is possible on a single chip with high efficiency facilitating more versatile PIC layouts. European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (688173).