Electro-thermal transport phenomena in semiconductors are described by the non-isothermal drift-diffusion system. The equations take a remarkably simple form when assuming the Kelvin formula for the thermopower. We present a novel, non-isothermal generalization of the Scharfetter-Gummel finite volume discretization for degenerate semiconductors obeying Fermi-Dirac statistics, which preserves numerous structural properties of the continuous model on the discrete level. The approach is demonstrated by 2D simulations of a heterojunction bipolar transistor. Self-heating effects are a major concern in modern semiconductor devices, where the on-going miniaturization of feature size leads to increased power loss densities. The optimal design of semiconductor devices relies on numerical simulations, based on thermodynamically consistent models for the coupled electro-thermal transport processes. The standard model for the simulation of self-consistent charge and heat transport processes is the non-isothermal drift-diffusion system We consider the non-isothermal drift-diffusion system on Poisson's Eq. ( The carrier densities are related with the quasi-Fermi potentials φ n/p , the electrostatic potential Φ and the (absolute) temperature T via the state equations where N c/v are the effective density of states, E c/v are the band edge energies of the conduction and the valence band, respectively, and k B is Boltzmann's constant. The function F describes the occupation probability of the electronic states. In the case of non-degenerate semiconductors (Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics), F (η) = exp (η) is an exponential function. At high carrier densities, where degeneration effects due to the Pauli exclusion principle (Fermi-Dirac statistics) must be taken into account, F is typically given by the Fermi-Dirac integral F 1/2 where σ n/p are the electrical conductivities and P n/p are the thermopowers of the material. In this paper, we choose the thermopowers according to the Kelvin formula as variational derivatives of the entropy S with respect to the carrier densities where D denotes the Gâteaux derivative. The Kelvin formula is the low frequency and long wavelength limit of the microscopically exact Kubo formula where the first to lines describe the free energy of the non-interacting electron-hole plasma (quasi-free Fermi gas), f L is the free energy of the lattice phonons (ideal Bose gas), G is the antiderivative of The potential Φ ext is generated by the built-in doping-profile and the applied bias. The free energy (8) recovers the state equations ( The temperature-dependency of the band edge energies can be modeled using, e.g., the Varshni model quantifies the degeneration of the carriers (g > 1 for Fermi-Dirac statistics; g ≡ 1 for Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics). See Fig. The Kelvin formula has two important implications, which lead to a very simple and appealing form of the thermoelectric cross effects in the system (1)-( We emphasize that in Eq. (11) -even though there is no explicit thermal driving force ∝ ∇T -the Seebeck effect is fully taken into account via the (temperature-dependent) diffusion coefficients D n/p . The latter obey the generalized Einstein relations The flux discretization described in Sect. 3.1 is based on the drift-diffusion form (11). The second implication of the Kelvin formula concerns the heat generation rate H. The commonly accepted model for H, which was derived by Wachutka which involves solely the three classically known self-heating effects, namely Joule heating (first term), the Thomson-Peltier effect (second term) and recombination heating (last term). Any further (transient) contributions, which necessarily arise for thermopowers different from the Kelvin formula We assume a boundary conforming Delaunay triangulation of the computational domain Ω ⊂ R d , d = {1, 2, 3}, and obtain the finite volume discretization Here, is a geometric factor and N (K) is the set of adjacent nodes of K. The subscripts K, L indicate evaluation on the respective nodes or edges. The discrete heat sources are where we used a technique involving a weakly converging gradient developed in A robust discretization of the flux projections J n/p,K,L = (r L -r K ) • j n/p is obtained by integrating Eq. (11) along the edge KL := {r (x) = x r L + (1x) r K , x ∈ [0, 1]}, while assuming the electric field, the current density and the mobility to be constant along KL. The temperature is assumed to be an affine function between adjacent nodes: In the case of Fermi-Dirac statistics (with g = 1), the resulting two-point boundary value problem on can be solved approximately, by freezing the degeneracy factor (10) to a suitable average g n/p,K,L (holes analogously) with X n,K,L = q (Φ L -Φ K ) / (k B T K,L g n,K,L ) and the Bernoulli function B (x) = x/ (exp (x) -1). The averaged degeneracy factor (consistent with the thermodynamic equilibrium The scheme ( The discrete system ( The edge-averaged discrete conductivity, which is implicitly taken by the Scharfetter-Gummel discretization, is a "tilted" logarithmic mean Λ of the carrier densities with sinhc (x) = sinh (x)/x. The thermopower P n,K,L (required in Eq. (15a)) reads The scheme is manifestly consistent with the thermodynamic equilibrium (no current for φ n,K = φ n,L and (using Eqs. (15a) and ( The approach is demonstrated by numerical simulations of the GaAs/ AlGaAs-based heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) shown in Fig. The temperature distribution and the heat generation rate are plotted in Fig. The Kelvin formula for the thermopower yields a remarkably simple form of the nonisothermal drift-diffusion system. The specific form of the current density expressions, which contain the thermal driving forces only implicitly, allow for a non-isothermal generalization of the Scharfetter-Gummel scheme for Fermi-Dirac statistics that was previously presented in In the following, the heat equation (4) will be derived from an integral form of the total energy balance equation. The total energy is obtained from the free energy and the definition of the entropy (see Sect. 2.1) as Using the free energy functional (8), one obtains where u L = f L (T ) -T ∂ T f L (T ) is the energy density of the lattice phonons. The (volumetric) heat capacity of the system is defined as the variational derivative of the total energy (22) with respect to the temperature Moreover, one obtains which, assuming the Kelvin formula for the thermopowers where the heat flux density is known as j Q = -κ∇T + T P n j n + T P p j p q (φ p + T P pφ n -T P n ) R, where the right hand side coincides with the heat generation rate as given in Eq. (13). Note that the appealing form (13) of the heat generation rate is a consequence from using the Kelvin formula for the thermopowers in Eqs. (23b)-(23c). For different models, additional (transient) terms will occur in the heat generation rate 