Cherenkov radiation is generally believed to be threshold-free in hyperbolic metamaterials owing to the extremely large photonic density of states in classical local framework. While recent advances in nonlocal and quantum effects extend our understanding of light-matter interactions in metallic nanostructures, the influence of nonlocality on threshold-free Cherenkov radiation still remains elusive. Here we theoretically demonstrate that the nonlocality provides an indispensable way to flexibly engineer Cherenkov thresholds in metallodielectric layered structures. Particularly, the nonlocality results in a lower-bound velocity cutoff, whose value is comparable to the electron Fermi velocity. Surprisingly, this lower-bound threshold can be significantly smaller than the classically predicted one if the metamaterial works around epsilon-nearzero frequencies. The capability to control Cherenkov thresholds opens numerous prospects for practical applications of Cherenkov radiation, in particular, for integrated free-electron radiation sources. Cherenkov radiation was firstly discovered in experiments by P. A. Cherenkov in 1934 Cherenkov threshold is also an important parameter to many practical applications including elementary particle detectors, dosimetry, medical imaging and therapy, etc (9-13). As a typical example, the threshold determines the sensitivity of Cherenkov detectors for the identification of high-energy particles over a wide momentum range. To be specific, a higher sensitivity of the detector requires a higher Cherenkov threshold (i.e., v th → c), and hence a smaller refractive index of the background material. As a result, the design of Cherenkov detectors generally demands materials with the refractive index close to unity (e.g., gases, aerogels) in order to identify charged particles in the multi-giga-electron-volt (GeV) range The capability to flexibly engineer the Cherenkov threshold could benefit many applications mentioned above. For instance, decreasing the Cherenkov threshold enables the on-chip application of low-energy free electrons in compact and integrated light sources Further reducing the Cherenkov threshold beyond the results in Ref. 29 has remained difficult, probably because of the elusive role of nonlocality which is generally ignored in previous theoretical modellings. Although the nonlocality is known to modify dramatically the electromagnetic responses of metallic nanostructures Here we address this issue by systematically investigating the nonlocal effects on Cherenkov radiation in metallodielectric layered structures. These structures have applied widely to construct hyperbolic metamaterials. We find that the interplay between the spatial dispersion from the structural periodicity and the nonlocal electron screening in metals can strongly modify the threshold behaviors of Cherenkov radiation. First, the nonlocality always enables the Cherenkov threshold to be larger than the hydrodynamical velocity β of plasma pressure waves in metals, namely v th ≥ β, for metallic nanostructures including hyperbolic metamaterials. Such a finding is in stark contrast to the previous prediction of the zero-value Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials under the local approximation. Second, around the epsilon-near-zero frequency, the nonlocality may largely decrease the value of the Cherenkov threshold. Such a counterintuitive finding originates from the appearance of longitudinal modes inside metallodielectric layered structures. Note that all the features of longitudinal modes cannot be captured by the local approximation. Moreover, our findings also indicate that the nonlocality may provide novel degree of freedom in controlling the interaction between free electrons and photonic systems, and it can be exploited for the flexible engineering of Cherenkov thresholds. The basic structural setup is shown in Fig. Here we set d 1 /P = 0.4 and P ≪ λ , where λ ∈ [0. On the other hand, when considering the nonlocality from the structural periodicity, the layered structure is used in the calculation by employing the transfer matrix method We begin with the analysis of the influence of nonlocal response from the structural periodicity on the Cherenkov threshold in Fig. 1 (B to E), it is reasonable to argue that the local approximation fails to describe the Cherenkov threshold and the interaction between free electrons and metallic nanostructures, particularly when the free electron moves at a low speed. Next, we proceed to analyze in Fig. To facilitate the experimental observation of the revealed nonlocal Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials, Fig. Now recall the in-plane permittivity ε || of the effective uniaxial material for the layered structure in Fig. On the one hand, for transverse modes, their isofrequency contour at λ 0 is elliptical In short, the features of Cherenkov threshold for longitudinal modes inside elliptical metamaterials in Fig. Since v th L (λ 0 ) < v th T (λ 0 ) for the arbitrary value of P in Fig. In summary, we for the first time theoretically prove the non-existence of threshold-free Cherenkov radiation in hyperbolic metamaterials. Instead, the realistic nonlocality would always enable an ultimate lower-bound velocity cutoff (whose value is comparable to the Fermi velocity of electrons in metals) inside metallodielectric layered structures, including hyperbolic and elliptical metamaterials. Moreover, we reveal that while the nonlocality would increase the value of Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials, it would, in turn, decrease the value of Cherenkov threshold in elliptical metamaterials. In addition, although the hydrodynamic model is a very approximate approach in treating the nonlocal and quantum effects in metallic nanostructures, we emphasize that our theoretical predictions of nonlocal Cherenkov threshold is universal regardless of which quantum models used. This is because the observed threshold behaviors of Cherenkov radiation in our configuration only rely on the reduced photonic density of states and the appearance of longitudinal modes. Previous experimental results have verified that the presented approaches in this work (i.e., the hydrodynamic model and the realistic periodic structure) can precisely anticipate these two phenomena induced by the nonlocality To reveal the impacts of nonlocality, we compare Cherenkov radiation in three configurations, i.e., homogeneous hyperbolic metamaterial, layered structure with the consideration of nonlocality only from the structural periodicity, and layered structure with the consideration of nonlocality from both structural periodicity and the electron screening in metals. In the first configuration, we treat the hyperbolic material as a homogeneous medium, with the effective permittivity given by Maxwell Garnet approximation. In the last two configurations, the permittivities are explicitly defined for each region of the layered structures. Without considering the nonlocal electron screening in metals, we calculate the fields in all region using potentials with decomposition of the magnetic field and the transverse electric field. When the nonlocal electron screening in metals is considered, we include an additional longitudinal electric field with hydrodynamic model. The transmission and reflection coefficients of the transverse field or the longitudinal field are analytically solved by employing the method of transfer matrix. In addition, Cherenkov thresholds in last two configurations are analytically determined from the corresponding isofrequency contours when the material loss is artificially neglected. Finally, we evaluate the dissipated power emitted by the swift electron using the power dissipation formula. th (λ 0 ) ≥ β for the arbitrary value of P. As such, the Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials is always nonzero since β ≠ 0 for realistic metals. The underlying mechanism is that the nonlocal response from metals regularizes the broadband singularity of photonic density of states in hyperbolic metamaterials, since the nonlocal metal is equivalent to a composite material, comprising a finite thin dielectric layer on top of a local metal