Competition between superconductivity and charge order is a recurring theme in contemporary condensed matter physics. This is quintessentially captured in the attractive Hubbard model, a simple theoretical model where the competition can be directly tuned. In previous studies by the current authors, it has been suggested that the Hubbard model maps to an SO(3) non-linear sigma model, where the phase competition becomes manifest. In this article, we rigorously demonstrate this mapping and use it to study thermal disordering of a supersolid. Starting with the attractive Hubbard model in the presence of an orbital field, we take the limit of strong coupling where a pseudospin description emerges. The in-plane pseudospin components represent superconducting pairing while the out-of-plane component encodes charge density wave order. We obtain an effective spin-1/2 Hamiltonian with ferromagnetic in-plane couplings and antiferromagnetic z-z couplings. In addition, the orbital field gives rise to a textured Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction that has the same periodicity as the magnetic unit cell. In order to examine the nature of ordering in this spin model, we consider it in the classical limit. We assume slowly varying fields, leading to the SO(3) non-linear sigma model description. As an application of these ideas, we study the nature of ordering using simulated annealing and classical Monte Carlo simulations. The ground state represents a supersolid with coexisting superconductivity and charge order. It can be viewed as a 'meron crystal', a regular arrangement of superconducting vortices with charge-ordered cores. The overlap of core regions gives rise to coherent long-ranged charge order. As the temperature is raised, this charge order is lost via a sharp phase transition in the Ising universality class. Experiments on the underdoped cuprates have fuelled renewed interest in phase competition, with superconductivity competing with charge density wave (CDW) order Studies have highlighted several manifestations of phase competition including ordered vortex cores A particularly interesting consequence of phase competition occurs in the presence of an orbital field. The superconducting order parameter forms vortices with superconductivity suppressed within the core region of each vortex. This allows for the competing CDW to arise locally. When the vortex density is large, the overlap between neighbouring vortex cores leads to coherent longranged CDW order One of our key results is the derivation of an SO(3) non-linear sigma model. This has strong similarities to the well-known SO (5) theory proposed in the context of the cuprates. The SO (5) theory is written in terms of a five component vector field: two corresponding to superconductivity and three to antiferromagnetism e iθij c † i,σ c j,σ + h.c. - We have introduced Peierls' phases in the hopping amplitudes, θ ij , that originate from a uniform orbital magnetic field. This can be viewed as an Aharonov-Bohm phase accrued by the particle as it hops from one site to the next. We have introduced a chemical potential μ to fix particle density. In the rest of this article, we will restrict our attention to half-filling and use t as a handle to tune phase competition. The competition between superconductivity and CDW orders arises from a special SU (2) symmetry, first pointed out by C. N. Yang The SU (2) symmetry is best seen in the strong coupling limit of the Hubbard model (U t). Previous studies have shown that the Hubbard model maps to a S = 1/2 pseudospin XXZ model We consider the strong coupling limit of the model with U t, t , following the superexchange scheme that has been presented in Refs. 39,40. If we only keep this dominant U -term in the Hamiltonian, the sites decouple from one another, leaving a purely on-site problem. The spectrum for the single site problem is shown in Fig. At half-filling, the empty and doubly occupied sites must have the same energy so that they are occupied with the same probability. To ensure this, we set μ = 0. The spectrum splits into two pairs of states as shown in Fig. We consider two sites labelled A and B. They may represent nearest neighbours or next-nearest neighbours on the square lattice. Apart from the dominant on-site terms, the Hamiltonian contains inter-site hopping terms, The hopping amplitude t AB can be complex with its phase given by the Peierl's substitution scheme. We reexpress it as t AB = τ AB e iθ AB . We now consider the low energy Hilbert space of the two-site problem. We introduce a pseudospin notation for the low energy states on a given site. We denote the empty state as pseudospin-down (| ⇓ ) and the doubly occupied state as pseudospin-up (| ⇑ ). In the two-site Hilbert space, we have four low energy states with each site having pseudospin-up or -down. As the hopping term takes us out of this subspace, we treat it within perturbation theory. Indeed, there are second order processes that connect low energy states, as shown in Fig. The two-site states with parallel pseudospins (both empty or both doubly occupied) are unaffected within second order. In states with antiparallel spins, we find two processes: one that preserves pseudospins and one that exchanges them. We obtain the following Hamiltonian where U/2 FIG. The 4 × 4 Hamiltonian matrix is given by with C = -U/2 + (-2τ 2 AB /U ) and D = -2τ 2 AB e -2iθ AB /U . The diagonal terms have a contribution from second order perturbation theory, in the form of C. In this term, the two hopping processes contribute with opposite phases that cancel out. In contrast, the phases add in the off-diagonal D term, imbuing it with a phase of 2θ AB . We now add a constant shift of U/2 + τ 2 AB /U along the diagonals. The resulting Hamiltonian can be expressed in terms of an effective exchange coupling, J = 4τ 2 AB /U , This matrix has a simple interpretation in terms of spin operators. It can be written as where Ŝ are pseudospin-1/2 operators. This can be rewritten as follows, The term proportional to sin(2θ AB ) can be expressed as D • ( ŜA × ŜB ), where D = {0, 0, J sin(2θ AB )} -a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction We have defined a pseudospin operator on each site. Its z-component represents the local CDW order parameter. To see this, we note that a site with pseudospin-up is doubly occupied with positive deviation from half-filling, whereas a site with pseudospin-down is empty with negative deviation. A state with maximal CDW order corresponds to an alternating arrangement of empty and doubly-occupied sites. This corresponds to an antiferromagnetic pseudospin arrangement with moments pointing alternately along ±ẑ. On the other hand, the inplane pseudospin components represent superconductivity. More precisely, the x and y components represent the real and imaginary parts of the pairing order parameter. This can be seen from the SU (2) pseudospin operators, Extending the two-particle effective Hamiltonian to the lattice, we arrive at a square lattice spin problem with the Hamiltonian The coupling strengths are given by J = 4t 2 /U and J = 4t 2 /U on nearest and next-nearest neighbours respectively. The bond-dependent exchange and Dzyalonshinskii-Moriya coefficients are given γ ij = cos(2θ ij ) and δ ij = sin(2θ ij ). The latter two depend on θ ij , the Peierls' phase associated with the bond (ij). In the initial Hubbard model, the Peierls' phases encode a uniform orbital magnetic field. They are given by θ ij = (e/ ) j i A • dl, where A is the magnetic vector potential. Several studies have explored ways to realize this physical setup in ultracold atomic gases As the vector potential is not unique, neither is the assignment of Peierls' phases. If the vector potential is altered by a gauge transformation, this can be absorbed into the in-plane spin components by a suitable redefinition. This can be seen from Eq. 8, where in-plane pseudospin components couple to the θ ij 's while the z components do not. This is consistent with the identification of the in-plane components with the superconducting order parameter. In this sense, the effective model of Eq. 8 should not be thought of as a true spin model, as the inplane spin components are gauge-dependent quantities. Traditionally, spin models are studied on finite lattices using periodic boundary conditions. Taking such an approach to Eq. 8 leads to some fundamental issues. We first note that the Peierls' phases necessarily contain singularities. To see this, we note that the square lattice forms a closed surface (a torus) due to periodic boundary conditions. A net flux through the lattice corresponds to having a magnetic monopole charge inside the torus. As argued by Dirac Using periodic boundaries has a second important consequence. Considering a charged particle on a surface enclosing a magnetic monopole, Dirac showed that its wavefunction cannot be defined in a smooth manner In the system at hand, the superconducting order parameter cannot be smoothly defined on the torus. This can be seen as a consequence of having a non-zero number of vortices and no compensating anti-vortices. In the spin model, the in-plane spin components will not vary smoothly on the square lattice. They will invariably contain singularities or jumps. This serves as an additional caveat in viewing Eq. 8 as a spin problem. In the previous section, we arrived at an effective pseudospin description, assuming half-filling and U t, t . We now show that this pseudo-spin problem gives rise to a non-linear sigma model in the low energy limit. We begin with the pseudospin Hamiltonian of Eq. 8 on an infinite square lattice. Promoting the spins to the classical limit, we have a lattice problem with threedimensional vector moments. We make two further assumptions: (a) at low energies (low temperatures), the spin configurations are 'smooth' with small gradients, and (b) with a weak orbital field, the Peierls' phase on each bond is small. We now note that Eq. 8 has antiferromagnetic zz couplings between nearest neighbours. In contrast, the in-plane couplings are ferromagnetic (for small θ ij 's). This indicates that, in low-energy configurations, the spins are of the form, S × (∆ x , ∆ y , (-1) r ρ), where ∆ x , ∆ y and ρ are slowly varying quantities satisfying ∆ 2 x + ∆ 2 y + ρ 2 = 1. Here, S denotes the spin length. We henceforth set S = 1 for simplicity. The z-component carries a rapid oscillation given by (-1) r , which varies in a checkerboard fashion on the square lattice. As we expect ∆ x , ∆ y and ρ to vary smoothly on the scale of the lattice constant, we elevate them to slowly varying fields, ∆ x (r), ∆ y (r) and ρ(r) respectively. Note that the spatially-averaged z-moment vanishes. This corresponds to the assumption of half-filling, as the z-moment represents the local deviation from half-filling. We now calculate the contribution from each term in Eq. 8 within the language of coarse-grained fields. We first consider the zz couplings in Eq. 8 that resemble those of an Ising model on the square lattice, where (m, n) represents a site on the square lattice. The contribution from each site is given by The factors of 1/2 have been added to avoid double counting. We reinterpret this energy density in terms of the coarse-grained ρ(r) field. We use Ŝz m,n ≈ (-1) m+n ρ(r m,n ), where (m, n) denotes a site of the square lattice. As with the standard Ising model, we elevate the summation over (m, n) to an integral and reexpress the integrand using ρ(r) and its derivatives. We (m, n) obtain where a ρ = 2{J -J } and χ ρ = (J-2J ) 2 . Here, denotes the lattice constant of the square lattice. In these two coefficients, the J and J appear with opposite sign. This stems from the rapidly oscillating (-1) m+n factor that takes the opposite (same) sign on (next-) nearest neighbours. In addition, their relative amplitudes are different in a ρ and χ ρ , i.e., we have a ρ ∼ (J -J ) while χ ρ ∼ (J -2J ). This difference arises from the differing bond lengths for nearest ( ) and next-nearest ( √ 2 ) neighbours. We now consider the in-plane terms in the pseudospin Hamiltonian. In order to get a better understanding, we first take the vector potential to be zero, i.e., we ignore the Peierls' phases. This leads to a two-component spin model on the square lattice with ferromagnetic XY couplings. We have where S i, = (S x i , S y i ). Taking the in-plane components to be described by the slowly-varying fields ∆ x (r) and ∆ y (r), we obtain the field theory of an XY ferromagnet, where ∆ ≡ (∆ x , ∆ y ), a ∆ = 2{J + J } and χ ∆ = (J+2J ) . This can be seen in direct analogy with the CDW term above, by replacing ρ with ∆ x/y . Unlike the CDW terms, the J and J contributions have the same sign here. We now draw an analogy to the problem of a free particle in two-dimensional space. We take its wavefunction to be ∆(r) = ∆ x (r) + i∆ y (r). Taking its mass to be 1/2χ ∆ and assuming a constant potential (-a ∆ ), its Hamiltonian is given by Ĥ = χ ∆ p2 + a ∆ . The expectation value of the Hamiltonian is then precisely given by Eq. 13. A discrete form of this Hamiltonian can be constructed using a tight-binding-like approach. Discretizing the space as a square mesh with sites denoted by (m, n), we take ∆(r) → S x m,n + iS y m,n . This leads to the Hamiltonian in Eq. 12. This analogy provides a simple interpretation for in-plane terms in the Hamiltonian: the superconducting order parameter represents the wavefunction of a free particle (the Cooper pair). We now introduce an orbital magnetic field. By comparing the Eqs. 12, 8 and 6, we see that the orbital field enters as Peierls' phases in a tight binding Hamiltonian. The superconducting wavefunction couples to the vector potential as a charged particle with charge 2e. It can immediately be deduced that the vector potential enters Eq. 12 via the well known minimal coupling prescription, where D ≡ ∇ + i 2e A. Note that the charge here is 2e, that of a Cooper pair. Indeed, we find the same result by a systematic analysis of the in-plane terms. The orbital field modifies Eq. 12 to give A • dl. Assuming slow variations in the ∆'s and small values of the Peierls' angles, we precisely recover Eq. 14. This follows the usual derivation of the long-wavelength minimalcoupling Hamiltonian from a tight binding model with Peierls' phases. Combining the CDW and superconducting contributions from Eqs. 11 and 14, we obtain the Hamiltonian density in terms of coarse-grained fields, We have combined ∆ x and ∆ y into a single complex field, ∆(r) ≡ ∆ x (r) + i∆ y (r). The fields ρ(r) and ∆(r) are not independent, as they must necessarily satisfy a uniform length constraint, ρ 2 + |∆| 2 = 1. The coefficients are given by a . Rescaling allows us to write a simpler form, where = 2J /(J + J ), χ = a 2 4 {1 + /2} and ξ = 4J /(J + 2J ). If t is small in the microscopic Hubbard problem, we have , ξ ∼ (t /t) 2 with ξ ≈ 2 . Here, and ξ reflect the anisotropy between superconductivity and CDW order. The SO(3) character of this model can be seen by setting t and the orbital field to zero. In this limit, Eq. 17 reduces to the Hamiltonian density of a symmetric Heisenberg ferromagnet. When weak anisotropies are introduced, the physics retains signatures of the proximate SO(3) point. This form is closely related to the previously conjectured model in Ref. 27, where the anisotropy in the gradient term was ignored (i.e., ξ was set to zero). Nevertheless, this does not lead to any qualitative change in the physics of phase competition. We see this below in the nature of the ground state. We have shown that the attractive Hubbard model reduces to an SO(3) non-linear sigma model. Using this equivalence, we seek to study its physics in the presence of an orbital field. The energy of the system is given by the Hamiltonian density of Eq. 17. The ground state can be found by minimizing the energy, subject to the uniform length constraint (ρ 2 + |∆| 2 = 1). However, minimizing Eq. 17 on the infinite two-dimensional plane is a non-trivial task. Likewise, thermal properties of the non-linear sigma model can be found by averaging over configurations with a suitable Boltzmann weight. Once again, this is a difficult task on the infinite plane. We approach this problem by reversing the arguments put forward in the previous sections. We now view Eq. 8, the pseudospin model on the square lattice, as a regularization of the non-linear sigma model in Eq. 17. We will study the pseudospin model on finite lattices with periodic boundary conditions and look for results that remain consistent upon increasing system size. This opens the door to well established techniques from the field of magnetism. In particular, we use simulated annealing to find the ground state of Eq. 8. We will interpret the result in terms of the smooth fields of the non-linear sigma model. We will then study the role of thermal fluctuations using classical Monte Carlo simulations. The pseudospin model of Eq. 8 is defined on the square lattice. As explained in Sec. III B above, the Hamiltonian depends on the choice of the Peierls' phases. We present results using the scheme depicted in Fig. To find the lowest energy state, we perform simulated annealing of the pseudospin model. We use two types of single-site moves: Metropolis and microcanonical (overrelaxation). At each site, we find the effective field that arises from the neighbouring moments. The Metropolis move corresponds to changing the inclination with respect to the effective field. The microcanonical move rotates the spin about the effective field so as to preserve the energy. The lowest energy state found from simulated annealing is shown in Fig. The competition with CDW order is clearly seen in Fig. This picture is consistent with the results of Ref. 27 where the Hubbard model was directly studied using Bogoliubov-deGennes mean field simulations. In particular, the low energy state here represents a 'supersolid'. It has well-defined superconducting order that is reflected in the formation of a vortex lattice. At the same time, it has long-ranged CDW order. We have established that ground state of the non-linear sigma model in Eq. 17 is a supersolid with coexisting superconductivity and CDW order. The superconductivity sector encapsulates an additional layer of ordering in the form of a vortex lattice with discrete translational symmetry. Upon increasing the temperature, we may see multiple phase transitions where these orders melt independently. To study thermal fluctuations, we study the pseudospin model of Eq. 8 using classical Monte Carlo simulations. We use single-site Metropolis and microcanonical (overrelaxation) moves. We start from a random initial configuration on an L × L lattice at high temperature and progressively decrease the temperature. At each temperature, we perform 8 ×10 6 sweeps, each with L 2 single-site moves, with the ratio of Metropolis to microcanonical fixed at 4:3. The first 2 × 10 5 moves are discarded to allow for equilibration. We first discuss the thermal evolution of the CDW order. In the non-linear sigma model of Eq. 17, the CDW order parameter shows an Ising-like character with the energy being invariant under ρ(r) → -ρ(r). This originates from the Hubbard model where the CDW order represents a checkerboard-like modulation in density. The Ising degree of freedom corresponds to choosing one of the two sublattices as that with higher density. In the pseudospin model of Eq. 8, the CDW order parameter is the staggered z-magnetization, given by M = 1 L 2 m,n (-1) m+n S z m,n , where L is the linear system size. We define the corresponding susceptibility and Binder cumulant as Here, . represents averaging over Monte Carlo configurations. The coefficients in the Binder cumulant are designed so as to (a) vanish in the high temperature paramagnetic phase and (b) approach unity in the case of maximal CDW ordering. The temperature dependence of the order parameter is shown in Fig. To determine the precise location of the CDW phase transition, we examine the Binder cumulant for various system sizes, shown in Fig. We next discuss thermal evolution of the superconducting order. We do not find a distinct phase transition within our Monte Carlo scheme. We believe this is due to technical limitations, as discussed below. Nevertheless, a qualitative understanding can be gained by examining typical configurations extracted from the Monte Carlo simulations, shown in Fig. We believe that a vortex melting transition occurs at T 0.005. However, this is not discernible in our simulations as the spins do not relax adequately at low temperatures. Indeed, we do not find a perfect vortex lattice even at the lowest temperatures as some distortions persist (see Fig. We have presented a study of phase competition in the attractive Hubbard model at strong coupling. We demonstrate a mapping to a pseudospin problem and further onto an SO(3) field theory. This brings out phase competition as an inherent feature of this model. It also reveals an interesting role for an orbital magnetic field as it induces vortices in the superconducting order, but with CDW-ordered cores. Indeed, we find a supersolid ground state with phase coexistence arising from vortexcore-overlap. In the language of spins, we find a meron crystal -an emergent crystalline phase with a mesoscopic lattice scale, analogous to the well known skyrmion crystal phase. With increasing temperature, superconductivity and CDW orders melt independently with a sharp Ising phase transition in the CDW sector. Our results bear similarities with disordering transitions in other systems with coexisting orders. We mention two examples from the field of magnetism: (a) The square J 1 -J 2 antiferromagnet with J 2 > J 1 /2 breaks O(3) ⊗ Z 2 symmetry, where the Z 2 character corresponds to a choice between vertical and horizontal stripes The pseudospin model derived in Sec. III B above is essentially a quantum model with S = 1/2 moments. We have studied this model in the classical limit, taking into account thermal fluctuations. An interesting future direction is to investigate the role of quantum fluctuations. In analogy with the thermal state immediately below the Ising transition, quantum fluctuations may disrupt superconductivity while preserving CDW order. Such a state would represent a 'pairing liquid' in analogy with a spin liquid. The pairing liquid offers two advantages over typical spin liquid models: (i) it has an additional tuning handle in the form of an orbital field, (ii) fluctuations of the pairing liquid are intrinsically coupled to the CDW order parameter due to the non-linear uniform length constraint. This offers a new route to probe fluctuations in the liquid phase. These issues may be explored within a quantum treatment of the pseudospin model. 