A theory of electron-phonon mediated superconductivity requires the knowledge of full phonon spectrum, α 2 (ω) • F(ω), to calculate superconducting transition temperature, Tc. However, there is no experimental technique which can measure α 2 (ω) • F(ω) in highlycompressed near-room-temperature (NRT) superconductors to date. In this paper we propose to advance McMillan's approach (1968 Phys Rev 167 331) which utilises the Debye temperature, T θ (an integrated parameter of full phonon spectrum), that we deduced by the fit of experimentally measured temperature-dependent resistance data, R(T), to Bloch-Grüneisen equation for highly-compressed black phosphorous, boron, GeAs, SiH4, HxS, DxS, LaHx and LaDy. By utilizing relations between Tc, T and electron-phonon coupling strength constant, e-ph (which can be computed by first-principles calculations), it is possible to affirm/disprove the electron-phonon coupling mechanism in given superconductors. We show that computed e-ph for highly-compressed black phosphorous, boron, GeAs, SiH4 and for one sample of LaH10 are in a good agreement with e-ph values deduced from experimental data. It is also found remarkable constancy of T θ = 1531 ± 70 K for H3S at different ageing stages. We also show that if phonon spectra of two isotopic counterparts have identical shape (or, in case of highly-compressed superconductor, the same material at different pressures), then within electron-phonon phenomenology these materials should obey the relation of T,1/T,2=Tc,1/Tc,2=ln,2/ln,2 (where subscripts 1 and 2 designate two isotopic counterparts). We report that for H3S-D3S pair ratios of Tc,H3S/Tc,D3S=ln,H3S/ln,D3S=1.27 are largely different from deduced T,H3S/T,D3S=1.65. This alludes that NRT superconductivity in H3S-D3S system is originated from more than one mechanism, where the electron-phonon coupling lifts Tc in H3S vs D3S, but primary origin for NRT background of Tc ~ 150 K in both H3S and D3S remains to be discovered. where * is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter, which is for a wide range of superconductors (including highly-compressed hydrides/deuterides) is assumed to be within a range of * = 0.10-0.17 [6]. Allen and Dynes [14,15] derived an asymptote for large λ e-ph values within the BCS theory [13]: T c = λ e-ph 2 ⋅ T θ . (3) Demanded for several decades where  is the phonon frequency, F() is the phonon density of states, and α 2 (ω) ⋅ F(ω) is the electron-phonon spectral function (more details can be found elsewhere For weak-coupled superconductors, Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer From Eq. 3 it is clear that Tc (within the BCS theory McMillan It should be noted, that McMillan However, the Debye temperature, T θ , can be in "the safest" manner where, the first term is the residual resistivity due to the scattering of conduction charge carriers (holes) on the static defects of the crystalline lattice, while the second term describes the hole-phonon scattering, and A and T are free-fitting parameters. Eqs. 4,5 are instructive tool to derive e-ph in intrinsic and silane It should be noted, that one of the most widely used approximation of the Eliashberg theory f 1 = (1 + ( )) 2 , (9) where f1 and f2 are so-called the strong-coupling correction function and the shape correction function, respectively Primary reason, why ( ) ⋅ T θ (in Eq. 4) was proposed to replace by ( ) ⋅ ω ln (in Eq. 6) is that the numerator ( ) in Eq. 4 was deduced for niobium (the element with highest Tc and intermediate e-ph). This numerator needs to be slightly adjusted from one material to another, while the pre-factor ( ) in Eq. 5 is much less varied (however, this does not mean that it should not need to be adjusted). Allen and Dynes Based on a fact that modern first-principles calculations techniques can compute α 2 (ω) • F(ω) spectrum (and, thus, e-ph) with a very high accuracy, Eq. 6 became a primary equation for the first-principles calculations studies for highly-compressed superhydrides/superdeuterides (extended reference list can be found elsewhere However, as we mentioned above, experimental measurements of α 2 (ω) ⋅ F(ω) in highlycompressed superconductors are not performed to date and alternative experimental approaches need to be developed for NRT superconductors in term to reveal the nature of the pairing mechanism in this compound. In this paper, we propose one of these approaches which consider the isotopic counterparts (designated by subscripts 1 and 2) of one chemical compound. We propose the exact relation between Tc and T which is independent from particular α 2 (ω) ⋅ F(ω) spectrum. Truly, all first principles calculations studies show that the shape of α 2 (ω) ⋅ F(ω) spectra for isotopic counterparts of H3S-D3S and of LaH10-LaD10 are practically undistinguishable, and thus, adjustable numerators of ( ) in Eq. 6 will be cancelled in the ratios: where the subscript of exp (T) on the right part designates that T and T are deduced by the fit of experimental (T) data to Bloch-Grüneisen (BG) equation (Eq. 5). It should be noted that Eq. 11 can be applied for any two superconductors which have the same or similar e-ph and *. In this regard, Eq. 11 is a new research tool to test the validity of electron-phonon mediated mechanism of superconductivity, which can be applied not only for two isotopic counterparts of the same chemical compound, but for any pair of superconductors for which computed, by the first principles calculations, e-ph and * values will be close enough. Thus, surprisingly enough, the research task to reaffirm/disprove the electron-phonon coupling mechanism in highly compressed hydrides/deuterides is to compare experimentally observed . By applying Eq. 11 to H3S-D3S system, we find that the ratio of From this we conclude that there are two distinctive mechanisms which cause the raise of NRT superconductivity in highly-compressed H3S-D3S system. One of the mechanism is the electron-phonon coupling which busts the observed Tc in H3S vs D3S, while the primary mechanism which is the origin for high background T c ≳ 150 K in both isotopic counterparts remains to be discovered. This means that, due to observed Tc in D3S is either not busted strongly, neither busted at all by the electron-phonon coupling, the research of D3S makes more fundamental interest in comparison with H3S. In this regard, the sulphur tritiate, T3S, looks even more attractive to be studied, in comparison with H3S and D3S, in term to reveal fundamental mechanism of NRT superconductivity, because of, at least, three reasons: 1. The contribution of electron-phonon coupling on the superconducting state in T3S should be even more supressed in comparison with D3S. Thus, unrevealed yet background mechanism which causes the raise NRT superconductivity in highly compressed super-hydrides/deuterides will be less distorted by the electron-phonon interaction. 2. Much greater chemical activity of tritium in comparison with hydrogen and deuterium, which originates from low-level -radioactivity of the former, can be served as additional catalytic factor (in addition to primary laser heating) to form T3S phase from T2S gas in diamond-anvil cell. 3. Ground state upper critical field, Bc2(0), in T3S might be lower than ones in H3S and D3S. This makes it possible to measure temperature dependent Bc2(T) for T3S in a wider temperature range in comparison with H3S and D3S, and, thus, to perform deeper analysis of Bc2(T). Despite a fact that the cost of T3S synthesis and studies will be much higher in comparison with ones for H3S and D3S, the former looks to be a key material to reveal the mechanism of NRT superconductivity. Same approach is equally applied for other NRT superconductor systems including LaHx-LaDy-LaTz (however, for simplicity, we mention only H3S-D3S-T3S system herein). In our previous works and showed that experiment supports the weak-coupling scenario in this superhydride. Kaplan and Imry To turn now to strong-coupling scenario within the Eliashberg theory ) which was never been experimentally measured in highly-compressed hydrides/deuterides to date. From other hand, all materials considered by Allen and Dynes (Table 1 Thus, with an accuracy of several percent, multiplicative shape correction function f2 (Eq. 7) can be replaced by the parabolic function: Numerators in Eq. 12 were deduced by the fit of tabulated f2 values for all materials reported by Allen and Dynes (Table 1 Multiplicative shape correction factor, f2 (Eq. 9), for all materials considered by Allen and Dynes will be designated as λ e-ph,aMcM as noted. Considering a fact that all first-principles calculations studies show that the shape of phonon spectra, α 2 (ω) ⋅ F(ω) and λ e-ph,fpc for H3S and D3S because as we show in Fig. Thus, major problem of the McMillan Because more thorough consideration requires the use of high-order momentums of normalized weight function: and/or, its mean values: which, however (from the author's knowledge) these higher-orders momentums have been never implemented for the analysis. To confirm that our approach (i.e., Eqs. 5,13) is an instructive tool to analyse experimental data for highly-compressed superconductors, in Section 4.3 we perform the comparison of deduced parameters deduced by the R(T) analysis and by the upper critical field, Bc2(T), analysis for highly-compressed GeAs (P = 15.3 GPa) recently reported by Liu et al To analyse Bc2(T) we use a model where 0 = 2.07•10 -15 Wb is flux quantum, (0) is the ground state coherence length, , and temperature dependent amplitude of the energy gap, (T), is taken from Gross et al where ΔC/C is the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc, and  = 2/3 for s-wave superconductors and, thus, deduced values of In other words, Eq. 18 is applied when the London penetration depths, (T), the superconducting coherence length, (T), and the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ(T) = λ(T) have finite values: This means that experimental data which are valid to be fitted by Eq. 18 should be obey the Bc2(T) definition based on Eq. 22 criterion. We note, that the upper critical field, Bc2(T), is very often defined by 50% fraction of the normal state resistivity, norm(T), criterion: which, cannot be, rigorously speaking, be fitted by Eq. 18, except if the width of the superconducting transition, Tc (which can be defined as the temperature range where 90% and 10% fractions of norm(T) achieve), is very narrow, ΔT c ≪ T c . Truly, 50% drop in the resistivity at some temperature T (we consider the case, when ρ(T) = 0 Ω ⋅ m achieves at lower T) indicates that there are large superconducting order parameter fluctuations (in space and time), at which, however, neither (T), nor (T) are defined yet, because the phase coherence for the condensate has not been formed at this temperature. This issue is closely related to the definition of the superconducting transition temperature, Tc, which we discuss in Section 3. We note, that Bc2(T) defined by Eq. 22, is also referred as the irreversibility field, Birr(T), especially for cuprate superconductors. Based on all above, the validity of electron-phonon mediated mechanism of superconductivity in highly-compressed superhydrides/superdeuterides can be, surprisingly enough, affirmed/disproved by the deducing the ratio of the Debye temperatures, T θ,H 3 S T θ,D 3 S , for isotopic counterparts, and compare this ratio with the ratio of experimentally observed . We report on the result of these studies for H3S-D3S system, herein. Due to primary focus of this paper is to compare experimentally observed and computed Tc values, there is a need to make strict definition for the superconducting transition temperature, which will be in use herein. In some papers, Tc is defined at temperature of the 95%, 50%, 10%, or other fractions of the normal state resistivity, norm(T), while the most rigorous definition is at the zero resistivity point, (T) = 0 •m (Eq. 24). The definition of Tc as the fraction of the norm(T) in highly-compressed hydrides/deuterides is widely used, however, this definition unavoidably raises many problems. For instance, a drop in (T) = 0.95•norm(T) at some temperature T cannot be a definitive confirmation for the superconducting state, before either (T) = 0 •m, either Meissner-Ochsenfeld diamagnetic response can be detected in experiment. To demonstrate this problem, in Fig. To further demonstrate that the definition of Tc is crucially important, we can refer recent report by Cao et al In this section we first show that the approach to use Eqs. 5,13 is a valid research tool to study highly-compressed superconductors. To demonstrate this, we perform (T) analysis and deduce λ e-ph values for highly-compressed black phosphorous (P = 15 GPa) [27] (Sections 4.3), and silane (P = 240 GPa) For the analysis we draw largely on experimental data reported by M. I. Wittig and Matthias In Figure Thus, there is an uncertainty, why more complicated intermediate coupling strength scenario should be considered, if weak-coupling limit of BCS is well satisfied. However, due to Li et al This result shows that calculated coupling strength λ e-ph is actually dependent on the chosen model, rather than to be unique characteristic value for given superconductor. The only valid result, we can trust so far, that because of calculated λ e-ph,BCS assymp = 0.019 ≪ T  = 563 ± 16 K  * = 0.17  e-ph,aMcM = 0.628 ± 0.005 μ * , then phonon-mediated Cooper pairs cannot exist in the assumption of strong-coupling scenario (which reflects a simple fact that there are no reasons to assume that λ e-ph can be large, if the superconductor has T c T θ ≅ 0.009). Eremets et al Eremets et al The R(T) data fit to Eq. 5 is excellent and deduced T θ = 314 ± 2 K. In Table Liu et al Fit of Bc2(T) to Eq. 18 is shown in Fig. It should be noted (Table It can be seen also (Table First principles calculations for highly compressed hydrogen-rich silane, SiH4, have been performed by several authors, from which we can mention a report by Feng et al Eremets et al In Figure The simplest assumption we can make is that in highly-compressed superconductors Tc and T are independent from each other. Drozdov et al Guigue et al GPa. It should be noted, that Cccm phase of H3S is non-superconducting. In contrast, Einaga et al Most extensive study for the phase transitions in highly-compressed sulphur hydride when gaseous H2S is used as a precursor was reported by Goncharov et al. Einaga et al. where the subscript m indicates a m-stage of the compression and n indicates n-stage of the compression. If the NRT superconductivity is mediated by the electron-phonon interaction, then Eq. 5 should be valid. In Fig. Results (Fig. It can be also seen in Table H 3 S (P = 160 GPa) strength models are applied, and thus there are no experimental evidences to make a conclusion which model is more preferable in comparison with others. However, deduced from experiment the Debye temperature, T, is remaining to be constant for all samples. This result is in agreement with the report by Harshman and Fiory Drozdov et al It should be noted that due to D3S samples were subjected to a wide range of pressure, P = 155 -190 GPa, at lowest pressure the compounds has R3m phase symmetry, and for P = 173 and 190 GPa the compound has Im-3m phase symmetry (which is exhibited at P ≥ 160 GPa). Based on this, we calculate average T only for Im-3m phase: which has, nevertheless, a narrow uncertainty of 10%. However, due to its large uncertainty, the T value for R3m phase is also within this temperature range. In overall, deduced e-ph (Table Now we turn to the discussion of the most crucial effect which can confirm or disprove the electron-phonon coupling mechanism in H3S-D3S system, which is the isotope effect. Due to all three available raw R(T) datasets for D3S never reached R(T)/Rnorm(T) = 0.0 state, we compare herein Tc data for H3S and D3S for R(T)/Rnorm(T) = 0.95 criterion. As we show above that if the superconductivity in two these isotope counterparts is belonging the electron-phonon coupling, then the Eq. 16 should be satisfied. By taking in account primary conclusion of first-principles calculations The ratio in Eq. 31 should be compare with the ratio of average value for Tc for two isotopic counterparts in Im-3m crystallographic phase state (Tables which is in a good agreement with Eq. 31. The ratio of the Debye temperatures for two isotopic counterparts in Im-3m crystallographic phase (Tables T θ,D3S = 1531±70 K 930±92 K = 1.65 ± 0.17 We start our analysis of LaHx-LaDy system by the analysis of R(T) dataset for Sample 3 which exhibits the highest transition temperature of Tc = 240 K in the report by Drozdov et al where subscripts 1 and 2 designate LaHx (Sample 10, Fig. Drozdov et al For similar problems, T and e-ph cannot be deduced for two isotopic counterpart samples with highest reported transition temperatures, i.e. LaH10 (Sample 1, Tc ~ 250 K) and LaD10 (Sample 17, Tc ~ 180 K) As it is mentioned above, one of fundamental problem in NRT superconductivity is, surprisingly enough, the definition of the transition temperature, Tc. Traditionally, the transition temperature in highly-compressed superconductors was defined at the onset of the R(T) curve. This criterion is widely accepted and, for instance it was applied for highly compressed boron Thus, there is a need to acknowledge a fact that the superconducting state is established at the point of R(T) = 0 , when the amplitude and the phase of the condensate are established within the whole sample. This means that at this point as the London penetration depth, (T), as the coherence length, (T), have got finite values. Also, and this is crucially important, that the measurement of R(T) = 0  point is the simplest experimental measurement that can be done for sample inside of the diamond anvil cell. The definition of the superconducting transition by the R(T) = 0  criterion is also important for the evaluation of the first principles calculations, because currently, due to many of highly-compressed superconductors have large width of the resistive transition (which can be defined by two temperatures at which R(T)/Rnorm(T) = 0.90 and R(T)/Rnorm(T) = 0.10 are reached), there is a problem to compare results of computed values with experiment. However, based on a fact that Drozdov et al and Kong et al Returning now to the analysis performed in this paper, we should mention that firstprinciples calculations is a very accurate modern research tool, and large disagreement of computed ratio of logarithmic phonon frequencies (Eq. 31) and experimentally observed ratio of critical temperatures (Eq. 32) with deduced ratio of Debye temperatures (Eq. 33) we reported herein means that electron-phonon mechanism is irrelevant to the observed NRT superconductivity in H3S and D3S, however it takes some effect of the second order on the magnitude of observed Tc. It is quite likely that electron-phonon mechanism is the origin for slightly higher transition temperature in H3S in comparison with D3S, however, primary mechanism which is the background that both H3S and D3S are NRT superconductors is remains to be unknown. It should be stressed, that the majority of applications of the BCS and the Eliashberg's theories to predict NRT superconductivity in hydrogen-rich highly-compressed compounds have been failed. For instance, we can mention the case of highly-compressed silane, SiH4, for which T c = 98 -107 K was predicted by Li et al More thorough theoretical analysis of recent experimental milestone discoveries of NRT superconductivity in some hydride compounds There is also one fundamental problem on widely used Allen-Dynes approach then the logarithm part of it: or even more complicated one: cannot be accepted to have physical meaning. Any functions, i.e., exp(x), cos(x), modified Bessel function of Kn(x), etc., and the logarithm as well, can be taken only from unit-less variable. However, in Allen-Dynes approach All physical laws where oscillations are primary variable (for instance, Rayleigh's scattering law, Planck's law, Fourier transformation, etc.) the utilization of the frequency is unavoidably involved multiplicative pre-factors which eliminate the units of hertz. Thus, a discussion why the concept of ln (Eqs. 7,37) is so widely used as a valid approximation of Eliashberg's theory is required. Perhaps, the concept of ln (Eqs. 7,37) is main reason why in so many cases predicted high Tc values were never confirmed in experiment. Alternative pairing mechanisms in superconductors are in discussion for several decades In this paper we deduce the Debye temperature, T, in highly-compressed black phosphorous, boron, GeAs, SiH4, HxS, DyS, LaHx and LaDy by the fit of temperaturedependent resistivity data, (T), to Bloch-Grüneisen equation. We find that isotopic counterpart compounds (designated by subscripts 1 and 2) should obey the relation: which can be considered as a new research tool to validate the electron-phonon mechanism of superconductivity in a variety of the materials. Application of Eq. 40 to H3S-D3S system leads us to a conclusion that NRT superconductivity in these compounds is originated from more than one mechanism. 353 ± 3 K, which is by one order of magnitude lower than T θ ≅ 3,500 -4,000 K computed by the first principles calculations