It has long been proposed that doping a chiral spin liquid (CSL) or fractional quantum Hall state can give rise to topological superconductivity. Despite of intensive effort, definitive evidences still remain lacking. We address this problem by studying the t-J model supplemented by timereversal symmetry breaking chiral interaction Jχ on the triangular lattice using density-matrix renormalization group with a finite concentration δ of doped holes. It has been established that the undoped, i.e., δ=0, system has a CSL ground state in the parameter region 0.32 ≤ Jχ/J ≤ 0.56. Upon light doping, we find that the ground state of the system is consistent with a Luther-Emery liquid with power-law superconducting and charge-density-wave correlations but short-range spin-spin correlations. In particular, the superconducting correlations, whose pairing symmetry is consistent with d ± id-wave, are dominant at all hole doping concentrations. Our results provide direct evidences that doping the CSL on the triangular lattice can naturally give rise to topological superconductivity. Quantum spin liquids (QSLs) are exotic phases of matter that exhibit various novel features associated with their topological character and support fractional excitations. One of the most promising spin liquid candidates is the spin-1/2 antiferromagnet with both the nearest-neighbor (NN) J and next-nearest-neighbor J 2 Heisenberg interactions on the triangular lattice. A number of simulations provide strong evidences that its ground state is a QSL in the parameter region 0.07 J 2 /J 0.15. Model and Method: We employ the DMRG with spin SU(2) symmetry where c † iσ denotes the electron creation operator with spin σ on site i. S i is the spin operator and ni = σ c † iσ c iσ is the electron number operator. t and J denote the NN electron hopping integral and spin interaction, respectively. The local Hilbert space is constrained by the no-double occupancy condition, n i ≤ 1. The chiral interaction J χ has the same amplitude for all the up and down triangles, and the three sites i, j and k in each triangle follow the clockwise order shown in Fig. Principal results: We find that the system exhibits power-law SC correlations for L y =4 cylinders in the lightly doped region δ ≤ 8.33%. As L x L y , the system can be thought of as quasi-1D, the long-range superconductivity expected in two dimensions will decay as a power-law due to the Mermin-Wagner theorem. The SC pair-pair correlation function Φ αβ (r), defined in Eq. ( Similar with the SC correlation, the CDW correlation also decays with a power-law corresponding to a local pattern of "partially filled" charge stripes. The wavelength of the CDW, i.e., the spacings between two adjacent charge stripes, is λ = 1/2δ. This charge stripe has an ordering wavevector Q = 4πδ with half a doped hole per each CDW unit cell (see Fig. is the spin-singlet pair-field creation operator, and α = a, b and c denotes the bond orientation (see Fig. At long distances, we find that the SC correlation is characterized by a power-law with the appropriate Luttinger exponent K sc defined by The extracted K c at three different doping levels are shown in Fig. Charge density wave order: To describe the charge density properties of the system, we have also calculated the charge density profile n(x) = Ly y=1 n(x, y) /L y , where x is the rung index of the cylinder. Our results on the L y = 4 cylinders (see Fig. Similar with the SC correlations, the spatial decay of the CDW correlations is also dominated by a power-law with the Luttinger exponent K c , which can be extracted by fitting the Friedel oscillation (charge density oscillation) induced by the open boundaries of the cylinders δn denotes the non-universal amplitude, φ the phase shift, n 0 the background density and k F is the Fermi vector. The K c is shown in Fig. To describe the magnetic properties of the ground state of the system, we have calculated the spin-spin correlations Here S x,y is the spin operator on site i = (x, y), (x 0 , y) is the reference site with x 0 ∼ L x /4 and r is the distance between two sites along the cylinder. At half-filling, i.e., δ = 0, the CSL state is fully gapped with short-range spin-spin correlation F (r) ∼ e -r/ξs where ξ s is the spin-spin correlation length. Upon light doping, we find that F (r) still decays exponentially as shown in Fig. Central charge: Our results suggest that the ground state of the lightly-doped CSL is consistent the LE liquid, which has one gapless charge mode with central charge c = 1. To show this, we calculate the von Neumann entropy S(x) = -Tr [ρ x ln ρ x ], where ρ x is the reduced density matrix of the subsystem with length x. For critical systems in 1+1 dimensions described the conformal field theory, it has been established Here A and B are fitting parameters and k F is the Fermi momentum. Fig. We calculate six types of superconducting (SC) pair-pair correlations Φ aa , Φ ab , Φ ac , Φ bb , Φ bc and Φ cc for all the systems studied. For each Φ αβ (r), we calculate Φ( ) with the truncation error by keeping corresponding number of SU(2) states m and then use second order polynomial function Φ( ) = Φ 0 + a 1 + a 2 2 to extract Φ 0 in the limit → 0, where a 1 and a 2 are fitting parameters. Examples of the finite truncation error extrapolation for different systems are shown in Fig. We determine the pairing symmetry of the SC correlations by measuring their associated phases θ αβ (r), i.e., Φ αβ (r) = |Φ αβ (r)| e iθ αβ (r) . To further support the d ± id pairing symmetry, we have measured θ αβ for all the types of the SC correlations. Unlike the Luttinger exponents K sc , the phases θ αβ are quite stable even with the lowest number of SU(2) states m = 2000 that we have kept. This is true for both L y = 4 and L y = 5 cylinders, which also appear true for L y = 6 cylinders. Therefore, we can determine the pairing symmetry of the SC correlations on the wider L y = 6 cylinders. The measured phases θ αβ (r) for L y = 4 ∼ 6 cylinders are shown in Fig. We have also calculated the single-particle correlation G(r) = 1 Ly Ly y=1 σ | c † x0,y c x0+r,y | for L y = 4 cylinders at different doping levels δ , where (x 0 , y) is the reference site with x 0 ∼ L x /4 and r is the distance between two sites along the cylinder. At long distances, we find that G(r) ∼ e r/ξ G decays exponentially with the correlation length ξ G ∼ 1.9 independent of doping δ. Therefore, there is a finite single-particle gap. In addition to the Friedel oscillation of the charge density profile, the Luttinger exponent K c can also be obtained from the charge density-density correlations defined by where n is the average electron density. Here (x 0 , y) is the reference site with x 0 ∼ L x /4 and r is the distance between two sites along the cylinder. For the quasi-long-range charge order, both N 1 and N 2 should decay with a power-law in large r limit with the same exponent K c as determined from the Friedel oscillation. As an example, both N 1 (r) and N 2 (r) for L y = 4 cylinders at two different doping levels are shown in Fig. • δ=0.00% ■ δ=8.33% We measure the chiral order parameter χ(r) = S i × S j ) • S k defined on the upper triangle from the open boundary to the bulk of the cylinder for J χ = 0.4 shown in Fig. 