Designing reconfigurable metasurfaces that can dynamically control scattered electromagnetic waves and work in the near-infrared (NIR) and optical regimes remains a challenging task, which is hindered by the static material property and fixed structures. Phase change materials (PCMs) can provide high contrast optical refractive indexes at high frequencies between amorphous and crystal states, therefore are promising as feasible materials for reconfigurable metasurfaces. Here, we propose a hybrid metasurface that can arbitrarily modulate the complex amplitude of incident light with uniform amplitude and full 2π phase coverage by utilizing composite concentric rings (CCRs) with different ratios of gold and PCMs. Our designed metasurface possesses a bi-functionality that is capable of splitting beams or generating vortex beams by thermal switching between metal and semiconductor states of vanadium oxide (VO2), respectively. It can be easily integrated into low loss photonic circuits with an ultra-small footprint. Our metadevice serves as a novel paradigm for active control of beams, which may open new opportunities for signal processing, memory storage, holography, and anti-counterfeiting. Metasurfaces have emerged as promising candidates for transforming the interactions between electromagnetic waves and matter for the integration of metadevices. Using the PCMs can achieve dynamic functionalities with high efficiency, feasibility, and larger working bandwidth, which makes PCMs a promising choice for reconfigurable metasurfaces. PCMs, such as germanium antimony telluride (GST), indium antimonide (InSb), gallium lanthanum sulfide (GLS), and vanadium oxide (VO2), are used for data storage, integrated optical circuits, color printing, optical display and so on, by employing their unique reversible, nonvolatile properties Upon an appropriate stimulus like thermal, optical, or electrical, PCMs offer a flexible control of optical parameters during the phase transition of the composite atom array between crystal and amorphous states or insulator-to-conductor states In previous work, some reconfigurable metasurfaces integrated with PCMs or other methods have been proposed for achieving complex amplitude and polarization modulation of the electromagnetic fields, and also for digital control In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a novel type of hybrid reconfigurable metasurface for dynamic control of mode modulation and spatial multiplexing. Such metasurface is composed of composite concentric rings (CCRs) with different ratio of gold and VO2, which can possess dual functionality between the two-phase states. By considering the optical properties of VO2, the CCR operates similarly as a concentric ring in metal (crystalline) state with relatively high conductivity like metal, while functions as a split ring wire loop for VO2 in its semiconductor state. The transition between the two states provides complex amplitude control due to the high contrast refractive index. We delicately design and select eight CCRs to achieve binary phase modulation for the metal (crystalline) state, and fully 2π phase shift for semiconductor (amorphous) state. The schematic design of such hybrid reconfigurable metasurface is shown in Fig. where A s , A as and Φ s , Φ as denote the scattered amplitude and phase from the symmetric and antisymmetric modes, and α represents the orientation angle, as shown in Fig. Note that the orientation angle of the CRR is along 45 ° with respect to x coordinate. The incident electromagnetic wave is along the x direction with wavelength of 1500 nm. The periodicity of the unit cell is p=500 nm. The mesh size along x and y direction is both 10nm, and the mesh size in z direction is 20nm. We utilize periodic boundary in both x and y direction. While we set perfect matched layer for the two states of the hybrid CRR, respectively. Based on the calculated data, we select four structures to cover a phase shift of π in the semiconductor state and no phase change in the metal state. Each structure possesses almost uniform amplitude modulation. By rotating the symmetry axis with 90°, a full 2π phase range can be realized. The opening angles for the four CCRs are 130°, 100°, 50°, 60°, the corresponding outer radii are 125 nm, 145 nm, 215 nm, 170 nm, which are also indicated in the hollow rings in Fig. Where n i and n t are the refractive index of incident and refractive side correspondingly. θ i and θ t are the incident and refractive angle, respectively, and λ is the incident wavelength in vaccum, dφ dx corresponding to the phase gradient. One can expect that the metasurface in the semiconductor state can bend the light trajectory to an oblique angle of 22.02 ∘ under the normal incidence (from substrate to the air). We calculate the electric field and visualize the phase profiles at the x-z plane in both two situations, which are depicted in Fig. The total transmission efficiency at the semiconductor and metal state is 8% and 3%, respectively. We carry out a grating analysis to further explain this phenomenon, as shown in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated the complex amplitude modulation of a hybrid metasurface composed of nanostructure made of a dynamically reconfigurable phase change material. By building composite concentric ring structures with different ratio of gold and VO2, we achieve uniform amplitude and 2π phase shift coverage in both metal and semiconductor states. With the realizing of anomalous refraction resulting from a phase gradient in the semiconductor state and symmetric diffraction resulting from a step-like phase profile in the metal state, we demonstrate that such metasurface can implement dual functionalities. That is, dynamic control can be achieved by changing the environmental temperature or by external femtosecond laser pulse stimulus. Furthermore, we have demonstrated switchable vortex beam generation and beam splitting phenomenon. Compared to previously designed metadevices working in the far/mid-infrared regime, such metasurfaces can pave the way for applications in the NIR band and even have the potential to extend to the optical regime. Importantly, such metadevices may serve as novel platforms for parallel laser fabrications, signal processing, memory storage, holography, anti-counterfeiting and so on.