Topological superconductors represent a fruitful playing ground for fundamental research as well as for potential applications in fault-tolerant quantum computing. Especially Josephson junctions based on topological superconductors remain intensely studied both theoretically and experimentally. The characteristic property of these junctions is their 4π-periodic ground-state fermion parity in the superconducting phase difference. Using such topological Josephson junctions, we introduce the concept of a topological Josephson heat engine. We discuss how this engine can be implemented as a Josephson-Stirling cycle in topological superconductors, thereby illustrating the potential of the intriguing and fruitful marriage between topology and coherent thermodynamics. It is shown that the Josephson-Stirling cycle constitutes a highly versatile thermodynamic machine with different modes of operation controlled by the cycle temperatures. Finally, the thermodynamic cycle reflects the hallmark 4π-periodicity of topological Josephson junctions and could therefore be envisioned as a complementary approach to test topological superconductivity. The promise of fault-tolerant quantum computing has made topological superconductors the focus of intense research during the past decade represent versatile thermodynamic machines with various operating modes. Moreover, the thermodynamic cycle properties reflect the 4π-periodicity of the topological ground state, distinguishing between parity-conserving and non-parity-conserving engines. Interestingly, we find that parity conservation generally boosts both the efficiency and power of the topological heat engine with respect to its non-topological counterpart. Our results are applicable not only to QSH-based junctions but also to any topological Josephson junction and establish topological Josephson heat engines as a novel testbed for the 4π-periodicity of the ground-state fermion parity by its entropic signature. In our proposed setup [Fig. A Josephson-Stirling cycle While the concepts outlined above are expected for any topological Josephson junction, we will discuss them explicitly for the example of a short, topological Josephson junction based on a QSH insulator. Here, the pairing in the superconducting (S) regions is induced from nearby s-wave superconductors [see Fig. where s =↑ / ↓≡ ±1 describes the natural (out-of-plane) spin projection, σ = t/b ≡ ±1 the top and bottom edges, and τ j (with j = x, y, z) denote Pauli matrices of the particle-hole degrees of freedom (see Supplementary Notes S1). We study a short junction with a normal QSH region of width L N , approximated by a δ-like profile. The proximity-induced pairing amplitude is ∆ and we use the phase convention Φ(x) = Θ(x)φ to describe the superconducting phase difference φ between the two S regions. Furthermore, px denotes the momentum operator, and V 0 is the potential difference between the normal QSH and proximitized S regions. We employ a scattering approach to determine the Andreev bound states and the continuum spectrum of Eq. ( with the Boltzmann constant k B and the temperature T of the QSH states (see Supplementary Notes S2 and S3). Here, Eq. ( where we use the convention that p = ±1 corresponds to even and odd ground-state parity, respectively. In Eq. (3), we again omit additive φ-independent contributions to F p , which are also parity independent. The contribution originates from the superconducting electrodes, where the energy scale E S = v F /L S is related to the total length L S of the superconducting QSH edge where e is the elementary charge, and the entropy via given by Eq. ( To overcome this difficulty, we measure F and S with respect to their values at φ = 0, thereby canceling the offset due to the φ-independent contributions. From S, one can subsequently obtain the heat capacity of the junction Importantly, Eq. ( (2) or (3) inherit the respective periodicities. This is illustrated by Figs. For the Josephson-Stirling cycle, we need to describe different thermodynamic processes. We study quasistatic processes, during which the system passes through quasi-equilibrium states. Then, the work done and heat released during a process i → f are W i→f = -/(2e) dφ I(φ, T ) and Q i→f = dS T , respectively. The sign convention is such that W i→f is positive when the system releases work to the environment, while Q i→f is positive when the system absorbs heat from the environment. For an isothermal process where φ is changed from and Q i→f = T [S(φ f , T ) -S(φ i , T )] can be directly obtained from Eqs. (2) and (3) and their temperature derivatives. During an isophasic process, T is changed from T i → T f at constant φ. In this case, W i→f = 0, while can be calculated from the total heat capacity. The φdependent contribution δC(φ, T ) = C(φ, T ) -C 0 (T ) can be directly calculated from Eqs. (2) or (3) and its derivatives and is measured with respect to φ = 0. In principle, we also need to account for the φ-independent contribution C 0 (T ) arising from the terms omitted in Eqs. ( We are now in a position to explicitly compute the total work and heat produced during each of the processes of the Josephson-Stirling cycle introduced above [Fig. is the total heat exchange during the cycle. Note that in our setup, there are no separate hot and cold reservoirs, but the environment acts successively as hot and cold reservoir. In Fig. A topological heat engine with φ f = 2π thus releases work only if parity is conserved and can thus serve as a test for the 4π-periodicity of the ground-state fermion parity. Until now, we have focused only on an engine. Depending on the relative values of T e and T b , the Josephson-Stirling cycle can, however, exhibit also other operating modes. This is illustrated by Fig. For T e > T b , the Josephson-Stirling cycle/machine acts as an engine: The machine absorbs Q e > 0 from the hot reservoir and releases |Q b | < Q e to the cold reservoir. Hence, W > 0 is done on the environment and the engine efficiency is given by η = W/Q e . A comparison of the engine efficiency and maximal power shows that a parity-conserving engine is on average more efficient and more powerful than its non-parity-conserving implementation [Figs. If T e < T b , the systems with and without parity conservation act as refrigerators with a Coefficient of Performance COP = Q e /|W | Importantly, a topological Josephson heat engine implemented as a Josephson-Stirling cycle can be used to test the hallmark 4π-periodicity of the phase-dependent ground-state fermion parity. In this implementation, a major challenge is to fastly modulate the temperature of the proximitized QSH junction while preserving its fermion parity. While this condition precludes galvanic channels of heat transfer to the QSH system, others such as phononic In this manuscript, we have explicitly discussed topological Josephson heat engines for the example of a short QSH-based Josephson junction. Since the concept is only based on the 4π-periodicity of the ground-state fermion parity, it is also applicable to long as well as nanowirebased topological Josephson junctions. Schemes to detect signatures of the 4π-periodic ground-state parity in topological Josephson junctions often require careful interpretation of the measurements Additional information: Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper. Competing financial interests: The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial Interests. Data Availability: The data that support the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information. Additional data are available from the corresponding author upon request. Here, we provide additional details on the derivation of the simplified BdG Hamiltonian (1) in the main text, which serves as the starting point of our calculations. We assume that the two edges of the QSH system are separated by a distance W S large enough such that there is no overlap between states from opposite edges. With the basis order ψt,↑ , ψt,↓ , ψb,↑ , ψb,↓ , ψ † t,↓ , -ψ † t,↑ , ψ † b,↓ , -ψ † b,↑ , the BdG Hamiltonian describing the Josephson junction is then given by Here, s j , σ j and τ j (with j = x, y, z) denote Pauli matrices describing spin, top/bottom edge and particle-hole degrees of freedom, respectively. Note that unit matrices are not written explicitly in Eq. (S1). The N region is described by the profile h(x) and the potential V 0 , which can also be viewed as describing the difference between the chemical potentials in the S and N regions, μ S and μ N = μ S -V 0 . Here, we use a δ-barrier model with h(x) = L N δ(x) and ∆(x) = ∆. A more general approach to the junction would be to use a finite N region with h(x) = Θ(L N /2 -|x|) and ∆(x) = ∆Θ(|x| -L N /2). Such a model is capable of describing both a short as well as a long junction. As explained in Supplementary Notes S2 below, the δ-barrier model is still suitable to capture the essential physics of a short junction based on QSH edge states. Since ĤBdG , s z = ĤBdG , σ z = 0, the wave functions can be described by the good quantum numbers s =↑ / ↓≡ ±1 for the spin projection in z direction and σ = t/b ≡ ±1 for the top and bottom edges. Hence, an eigenstate Ψ s,σ (x) of the BdG Hamiltonian (S1) can be written as Ψ s,σ (x) = ψ s,σ (x) ⊗ η σ ⊗ χ s , which satisfies Ĥs,σ ψ s,σ (x) = Eψ s,σ (x), (S2) where [see also Eq. ( In order to compute the ABS as well as the φ-dependent part of the continuum DOS ρ c ( , φ), we employ a wavefunction matching approach to solve Eq. (S2). For ABS, that is, states with | | < ∆ and thus states localized around the N region, we can make the piecewise ansatz for a junction with a finite N region. The ansatz for a δ-junction is similar to Eq. (S4), with the states ψ s,σ (x < 0) given by the first line of Eq. (S4) and ψ s,σ (x > 0) given by the third line of Eq. (S4). In Eq. (S4), , and L tot = L N + L S is the unit length of the entire S/N/S edge. The ansatz (S4) for ψ s,σ (x) has been chosen in such a way that Eq. (S2) is satisfied in each S and N region separately and that lim x→±∞ ψ s,σ (x) = 0. The coefficients a s,σ , b s,σ , e s,σ , and h s,σ have to be determined from the boundary conditions at the S/N interfaces. For the δ-barrier, the boundary condition can be obtained by integrating Eq. (S2) from x = -η to x = η with η → 0 + . The corresponding procedure where For a finite barrier, on the other hand, the boundary conditions require ψ s,σ (x) to be continuous at the S/N interfaces, First, we consider the δ-barrier model, for which we invoke the boundary condition (S5) and require a nontrivial solution for the coefficients a s,σ and b s,σ . This procedure yields a transcendental equation for the ABS energy in the form of where n is an integer that has to be chosen in such a way that 0 ≤ arccos ( /∆) ≤ π. Solving Eq. (S7), we obtain the ABS describing two ABS s =↑ / ↓ per edge (σ = t/b). At a given edge, these two ABS s =↑ / ↓ exhibit a protected crossing at φ = π, which also corresponds to a change in the ground-state fermion parity For a finite N region, we use the boundary conditions (S6) and require a nontrivial solution for the coefficients a s,σ , b s,σ , e s,σ , and h s,σ . Now, we obtain the transcendental equation where n is again an integer chosen in such a way that 0 ≤ arccos ( /∆) ≤ π. The second term on the left-hand side of Eq. (S9) takes into account the finite width of the N region. This term becomes only important in long junctions, ∆ v F /L N , where it causes multiple subbands to appear in the Andreev spectrum. These additional bound states in long junctions cannot be captured with a δ-model, which always yields two ABS per edge. Still for short junctions, ∆ v F /L N , Eq. (S9) tends to Eq. (S7). Above, we have determined the discrete Andreev spectrum. If we now turn to the continuous spectrum with > ∆, we have to modify the ansatz (S4) to account for propagating wave functions. An incident electron-like quasiparticle propagating from x → -∞ to x → ∞ with > ∆ can be described by the ansatz if a finite N region is considered. The ansatz for a δ-junction is again similar to Eq. (S10), but with ψ s,σ (x < 0) given by the first line of Eq. (S10) and ψ s,σ (x > 0) given by the third line of Eq. (S10). In order for the quasiparticle to be a right mover, sσ = 1 in Eq. (S10), that is, s =↑ at the top edge and s =↓ at the bottom edge. Corresponding equations can be set up for hole-like quasiparticles propagating to the right as well as for quasiparticles propagating to the left. In Eq. (S10), , and all other quantities are the same as defined in Eq. (S4). Note that no additional normalization factors are needed in Eq. (S10) because each individual state in the S regions carries the same absolute value of quasiparticle current. By invoking the boundary conditions (S7) or (S9), one can then obtain the reflection and transmission coefficients r s,σ eh and t s,σ ee in Eq. (S10). For hole-like incident quasiparticles, one can likewise obtain r s,σ he and t s,σ hh . These states then allow us to set up the S matrix as and The scattering matrix S σ SNS ( , φ) allows us then to compute the (φ-dependent part of the) continuum DOS of the Josephson junction as Since S SNS is block-diagonal in the top/bottom-edge degree of freedom, det (S SNS ) = det (S t SNS ) det S b SNS can be decomposed in a contribution from the top edge (σ = 1) and one from the bottom edge (σ = -1). Then, we obtain for the top edge of a δ-barrier model if > ∆. Note that because spin s =↑ / ↓ is a good quantum number, Eq. (S15) also factorizes into separate contributions from s =↑ / ↓. These two factors have opposite complex phases which cancel with each other to give det (S t SNS ) = 1. The contribution from the bottom edge can be obtained by switching ↑ ↔ ↓. Hence, det S b SNS = det (S t SNS ) = 1. Inserting Eq. (S15) into Eq. (S14) then yields ρ σ 0 ( , φ) = 0. For the δ-model, there is consequently no φ-dependent contribution to the free energy from the continuum states. If we consider a finite N region, the above discussion still applies, but now for the top edge if > ∆. The contribution from the bottom edge can be obtained from ↑ ↔ ↓ and thus again as det (S t SNS ) = det S b SNS . For L N → 0, det (S t SNS ) = det S b SNS → 1 as in the δ-model. We thus conclude that also for short finite junctions, the continuum states do not significantly affect the φ dependence of the free energy. From the ABS and continuum spectra of Eq. (S2), one can calculate the free energy F σ (φ, T ) at a single edge σ = t/b. These free energies can in turn be used to obtain the Josephson current and other thermodynamic quantities of a given edge. Without parity constraints, the free energy is-up to an additive φ-independent contribution-given by where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. The sum over n describes the contribution from the ABS with discrete energies σ n (φ), while the integral describes the contribution from the continuum states with DOS ρ σ c ( , φ). At this point, it is important to note that due to the lack of spin degeneracy the degeneracy factor is just g = 1 in Eq. (S17) The φ-dependent continuous spectrum of the Josephson junction is described by ρ σ 0 ( , φ), which we compute from the scattering matrix via Eq. (S14) and which vanishes for the δ-model, ρ σ 0 ( , φ) = 0, consistent with the expectation that only ABS exhibit a significant φ dependence in short junctions Following Ref. Here, the energy scale E S = v F /L S is determined from the length L S of the superconducting electrodes. Inserting the ABS σ n from Eq. (S8) into Eq. (S17) and omitting all φ-independent terms, which arise from ρ σ c ( , φ) = ρ S ( ), we arrive at Eq. ( If the fermion parity p = ± is conserved at a given edge σ = t/b, the free energy acquires an additional contribution due to the parity constraint and reads (S20) Here, p = ±1 and the function describes the ground-state fermion parity as φ is tuned. From the form of Eq. (S20), it is clear that even φ-independent terms in ρ σ c are important in determining the φ dependence of F σ p . This is why, for example, the contribution from the superconducting electrodes can also affect other quantities such as the Josephson current. If we split the integral over ρ σ c in Eq. (S20) into an integral over ρ σ 0 and ρ S , define and insert the ABS for σ n , we arrive at Eq. ( ∆, where K 1 is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Equations (S20) and (S22) show that even φ-independent contributions from the continuum modify the φ dependence of the free energy via the factor exp(J S ) if fermion parity is conserved. This is different compared to short junctions without fermion-parity conservation, where φ-independent continuum contributions do not affect the φ dependence of the free energy. Note that, similar to Eq. (S17), Eq. (S20) yields the same value for the top and bottom edges, σ = t/b. Hence, the total free energy of both edges is simply twice the free energy of a single edge. This applies to the cases without and with fermion-parity conservation. Finally, we note that we neglect the inductance associated with the superconducting ring here, that is, we assume that both the geometrical and kinetic inductances associated with the ring are negligible. There is, however, no equilibrium current circulating in the superconducting ring and hence no additional contribution to F for integer multiples of φ = 2π. Without constraints on the fermion parity, there is likewise no current and no inductance contribution for integer multiples of φ = π. Similar to Ref. For the quasi-static processes studied here, the work and heat released during a process i → f are W i→f = -/(2e) dφ I(φ, T ) and Q i→f = dS T , respectively. The sign convention is such that W i→f is positive when the system releases work to the environment, while Q i→f is positive when the system absorbs heat from the environment. Throughout the manuscript, we assume ∆(T ) ≈ ∆(T = 0) and ∂∆/∂T ≈ 0. During an isothermal process, φ is changed from φ i → φ f at constant T . In this case, the work W i→f = -[F (φ f , T )-F (φ i , T )] and the heat exchange Q i→f = T [S(φ f , T ) -S(φ i , T )] can be directly obtained from Eqs. ( For an isophasic process, where T is changed from T i → T f at constant φ, W i→f = 0. The heat exchange, on the other hand, is given by and can be calculated from the total heat capacity [see also Eq. ( using the BCS DOS. From C(φ, T ) = C 0 (T ) + δC(φ, T ) and Eq. (S23) [equivalent to Eq. ( An appealing property of a Josephson-Stirling cycle without parity constraints is that it allows for closed analytical expressions for the work and heat flows. For example, the heat flows during the isophasic processes can then be computed from Eqs. ( where Erf denotes the error function and the factor 2 accounts for the top and bottom edges. For the Josephson-Stirling cycle discussed in the main text with φ f = π and without parity constraints, we can calculate the total work W as well as the heat exchanges Q e and Q b . Using Eq. (S25) for the isophasic processes as well as Q i→f = T [S(φ f , T ) -S(φ i , T )] for the isothermal processes, the heat exchange with the reservoir at temperature T e , Q e = Q 1→2 + Q 4→1 , can then be computed as Likewise, the heat exchange with the reservoir at temperature For T e > T b , the machine acts as an engine with a hot reservoir of temperature T e and a cold reservoir of temperature T b . In this case, the efficiency η = W/Q e of the cycle is which is in turn bounded by the Carnot limit η C = 1 -T b /T e . In the refrigerator mode, the superconductor acts as a cooled subsystem of temperature T S = T e and as a heat sink of temperature For illustration, Supplementary Fig. Here, we wish to discuss the flexibility of the topological engine to operate in different regimes. Figure For completeness, we present W , Q e and Q b for the Josephson-Stirling cycle without parity constraints and with φ i = 0 and φ f = π in Supplementary Fig. Having discussed schemes to determine the work per cycle via measuring the current-phase relation, we now turn to another experimental challenge: An experimental realization of our proposal to test the 4π periodicity of topological Josephson junctions requires that fermion parity is preserved. In order to achieve this, one has to reduce quasiparticle poisoning, similar to other experimental proposals to directly observe a 4π periodicity in the junction properties. This requirement then precludes galvanic channels of heat transfer because large quasiparticle poisoning rates due to a direct galvanic contact to large thermodynamic reservoirs are expected to prevent conservation of the fermion parity in this case. For our scheme to work, however, a good thermal coupling of the QSH-based junction to superconducting reservoirs is not required, but rather a good thermal coupling to heat baths. Such a coupling does not necessarily have to be facilitated with galvanic coupling to baths. Radiative heating For the fermion parity to be preserved during one thermodynamic cycle, the quasiparticle poisoning time should be larger than the duration of the Josephson-Stirling cycle, which consists of two sweeps of the phase φ and two sweeps of the temperature of the QSH edge states. The timescale of the temperature modulation is bounded from below by the response times for the QSH edge states to thermally equilibrate with the reservoirs. This response time can be roughly approximated as where C(φ 0 , T e ) and κ th (T e ) are the heat capacity of the QSH edge states and the thermal conductance of the QSHbased Josephson junction with the thermal reservoir, respectively. Here, φ 0 denotes the fixed superconducting phase difference at which the temperature is changed, that is, φ 0 = 0 or φ 0 = 2π for the parity conserving case. For a rough estimate, we assume that the thermal conductance of a QSH edge is given by where g 0 = 2e 2 /h is the quantum conductance of a single edge channel. This ideal estimate provides an order of magnitude for the temperature equilibration timescale, but non-ideal factors could further limit the thermal transfer efficiency. If we take the total heat capacity described in Supplementary Notes S4 above, we find τ eq ≈ 0.1 ns as a rough estimate for the timescale of each of the isophasic temperature changes between k B T b = 0.1∆ and k B T b = 0.4∆ [τ eq (φ = 0, T e ) ≈ 98.9 ps and τ eq (φ = 2π, T b ) ≈ 106.0 ps]. As mentioned above, non-galvanic channels of heat transfer to the QSH system are preferable if fermion parity has to be preserved during the thermodynamic cycle. This precludes galvanic coupling of the QSH-based junction to thermodynamic reservoirs and we envision other channels of heat transfer, such as radiative heating While the quasiparticle poisoning timescales can be very large in conventional Josephson devices, where parity lifetimes of up to 1 minute have been reported in NbTiN Here, we discuss how the work per thermodynamic cycle can be experimentally determined. For a Josephson-Stirling cycle, work is done only during the isothermal processes 1 → 2 and 3 → 4 with for each process, where φ i and φ f denote the corresponding initial and final phases. The total work per cycle is then given by the sum W 1→2 + W 3→4 . Hence, an experimental measurement of the total work requires a precise control of the phase bias φ, modulated by the magnetic flux Φ, as well as a good knowledge of the current I flowing through the ring. This can be achieved by using a scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscope to perform contactless measurements of the diamagnetic response and current-phase relation of the junction. The basic idea is shown in Supplementary Fig. 