Graphene hydrophobic coatings paved the way towards a new generation of optoelectronic and fluidic devices. Nevertheless, such hydrophobic thin films rely only on graphene non-polar surface, rather than taking advantage of its surface roughness. Furthermore, graphene is typically not self-standing. Differently, carbon aerogels have high porosity, large effective surface area due to their surface roughness, and very low mass density, which make them a promising candidate as a super-hydrophobic material for novel technological applications. However, despite a few works reporting the general super-hydrophobic and lipophilic behavior of the carbon aerogels, a detailed characterization of their wetting properties is still missing, to date. Here, the wetting properties of graphene aerogels are demonstrated in detail. Without any chemical functionalization or patterning of their surface, the samples exhibit a super-lipophilic state and a stationary super-hydrophobic state with a contact angle up to 150 ± 15 • and low contact angle hysteresis ≈ 15 • , owing to the fakir effect. In addition, the adhesion force of the graphene aerogels in contact with the water droplets and their surface tension are evaluated. For instance, the unique wettability and enhanced liquid absorption of the graphene aerogels can be exploited for reducing contamination from oil spills and chemical leakage accidents. In general, the realization of artificial hydrophobic surfaces depends on the material surface chemical composition and its morphological structure. Although the chemical composition is an intrinsic material property, it can be engineered to decrease the solid surface tension 1 , therefore increase the hydrophobicity of the surface. On the other hand, surface roughness 2,3 (micro-and nano-morphology) may also enhance the hydrophobicity, particularly by exploiting hierarchical 2,4-7 and fractal architectures Graphene is constituted by a sp 2 lattice of graphitic carbon, thus it has a slightly hydrophilic (graphite contact angle ≈ 86 On the other hand, carbon aerogels Here, we give insight on the wetting properties of graphene aerogels in detail. In particular, we show that owing to their particular morphology and high surface porosity (up to 0.81), our graphene aerogels exhibit a super-lipophilic state and a stationary super-hydrophobic state, achieving high apparent contact angle values θ ≥ 150 • , with low contact angle hysteresis 1 (CAH) ≈ 15 • , and high work of adhesion (10 mJ/m 2 ). In addition, we characterized the graphene aerogel solid surface tension. The graphene aerogels studied are made of a cellular material called Aerographene (see Methods). The samples have a square-shaped surface with a lateral size L = 2 cm, a thickness d = 0.2 cm, and a mass m = 5 -15 mg. A representative sample is reported in Figure The mass density of the Aerographene aerogels can be estimated at first approximation by ρ = m/V . However, this is the total mass density, as aerogels are matter with a mixed phase of gas and solid. Hence, a better estimation of the solid mass density can be provided by the effective medium approximation ρ = ρ c (1 -Φ -) + ρ air Φ -, with Φ c + Φ -= 1, where ρ c = 2200 kg/m 3 and Φ c = V c /V are respectively the density and the volume fraction of the carbon phase, while ρ air = 1.225 kg/m 3 and Φ -= V air /V are the density and the volume fraction of air, respectively. Hence, the effective mass density is defined as ρ ef f = ρ c (1 -Φ -). Therefore, the aerogel porous fraction is Φ -= 0.992 -0.998, leading to an effective mass density down to ρ ef f = 5 kg/m 3 . Owing to their random surface morphology, the static contact angle on porous media can be defined only on average 1 . The contact angle of a water droplet cast on a representative Aerographene aerogel is shown in Figure Moreover, we evaluated the work of adhesion of the aerogel surface in contact with water by the Young-Dupré equation 1 For the super-hydrophobic sample in Figure In order to better understand the wettability of Aerographene aerogels, we characterized their wetting states with respect to a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) reference substrate (Bruker). In Figure Generally, the contact angle between a chemically homogeneous solid surface and a liquid droplet obeys to the Young relation where γ SV and γ SL are the solid-vapor and solid-liquid surface tensions, respectively. Therefore, the lower the surface tension of the liquid droplet, the lower the Young contact angle of the HOPG. This phenomenon is connected to the lipophilicity of the non-polar surface of carbon-based materials. Indeed, a minimum contact angle (θ = 70 • ) can be measured on the HOPG for pure ethanol droplets (Figure by considering the Aerographene aerogel as a composite surface with a solid surface fraction φ, a surface frac-tion wetted by the liquid φ + , an aerogel contact angle θ * , and a HOPG Young contact angle θ. We obtained from the fit (green solid line) a liquid fraction φ + = 0.48 ± 0.03 in contact with the droplet. We point out that metastable where r is the roughness factor (i.e, the ratio between the actual wet surface area and its geometrical projection on the plane) from which we infer that the lipophilic Wenzel/Cassie-Baxter transition point occurs at cos θ = 0.07 (the intersection between the red and green solid lines in Figure On the other hand, in the hydrophobic regime (third quadrant of the plot) we observe a continuous transition between the Wenzel and the Cassie-Baxter states beyond cos θ = 0. Also, the plot depicts that the transition occurs by passing through metastable states extending into the fourth quadrant, slowing down the dewetting process. By fitting our data (blue solid line) in Figure we obtained an air surface fraction φ -= 0.45 ± 0.02 below the liquid droplet. Furthermore, from Equation from which we infer that the hydrophobic Wenzel/Cassie-Baxter transition point is at cos θ = -0.07 (the intersection between the red and blue solid lines in Figure In addition, we investigated the stability of the Aerographene aerogel hydrophobicity over time. Figure Moreover, we estimated the solid surface tension γ SV of the HOPG substrate (Figure where γ LV is the liquid-vapor surface tension of the different concentrations in volume of ethanol in water and β is a constant. The fit in the lipophilic regime returns γ SV ≈ 42 mN/m and γ SV ≈ 63 mN/m for the HOPG and the graphene aerogel, respectively. In summary, we investigated the wetting properties of graphene aerogels. We demonstrated that such a material can be in a super-lipophilic, thus super-hydrophobic state that is stationary. The evaluated adhesion force of the water droplets with the aerogel is higher than the leaves of aquatic plants and we estimated the graphene aerogel solid surface tension. Stationary super-hydrophobic be-havior of solid surfaces is a relevant property in a number of natural 2 and technological processes 32 with several industrial applications such as waterproof surfaces Fabrication of the Aerographene aerogels. A macroscopic (2 × 2 × 0.5 cm) and highly porous (≈ 0.94) template consisting of interconnected ceramic ZnO tetrapods Contact angle measurements. Images of sessile water drops deposited on Aerographene aerogels were acquired by Dataphysics OCA instrument and analyzed by its software. In order to estimate the average, maximum, and minimum contact angle on the aerogel surface, static, advancing, and receding contact angles 1 were measured, respectively, by increasing and decreasing the volume of the drop by 1 μL steps. In static contact angle measurements, the volume of the deionized (18.2 MΩcm) water droplet was V = 15 μL. Every contact angle was measured 15 s after drop casting to ensure that the droplet had reached its equilibrium position, and it was averaged over the values obtained in different areas of the sample surface. Due to the heterogeneous and porous aerogel surface, we evaluated the error on the contact angle values by CAH ≈ 15 • . The experimental contact angle probably corresponds to a lower limit, as the water droplet might cause some small dimple on the aerogel surface. The calculated surface air and liquid fractions are effective values, as they were determined by macroscopic techniques relying on the surface properties of the material. The liquid-vapor surface tension of the concentrations in volume of ethanol in water was measured by the pendant drop method 1 .