Quasiparticle (qp) poisoning is a major issue that impairs the operation of various superconducting devices. Even though these devices are often operated at temperatures well below the critical point where the number density of excitations is expected to be exponentially suppressed, their bare operation and stray microwave radiation excite the non-equilibrium qps. Here we use voltage-biased superconducting junctions to demonstrate and quantify qp extraction in the turnstile operation of a superconductor-insulator-normal metal-insulator-superconductor single-electron transistor. In this operation regime excitations are injected into the superconducting leads at a rate proportional to the driving frequency. We reach a reduction of density by an order of magnitude even for the highest injection rate of 2.4 × 10 8 qps per second when extraction is turned on. In superconducting circuits it is important to minimize the number of non-equilibrium quasiparticles as they deteriorate the operation of various devices, such as the coherence of quantum bits based on Josephson junctions For radio frequency (rf) driven superconductorinsulator-normal metal-insulator-superconductor (SINIS) turnstiles Here we combine the turnstile with an independent, in-situ control -both extraction and injection -of qps. The qp poisoning can be reduced by suitably voltage biasing superconductor-insulator-superconductor (S 1 IS 2 ) junctions with different superconducting gaps (∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , respectively) where excitations are extracted from S 1 to S 2 as long as ∆ 1 < ∆ 2 The evacuation of qps is manifested by the stabilization of current to ef in the SET turnstile operation Here we show detailed results for two devices for confirmation of results, both with copper as the turnstile normal-metal island, separated by aluminum-oxide barriers from two aluminum leads. The samples were patterned by electron-beam lithography and metal deposition was done by multi-angle shadow electron-beam evaporation, see Supporting Information for further details on the fabrication process. One of the leads (left in Fig. We characterize the samples by sweeping the gate voltage V g between the "closed" (n g = 0) and "open" (n g = 0.5) states (with n g = C g V g /e, where C g is the gate capacitance), and stepping the SET bias voltage V b . The S 1 IS 2 junctions are first kept unbiased, named as the "cooler-off" case. The main parameters of the samples have been extracted from these measurements by fitting the measured current I to current-voltage curves calculated with a master equation approach taking into account sequential tunnelling and Andreev reflections The strong cooling by the superconducting junctions is evident in the turnstile operation of the SET shown in Fig. To quantify the reduction of the qp density, the pumping data at the plateau shown in Fig. The influence of the S 1 IS 2 cooler is qualitatively the same for both samples and independent of the operation frequency as well as of the SET bias, although the plateau levels are different, see the supplementary material for additional measurements to corroborate this fact. Note that this level approaches the ideal value but never reaches it even in the calculations for samples with low E c < ∆ (see Fig. We estimate the lead temperature for a wide range of operation frequencies. Figs. We measured further reference samples with identical aluminum lead geometry but without S 1 IS 2 SQUIDs and obtained the qp densities in them (for results see Supporting Information). The qp densities are similar to those shown in Fig. where l, ̟, θ are the dimensions of the lead (25 μm × 100 nm × 70 nm), P inj is the injected power which can be approximated by ∆ 1 f in the driving regime of the experiment The applicability of the qp extraction and detection techniques considered in this work extends beyond SINIS turnstiles and improving the accuracy of their pumped current. First, one can envision straightforward integration of S 1 IS 2 coolers for instance with absorbers of kinetic inductance detectors, or into superconducting resonators analogously to NIS coolers In summary, we have been able to demonstrate active extraction of non-equilibrium excitations from a superconductor. A more than an order of magnitude reduction from values as high as 5.8 × 10 3 μm -3 to 260 μm -3 at the highest studied injection rate of 2.4 × 10 8 s -1 was achieved. Furthermore, in the limit of no qp injection (f → 0) we find a similar reduction although a finite population of environmentally created excitations remains. Our work shows that the qp density in the superconducting electrodes can be controlled by active qp traps, here demonstrated for the first time with in-situ control of qp injection. Supporting Information. Calculations of the cooling power of S 1 IS 2 junctions are contained here, as well as a model for the power transfer in a driven system. Additionally, details on fabrication and measurement procedures are given. Further details on the theoretical background and numerical calculations of SINIS SETs as well as results for additional and reference measurements are provided. Finally, details on the aluminum resistivity are given. A simplified model of a resistively shunted superconducting junction can be developed for calculating the cooling power of one of the superconductors where e is the elemental charge and I c is the critical current of the junction. For a single junction, I c can be approximated by Here, f 1 denotes the distribution function of the superconductor 1 (often taken to be the Fermi-Dirac function), whereas R is the normal-state tunnel resistance. In the experiments, instead of an individual S 1 IS 2 junction we use a DC superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) with two junctions in parallel to be able to minimize I c by a magnetic flux Φ. Neglecting the inductance of the loop, the critical current is given by , where I c,L/R are the critical currents of the individual junctions and Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum. We apply an external magnetic flux Φ = Φ 0 /2 through the SQUID loop so that I c = |I c,L -I c,R | is at a minimum, due to typical junction size asymmetry at a value around 0.5 nA. Suppressing I c allows us to voltage bias the SQUID at subgap voltages, essential for the S 1 IS 2 cooling. In the simplest approximation, we neglect the cooling power of the SQUID junction that is further away from the SINIS turnstile, and model the SQUID as a single junction with the suppressed I c . Combining Eqs. (1) one obtains V SIS (mV) In a Josephson junction φ = 0 when The power transferred from the lead i = 1 is written as P (1) (t) = P J (t), where P qp (t) is the power transmitted by quasiparticles (qp's) given by P (1) qp In Here, η is the Dynes parameters which models subgap leaks On the other hand the Josephson contribution [1] P J (t) can be written as P sin (t) sin φ, where When averaging the power in time the sine contribution vanishes and the power extracted from the lead i = 1 is When the junction is biased above critical current (V SIS > I c R S ) the cosine component vanishes in average. If ∆ 2 > ∆ 1 the power is positive and the average is peaked at eV SIS = ±|∆ 1 -∆ 2 |, as shown in Fig. The process of transferring electrons from the island to the leads can be regarded as a jump stochastic process whose probability of jumping is governed by the equation The reverse process is assumed to vanish and Γ is the rate, which in the slow driving regime depends on the driving as Γ = Γ 0 e -β (1-ε) . For the present case, Γ 0 = ∆ e 2 R , with R the tunnel resistance and β = ∆ kBT (k B is the constant, T is the temperature and ∆ the superconducting gap). Furthermore, ε(t) = 2E c /∆ (n g (t) -1/2) is the energy of the transferred electron normalized to the energy gap, where E c is the charging energy of the island and n g is the charge induced by the driving signal. The solution of Eq. ( Now, notice that the power transfer is given by P (t) = Ė = ∆εΓ(t)p(t). The average transmitted power during one drive period of length τ = 1/f is then given by In the conditions of interest β ≫ 1 and Γ ≫ f , with f the frequency of the driving. The integral is thus ∼ 1 for a general periodic driving and P ≈ ∆f . A specific case of the dynamics of the instantaneous power transfer is shown in Fig. Observe how almost all the power is transferred when ε(t) = 1 and ∆ = 2E c (n g (t) -1/2). The samples were fabricated on 4-inch silicon substrates covered by 300 nm thermal silicon oxide. The process is based on electron beam lithography (EBL, Vistec EBPG5000+ operating at 100 kV) and multiangle shadow deposition of metals in an electron-beam evaporator. First, a set of bottom gates (visible e.g. in Fig. The tunnel junction deposition starts by evaporating a 13 nm layer of Al at a substrate tilt angle of approximately 55 • , resulting in an approximately 8 nm film that forms the fork-shaped S 2 electrode of the SQUID. Right after deposition, this film is oxidized in situ in the evaporator (static oxidation with typically 2 mbar of pure O 2 in the chamber for two minutes). A subsequent deposition of 70 nm aluminum at normal incidence angle (zero tilt) completes the S 1 IS 2 SQUID and forms the S 1 electrodes of the turnstile. Finally, the SINIS turnstile and the whole device are completed by a second oxidation (typically 1 mbar O 2 for one minute) and depositing 50 nm of copper under a tilt angle of 39.5 • (in the opposite direction compared to the S 2 layer), resulting in an approximately 40 nm thick Cu island. For measurements at cryogenic temperatures, a chip with an array of 3-by-3 devices is cleaved to fit a custommade chip carrier and electrically connected to it by Al wire bonds. Due to the limited number of measurement lines, typically 2-3 devices from the chip are selected to be characterized at low temperatures. Experiments were carried out in a custom-made plastic dilution refrigerator with base temperature of about 50 mK. Conventional cryogenic signal lines (resistive twisted pairs between room temperature and the 1 K pot flange, followed by at least 1 m Thermocoax cable as a microwave filter to the base temperature), connect the bonded chip to a roomtemperature breakout box. The rf line for applying the drive signal to the turnstile gate consists of a stainless steel coaxial cable down to 4.2 K, a 20 dB attenuator in the liquid helium bath, followed by a feedthrough into the inner vacuum can of the cryostat. Inside the cryostat, the rf signal is carried by a continuous superconducting NbTi coaxial cable from the 1 K stage down to the sample carrier. Magnetic field for the S 1 IS 2 SQUID was applied by current biasing a superconducting coil placed on the exterior of the inner vacuum can. Current and voltage biases were realized by programmable voltage sources and function generators. Current amplification was achieved by room-temperature low-noise transimpedance amplifiers (FEMTO Messtechnik GmbH, models DDPCA-300 and LCA-2-10T). The curves of the pumped single-electron current were typically iterated at least 10 times and averaged accordingly, neglecting those repetitions during which an offset charge jump had occurred. Amplifier offset currents were subtracted by comparing the pumping curves with their counterparts measured under source-drain bias of opposite polarity. The current-voltage characteristics of a SET can be modelled from a stochastic master equation on the charging events n, where n designates the charge state of the island. The probability p (n) evolves as where γ nn ′ is the total transition rate from the n state of the island to the n ′ state. Furthermore, in the steady state dp (n, t) /dt = 0 and since the charging events n are discrete one can express Eq. ( where p i = p(n i ), A ii =j =i γ ij and A ij = γ ij for i = j. Generalizing for two leads, as is the case of an SET, the transition rates are given by γ nn ′ = Γ l n→n ′ (δE) + Γ r n→n ′ (δE). Here, Γ is the transition rate between individual charging states n and n ′ , l designates events between the left lead and the island and r similarly stands for the right lead. Finally, δE is the energy change of the process given by δE ±,l/r 1e for single-electron (1e) and two-electron (2e) tunnelling, respectively. Here V l = κ l V b and V r = -κ r V b , κ l/r is the ratio between the junction capacitance and the total capacitance, V b is the bias voltage applied between the leads of the transistor. In Eqs. ( for 1e tunnelling, and for Andreev tunnelling, and δE is the corresponding energy change from Eqs. ( Once the probability vector p is obtained, the current through the SET can be calculated as In order to get realistic results the temperature change of the island has to be taken into account. To do this one calculates the power transferred to the normal island in a single electron event as where N refers to normal metal and δE is again the related energy change cost from Eq. ( A similar method can be applied when a periodic gate drive is applied to the system then the initial probability is given by since for a periodic driving p(0) = p(τ ). A more useful form of the propagator is given by where In Eq. ( Then, Eq. ( A third sample similar to A and B (see Fig. As expected, the narrow lead cools down when a bias voltage V SIS is applied to the SQUID (see Fig. Notice that the behaviour shown in Fig. In order to estimate the qp reduction in the narrow lead, the device was first operated in the cooler-off regime (V SIS = 0 μV). Using the same procedure as for samples A and B, the narrow lead temperature and excitation densities were determined in the turnstile operation at different gate signal frequencies by comparing these measurements with simulations. The results can be seen in Fig. In addition, the system was operated near the optimal cooling point (V SIS = 28 μV). It was observed that the qp density of the narrow lead varies only slightly throughout the different employed frequencies. The temperatures (and excitation densities) remain approximately at 180 mK (5.98 μm -3 ) for 10, 20 and 40 MHz, and there is a slight increase to 190 mK (12.32 μm -3 ) at f = 80 MHz. This could be due to an increased recombination rate that is only overcome at 80 MHz. Again, the qp densities have been reduced by an order of magnitude with respect to the cooler-off case. In order to check if the unbiased S 1 IS 2 junctions affect the excitation density a reference sample without the SQUID was measured. As can be seen in Fig. Following the same steps as with samples A and B, current measurements in the turnstile operation of the reference SET were done and compared to simulations as shown in Fig. Since the aluminum deposition rate for the measured SINIS SETs was ∼ 2 Å/s, we estimate that the resistivity of the long leads in the normal state at 77 K is around 31 Ωnm. Furthermore, immersing a few test wires in liquid helium (∼ 4.2 K) allows us to expect a roughly 10% decrease in resistivity (ρ 4.2 K ≈ 28 Ωnm) compared to the values measured at 77 K. Pico group, QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, FI-000 76 Aalto, Finland