We present a detailed analysis of two chip-based superconducting trap architectures capable of levitating micrometer-sized superconducting particles in the Meissner state. These architectures are suitable for performing novel quantum experiments with more massive particles or for force and acceleration sensors of unprecedented sensitivity. We focus in our work on a chip-based anti-Helmholtz coil-type trap (AHC) and a planar double-loop (DL) trap. We demonstrate their fabrication from superconducting Nb films and the fabrication of superconducting particles from Nb or Pb. We apply finite element modeling (FEM) to analyze these two trap architectures in detail with respect to trap stability and frequency. Crucially, in FEM we account for the complete three-dimensional geometry of the traps, finite magnetic field penetration into the levitated superconducting particle, demagnetizing effects, and flux quantization. We can, thus, analyze trap properties beyond assumptions made in analytical models. We find that realistic AHC traps yield trap frequencies well above 10 kHz for levitation of micrometer-sized particles and can be fabricated with a three-layer process, while DL traps enable trap frequencies below 1 kHz and are simpler to fabricate in a single-layer process. Our numerical results guide future experiments aiming at levitating micrometer-sized particles in the Meissner state with chip-based superconducting traps. The modeling we use is also applicable in other scenarios using superconductors in the Meissner state, such as for designing superconducting magnetic shields or for calculating filling factors in superconducting resonators. Superconducting magnetic levitation We consider levitation of superconducting particles in the Meissner state, inspired by Refs. In our work, we present the fabrication and modeling of two promising chip-based trap architectures suitable for levitation of micrometer-sized superconducting objects of spherical, cylindrical or ring shape. We focus on multi-layer anti-Helmholtz coil-like traps (AHC) and single-layer double-loop traps (DL). We first demonstrate fabrication of the traps using thin films of Nb Our FEM simulations are based on implementing Maxwell-London equations in the static regime using the A-V formulation under the assumption that the levitated particles are in the Meissner state In the following, we describe the microfabrication of chip-based traps from superconducting Nb films and of superconducting particles from Pb and Nb. Note that other superconducting materials, such as Al, can also be used. The choice of material determines the maximal allowed temperature of the cryogenic environment. While Pb and Nb, for example, allow levitation at liquid He temperatures, Al requires temperatures below 1.2 K. Further, the particles need to be in the Meissner state to avoid mechanical loss The AHC-type trap is formed by two coils arranged in an anti-Helmholtz-like configuration. This trap yields a large magnetic field gradient in the trap center, resulting in trap frequencies above 10 kHz, see section III B. Figure We determined the properties of the 300 nm thick Nb film from R-T, I-V and Hall effect measurements to have a T c ≈ 9 K, a critical current density up to j c = 5 • 10 11 A/m 2 and a critical field B c2 ≈ 0.4 T, similar to previously reported values The particles can be obtained from particle powders or can be microfabricated directly in the trap. Figure In the following, we systematically analyze the presented trap architectures with respect to the stability of the trap and achievable trap frequencies for different trap sizes and geometries of the levitated particle. Before we proceed with this analysis, we recall the conditions for achieving stable levitation and present the different models we are going to use. Two requirements have to be met to achieve stable levitation where m is the mass of the particle and k t is the spring constant of the trap. A non-spherical particle also requires rotational stability and, thus, we also analyze torques, τ i , rotating the particle around an axis i by an angle θ j . If stable at θ lev , we calculate a corresponding angular frequency, ω τ i , from where I is the moment of inertia of the particle and k τ i is the angular spring constant. Equation (1) and equation (2) yield accurate trap frequencies as long as the force and torque depend linearly on displacement and angle, respectively, to which we restrict our analysis. Deviations can occur for larger particle amplitudes, see, e.g., Refs. Knowing the magnetic field distribution of a particle in the trap allows calculating the necessary forces and torques, for details see appendix A. Table The FEM modeling we use is based on the following assumptions. First, the particle is assumed to be in the Meissner state, which is motivated by the proposals of Refs. We first analyze the magnetic field distribution of the AHC trap. Figure thus, will affect the trap frequency and levitation point. a. Trap stability for translational degrees of freedom The force acting on the spherical particle can now be calculated from the field distributions. Figure position from which the spring constants k i , their uncertainties and trap frequencies ω i are calculated. b. Trap stability for angular degrees of freedom When a non-spherical particle, such as a cylinder or ring, is placed in the field of the realistic AHC-trap, torques also act on the particle, see figure For a ring with no trapped flux, a stable and metastable orientation are found at a tilt angle of 0 and π/2 with respect to the y-axis, respectively. However, for the other orientation, there is only one stable orientation close to π/6. This asymmetry is caused by the coil openings and flux quantization that generates an additional current in the ring. A torque acts to minimize this current, orienting the ring towards the coil openings, where the field is weaker. If the AHC-trap had no openings, a stable and metastable orientation would appear at an angle of 0 and π/2 with respect to the y-axis, respectively. c. Trap frequency The previous analysis confirms that particles of different shapes can be stably levitated in a realistic AHC. We now systematically study the trap frequency and consider first particles of different shape in the same AHC trap, see table II and table III. We observe in table II that the trap frequency for a spherical particle along z is by a factor of two larger than along x or y for the analytical models, which is expected due to the ideal anti Helmholtz coil arrangement in the trap. In FEM, however, this factor is reduced due to the deviation from a quadrupole field caused by the finite extent of the coil wires. We observe further that when account-ing for the volume of the particle and treating it as a superconductor in the Meissner state, the magnetic field gradient around the particle is decreased and, thus, also the trap frequency. When also accounting for the opening of the coils via FEM-3D, the magnetic field distribution becomes asymmetric and leads to different trap frequencies along x and y. Table We now analyze the dependence of the trap frequency on the size of a spherical particle in a trap with unaltered dimensions. In figure In figure To summarize, we find that FEM gives useful predictions for the stability, orientation and trap frequencies of different particle shapes levitated in realistic AHC traps. In contrast, analytical models tend to overestimation of trap frequencies and deviating predictions when scaling the trap geometry, which can be traced back to the assumptions made by these models. We now turn to analyze the properties of the DL trap and show in figure The breaking of symmetry due to the openings of the coil wires has a significant effect in the DL trap. As shown in figure a. Trap frequency Table Figure cle method, while it deviates for smaller particles due to the finite field penetration. Modeling via FEM-2D and FEM-3D results in gradually smaller trap frequencies due to a reduced gradient of the trap. Interestingly, the trap frequency reaches a local maximum around λ L /R sphere ∼ 0.05. For larger particles, the trap frequency decreases due to the trap becoming more magneto-gravitational, whereas for smaller particle sizes the magnetic field penetration into the particle leads to a reduction of the trap frequency. In figure To summarize the analysis of the DL trap, we find that analytical models overestimate the trap frequency and may even fail to predict stability in case the wire coils have openings. Magnetic levitation of superconducting micrometersized objects promises to reach an exceptional decoupling of the levitated object from its environment Using FEM we can now calculate the expected signal for realistic geometries by accounting for extended volumes, field penetration and flux quantization. In the following, we first consider a 1 μm diameter spherical particle trapped in an AHC-trap (cf. figure The slope of the curve in figure Commonly, one measures the flux noise power spectral density S φ i (ω), which is given as with S x i (ω) is the noise power spectral density of mechanical motion, x rms,i = k B T/mω 2 i (k B is Boltzmann's constant, T is temperature) the root mean square amplitude of the oscillation in direction i and γ i = ω i /Q i is the mechanical damping with Q i being the mechanical quality factor. On mechanical resonance, one obtains Table Figure We have analyzed in detail using analytical Crucially, we have shown that trap properties, like trap stability and frequency, can significantly differ from idealized, analytical models due to breaking of symmetry by coil openings, demagnetizing effects and flux quantization. We found that a chip-based AHC trap is capable of levitating micrometer-sized particles of spherical, cylindrical and ring shape with trap frequencies well above 10 kHz for a current density of 10 11 A/m 2 in the trap wires. However, the fabrication of such a trap on a single chip is complex and requires a three-layer process. A promising alternative would be to use a flip-chip architecture Extending our modeling by including flux pinning Maxwell stress tensor T, whose components T i j are given as: where 0 and μ 0 are the electrical permittivity and magnetic permeability, respectively, E i and B i are the vector components of the electric and the magnetic field and δ i j is the Kronecker delta. The knowledge of the field distributions E(r) and B(r) is sufficient to calculate electromagnetic forces and torques via surface integrals as and where τ is the torque, n is the unit vector normal to the particle surface, Ω is the surface of the particle and r and r 0 are the application point of the torque and the center of mass of the particle, respectively. While balance of the gravitational and magnetic force is a necessary condition, it is not sufficient. Additionally, the local energy minimum at r = (x, y, z) T = r lev = (x lev , y lev , z lev ) T must fulfill The FEM simulations we use are based on the London model where λ L = m μ 0 |Ψ | 2 e 2 is the London penetration depth, |Ψ| 2 = n c is the squared amplitude of the order parameter's wave function Ψ(r, θ) = |Ψ(r)|e iθr with phase θ, n c is the Cooper pair density, and e is the electron charge. By implementing this equation in FEM software as an external contribution to the current density in the superconductor domains, one can model domains as superconductors in the Meissner state. Note that equation (B1) is in general not gauge invariant under the transformation A = A + ∇Φ s , where Φ s is here an arbitrary scalar potential. However, in the specific case we consider, charge is conserved and the potentials A and Φ s change slowly in time (i.e., in the quasi-static regime), such that we can use equation (B1) in the Coulomb gauge ∇ • A = 0. The FEM implementation solves the Maxwell-London equations using A-V formulation Another feature of superconductivity is fluxoid quantization, which should be accounted for to accurately describe superconducting objects with holes. In our case, this concerns the levitation of ring-like particles. Fluxoid quantization can be derived by integrating the Ginzburg-Landau equation for the supercurrent (m e is the mass of the electron, is Planck's constant) over a closed loop in the superconductor, which contains a hole with magnetic flux Φ hole . This results in where n is an integer, and Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. Equation (B3) tells us that the supercurrent will preserve the magnetic flux threading the hole of the superconductor as the multiple of Φ 0 closest to Φ hole . Since our model does not account for the contributions of the wave function's gradient in equation (B2), fluxoid quantization cannot emerge from the implementation of equation (B1). We simplify our modeling by considering only flux quantization and, thus, neglect the flux in the ring's interior material caused by the finite penetration depth of the external magnetic field. This approximation is reasonable for Λ/R 1 (we have Λ/R < 0.04), where Λ = λ 2 L /d is the two dimensional effective penetration depth, R is the lateral size of the superconducting object and d its thickness is fulfilled within the defined area. In this way, a superconductor with trapped flux in a hole can be modeled. In order to validate our specific FEM implementation, we compare its results to test case, where analytical results exist. To this end, we select the magnetic field expulsion of a superconductor and demagnetizing effects of superconducting objects with different geometries. We also look at flux quantization in a ring and calculate the torque acting on a ring in a homogeneous magnetic field. a. Magnetic Field Expulsion To examine magnetic field expulsion we consider (i) a flat superconducting object with infinite extension in the z and positive x axes and (ii) a thin superconducting film with infinite extension in the z axis, under a homogeneous magnetic field B 0 = B 0 • k, see figure , where x is the distance from the superconductor's surface. For the second case, the magnetic field inside a superconducting thin film of thickness t is expected to also decay exponentially from both sides, but the tails of each exponential will overlap in the middle of the thin film, thus limiting the field expulsion We simulate the structures for case (i) with a semiinfinite superconductor that occupies the positive half space x > 0 and all z, and for case (ii) with a super- conducting thin film with t = 1 μm in x direction centered at zero while y = z = ∞. In both cases, we use λ L = 100 nm and a homogeneous magnetic field B 0 = B 0 • k with B 0 = 100 mT applied parallel to the z axis. The results are shown in figure b. Demagnetizing Effects Field expulsion concentrates field lines around the surfaces of the superconducting object parallel to the field. In these regions, an increase of magnetic field intensity appears. This increase can be calculated analytically as a multiplying factor called demagnetizing factor. Demagnetizing effects arise naturally in our modeling. In figure The ring with no flux quantization experiences a torque because the field is less perturbed when B 0 is parallel to the area of the hole than when it is perpendicular. Hence, it takes less supercurrent to expel the field when θ = π/2 or 3π/2. When the area of the hole is perpendicular to B 0 the torque on the ring vanishes due to symmetry, since it is as likely to tilt clockwise or counter-clockwise, in other words, it is in an unstable equilibrium. The stable configuration for the ring including flux quantization and no trapped flux, i.e., Φ t = 0, is to be oriented so that no flux is threading the hole, i.e., π/2 or 3π/2. The difference is that the torque is stronger due to additional current from flux quantization that keeps Φ t = 0 when θ π/2 or 3π/2. For the case of a ring with one trapped flux quantum parallel to B 0 , the configuration in which the least supercurrent is generated is that where B 0 is parallel to the trapped flux quantum, since B 0 is chosen so that the flux through the hole equals Φ 0 when the ring is perpendicular to the field. Thus, the ring will experience a torque that will force it to θ = 0. For θ = π the ring will be unstable because the flux through the hole at this configuration is maximum (Φ = 2Φ 0 ). d. Flux quantization: a ring and levitation Ref. [23] provides an analytical formula for the trap frequency along the vertical direction for levitating a ring in a quadrupole field, including flux quantization. We compared FEM-2D simulations to this formula for a ring with inner and outer radii of 0.4 μm and 0.5 μm, respectively, thickness of 50 nm and λ L = 50 nm in an AHC trap with coil radius and separation of 10 μm and a current of 3 A. Using FEM-2D and assuming zero flux trapped in the ring, we obtain (212 ± 0.6) kHz, which is in good agreement with the 209 kHz predicted by Ref. Given that the model is based on FEM, the results are mesh dependent. Constructing a mesh fine enough at the surface of the superconducting domains is critical to get reliable results. This dependence is illustrated in figure ber of mesh elements in the sphere and, thus, reduces the average element area that one mesh element covers. This is reflected in the number of degrees of freedom (DOF) in the sphere, that is, the number of unknowns to solve for in the model, which in general equals the number of dependent variables (A x , A y , A z and the gauge fixing potential inside the sphere) times the number of nodes in the geometry. In all our simulations we use quadratic mesh discretization, which means the lines connecting the mesh nodes are not straight lines but polynomials of order. For l mesh 5 • λ L = 250 nm, we observe no clear trend of the trap frequency within its uncertainty. However, for l mesh 0.5 • R sphere = 250 nm, the particle itself is not properly resolved and the magnetic field penetrates parts or the entire volume of the particle, which effectively increases the effect of field penetration and, thus, decreases the trap frequency. For FEM-2D we can decrease l mesh further as the computational cost is not as large as for FEM-3D simulations. Figure The trap frequency dependence on the mesh might not only be related to the mesh element size itself, but also on differences in the mesh being differently built for similar FEM models. To test this, we simulated the trap configuration as used for figure Note that the computation time for obtaining a typical magnetic field distribution of a particle is 30 -120 min and requires 50 -600 GB of RAM on computing nodes with 20 core Intel E5-2650v3 CPUs with 2.30 GHz base frequency available via a computing cluster. Figure 