A comprehensive theory of superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 must simultaneously explain experiments that suggest even parity superconducting order and yet others that have suggested broken time reversal symmetry. Completeness further requires that the theory is applicable to isoelectronic Ca2RuO4, a Mott-Hubbard semiconductor that exhibits an unprecedented insulator-to-metal transition which can be driven by very small electric field or current, and also by doping with very small concentration of electrons, leading to a metallic state proximate to ferromagnetism. A valence transition model, previously proposed for superconducting cuprates [Phys. Rev. B 98, 205153] is here extended to Sr2RuO4 and Ca2RuO4. The insulator-to-metal transition is distinct from that expected from the simple melting of the Mott-Hubbard semiconductor. Rather, the Ru-ions occur as low-spin Ru 4+ in the semiconductor, and as high-spin Ru 3+ in the metal, the driving force behind the valence transition being the strong spin-charge coupling and consequent large ionizaton energy in the low charge state. Metallic and superconducting ruthenates are thus two-component systems in which the half-filled high-spin Ru 3+ ions determine the magnetic behavior but not transport, while the charge carriers are entirely on on the layer oxygen ions, which have an average charge -1.5. Spin-singlet superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 evolves from the correlated lattice-frustrated 3/4-filled band of layer oxygen ions alone, in agreement with quantum many-body calculations that have demonstrated enhancement by electron-electron interactions of superconducting pair-pair correlations uniquely at or very close to this filling [Phys. Rev. B 93, 165110 and 93, 205111]. Several model-specific experimental predictions are made, including that spin susceptibility due to Ru-ions will remain unchanged as Sr2RuO4 is taken through superconducting Tc. Sr 2 RuO 4 has long been thought of as a chiral spintriplet superconductor, with orbital parity p x ± ip y It is useful to point out here that the concept of valence transition in systems consisting of donor and acceptor components is widely accepted in the context of pressure, temperature and light-induced neutral-to-ionic transition in quasi-one-dimensional mixed-stack organic charge-transfer solids The negative charge-transfer gap model is arrived at from heuristic arguments as opposed to direct computations, as the sheer number of many-body interactions and parameters that would enter such computations are enormously large. The relative magnitudes of the different parameters that would enter a complete theoretical model are known, however, which allows making the physical arguments for the transition. This approach is counter to existing theoretical approaches to Sr 2 RuO 4 , but as in the previous work In the next section I list what I believe are the most challenging observations, including apparent contradictions, in (i) Sr 2 RuO 4 , and (ii) the isoelectronic Mott-Hubbard semiconductor Ca 2 RuO 4 , which exhibits dramatic IMT induced by current A. Experimental puzzles, Sr2RuO4. (i) T c enhancement under uniaxial pressure. The superconducting critical temperature T c in Sr 2 RuO 4 crystals is strongly enhanced upon the application of uniaxial pressure along the [100] direction In view of what follows in Section IV, it is pointed out here that strong pressure-induced enhancement of T c is also found in Ce-based heavy fermion superconductors, and is ascribed to critical valence fluctuations by some investigators (ii) 17 O NMR. The earlier experiment that had given the most convincing evidence for triplet SC was based on the measurement of the O-ion Knight-shift as a function of temperature Replacement of Sr with Ca generates the isoelectronic Ca 2 RuO 4 as well as the "doped" compounds Ca 2-x Sr x RuO 4 , 0 ≤ x ≤ 2. Ca 2 RuO 4 is an antiferromagnetic semiconductor with energy gap between 0.2 -0.4 eV at low temperatures (i) Current-induced IMT. An unprecedented electric field-induced IMT, with a lower threshold field of 40 V/cm, tiny compared to the known semiconducting gap of 0.2 -0.4 eV, has been found in Ca 2 RuO 4 (ii) IMT induced by La substitution. There exist remarkable yet hitherto unnoticed similarities between IMT induced by current and electron doping by substitution of La for Ca. The ionic radii of Ca 2+ (1.00 Å) and La 3+ (1.03 Å) are nearly equal. The consequences of La-substitition are more dramatic than Sr-substitution, even though Sr 2 RuO 4 is isoelectronic with Ca 2 RuO 4 To summarize, any theory of Sr 2 RuO 4 must simultaneously explain the apparent contradictions between the 17 O NMR experiments The central postulate of the present work is that the peculiarities observed in Sr 2 RuO 4 should not be considered in isolation, as equally perplexing mysteries persist with the other perovskite superconductors cuprates and (Ba,K)BiO 3 , and in the pseudogap-like state A. The need to go beyond cation-centric models, experiments (i) The simultaneous breaking of rotational and translational symmetries in the hole-doped T-phase cuprates, accompanied by intra-unit cell O-ion inequivalency (ii) Negative charge-transfer gap in BaBiO 3 is already recognized. The semiconducting gap in undoped BaBiO 3 within traditional cation-centric models (iii) Sr 2 IrO 4 has attracted strong attention in recent years as an effective square lattice Mott-Hubbard insulator. The active layer consists of IrO 2 unit cells with nominally tetravalent Ir 4+ . The d-electron occupancy is t 5 2g as a consequence of large crystal field stabilization energy (CFSE). The t 2g orbitals are split by spin-orbit coupling into lower twofold degenerate total angular momentum J ef f = 3 2 levels and an upper nondegenerate narrow J ef f = 1 2 level It is useful to point out a crucial recent theoretical development. Convincing proof of the absence of SC in the weakly doped 2D Hubbard Hamiltonian with nearest neighbor-only hoppings has been found from a comprehensive study that used two different complementary many-body techniques The traditional approach to arriving at phenomenological minimal Hamiltonians for complex oxides assumes that the nominal and true charges (ionicities) of the active cation and the O-ions are the same. The known example of BaBiO 3 (see above) already indicates that this can be incorrect. Physical understanding of the distinction between true versus formal charge is best obtained within strongly correlated ionic models For any cation M that can exist in two different valence states M n+ and M (n-1)+ , the true ionic charge of the oxide is determined by the inequality where I n is energy of the nth ionization (M (n-1) → M n+ + e) and A 2 is the second electron-affinity of O. Here , where E M,n is the Madelung energy of the solid with the cation charge of +n. ∆(W ) = W n -W n-1 , where W n and W n-1 are the gains in total one-electron delocalization (band) energies of states with cationic charges +n and +(n -1), respectively. I n and A 2 are positive, while ∆E M,n is negative. Note that, (i) W n and W n-1 are both negative, (ii) for cation charge of +n there are very few charge carriers, while for cation charge +(n -1) a large fraction of the O-ions (nearly half) are O 1-and the number of charge carriers is far larger, making ∆(W ) positive. The two largest quantities in Eq. 1, I n and ∆E M,n , have opposite signs and magnitudes several tens of eV or even larger (see below), and are many times larger than A 2 and ∆(W ), which are both a few eV. This introduces the possibility of distinct quantum states with nearly integer valences, as opposed to mixed valence Since ∆E M,n is nearly independent of the detailed nature of M within a given row of the periodic table, it follows that for unusually large I n oxides will have strong tendency to be in the ionic state M (n-1)+ . This conclusion immediately explains the occurrence of only Bi 3+ in BaBiO 3 . As shown in Fig. As with Bi 3+ , unusually large nth ionization energy is a characteristic of all closed-shell M (n-1)+ . Additionally, for systems already close to the boundary of the inequality 1, external variables such as temperature, pressure or doping can change ∆E M,n or ∆(W ) enough to lead to first order transition from open-shell M n+ to closed-shell M (n-1)+ . The most well-known among such valence transitions are the temperature, pressure and light-induced neutral-to-ionic transitions in the family of mixed-stack organic charge-transfer solids, which have been known for more than four decades The charge-transfer gap following the valence transition is the excitation Cu 1+ O 1-→ Cu 2+ O 2-, opposite to the excitation in the undoped semiconducting state, and is therefore "negative". Following valence transition doped cuprates consist of an effective nearly 1 4 -filled O hole-band ( Closed-shell characters of Cu 1+ and Bi 3+ are true independent of crystal structure. In octahedral complexes with large CFSE unusually large ionization energy will be true for cations with electron occupancy t 6 2g . This tendency would be strongest with 5d cations with CFSE much larger than for 3d and 4d cations. Reference 10 therefore proposed that the transition to the pseudogap state in electron-doped Sr 2 IrO 4 is a consequence the valence transition from Ir 4+ with open-shell configuration t 5 2g to Ir 3+ with closed-shell t 6 2g . As in the cuprates this would again imply a nearly 1 4 -filled oxygen holeband, which would have the tendency to the same chargeordering and hence the same d-wave like gap. Strong support for this viewpoint comes from the known true charge distribution in octahedral IrTe 2 . Even as the nominal charges are Ir 4+ (Te 2-) 2 , the true ionic charges are accepted As seen in the previous section, negative chargetransfer is very likely with closed-shell cations and can be driven by both ∆E m,n or ∆(W ), thereby introducing a new mechanism for IMT. In the following I discuss how a similar IMT can occur in complexes where formal charges correspond to nearly half-filled d-shells. A. The unusally large ionization energies of half-filled ions. Beyond completely closed-shell cations, isolated free ions that are exactly half-filled also have unusually large ionization energies. For the d-block elements this is true for ions with electron configurations d 5 , which as free ions occur in their high-spin configurations because of Hund's coupling. Fig. The nominal charge of the Ru-ion in Sr 2 RuO 4 and Ca 2 RuO 4 is Ru 4+ with four d-electrons. The ion is assumed to be in the low spin state in all prior theoretical work (two experimental studies have however claimed high-spin Ru 4+ in Sr 2 RuO 4 The charge-spin coupling implied in Figs. Beyond the terms already included in Eq. 1, inter- actions that determine the relative energies of |III and |IV include: U (CF SE : j), U (Coulomb; j) and U (exchange : j), |j = |III and |IV , where U (CF SE : j) is the crystal field stabilization energy; U (Coulomb; j) the direct Coulomb repulsions between electrons occupying the d-orbitals (Hubbard repulsions between electrons occupying the same as well as different d-orbitals); and U (exchange : j) is the Hund's exchange energy. The inequality that determines the competition between highspin Ru 3+ and low-spin Ru 4+ is, In the above n = 4, and A 2 , ∆E M,n and ∆(W ) have the same meanings as in Eq. 1. ∆ CF = U (CF SE : III) -U (CF SE : IV ) is negative (U (CF SE : III) 0) and favors state |IV over state |III , while ∆ J = U (exchange : III)-U (exchange : IV ) is positive and favors state |III over state |IV . It is difficult to estimate ∆ C = U (Coulomb; III)-U (Coulomb; IV ); it is assumed to be small relative to the larger ∆ CF and ∆ J , the competition between which determine the relative stabilities of high versus low-spin in semiconductors. As with Eq. 1, a smaller (larger) left hand side favors Ru 4+ (Ru 3+ ). The following are now pointed out: (i) First-principles calculations for the cuprates have consistently determined large direct O-O hoppings t pp ≥ 0.5t dp in the cuprates (ii) The actual contribution by ∆(W ) to the stabilization of |III is even larger, given that in |III t dp includes contributions from the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, over and above from d xy . (iii) ∆ CF in Eq. 2 need not be a rigid quantity as in the competition between two semiconductors, where ∆(W ) = 0 by default. When the competition is between a semiconductor and a metal it is likely that ∆ CF decreases self-consistently with conduction. It is argued in (i) above that conduction due to electron hopping between O-ions requires state |III to make significant contribution to the electronic structure of Sr 2 RuO 4 . Given the large Coulomb repulsion between electrons occupying the same d-orbital, this implies that the extra electron in the Sr 3+ -ion will likely occupy an e g orbital (see Fig. Based on the above I posit that the difference between the Mott-Hubbard semiconductor bulk Ca 2 RuO 4 and metallic Sr 2 RuO 4 originates from different charges of the Ru-ions in these systems. As a consequence of the negative charge-transfer gap in Sr 2 RuO 4 there is a preponderance of layer O 1-ions instead of a few due to self-doping. In Figs. A. Sr2RuO4 (i) d-wave SC. Within the valence transition model the charge-carriers are entirely on the O-ions which have average charge -1.5. The Ru 3+ -ions play at most a virtual role in transport, exactly as the closed-shell Cu 1+ ions in the cuprates Correlation-driven SC in the frustrated 3 4 -filled or 1 4filled band is not due to spin fluctuation. Rather, the superconducting state in the frustrated 3 4 -filled band evolves from a commensurate CDW of Cooper pairs, -a paired-electron crystal (PEC) -that is unique to the exactly 3 4 -filled frustrated lattice (iii) T c enhancement by the application if uniaxial pressure. Carrier density-dependent calculations of superconducting pair-pair correlations have found that these are enhanced relative to the noninteracting Hamiltonian over a region of small width about 3 4 -filling, with the strongest correlations occurring for exactly 3 4filling ) T c will be less than the maximum possible. Within the valence transition model, pressure along the Ru-O bonds (but not along the Ru-Ru diagonal direction) enhances the reverse charge-transfer because of the increase in t dp . (i) Current-induced IMT and diamagnetism. There is no explanation of the current-induced IMT ). Reference 10 has pointed out that the charge-ordered state in the cuprates (and many other systems with the same carrier density) can be understood within the same picture. The concept of the PEC is identical to the concept of density-wave of Cooper pairs that has been conjectured by many authors to be proximate to the superconducting state in the cuprates (ii) La-doping, IMT and ferromagnetism. The valence transition model gives the simplest explanation for the IMT induced by La-doping, as illustrated in Fig. (iii) Co-appearance of ferromagnetism and possible SC. This also has a natural explanation within the negative charge-transfer gap model. Observation of SC here is reminescent of superconductivity in undoped thin film T cuprates, which is readily understood with the negative charge-transfer gap model Here I make experimental predictions specific to the negative charge-transfer gap model. (i) Charge densities on the layer oxygens in Sr 2 RuO 4 . 17 O NMR experiments should be able to find the charge densities on the layer oxygens. It is predicted that this charge density in Sr 2 RuO 4 in the superconducting state is -1.5. (ii) Intra-unit cell inequivalency of layer oxygens. It is conceivable that in the current-induced semimetallic state, or in weakly La-doped CaRu 2 O 4 intra-unit cell inequivalency of layer O-ions will be detected by 17 O-NMR or other experiments, as in the case of YBa 2 Cu 3 O y In conclusion, nominal and true charges in conducting perovskite oxides can be very different. The natural state of oxide ions is not necessarily O 2-, even though that is commonly assumed. The second electron affinity of O is positive (it costs energy to add the second extra electron) and it is only the gain in Madelung energy in the insulating oxides that drives a metal oxide to a state with high cation charge M n+ and anion charge O 2-. With cations that in their lower charge state M (n-1)+ have high ionization energies, IMT occurs via a valence transition M n+ → M (n-1)+ , which in the quasi-2D materials leaves the layers with 3 4 -filled oxygen band of electrons. Average charge of -1.5 on oxygen anions is neither strange nor unprecedented, -this is, for example, the known true charge on the oxygens in alkali metal sequioxides The negative charge-transfer gap model gives the simplest yet most comprehensive explanations for the many apparently peculiar observations in Sr 2 RuO 4 and Ca 2 RuO 4 . All of the peculiarities are understood once it is recognized that magnetism and SC involve two entirely different components of the crystals: the high-spin Ru 3+ ions are responsible for the magnetic behavior but the charge carriers are entirely on the O-sites. The two phenomena are, however, coupled in that it is the lower charge on the cation that gives the specific carrier density on the oxygen sites necessary for correlated-electron SC. Additonal attractive features of the theory are that the model appears to be simultaneously applicable to many other correlated-electron systems 