Detection of electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) using a microwave cavity resonating at a fixed frequency (between 9 and 10 GHz) remains the most popular method until now. Here, we report a cavity-less technique which makes use of only an impedance analyzer and a copper strip coil to detect L-band EPR (f = 1-3 GHz) in the standard EPR marker 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH). Our method relies on measuring the magnetoimpedance (MI) response of DPPH through a copper strip coil that encloses DPPH. In contrast to commercial EPR which measures only the field derivative of power absorption, our method enables us to deduce both absorption and dispersion. Changes in resistance (R) and reactance (X) of the copper strip while sweeping an external dc magnetic field, were measured for different frequencies (f = 0.9 to 2.5 GHz) of radio frequency current in the coil. R exhibits a sharp peak at a critical value of the dc magnetic field, which is identified as the resonance field and X shows a dispersion at the same frequency. The data were analyzed to obtain line width and resonance field parameters. The resonance field increased linearly with frequency and the obtained Landé gg factor of 1.999 is close to the accepted value of 2.0036, measured in X-band. The simplicity of this technique can be exploited to study paramagnetic centers in catalysis and other materials. The first electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra was recorded by Yevgeny Konstantovich Zavoisky almost 70 years ago using a simple home-built spectrometer The EPR spectra at low frequencies can exhibit better resolution in certain cases, e.g. the EPR spectra of Cu 2+ complexes such as Cu(DOPA)2 and Cu(carnosine)4 were better resolved at 2.62 GHz than at 9.30 GHz In this article, we present a simple method to detect EPR in the L-band frequency region, which makes use of only an impedance analyzer and a copper stripcoil. Our method is compact, fast, requires very less instrumentation and can easily be incorporated in teaching and research laboratories. Our technique provides additional information pertaining to the absorptive and dispersive components of the high frequency magnetic susceptibility whereas conventional EPR spectrometers are designed to provide information about the field derivative of the power absorbed by the sample. Using our simple setup, we demonstrate the detection of EPR due to free radicals in a standard sample of 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH). As a stable and well-characterized solid radical source, DPPH is the most popular reference sample with Landé g-factor of 2.0036 The intensity of EPR signals depends on the number of radicals for a freshly prepared sample and can be determined by weighing the DPPH sample. DPPH exhibits a single response line in X-band with a small linewidth ~1.5-4.7 Oe due to the presence of only one unpaired spin per 41 atoms. To detect EPR in DPPH sample we measure the magnetoimpedance (MI) of a copper strip surrounding the sample. MI refers to the variation of electrical impedance (Z (f, H) = R(f,H)+iX(f,H)) of a material in presence of an applied dc magnetic field (Hdc) at different frequencies of alternating current (f). It consists of measuring the magnetic field dependence of the magnitude of impedance (Z) alone or resistance (R) and reactance (X) of the sample i.e., magnetoresistance and magnetoreactance, respectively. The radio frequency (rf) current from the impedance analyzer flows through the stripcoil and terminates at the ground of the SMA connector creating an rf magnetic field in the interior of the stripcoil along the axial direction as shown in Fig. where φφ is the rf magnetic flux passing through the stripcoil given by φφ = μμ 0 μμ rr HH rrrr AA. Here, Hrf is the magnetic field inside the strip-coil and AA is the cross-sectional area of the stripcoil. Since the high frequency permeability is μμ = μμ ′ -iiμμ′′ where μʹ is the in-phase and μ′′ is the out-of phase of the permeability which describe dispersion and absorption or loss in the sample, respectively. By substituting the complex permeability, we obtain RR = G(ωωμμ 0 μμ rr ′′ ) and ii = G(ωωμμ 0 μμ rr ′ ), where G is a constant depending on the geometry of the stripcoil. Since the high frequency permeability of the paramagnetic DPPH sample is affected by the application of dc bias magnetic field, the resistance and reactance of the stripcoil also changes. R and X were recorded without and with the sample inside the stripcoil and the data for each frequency and magnetic field were subtracted to obtain only the sample contribution. Fig. Conventional EPR spectroscopy with lock-in detection technique measures the field derivative of the rf power absorbed, dP/dH, which is proportional to dχ′′/dH. The dispersive signal is rarely reported except in a few experiments Here, ΔHH and HH rr are the line widths and resonance fields corresponding to a particular frequency. Ksym and Kasym are the frequency dependent magnitudes of the absorptive and dispersive components present in the signals and C is a constant offset. To understand the line shape, we look at the Ksym /Kasym ratio for R and X as obtained from the DPPH sample. On fitting R at 2 GHz it was found |Ksym/Kasym|= 4.5658, indicating R is dominated by the symmetric component while for X, |Ksym/Kasym|= 9.6943x10 -4 indicating the line shape is dominated by the dispersive component. In conventional EPR spectrometers, the derivative of the power absorbed is usually measured and the line shape is fitted to the Dysonian equation given by Eq. 2: 29 The first term in the above equation describes the absorption while the second term represents the dispersion. αα denotes the dispersion-to-absorption ratio. The asymmetricity is prominent in conducting samples since the electric and magnetic rf components in conducting samples become out of phase with each other leading to an admixture of the dispersion into the absorption spectra. αα = 0 when the skin effect is negligible as in insulating samples while αα = 1 for highly conducting samples where the skin depth is very small compared to the sample size. In this case the absorption and dispersion are of equal strength. So, a dP/dH measurement alone cannot isolate the absorption and dispersion effect whereas, the R and X responses from the magnetoimpedance measurements can provide this information and enable accurate analysis of the physical parameters. In Fig. where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio (γγ = ggμμ BB /ħ, where g is the Landé g factor, μμ BB is the Bohr magneton and ħ is the reduced Plank's constant). Therefore, with increasing Hdc the resonance frequency increases linearly. This linear behavior was observed in the plot of fr vs Hdc presented in Fig. To verify the results obtained through the MI method, we measured the EPR spectra with a broad band ferromagnetic resonance spectrometer (Cryo-FMR by NanoOsc TM from Quantum Design Inc.USA). This spectrometer makes use of the lock-in technique and records the derivative of power absorbed (dP/dH) by the DPPH sample placed on top of a wave guide while Hdc is swept for fixed rf excitations of 2 GHz, 4 GHz, 10 GHz and 12 GHz as shown in Fig. 