Bound states at interfaces between superconductors and other materials are a powerful tool to characterize the nature of the involved systems, and to engineer elusive quantum excitations. In-gap excitations of conventional s-wave superconductors occur, for instance, at magnetic impurities with net magnetic moment breaking time-reversal symmetry. Here we show that interfaces between a superconductor and a quantum antiferromagnet can host robust in-gap excitations, without breaking time-reversal symmetry. We illustrate this phenomenon in a one-dimensional model system with an interface between a conventional s-wave superconductor and a one-dimensional Mott insulator described by a standard Hubbard model. This genuine many-body problem is solved exactly by employing a combination of kernel polynomial and tensor network techniques. We unveil the nature of such zero modes by showing that they can be adiabatically connected to solitonic solutions between a superconductor and a mean-field antiferromagnet. Our results put forward a new class of in-gap excitations between superconductors and a disordered quantum spin phase, including quantum spin-liquids, that can be relevant for a wider range of heterostructures. Topological modes emerging in condensed matter systems are among the most intriguing features in physics. Well-known examples are the electronic solitons in polyacetylene Among the different in-gap states found in materials, those of superconductors have attracted special attention, because they might provide valuable information about the nature of the superconducting phase, even if it is topologically trivial. On the one hand, a classical magnetic impurity (a static magnetic moment) gives rise to in-gap Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in s-wave superconductor, probing the vulnerability to the superconducting phase against time-reversal symmetry violation (spin polarization) Here we demonstrate how solitonic in-gap modes can emerge at interfaces between a conventional superconductor and a quantum antiferromagnet without longrange order, both topologically trivial on their own. In particular, we show that time-reversal symmetry needs not to be broken and that these modes can be adiabatically connected with solitonic zero modes of the antiferromagnetically ordered phase violating time-reversal symmetry. In this way, we extend the set of situations where the composition of different materials can generate a non-trivial phase at interfaces. In particular, our results put forward a minimal model system where the interplay of superconductivity and quantum spin lqiuid physics gives rise to unconventional excitations. The manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we show the emergence of the solitonic zero mode and its robustness towards system parameters, by exactly solving the interacting model. In Sec. III we put forward a connection between the time-reversal symmetric interacting zero mode, and a solitonic zero mode in a non-interacting model with broken time-reversal symmetry. Finally, in Sec. IV we summarize our conclusions. We model our system by the following Hamiltonian of a one-dimensional chain, that allows us incorporate an interface between a conventional superconductor and a quantum antiferromagnet in the simplest way: H = H kin + H U + H SC , where H kin is the kinetic energy term in a tight-binding form, H U is the Hubbard interaction term with a position dependent U and H SC introduces conventional superconductivity in the mean-field formulation The heterostructure can be modeled by the parametrization U (n) = [tanh(n/W ) + 1]U/2, and ∆(n) = [-tanh(n/W ) + 1]∆/2 locating the interface at n = 0 (Fig. For the treatment of this genuine many-body Hamiltonian we employ the computational matrix product state formalism and, in particular, determine the local singleparticle spectral function defined as This dynamical correlation function can be computed for the whole frequency range by exploiting a kernel polynomial technique The spectral function A(n, ω) shows the quasiparticle excitation gap in real space. Thus, it is instructive to consider first each subsystem of the model separately using our computational scheme for a system of finite length. For the uniform superconductor, A(ω, n) shows a quasiparticle gap (Fig. We turn now to the spatially resolved spectrum of a heterostructure connecting the two phases. As shown in Fig. Let us now consider the properties of this interface excitation. First, we examine how the interface mode behaves for varying the model parameters ∆ and U . In Fig. A further path to elucidate the character of the zeroenergy modes runs via the using a mean-field antiferromagnetic phase for n > 0. We restrict to the single-particle description by replacing The Hamiltonian for this inhomogeneous 1D system can be easily solved numerically by means of a Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) scheme with the results displayed in Fig. The nature of this interface mode can be easily explained with an analytical approach in the continuum limit of this model. For this purpose we choose a twosite unit cell adapted to the staggered moment (A and B sublattice) and rewrite the kinetic energy term in kspace, which near k = π takes the form of a 1D Dirac equation with H(p) = τ y p, with τ y the sublattice Pauli matrix. We now use p = -i∂ x , introduced into the adapted H AF and H SC and turn to continuum variables defining the continuum 1D Hamiltonian, This Hamiltonian can be diagonalized defining the Nambu spinor Ψ = (ψ A,↑ , ψ B,↑ , ψ † A,↓ , ψ † B,↓ ), for the sector of spin-up electron/spin-down hole, where we obtain The spectrum is obtained by BdG transformation. While both the superconductor and the antiferromagnet have an excitation gap, we find at the interface a zero-energy eigenvalue with an eigenoperator 2,44-46 , (8) for m AF (∞) > 0. Although the many-body problem is challenging, we may connect with the previous solitonic mode by extending the many-body Hamiltonian with a staggered field on the Mott side, i.e. H = H kin + H U + H SC + H AF . In this way, we introduce a static moment in addition to the quantum fluctuation. This model shall again be solved by our computational many-body scheme. The schematic result obtained is shown in Fig. We now verify the previous picture by examining the spectral function Eq. 4 at the interface, n = 0 (Fig. An interesting feature is the splitting of in-gap mode into two branches when m AF is switched on, whereby only one branch evolves into the solitonic zero-energy mode, while second rises in energy and gradually loses weight. Moreover, it is also important to note that depending on the sign of m AF , the low-energy mode will transform either into Ψ † or into ΘΨ † Θ -1 . In the quantum antiferromagnetic regime, the two modes coexist, such that there is a two-fold degeneracy for the in-gap mode at m AF = 0, whose energy needs not to lie at exactly zero. Finally, we highlight two potential platforms to experimentally realize our proposal, bulk compounds showing quasi-1D chains and atomically engineered lattices. The first direction consists of creating an interface be-tween a conventional superconductor and a compound hosting quasi 1D quantum antiferromagnets, such as CuCl 2 -2N(C 5 D 5 ) 49 , KCuF 3 To summarize, we have put forward a minimal system consisting of a many-body quantum antiferromagnet and a conventional s-wave superconductor that host solitonic in-gap excitations. We have unveiled the nature of those states, by showing that they can be adiabatically connected to solitonic states between a mean-field antiferromagnet and a superconductor, which resembles the Jackiw-Rebbi soliton. Our results put forward a minimal example in which solitonic modes appear between a quantum disordered magnet and a superconductor, providing a stepping stone towards the study of interfaces between superconductors and quantum spin liquids. shows the interface spectral function for the parametric path defined in Eq. A2, where λ = 0 denotes the analytically solvable limit, and λ = 1 the quantum limit (with time reversal symmetry). It is observed that the solitonic mode remains robust in both paths, keeping a finite bulk gap. We took ∆ = 0.5t for (a,b), U = 5t for (b) and mAF = 0.3t for (a,b). Furthermore, to demonstrate the robustness of the adiabatic connection used in the main text, we show an alternative interpolation between the quantum and classical antiferromagnet. For this purpose, we now define the parametric Hamiltonian as so that for λ = 0 the Hamiltonian becomes purely noninteracting (breaking time reversal symmetry), whereas for λ = 1 the system becomes purely many-body (conserving time reversal symmetry). As it is observed in Fig. It is interesting to note that, since the interface mode is not of topological origin, there is not a symmetry protected topological index associated with it. This is what allows us to connect smoothly the symmetry broken state, and the time reversal symmetric many-body soliton. We highlight that along this path, the bulk charge gap of the antiferromagnet remains open, so that the evolution of solitonic mode can be clearly followed. Finally, we note that although the emergence of in-gap states at interfaces between time-reversal symmetry broken states and superconductors is a generic feature, We now elaborate on the different perturbations addressed, which are summarized below. • Arbitrary doping in the superconductor (Eq. A1) • Interface scattering (Eq. A2) • Extended hopping (Eq. A3) • Extended many-body interactions (Eq. A4) • Anderson disorder (Eq. A5) • Selfconsistent treatment of the superconductor (Eq. A6) In all those instances we have observed the persistence of the many-body solitonic mode in our calculations (Fig. The unperturbed Hamiltonian considered for the system is H = H kin + H U + H SC , with the kinetic term n,s c n,s , the local interactions of the form , and the superconducting term of the form as considered in the main manuscript. ∆(n) is defined to be non-zero in the superconductor, U (n) to be non-zero in the quantum antiferromagnet and μ(n) is a local onsite energy. In the following we will add a variety of perturbations to the previous Hamiltonian, and show that the zero mode remains present. First (Fig. where i ∈ SC denotes sum over the superconducting part, and we compute the spectral function for the Hamiltonian H = H + H D where we take D = 1.6t. The result is shown in Fig. so that the total Hamiltonian is H = H + H P S , and we took w = 0.8t. As it is observed in Fig. which breaks the bipartite nature of our model, and generalizes to realistic realizations where it is expected a finite second neighbor hopping. We take t N N N = 0.2t, and compute the spectral function for the model H = H + H N N N , whose result is shown in Fig. that acts in the whole system, so that the total Hamiltonian is H = H + H V and we take V = 0.3t. As it is observed in Fig. where δ n is a random number for each site i between in the interval [0, 0.4t]. The total Hamiltonian considered H = H + H A , and as shown in Fig. a strongly interacting Hubbard model, including CuCl 2 -2N(C 5 D 5 ) 49 , KCuF 3 We now address the proposal based on atomically engineered chains. 