An Andreev molecule is a system of closely spaced superconducting weak links accommodating overlapping Andreev Bound States. Recent theoretical proposals have considered one-dimensional Andreev molecules with a single conduction channel. Here we apply the scattering formalism and extend the analysis to multiple conduction channels, a situation encountered in epitaxial superconductor/semiconductor weak links. We obtain the multi-channel bound state energy spectrum and quantify the contribution of the microscopic non-local transport processes leading to the formation of Andreev molecules. The physical properties of Josephson junctions, both isolated and in ensembles, are well understood and exploited in various fields such as magnetometry and metrology Recently we elucidated an unconventional coupling mechanism, historically referred to as the "order-parameter" interaction In an isolated Josephson junction with multiple conduction channels, each channel hosts independent ABS. The total supercurrent is given by the sum of the contributions from each channel, a function of the overall superconducting phase difference and the individual channel transmissions Here we apply the scattering matrix formalism to describe Andreev molecules with multiple channels. First we formulate the problem for the case of two weak links connected to three superconductors, introducing new terms accounting for partial Andreev reflection at the finite central superconductor. We identify the microscopic scattering processes, elastic cotunneling and crossed Andreev reflection, which give rise to ABS hybridization. After verifying that the results are consistent with the BdG treatment of a single-channel molecule, we calculate the energy spectra of a twenty-channel Andreev molecule. Finally we depict the extended quasiparticle trajectories arising in an Andreev molecule and plot their probabilities as a function of the size of the finite superconductor. A convenient approach to treat conduction through mesoscopic systems is the Landauer-Büttiker scattering formalism These waves can be labeled with two sets of eight coefficients where A describes waves propagating towards weak links with amplitudes a and B describes outgoing waves with amplitudes b. The scattering equation for the weak links is given by B = S N A with The individual normal scattering matrices at the left and right weak links are S L,R for electrons and S * L,R for holes. The specific form of S L,R and S * L,R will depend on the weak links. For example the scattering matrix corresponding to a Dirac δ-potential as used in the BdG analysis of the Andreev molecule where the constant u is related to the strength of the δ-potential, U 0 , and the Fermi velocity, v F , by u = U 0 / v F . For simplicity, in the following analysis for a multi-channel weak link we use (d) The probabilities of Andreev reflection, transmission, and their product, which factors into the probability for CAR, is plotted as a function of l/ξ 0 for fixed energy E = 0.1∆. In a long superconductor, l ξ 0 , only Andreev reflection occurs whereas for a short one, l ξ 0 , only elastic co-tunneling occurs. At intermediate values l ≈ ξ 0 and in the presence of scattering there is a peak in the CAR probability which goes to zero elsewhere. random symmetric unitary matrices for S L and S R . These matrices can in principle include additional scattering at the superconductor-weak link interface. Other classes of scattering matrices corresponding to breaking time-reversal symmetry or spin-rotation symmetry can be used to model the effect of a magnetic field or spin-orbit interaction It remains to determine scattering on the superconductors. In contrast to scattering at the normal weak links, which need not preserve momentum, scattering on the superconductors occur through Andreev processes which are momentum-conserving when the Fermi energy is much larger than the superconducting gap. For the semi-infinite superconducting electrodes to the left and right, for energies smaller than the superconducting gap (|E| < ∆), the only scattering process possible is Andreev reflection, in which an incident electron is retroreflected as a hole and an incident hole is retroreflected as an electron. This Andreev reflection amplitude is r A = e -i(α±φ L,R ) , where φ L,R is the superconducting phase of the left (right) superconductor and α = cos -1 with = E/∆ As shown in Fig. The probability amplitude associated with the process of partial Andreev reflection, Fig. where the coherence factors are given by and k e,h are complex to account for bound states. If the superconducting gap is much smaller than the Fermi energy ∆ E F , they can be approximated as k e,h ≈ k F ± i/ξ where k F is the Fermi momentum in the normal state and the coherence length is a function of energy Here ξ 0 = v F /∆ is the bare superconducting coherence length, v F is the Fermi velocity and = E/∆ is the normalized energy. If we focus on the subspace of waves with positive momentum the wavefunction is given by where the three regions are the finite superconducting slab (|x| ≤ l/2) and the normal conductors to the left (x < -l/2) and right (x > l/2) of the slab. The superconducting phase on the central superconductor is fixed at zero and serves as the reference for the phase differences φ L,R on the left and right superconductors. Each junction can be shorted by a superconducting loop which allows tuning φ L,R independently with external magnetic fields. In addition this ground connection allows an additional path for current flow such that the supercurrents through the two weak links may be different. In the normal regions (x < -l/2 or x > l/2) only electron or hole plane waves are possible, with wavevectors ±k F and coherence factors either (1, 0) (electrons) or (0, 1) (holes). In the superconducting slab the wavefunctions mix electrons and holes and may have an exponential, energy-dependent envelope as a result of the complex wavevectors k e,h . Imposing boundary conditions at the slab edges x = ±l/2 to preserve continuity we have By eliminating the coefficients c + e,h we can relate incoming and outgoing waves with a scattering matrix, where we define the Andreev transmission amplitude, with t ± S = t S e ±ik F l , and the partial Andreev reflection amplitude, For the negative momentum wavefunction the substitution k F → -k F yields the same scattering matrix with t + S and t - S swapped. These amplitude satisfy |r S | 2 + |t ± S | 2 = 1 as expected from quasiparticle conservation. In a realistic system with a three-dimensional central superconductor, the wavefunctions ψ (Eq. ( The following analysis is limited to the one-dimensional case. For convenience and visibility we set k F l to constant values in the scattering coefficients while maintaining k F l 1. In principle each channel may have a different phase factor resulting from interference but such offsets are already included via the random unitary scattering matrices S L,R and do not change the results qualitatively. In addition we have assumed that the energy gap of the superconducting slab is the same as that of the superconducting electrodes, effectively ignoring any inverse proximity effect which is reasonable given that we consider typical semiconducting weak links. In As the superconductor thickness goes to zero, l/ξ 0 → 0, Andreev reflections are suppressed and all quasiparticles tunnel across, t S → 1. Andreev processes are equally probable when l/ξ 0 ≈ 1. As we extend the length of the central superconductor, l/ξ 0 → ∞, one recovers the Andreev reflection amplitude of a semi-infinite superconductor, r S → r A = e -iα , and transmission is quashed, t S → 0. The Andreev phase-conjugating mirror is only perfect if it is much thicker than ξ 0 , the characteristic length scale for Andreev reflection. Scattering at the weak links will also reduce elastic co-tunneling. If the single-channel transmissions of the weak links are τ L,R , the first order EC probability will be reduced to τ L τ R |t S | 2 . For τ < 1, there will be higher order processes involving multiple reflections at the barriers which will also transmit a particle across the superconductor. Also plotted in Fig. In a similar fashion to the derivation of S N , we use these results for scattering from the three superconductors to define a matrix S S which relates waves incident on the slab (B) to the outgoing waves, A = S S B, with blocks S eh on the anti-diagonal for Andreev reflections, and blocks S ee and S hh on the diagonal for tunneling through the central superconducting slab, S hh is obtained from S ee with the transformation t + S → t - S . The superconducting phases are contained in the diagonal matrix Φ = diag (φ L , 0, 0, φ R ) and I N is the N × N identity matrix. The total size of S S , like S N , is 8N × 8N , accounting for N conduction channels. We combine the scattering equation for weak links, B = S N A, and for superconductors, A = S S B, in order to obtain the master equation, The scattering product S N S S depends on energy , the scattering properties of the weak links (S L,R ), and the superconducting phases φ L,R . Eq. ( gives the energy spectrum , the scattering amplitudes a and b, and the corresponding wavefunctions of the Andreev molecule To verify correctness we numerically solved Eq. ( In Fig. For large separation, l/ξ 0 1, there is no coupling between the two weak links, and the spectral lines follow the standard ABS energy dispersion, where τ Ln,Rn corresponds to the transmission of the n-th channel in the left or right weak link. Since the right phase is fixed, φ R = 3π/5, ABS corresponding to the right weak link (red) do not disperse with φ L , whereas those of the left junction (blue) dip towards zero as φ L approaches π. There is no hybridization between ABS at the right and left junctions and the spectral lines cross without forming gaps. As the junctions are brought closer, for l/ξ 0 = 1, 0.5, 0.1, multiple avoided crossings materialize, signaling the formation of Andreev molecules. Similarly to the one-channel case At separation l = 0.1ξ 0 , where the Andreev molecule fuses into a single weak link, only approximately half of the ABS remain in the gap and the states have shifted in phase to the right by φ R = 3π/5. Overall the spectra of Fig. An eigenvector B 0 which solves Eq. ( The trivial cycle is a conventional Andreev bound state at one of the weak links and is represented in Fig. With a shorter central superconductor, Fig. matrices have high channel transmissions and the phases φ L,R have opposing signs and values which result in an energy degeneracy in the limit l/ξ 0 → ∞. In the case of a symmetric single-channel Andreev molecule At large separation, l/ξ 0 ≈ 10, both probabilities at the right weak link (red) are approximately 0.5 whereas those at the red weak link (blue) are almost zero, indicating that eigenstate is a conventional ABS as in Fig. As the separation is reduced, the weights at the left weak link (blue) start to increase and those at the left weak link (red) decrease, indicating the formation of a dEC state. The position of the step will depend on the detuning of φ L from -φ R . Near l/ξ 0 ≈ 1, the orbit is approximately equally distributed between the left and right weak links. The decomposition of dEC into two simultaneous EC processes leads to the qualitatively similar form of the probabilities in blue with the EC probability |t S | 2 of Fig. For even smaller separation both the red and blue probabilities decrease and are compensated by an increase in the amplitudes |b ← Le,Re | 2 and |b → Lh,Rh | 2 (not shown) of the counterpropagating orbit given by reversing the directions of the arrows in Fig. The second molecular bound state, dCAR, is shown in Fig. The dCAR probability is plotted in Fig. As the separation is reduced the probability shifts to the left weak link, much as with dEC. The increase in probability at the left weak link (blue lines) occurs at smaller l/ξ 0 than for dEC, most likely a result of the high value of transmission which leads to weak dCAR hybridization. After reaching a maximum at l/ξ 0 ≈ 1 the blue lines take a sharp downturn and approach zero as the separation is further reduced. The probability for dCAR follows the Andreev reflection probability which vanishes as l/ξ 0 → 0. As with dEC the probabilities describing propagation through the right weak link, including the time-reversed ones not shown, approach approximately the same value as l/ξ 0 → 0. However since the probability of all trajectories at the left weak link must vanish, the red lines approach a value of 1/4 instead of 1/8 as with dEC. The additional splitting of the probabilities for l/ξ 0 1 is also due to imperfect transmission. Unsurprisingly, the overall shape of the dCAR probabilities (blue lines) are similar to that of the CAR probability plotted in Fig. In the general multi-channel, non-symmetric case and as a function of the separation the eigenstates will be mixtures of conventional ABS and molecular ABS. The phase configuration necessary for molecular orbits will coincide with the position of level crossings in the large separation ABS energy spectrum such as in Fig. Andreev molecules, or in general, arbitrary mesoscopic systems with superconducting regions of size comparable to the coherence length can be modeled with the scattering approach incorporating the partial Andreev reflection and transmission coefficients (r S , t S ). We validated this formalism by checking for agreement with the Bogolubiov-de-Gennes results for a single-channel Andreev molecule Although the formalism presented here has the advantage of simplicity, it has several limitations. Our one-dimensional treatment ignores the lateral extension of the central superconductor which, as mentioned above, results in a larger overlap between ABS than expected in three dimensions. A smaller overlap will lead to a reduction in the size of the avoided crossings in Fig. The scattering formalism can easily be extended to more complicated structures and take into account additional mechanisms such as spin-orbit interactions or a magnetic field, relevant for Majorana bound states. It would also be possible to model superconducting weak links with multi-junction nanowires 