Grazing-Incidence X-ray fluorescence (GIXRF) analysis, which is closely related to total-reflection XRF, is a very powerful technique for the in-depth analysis of many types of technologically relevant samples, e.g. nanoparticle depositions, shallow dopant profiles, thin layered samples or even wellordered nanostructures. However, the GIXRF based determination of the depth-dependent information about the sample is usually based on a modelling of the experimental data. This requires profound knowledge of the geometrical parameters of the setup employed, especially the incident beam profile as well as the detector aperture parameters. Together they determine the incident angle dependent so-called effective solid angle of detection which must be known in order to model any experimental data set. In this work, we demonstrate how these instrumental parameters, which are typically not known with sufficient accuracy, can be determined using dedicated experiments with a wellknown calibration sample. In addition, this paves the way for a full calibration of the setup, as also information about other parameters, e.g. the incident photon flux is gained. Here, we are using a commercially available instrument for this demonstration but the principle can also be applied for other GIXRF setups. In recent years, both the total-reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) Even though no physical reason hinders a large-scale transfer of the technique to laboratory based instrumentation, there are not nearly as many examples of successful laboratory GIXRF instruments as one might expect. From a technical point of view, the requirements for a GIXRF laboratory setup differ only slightly from those for a TXRF or a X-ray reflectometry (XRR) instrument, both of which are available from multiple vendors and can be found in laboratories. For successfully creating an X-ray standing wave, one must have a monochromatic and low-divergence excitation source available just as for TXRF and XRR. Thus, the reasons for the limited availability of laboratory GIXRF are to be found on the data evaluation side. First, profound knowledge of the instrumental function is required for effective GIXRF applications -especially knowledge of the effective solid angle of detection, which results from the interplay between the fluorescence detectors field of view and the incident angle-dependent projection of the spatial incident beam intensity distribution. Second, in almost all applications of GIXRF, a modeling of the experimental data is required in order to derive the information of interest. To create such a model, a problem-specific modeling approach must be developed, which is not always straightforward. As a result, GIXRF itself requires a lot of experienced input and thus could be considered less user-friendly than TXRF or XRR. Several software packages have been developed in an effort to make the modeling aspect of GIXRF more user friendly This can be circumvented by taking a different approach: As the effective solid angle is mainly determined by the aperture geometry, by the distance of the detector from the sample surface as well as by the spatial intensity profile of the excitation beam, it can be determined in a dedicated approach for a given tool until any of the relevant parameters change. Furthermore, if an adequate geometrical model is used, even changes in relevant parameters of the setup can be taken into account and the new effective solid angle of detection can be predicted. In this article, we will demonstrate such an approach for the characterization of the geometry of a Bruker S4 T-Star. The approach is based on a well-known sample, which is pre-characterized using the reference-free GIXRF approach of PTB At the PTB laboratory By relying on these radiometrically calibrated detectors and on reliable knowledge of the atomic fundamental parameters, well-characterized beamlines and a well-calibrated geometry of the instrumental setup, one can perform so-called reference-free X-ray fluorescence spectrometry By performing the reference-free XRF analysis in different excitation conditions, especially with respect to the incident angle of the exciting radiation, depth-dependent information can be derived It should be noted that the calculation of the XSW involves a full description of the sample. If concentration gradients are present, this must be taken into account by using appropriate depth-dependent optical constants. The in-depth composition of the sample is then changed in order to reproduce the experimental data by means of adequate optimization algorithms. A combined modeling of both the reference-free GIXRF and XRR data For such a modeling of experimental GIXRF data, profound knowledge of the relevant instrumental parameters is crucial. As already mentioned, the effective solid angle of detection Ω(θi) 4π is very important as it is also strongly incident angle-dependent due to the changing projection of the incident beam profile onto the sample surface. Thus, even if no reference-free GIXRF is to be performed and thus parameters as the incident photon flux or the SDD's detection efficiency are not needed, the effective solid angle of detection must be known in order to be able to derive depth-dependent information from the experimental data. The S4 T-STAR is a table-top TXRF spectrometer designed primarily for routine analysis of a wide variety of sample types. The instrument is equipped with a robotic sample changer that can handle a total of 90 sample carriers via 10 tray inserts. In addition to widely used 30 mm quartz discs, other sample geometries such as microscope carriers and 2" wafers can be used. The instrument comprises two microfocus x-ray tubes (both powered with up to 50 W), one with a tungsten target and one with a molybdenum target. Three individually designed monochromators can be combined with these tubes. Each one is optimized for the characteristic fluorescence lines of the anode materials: Mo Kα (17.4 keV) and W Lα (8.4 keV), plus one for Bremsstrahlung (typically of the W anode) at 35 keV. All monochromators consist of a multilayer as the dispersive element, an entrance slit, a central aperture above the multilayer and an exit slit. The distance from the X-ray source to the center position of the multilayer is 85 mm and the distance from the center position to the sample is 100 mm. The monochromator for the GIXRF measurements with Mo Kα was designed for the lowest possible beam divergence. A spherically polished (R: 14.5 m) Si crystal was used as a substrate and the applied Mo/Si multilayer coating has a variable spacing along the beam direction. The effective beam cross section at the height of the sample is 0.2 mm by 6.0 mm. Since the beam divergence is determined by numerous factors such as source size, position of apertures and sample as well as the properties of the multilayer, the actual beam divergence was determined experimentally. For this purpose, the beam profile between the exit slit of the monochromator and the sample position was scanned stepwise with an X-ray camera and then reconstructed in three dimensions. The beam divergence determined by this method is 0.014° The positioning of the X-ray tubes, the monochromators, the sample position and the excitation angle is done electromotively. One of the special features of the system is that it can optimize the positioning of all X-ray components in an automated measuring process. For this purpose, a sample stored in the device is loaded and a cyclic adjustment process of all relevant assemblies is carried out. This quality process can be activated automatically at regular intervals or as required and ensures reproducible measuring conditions even under changed ambient conditions and after the excitation conditions have changed. The sample is positioned by pressing it against three mechanical reference points in front of the silicon drift detector (SDD). A rotation and linear unit enable the plane spanned by the pressure points to be moved and tilted in space. Such a movement relative to the excitation beam can be used e.g. for a GIXRF measurement. The minimum step size for adjusting the incident angle is one motor step, which corresponds to about 0.0005 • . Based on the knowledge of the detector geometry (see fig. Aperture 2 Aperture 1 Figure For a characterization of the geometrical parameters of the laboratory instrument, we used a Ni single layer deposited on a Si wafer piece by means of ion beam sputtering (IBS) at AXO DRESDEN GmbH. The nominal Ni layer thickness was 12 nm. However, oxidation in ambient air leads to the rapid formation of a thin oxide layer in the surface region of the sample. XRR measurements of the sample with Cu K-alpha radiation and fits of the XRR curves suggested a stack composition of 11 nm Ni covered with 2 nm NiO on the Si substrate (which also has a natural native SiO 2 top region). This sample was then characterized using the reference-free GIXRF-XRR technique of PTB in order to accurately model the in-depth structure to e.g. derive the oxide layer thickness. Therefore, we first performed reference-free GIXRF-XRR experiments at the four crystal monochromator (FCM) beamline For the reference-free GIXRF-XRR experiments, PTB's in-house built instrumentation At each incident angle, the recorded fluorescence spectra are deconvolved using detector response functions The full layer stack is separated into sublayers in order to calculate both the resulting XRR curve and the XSW using an implementation of the matrix algorithm (XSWini 3 Results and Discussion A GIXRF measurement on the pre-characterized Ni sample was also performed on the Bruker S4 T-STAR tool. The recorded fluorescence spectra were treated in a similar way as for the reference-free GIXRF experiments at PTB in order to derive the Ni-K as well as the Si-K GIXRF curves (sum of the Kα and Kβ lines). The laboratory data set can only be normalized with respect to the sine of the incident angle and the integration time, as both the incident photon flux and the effective solid angle of detection are not known absolutely. For a determination of these parameters, we use knowledge about the previously characterized Ni sample. Using the verified layer model, we can now calculate both the Ni-K and the Si-K fluorescence intensities the sample would emit for a Mo-Kα excitation using eq. 1 (right-hand side). As this is performed in a quantitative manner, the experimental data should exactly match the two datasets if normalized to the correct incident photon flux, correct detector efficiency and correct effective solid angle of detection (left-hand side of eq. 1). This can then be used to define a criterion for an optimization algorithm that uses the geometrical parameters of the detector geometry and an absolute incident photon flux as parameters. As the Bruker S4 T-STAR setup is working in air, also the attenuation in air from the sample to the entrance window of the detector must be taken into account. The optimization algorithm varies the relevant geometrical parameters e.g. the aperture sizes and distances and the Be entrance window thickness within the fabrication tolerances and calculates the effective solid angle of detection for each incident angle in the experimental data. The shape of the incident beam intensity profile has been derived from a dedicated experiment during the sample alignment procedure and is only varied with respect to its widths and position relative to the field of view of the detector. In addition, the incident photon flux is varied by means of the optimization routine in order to match both the angular shape (sensitive for the solid angle of detection) and the absolute value of the correctly normalized experimental data (sensitive to the incident flux, the Be-window thickness and the solid angle of detection). Similarly as for the pre-characterization of the Ni sample, the angular divergence of the incident beam is taken into account by averaging over multiple different incident angles in the vicinity of the angle of interest. In fig. For a validation of the parameter set derived for the calculation of the instrument's effective solid angle of detection function, two ultrashallow ion implant samples were used. Both arsenic implants were put into silicon. Sample A was implanted at 1.25 keV and a total dose of 5 × 10 14 At. cm 2 , whereas sample B was implanted at 2.5 keV and a total dose of 1 × 10 15 At. cm 2 . These samples were pre-characterized using PTB's reference-free GIXRF approach, and depth profiles for the implant depth distribution were derived according to Due to relatively high excitation photon energy (Mo-Kα) in the Bruker S4 T-STAR, the depth profiling performance for the identical two samples crucially depends on both the correct calculation of the effective solid angle and the correct alignment of the sample. Furthermore, the quantification of the total retained As doses crucially depends on the accuracy of the previously determined photon flux, Be window thickness and the effective solid angle of detection. Thus, a comparison of depth profiling results as derived from the experiments on the Bruker S4 T-STAR allows for an assessment of the quality of the previously derived instrumental parameters as any errors would result in either different implant doses or different depth distributions. In the applied experimental procedure, the GIXRF experiment on the Ni sample was first run in order to derive the effective solid angle and the incident photon flux. For this experimental run, a photon flux of 4.3 × 10 7 s -1 was determined as already mentioned. Afterwards, the two implant samples were measured after proper alignment. Count rates for the As K-shell lines (sum of the Kα and Kβ lines) were derived from the spectra at each incident angle, normalized to the effective solid angle and then modeled using the same approach as for the experiments performed at PTB. The experimental GIXRF data obtained as well as the corresponding modeled curves are shown in fig. In this article, a methodology to characterize both the effective solid angle of detection and the incident photon flux of a Bruker S4 T-STAR instrument has been presented and validated by depth-profiling well-known As ion implant samples. By first characterizing the Bruker tool, we were able to derive quantitative results for both the in-depth distribution and the total retained doses, which are competitive with reference-free GIXRF results obtained using dedicated instrumentation on a synchrotron radiation beamline. Even though we only used shallow ion implant samples for validation and demonstration of the depth-profiling capabilities of the Bruker S4 T-STAR instrument in conjunction with the characterized effective solid-angle properties as well as the incident photon flux, it can be expected that the S4 T-Star will also work for other types of sample structures. This includes above-surface structures (e.g. nanoparticles and nanostructures) as well as subsurface structures (e.g. thin layer stacks or diffusion depth profiles). However, especially for the above-surface structures, the sample mounting must be improved in order to address the related modeling deviations at very low incident angles. The range of possible materials which could be studied with the instrument is limited on the one hand side by the employed excitation and fluorescence detector. Low-Z materials up to aluminum cannot be studied at present, as their fluorescence is nearly fully attenuated in the Be detector window and high spectral backgrounds due to silicon fluorescence is to be expected for higher incident angles. In addition, of course also the element-dependent detection limits of the tool must be considered. By expanding the characterization procedure with additional materials other than Ni and Si, one may expect it to also provide information about the photon energy-dependent detection efficiency of the equipped fluorescence detector or the influence of secondary excitation due to photo-electrons. This would then enable a quantification of fluorescence lines, which are energetically further away from the elements used for the characterization and thus outside of the energy region where the detector efficiency is very close to unity. This will enable a full calibration of the laboratory-based GIXRF setup and, thus, allow a fully quantitative analysis without any further calibration by means of other standards or reference samples. In addition, the approach presented here is also transferable to other types of TXRF and GIXRF instrumentation from other vendors or even custom-built setups.