Several works reported increased differentiation of neuronal cells grown on graphene; however, the molecular mechanism driving axon elongation on this material has remained elusive. Here, we study the axonal transport of nerve growth factor (NGF), the neurotrophin supporting development of peripheral neurons, as a key player in the time course of axonal elongation of dorsal root ganglion neurons on graphene. We find that graphene drastically reduces the number of retrogradely transported NGF vesicles in favor of a stalled population in the first two days of culture, in which the boost of axon elongation is observed. This correlates with a mutual charge redistribution, observed via Raman spectroscopy and electrophysiological recordings. Furthermore, ultrastructural analysis indicates a reduced microtubule distance and an elongated axonal topology. Thus, both electrophysiological and structural effects can account for graphene action on neuron development. Unraveling the molecular players underneath this interplay may open new avenues for axon regeneration applications. In the past years, a number of studies have investigated graphene potential as a conductive neural interface, able to enhance adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of various cell types, including neural cells To understand the molecular mechanism of axon outgrowth on graphene, some groups investigated GAP-43, a recognized marker of developing and regenerating axons. Increased GAP-43 levels were reported in hippocampal neurons grown on graphene have not yet been investigated. A recent study has reported an increased cell firing for hippocampal neurons grown on graphene, probably due to altered membrane ion currents at the material interface In this work we demonstrate that graphene significantly stimulates axonal outgrowth during the first 3 days in culture of DRG primary neurons. Hence, we investigate the effect of graphene on the fast axonal transport properties during the early developmental phase. In detail, the role of nerve growth factor (NGF), a key neurotrophin involved in neurite elongation and survival during DRG development Patch-clamp recordings and ultrastructural analyses concur to show that profound rearrangements occur in axons developing on graphene, which may account for the local accumulation of NGF resulting in the increased axon elongation. Our results provide a broad structural and functional understanding of the impact of graphene on DRG neurons, key information towards the development of graphene-based devices for neural regeneration applications. The effect of graphene on axon outgrowth in primary peripheral neurons was investigated using DRG neurons dissected from postnatal day (P) 4 mice, which were cultured on PDL/laminin coated substrates This approach allows to selectively apply treatments to axons and mimics well the physiological NGF stimulation -where the trophic factor is produced by target innervated tissues and is endocyted at the distal axon tips, far from the cell soma 19,2 >. Figure It should be noted that the same axonal length analysis at an early developmental stage was also performed on standard and graphene coated coverslips, yielding results that confirm preferential neurites outgrowth on graphene (Fig. Moreover, as graphene crumpling was never observed in our analyses, we can exclude its effect on substrate wettability and soma clumping Obtained results support the trend previously reported for embryonic DRG neurons on epitaxial graphene Survival of sympathetic and sensory neurons is known to rely on the retrograde axonal transport of NGF signaling endosomes back to the cell body 17,18,2 >, while numerous studies indicate that axon elongation is prompted by a local effect of NGF which does not directly involve mechanisms in the cell body A schematic of the experiment is shown in Figure (1) stalled (stl), when the vesicles did not move; (2) retrograde (ret) when the vesicles moved from the axon tip to the cell soma; (3) anterograde (ant) when the vesicles moved from the cell soma to the axon tip; and (4) oscillating (osc) when the movement of the vesicle switched between retrograde and anterograde within a limited space. We found that in graphene and control the majority of NGF vesicles were stalled both at DIV2 and DIV5 (Figure Electric activity has been recently associated to increased retrograde flux of signaling endosomes in hippocampal neurons 2 > and to inhibited axon outgrowth in adult sensory neurons These results demonstrate that the early days of contact with graphene are characterized by a change in neuron excitability, followed by a phase of adaptation. Hence, we describe a correlation between neuron excitability, axon elongation and signaling endosomes transport. The synchrony between restored excitability and recovery of normal NGF retrograde transport dynamics with prolonged culturing is a strong clue of such correlation. The recovery of normal signaling endosome transport shall, in turn, contribute to maintain neuronal survival 3 >. In order to understand the reasons behind the observed reduced cellular excitability in the cell/electrolyte/graphene system, we carried out further electrical and spectroscopic analysis. Electrical measurements with a van der Pauw geometry of the graphene sample (i.e., coated and after medium immersion, with no neurons on top) indicate that holes are the majority carriers (Table It is known that carbon-based π-electron-rich surfaces are ideal adsorption sites for potassium (K + ) ions NGF retrograde axonal transport is mediated by the dynein-microtubule (MT) transport system 3 > and can thus be influenced by structural changes in the axon. This is maintained by a complex system of proteins including MTs and actin filaments that ensures shape, capacity to direct movements and extension of the growth cone Here, we first took the membrane-associated periodic skeleton (MPS) in consideration. This is a periodic ring-like structure around the axon circumference formed by actin, spectrin and associated proteins, found in a broad range of neuronal cell types including DRG neurons percentile; horizontal line: median; whiskers: 5 th and 95 th percentiles; square: mean; circles: outliers; number of analyzed couples: 79 for graphene and 97 for glass, each from two independent cultures. We found that graphene-cultured neurons maintain the characteristic periodicity of ~190 nm of the MPS (graphene, 195.6 ± 20.8 nm vs. glass, 196.7 ± 14.9 nm, Figure We next exploited transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to analyze whether and how the MT organization is affected by this topological rearrangement. In detail, we quantified the spacing between adjacent couples of MTs in longitudinal sections of the DRG culture on graphene in comparison with the control (Figure Graphene has attracted the interest of the neuroscience community worldwide for its biocompatibility, electrical properties and regenerative potential >. However, the real possibility of using this material for neuroregeneration applications will depend on our understanding of how graphene influences the processes of neurite outgrowth, elongation and regeneration following injury. This can be achieved by exploiting graphene optical transparency to observe the processes of interest, as we propose in this work. Optical microscopy of DRG neurons shows an axonal length greater on graphene than in the control. Single-molecule fluorescence microscopy in living DRG neurons reveals that, although on graphene neurons are completely viable for weeks To investigate possible causes for the observed NGF trafficking alteration, we studied graphene influence on both electrical and structural properties of axons. In the former case, we observe mutual effects: on one side neurons change graphene charge concentration, inducing a doping clearly measurable via Raman spectroscopy (Figure The graphene was synthesized using an Aixtron BM Pro cold-wall reactor on electropolished Cu foil (purity 99.99%, Alfa-Aesar) as previously describe in ref The transfer of single layer graphene (SLG) on glass coverslips was performed using the standard wet etching technique Ar, 1 min. The Cu was etched overnight using a 0.1 M solution of ammonium persulfate (APS). The membrane was repetitively rinsed in deionized (DI) water to remove any residuals of the Cu etchant. PMMA/SLG membrane was transferred on a glass coverslip, previously cleaned with acetone and isopropanol and treated with oxygen plasma for 5 min at 100 W. When completely dried, the sample was kept in acetone for at least 2 h to remove the PMMA, rinsed with isopropanol and annealed at 170 °C for 3 h on a hotplate. PDL with laminin coating (30μg/ml PDL (P1149 Sigma) and 5μg/ml laminin (Life Technologies)) was selected to carry on the DRG culture experiments. An incubation time of 4 h was used for coating the 10 mm round glass coverslip The quality of graphene after its transfer on glass was assessed by Raman spectroscopy. A micro-Raman spectroscope (inVia Raman, Renishaw), equipped with a motorized sample stage and a 532 nm laser with a spot size of around 1 μm in diameter, was used to map the characteristic graphene Raman peaks. The laser power was kept at 1 mW with an acquisition time of 2 s. The Raman spectra confirmed the single layer nature of the graphene samples, with prominent G and 2D peaks, narrow 2D peak (FWHM = 29-34 cm -1 ) and absence of the D-peak All animal procedures were approved by the Italian Ministry of Health (notification n° 917) and were fully compliant with Italian (Ministry of Health guidelines, Legislative Decree n° 26/2014) and European Union (Directive n° 2010/63/UE) laws on animal research. The experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the approved guidelines. In addition, the principles of the Basel Declaration, including the "3R" concept, have been considered throughout the whole project. The primary sensory neurons used in this study were obtained from the dorsal root ganglia of wildtype B6129 P3-P4 neonatal mice, by adopting the protocol described in Testa et al. The DRGs were enzymatically digested by incubating them for 40 min at 37 °C in a PBS solution containing 0.03 % Collagenase from Clostridium histolyticum (C7657 Sigma), 0.3% Dispase II protease (D4693 Sigma) and 0.18% glucose. After digestion, ganglia were transferred to a 50 mL conical centrifuge tube with 5 mL of PBS containing 0.01% Deoxyribonuclease I from bovine pancreas (D5025 Sigma) and 0.05% Trypsin inhibitor from Glycine max (T9003 Sigma). Ganglia were dissociated by mechanical agitation through a fire-polished glass Pasteur pipette until the suspension was homogeneous. The solution was then centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 rpm and resuspended in Primary Neuron Basal medium (PNBM, Lonza) supplemented with 1% Lglutamine (Lonza), 0.1% Gentamicin Sulfate/Amphotericin-B (Lonza), 2% NSF-1 (Lonza). For the survival of DRG neurons, 100 ng/ml of NGF (Alomone Labs) were added to the media. Since 24 h after seeding, 2.5 μM AraC (Sigma) was added for inhibition of glia proliferation. Half of the medium was replaced every 3-4 days. Axonal length, transport and electrophysiology studies were performed on live neurons; immunofluorescence and Raman studies were performed on neurons fixed in 4% v/v paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. For compartmented cultures, PDMS microfluidic chambers (RD450 and RD150, Xona Microfluidics) were used. Bare glass coverslips were treated overnight with 65% nitric acid (Sigma), washed several time with DI water and left in 96% ethanol. Prior to assembly the glass substrates with the chamber, both the coverslips and the devices were immersed in 96% ethanol for 30 min, rinsed several times with DI water and dried under a tissue culture hood to guarantee sterility. When graphene was used, a CVD-grown graphene sheet was transferred on the glass before the device assembling. The device was then assembled by simply placing it on top of the coverslip and pressing down with the back of a pair of tweezers to create a seal between the PDMS and the substrate. It was washed with ethanol and DI water. Due to the high hydrophobicity of the device and glass a micropipette was used to push the water into the main channel and remove any possible bubbles. Next, the coating solution (150-200 μl, 30 μg/ml PLD and 2 μg/ml laminin in DI water) was added to each compartment and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The sample was cleaned repeatedly with DI water and incubated with DI water for 1 hour. It was then washed for the last time with the cell culture medium before cell seeding. Neurons seeded on the coverslips were plated as a drop of 80 μl on each coverslip and left to attach for 1 h, before 500 μl of culture medium were added. When a more homogeneous cell distribution was preferred (e.g. low cell density for axonal elongation measurements), neurons were suspended in a larger volume of culture medium and 500 μl of culture medium were added to each well. When neurons were plated in microfluidic devices, 10 μl of neurons were loaded in the soma compartment at a concentration of 2.5 to 4.5 million cells per ml. The device was incubated for 1 h to allow the cell to attach and then each well was filled with the media. The medium was changed every 1-2 days to prevent salt concentrations increasing due to medium evaporation. Moreover, after 24 hours from the seeding, 50 ng/ml of NGF were added to the soma compartment and 100 ng/ml to the axon compartment to generate a gradient of NGF and induce DRG axons to reach the axonal side by crossing the microgrooves Axon lengths for neurons seeded in the microfluidic devices were measured daily in the microgrooves compartment and in the axon compartment. The length quantification was performed excluding the axonal segments in the soma compartment due to impossibility to distinguish single axons in the network complexity. We performed two independent cultures and quantified more than 50 axons per sample. Transmitted light imaging were acquired at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in differential interference contrast (DIC) configuration using an inverted Leica AF6000 microscope with an oil immersion 63x objective. For axon length quantification of neurons seeded on glass coverslips, we performed two independent cultures with three and four biological replicate each. We analyzed at least 40 cells from more than 10 selected fields obtained with an inverted microscope equipped with a 20× objective (Leica DMI4000B microscope). Neurons were fixed at various DIV using 2% (w/v) Paraformaldehyde (PFA), 4% (w/v) sucrose in PBS for 20 min at room temperature (RT) and rinsed 3 times with PBS. Fixed neurons were then permeabilized in 0.1% (v/v) Triton-X-100 in BSA 2% (w/v) in PBS for 7 min. After 5 washes in PBS, samples were blocked in blocking buffer (BSA 5% in PBS) for 1 h and subsequently stained with mouse anti-NfH antibody (1:500, neurofilament heavy chain, Abcam ab7795) in incubation solution (BSA 2.5% in PBS) for 2 h. After PBS washing, the samples were stained for 1 h at RT with secondary antibodies anti-mouse-Alexa488 (1:100, Invitrogen, A21202) diluted in incubation solution. Coverslip were mounted on glass slide in Fluoroshield with DAPI mounting media (Sigma). We performed a cation exchange HPLC, using a Propac SCX-20 column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 100 mM HNa2PO4 mobile phase with 0 M to 1 M NaCl gradient. The temperature was kept at 4 °C. The elution time of the reacted neurotrophin was shifted due to the negative charge of the fluorophore. The fluorescent NGF (fluoNGF) was separated from the non-reacted neurotrophins and from the free fluorophore by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm and 488 nm. The fluoNGF was stored at 4 °C for at most 15-20 days. To image transport of fluoNGF in live DRG neurons, the compartmentalized culture was supplied with 2nM of fluoNGF in the axon side and incubated for 1 h. The sample was then mounted on a homemade microscope stage and kept at 37 °C and 5% CO2 during measurements. Time-lapse images were acquired using an inverted epifluorescence microscope (Leica AF6000) equipped with Leica TIRF-AM module, a 100× oil immersion objective (NA 1.47), and a Hamamatsu camera (ImagEM C9100-13, Hamamatsu). NGF conjugated with Alexa 488 were excited with a 488 nm laser in epifluorescence configuration, with an exposure time of 100 ms. Up to 1000 frames for each experiment were acquired. Live cell fluorescence imaging was effectuated in the channel compartment, after 30 min from the neurotrophin administration, for about 45 min. Tracking of single vesicles containing NGF was performed using homemade scripts in MatLab (The MathWorks), starting as described in De Nadai et al. Trajectories longer than 5 frames were considered and divided in subtrajectories on the basis of the vesicle velocity calculated using a mobile window of 5 frames, considering retrograde (positive) and anterograde (negative) movement for velocities higher than 0.5 μm/s or lower than -0.5 μm/s, respectively. We calculated the velocity distribution of these mobile subtrajectories, weighting the velocity of each subtrajectory with its time length and considering its s.e.m. as in Differently from Recordings were performed on DRG primary neuronal cultures, prepared as described above, by adapting the procedure described in Siano et al. STORM microscopy was performed using a Nikon N-STORM system configured for total internal reflection fluorescence imaging. Alexa-647-labelled samples were excited by 647 nm laser line. The ultraviolet (405 nm) line was used to activate the photoswitchable dyes during frames acquisition. Fluorescence was collected using a Nikon 100x, 1.4NA oil immersion objective and passed through a quad-band-pass dichroic filter (97335 Nikon). Time-lapses of 30000 frames were recorded on a 256 × 256 pixel field (pixel size 160 nm) of an EMCCD camera (ixon3, Andor). Data were analyzed with the STORM module of NIS Elements (Nikon), ImageJ and Origin. We selected a ROI in each image containing a portion of the axon with more than 5 ring-like structures and used a Fourier transform of the intensity profiles of spectrin along the axon to calculate the fundamental frequencies corresponding to the spatial period. The intensity profiles showed in Figure The length was quantified by manually tracing the axon from the soma to the axonal tip. We were able to quantify the neurite length up to 4 days of culture, as later on the neuronal network was too dense to distinguish isolated axons. Indeed, especially in more dense cultures, already after 3 days of culture, cells on graphene displayed a more complex distribution, a network of small cell-body aggregates connected by axons, differently from the control surface where they distributed homogeneously (Figure Figure An important benchmark for the quality of graphene is the FWHM of the 2D mode. The broadening of the 2D peak is attributed to nanoscale strain fluctuations>. Figure Figures Panel (b) shows the 2D FWHM distribution for pristine graphene after the transfer, after coating and after cell growth. In all the presented cases, the distribution is peaked at 27 cm -1 with a FWHM of 2 cm -1 and higher tail at higher values, demonstrating the presence of areas with larger strain fluctuations. We observed a discrepancy between the values of 2D/G intensity and 2D width after cell growth reported in panel (a) and (b) of Figure It is worth noting that the defect activated Raman mode (D mode) 4, > is not present in all the conditions, indicating the high quality of the employed material and that the PDL/laminin coating and cell growth do not induce any damaging of the underlying graphene. Standard error of the mean (s.e.m.) of the percentage of vesicles for each population (stalled,