In a previous work, we predicted that a thermally biased tunnel junction between two different superconductors can display a thermoelectric effect of nonlinear nature in the temperature gradient, under proper conditions. In this work we give a more extended discussion, and we focus on the two main features of the nonlinear contributions: i) the linear-in-bias thermoelectricity, that can be associated to a spontaneous breaking of electron-hole symmetry, ii) the strong contribution at the matching peak singularity, which is typically associated to the maximum output power and efficiency. We discuss the nonlinear origin of the thermoelectricity and its relationship with the non-linear cooling mechanism in superconducting junctions previously discussed in the literature. Finally, we design and characterize the performance of the system as a heat engine, for a realistic design and experimental parameter values. We discuss possible non-idealities demonstrating that the system is amenable to current experimental realization. The degree of control of nano-fabrication techniques reached over the last few decades has stimulated the investigation of thermal transport at the micronanoscale We consider a tunnel junction between two Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS Hence, the transport is completely associated to quasiparticles, and the charge and the heat current flowing out of the α-electrode (with ᾱ = R when α = L and vice versa) read and G T is the normal-state conductance of the junction. In the BCS model, the energy gap ∆ α (T α ) is a monotonically decreasing function, and it is zero for temperatures larger than the critical temperature T c,i = ∆ 0,i /(1.764k B ) Figure The typical subgap voltage evolution in the presence of thermoelectricity is displayed in Fig. ), this linear-in-bias contribution implies the existence of, at least, a point (V s = 0), where the current is zero, i.e., I(V s ) = 0 (see Fig. In Fig. In summary, the nonlinear thermoelectricity in the S'IS junction is characterized by two main contributions, namely the linear-in-bias and the nonlinear-in-bias. The origin of the thermoelectric effect for T L > T R can be intuitively understood in the semiconductor model, as displayed in Fig. In the previous section, we have qualitatively discussed the origin of the thermoelectric effect, which relies on the competition between the particle and the hole current. Here, we give a quantitative discussion and we neglect any effect associated with the Dynes parameter, for simplicity. At subgap voltages eV < ∆ L + ∆ R , the latter is described by the formula (with (2) which yields a good approximation in the limit valid for T R = 0 and Γ → 0, provided that ∆ L (T L ) > ∆ 0,R . The goodness of the low-T R expression of Eq. 3 is investigated in Fig. In the limit r 1, the zero-bias differential conductance of Eq. 3 is well described by the interpolation formula The degree of validity of this expression is displayed in Fig. Note that g 0 diverges for the temperature value where ∆ L (T L ) = ∆ 0,R , which annihilates the denominator of Eq. 4. We wish now to give a more complete discussion on the conditions where the linear-in-bias thermoelectricity appears for T R → 0. In this respect, Fig. Several features can be easily captured from the plot. First, there is no thermoelectric effect (white regions): i) for T R > T L , i.e., heating the larger gap superconductor is a necessary condition for thermoelectricity, ii) for T L 0.2T c,L , due to the subgap contribution to the current related to the finite Dynes parameter, iii) for values of T L , where ∆ L (T L ) < ∆ R (T R ) (above the blue solid curve), iv) for T R > T c,R = 0.5T c,L (irrespectively of T L ), since the right electrode is in the normal state. The last point is associated to the fact that the thermoelectric effect cannot be observed in a hybrid normalsuperconducting tunnel junction. Indeed, in the thermoelectric effect we discuss it is crucial the monotonically decreasing DOS of the right electrode above gap, which is guaranteed by the superconducting state, as previously discussed in Ref. Secondly, a nonlinear temperature gradient is requested for thermoelectricity. In fact, in Fig. To conclude this section, we discuss the relationship between the nonlinear-in-bias thermoelectric effect in our structure and the evaporative cooling in superconducting tunnel junctions. In fact, it is well known Thus, a voltage biased asymmetric junction between two superconductors (r = 1) can behave either as a refrigerator or as a thermoelectric generator, depending on the temperature of the two electrodes T L , T R . The competition of these two effects in a S'IS junction for a voltage bias V = V p is displayed in Fig. Let's focus first on T L < T R . Note that it is possible to remove the heat from the lower gap superconductor ( QR > 0), but necessarily there is no thermoelectricity, in agreement with the previous discussion. Note that this mechanism cannot be properly defined as cooling, since the heat is removed by the hotter electrode (sometimes called heat pump). However, this mechanism still relies on the existence of the larger superconducting gap. Consider now T L ≥ T R . In this case, for a given value of T R < T c,R , the junction behaves as a refrigerator as long as the temperature difference is smaller than a threshold value. For larger values of T L the junction is first dissipative and then it shows a thermoelectric generation for sufficiently high temperature gradients (roughly given by T L > T R /r, see red dashed lines). This progression from thermoelectricity towards cooling passing by a dissipative behaviour may remind the standard behaviour of the linear thermoelectricity In the previous section, we discussed the theoretical features of the thermoelectric effect in a S'IS junction. In this section, we discuss the design of a heat engine based on this effect, for materials and a geometry which are experimentally feasible with standard nanofabrication techniques. Since we are interested in phenomena which require a temperature difference for nanoscale tunnel junctions, it is convenient to work with superconductors whose critical temperature is of order 1 K, such as aluminum (Al), with a bulk critical temperature T bulk c,Al = 1.2 K. In fact, at sub-Kelvin temperatures, the electron-phonon coupling is quite weak and hence it is possible to raise the quasiparticle temperature well above the bath temperature T bath , which typically represents the temperature of the phonons in the electrodes In order to compute the thermovoltage and Ẇload , one has to impose the current conservation in the circuit, namely and to solve it self-consistently in V . Due to the EH symmetry, this equation admits always the trivial solution V = 0, where the current I load (and hence the delivered power Ẇload ) is zero. In the presence of thermoelectricity, the junction displays an absolute negative conductance for biases below V S , and hence additional solutions with finite voltage Ṽ = 0 are possible (see Fig. FIG. crossings of the current density characteristic J(V ) = I(V )/A with a load line of negative slope -2σ G , as displayed in Fig. Here, we discuss the thermoelectric power density and the corresponding thermodynamical efficiency as a function of the load conductivity σ G . Note that, for a given thermoelectric configuration, characterized by the parameters T hot , T bath , r, the power and the efficiency are zero either for σ G = 0 since I load = 0 and for σ G > |σ p |/2, where V load = 0. Figure In a open circuit configuration, i.e., in the limit σ G → 0, the current I load = 0 and hence the thermoelectric power is zero. In this case, the thermoelectric effect purely manifests as a voltage signal across the load V load = 2V s , where V s is the Seebeck voltage introduced in Sec. II. Figure Here, we want to characterize the impact of the main source of non-ideality in our model, namely the Dynes parameters Γ α . In fact, these parameters characterize either the finite number of states at subgap energies of the BCS superconducting DOS and the smoothing of the peaks in superconducting DOS. As a consequence, the current at V p and hence relevant quantities such as the thermoelectric power are reduced. Differently from the rest of this work, here we introduce a dimensionless parameter γ and we consider equal values for the Dynes parameters Γ S = Γ S = γ∆ 0,S = max(Γ S /Γ S ) in order to overestimate the worsening effect. In the plots, we set T bath = 100 mK. First, we consider the quantities where the variation of the Dynes parameter is expected to impact in a stronger way, namely the thermoelectric power and the efficiency at the matching peak singularity V p = [∆ S -∆ S ]/e. These quantities are displayed for different values of T hot in Fig. In summary, we have given an extended discussion of the nonlinear thermoelectric effect recently predicted in tunnel junctions between two different BCS superconductors the SNS-WIS jointlab QUANTRA funded by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Coopera-tion, and the Royal Society through the International Exchanges between the UK and Italy (Grants No. IES R3 170054 and IEC R2 192166).