The three-band d-p model is investigated by means of Variational Monte-Carlo (VMC) method with the BCS-like wave-function supplemented by the Gutzwiller and Jastrow correlators. The VMC optimization leads to d-wave superconducting state with a characteristic dome-like shape of the order parameter for hole doping δ 0.4, in a good agreement with the experimental observations. Also, the off-diagonal pair-pair correlation functions, calculated within VMC, vindicates the results obtained very recently within the diagrammatic expansion of the Gutzwiller wave function method (DE-GWF) [cf. Phys. Rev. B 99, 104511 (2019)]. Subsequently, the nature of the d-wave pairing is investigated by means of recently proposed minimal-size real-space d-wave pairing operators [Phys. Rev. B 100, 214502 (2019)]. An emergence of the long-range superconducting ordering for both d and p orbitals is reported by analysing the corresponding off-diagonal pair-pair correlation functions. The dominant character of d-wave pairing on d orbitals is confirmed. Additionally, the trial wavefunction is used to investigate the magnetic properties of the system. The analysis of spin-spin correlation functions is carried out and shows antiferromagnetic q = (π, π), short-range order, as expected. For the sake of completeness, the charge gap has been estimated, which for the parent compound takes the value ∆CG ≈ 1.78 ± 0.51 eV, and agrees with values reported experimentally for the cuprates. The unconventional superconductivity discovered in copper based compounds by Bednorz and Müller in 1986 is still under intensive debate Encouraged by the results for the superconducting and nematic states obtained by means of the Diagrammatic arXiv:2003.03117v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Jun 2020 Expansion of the Gutwziller Wave Function (DE-GWF method) approach for the three-band d-p model In the next Section we describe the model and sketch the method. Subsequently, in Sec. III we present the characteristics of the d-wave superconducting phase for the hole-doped case by means of the standard investigation, i.e., by analyzing the correlation functions for the d-wave pairing between holes residing on the nearestneighbor d orbitals. Subsequently, we continue our analysis of the correlation functions defined for the minimalsize real-space d-wave pairing operators, consisting of a proper combination of the d-p and p-p pairing amplitudes. In Sec. IV, we also provide the spin-spin correlation functions and show the development of the shortrange antiferromagnetic order, as well as determine the value of the charge transfer gap. We conclude our results in the last Section. We consider the three-band d-p model described by the Hamiltonian where ĉ † ilσ (ĉ ilσ ) are creation (anihilation) fermionic operators acting on orbital l ∈ {d x 2 -y 2 , p x , p y } related to i-th unit cell. As in our previous works, As mentioned, we employ VMC approach in this study. This method exhibits both advantages as well as drawbacks which are common for the whole family of varia-tional methods. Particularly, the proper choice of wavefunction ansatz is crucial to obtain reasonable output. Thus, one cannot expect to obtain properties of the system which are not encoded in the variational wavefunction since the solution is narrowed to the sub-space in the Hilbert space. Therefore, the specific form of the wave-function should be carefully chosen. This issue does not appear in the determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) which in principle (disregarding controllable approximations ) provides an exact solution for the non-zero temperature. However, DQMC suffers for the infamous sign problem and is more complex from the algebraic perspective. It must be stressed out that the variational wave-function in the VMC approach can be formulated in the manner which ensures reasonable computational costs and flexibility which is necessary to describe correlated system in many cases. Also, one of the main advantages of VMC in the context of strongly correlated systems is its universality, e.g., long-range interactions, as wel as three-and four-center two body terms can be encompassed almost effortlessly, when the dose of generality is applied during the process of code development. Our many-body trial wave-function is taken in the following manner where PG is the Gutzwiller-type correlator given in the form with g px = g py due to the equivalency of the oxygen orbitals. The inter-orbital correlations are captured by the symmetric Jastrow density-density correlator Both {g l } and {λ il,jl } are the subsets of variational parameters. When performing calculations for the zcomponent of the total spin, we set S z tot = 0 and constant number of electrons N e , as well as the projectors LS z tot and LNe are applied during sampling procedure. The non-interacting part |Ψ 0 is constructed from eigenstates of the BCS variational Hamiltonian Ĥeff defined as Note, that parameters with tilde, are different than those in non-interacting part of d-p Hamiltonian (Eq. 1) as they are considered as variational parameters to be optimized. More precisely, the above effective Hamiltonian defines the uncorrelated wave function |Ψ 0 . The choice of both the hopping terms, and the pairing amplitudes is thus identical as in our DE-GWF study where | 0 is the vacuum state for operators γ † p ( γp ) representing quasi-particles, for which the variational Hamiltonian Ĥeff can be written in the diagonal form. Note, that index p = 1, 2, ...ñ runs over first ñ singleparticle eigenstates of the variational Hamiltonian with ñ = N + il (n il↑ -nil↓ ), resulting directly from the particle-hole transformation for the down-spins. The sampling procedure is executed in the standard manner. Configurations representing the distribution of ñ particles among N orbitals, {|x }, are sampled by means of Metropolis-Hastings 14 algorithm according to the probability density ρ(x) ∝ | x|Ψ T | 2 . Physical quantities related to operators { Ô} are estimated as an average of their so called local values with |x m generated with respect to the probability density ρ(x). In particular, the expectation value of the system energy, i.e., Ĥ can be computed for a given set of variational parameters. At least two, commonly exploited strategies for the wave-function optimization exist: variance optimization and energy optimization. Sorella et al. elaborated the efficient procedure -Stochastic Reconfiguration (SR) method In our computations the system is represented by the square cluster containing L × L = 64 unit cells, each consisting of one d-orbital and two p-orbitals (p x and p y ). This results in 64 copper and 128 oxygen atoms represented by appropriate orbitals. For the sake of clarity we define doping parameter δ i.e., the parent compound refers to δ = 0 with 5 electrons per CuO 2 complex, and δ > 0 corresponds to the hole-doped complex with N e < 5. We assume S z tot = 0; therefore minimal doping resolution is ∆δ=2/64 = 0.03125. The trial wave function is minimized with respect to the set of variational parameters by means of the SR method, and probed averages Ô are sampled within M ∝ 10 7 MC steps. Also, since VMC operates in the real space representation and the considered cluster is finite, we apply the periodic boundary conditions. Within the VMC approach the superconducting properties of the system are typically determined by analysing the appropriate anomalous correlation functions (CFs) (equal-time two-body Green functions). However, the choice of CFs is not unique and one may find particular form more suitable than other in the given method-ological context To inspect fundamental superconducting properties, as well as to compare the results obtained by means of VMC with those of DE-GWF solutions, we analyzed first the spatial dependence of standard off-diagonal pair-pair CFs for d-d pairs, which is defined as with α, β ∈ {x, y}, and, Function i(r) maps the position of the center of the given orbital d onto the index i. Vectors a α are given as where a is the lattice parameter. The functions defined in Eq.( as we apply the periodic boundary conditions to the system. In Fig. The comparison of ∆ dd for both methods shows that DE-GWF and VMC provide quantitatively similar results (c.f. Fig. Moreo and Dagotto 10 , emphasize that the local d-wave operators can provide a more suitable description of the paired holes in cuprates. Their arguments are based on the recent experimental observation of surprisingly small real-space extension All of the four MSPO preserve d-wave symmetry. Intra-site p-orbital pair correlation operator is defined as where γ μ = sgn(μ). The analysis of time evolution of ∆ † D0 (i.e., Heisenberg equation -i ) provides also other pairing operators in the systematic and elegant manner. Namely, the d-p pairing operator is given as where μ ∈ {±x, ±y}, and f (σ) = sgn(σ) with sgn(σ) = -sgn(σ), and, α i(r),μ = ±1 consistently with the d-p hopping sign convention (cf. Fig. and where μ ⊥ μ. Schematic representation of the above operators is shown in Fig. where τ ∈ {0, pd, pp, plaq}. In Figs. It is reasonable to compare the above amplitudes with the dominant d-d gap. The order parameter defined in Eq. ( In Fig. The VMC method allows to determine the characteristics of the spin and charge ordering. Though the variational Hamiltonian does not include explicitly antiferromagnetic (AF) terms, the short range correlations of this type can be expected. The existence of the AF order for both hole-and electron-doped cuprates is one of the main features of their phase diagram. Therefore, we investigate if the considered ansatz is able to reproduce such a tendency. We perform the analysis of z-component of spinspin correlation functions defined in a standard Static spin-spin susceptibilities as a function of holedoping δ for the d orbitals. S z d (π, π) is dominant, particularly with decreasing δ, and attains maximum value for the parent compound. manner and the static spin-spin susceptibility, which has the form with q being the ordering vector given in 1/a units. In Fig. fits the finite-size scaling analysis performed by Kung et al. For the sake of completeness, the correlation functions related to p orbitals are presented in Fig. FIG. 12. Equal-time correlation functions S z py (q) for the selected wave vectors as a function of doping. In the considered range of doping the system does not exhibit spin ordering at the p-orbitals. As cuprates fall into the class of strongly correlated systems, the emergence of electron-electron induced insulating phase is characteristic to these compounds. The outcome of our estimation is directly comparable to other theoretical treatments as well as to the experimental results. One of the methods for calculating the charge gap (CG) ∆ CG (which identifies insulating state) is based on the Single-Mode Approximation (SMA), which has been proved to be an efficient method for the Hubbardtype systems. Within such analysis one has to determine quantity where χ c (q) is the Fourier transform of equal-time charge-charge correlation function. Unfortunately, the minimal norm of the wave vector for L = 8 is |q| = π 2 , thus we are not able to provide a firm estimate of ∆ CG along these lines. Instead, we determine the value of ∆ CG in a standard manner. Namely, where E(N e ) is the total energy of the system at the doping value corresponding to particular number of electrons N e . The above formula previously used by us in a different context In Fig. In this paper we have considered a three-band dp model of the copper-oxygen plane within the VMC approach with a wave-function ansatz containing both onsite Gutzwiller and intersite Jastrow correlators in real space. The analysis of superconducting pairing properties in view of the so-called standard analysis, i.e., the one based on d-orbital pairing correlation functions, provided us with results which are quantitatively consistent with our previous work, as well as, qualitatively with selected experimental observations. As an extension of our previous work we have also calculated the spatial distribution functions of pairing operators proposed by Moreo and Dagotto in their very recent report For the sake of completeness, we have also determined spin-spin equal-time correlation functions. Even though the utilized ansatz is not supplemented with explicit antiferromagnetic terms, we have observed short range AF ordering on the d-orbitals. Detailed analysis, brought us to conclusions similar to those obtained by Kung et al. Recapitulating, we have retrieved the main features of hole-doped cuprate compounds by means of VMC method, within compact, Gutzwiller-Jastrow variational approach. According to experimental findings 5 , the symmetry of charge order in the cuprates is likely to be complex, and the role of p-orbitals is supposed to be quite important. Nevertheless, we have not analyzed the onset of charge ordering 5 . This issue can be related both to the supercell size, as well as to the form of variational ansatz. Possibly, the application of most general, Pfaffian-wavefunction and more distant Jastrow terms, with a minimal dose of symmetries, could provide a better understanding of this state. However, in such a scenario the number of variational parameters is large and the optimization procedure may become too complex. The recent development of dedicated VMC codes may help to overcome these difficulties 