Racetrack memory based on magnetic domain walls (DWs) motion exhibits advantages of small volume and high reading speed. When compared to current-induced DW motion, voltage-induced DW motion exhibits lower dissipation. On the other hand, the DW in an antiferromagnet (AFM) moves at a high velocity with weak stray field. In this work, the AFM DW motion induced by a gradient of magnetic anisotropy energy under a voltage pulse has been investigated in theory. The dynamics equation for the DW motion was derived. The solution indicates that the DW velocity is higher than 100 m/s, and because of inertia, the DW is able to keep moving at a speed of around 100 m/s for several nano seconds after turning off the voltage in a period of pulse. The mechanism for this DW inertia is explained based on the Lagrangian route. On the other hand, a spin wave is emitted while the DW is moving, yet the DW is still able to move at an ever increasing velocity with enlarging DW width. This indicates energy loss from emission of spin wave is less than the energy gain from the effective field of the gradient of anisotropy energy. Motion of magnetic domain walls (DWs) in nanowires is vital to development of novel magnetic memory devices with small volume and high reading speed, such as racetrack memory in which digital information is stored in magnetic domains and read based on DW motion In the past, researches were concentrated on DW motion in a ferromagnetic (FM) nanowire. In recent years, more attention is paid on special dynamical behaviors of magnetic textures in other magnetic media, such as antiferromagnet (AFM) In this letter, we report our theoretic calculation about DW inertial motion at a high velocity (around 100 m/s) in an AFM nanowire driven by a gradient of anisotropy energy induced by constant or pulsed voltage (Fig. , and MS is the saturation magnetization of each sublattice and () m  is the unit vector for the orientation of magnetization. The Hamiltonian of this AFM model is , In Eq. (1), J is the exchange constant for the nearest AFM exchange coupling. Kz is the uniaxial anisotropy constant. Ly, Lz, ∆j, and ∆k are the width, thickness, and cell size in the width and thickness direction, respectively. The uniform magnetization and staggered order parameters for the i-th cell i m and i n are introduced as: ( ) ( ) Here l is the absolute value of ( ) ( ) ii MM and close to 2MS for strong exchange coupling. Under continuum approximation and neglecting edge magnetization and parity-breaking term In Eq. 4, a is a homogeneous exchange energy (a = 5J/Vcell); A is an exchange stiffness constant (A = J∆i 2 /Vcell) and K = Kz/Vcell. Here ∆i and Vcell represent cell size in the length direction and the volume of AFM unit cell, respectively. Based on Eq. ( and Here, μ0 is the permittivity of vacuum. Starting from the LLG equation, we have formulated the dynamics equations for m and n under strong exchange coupling: Here G1 and G2 are the effective damping parameters for n and m (G1 = α/l, and G2 = αl). Combing Eqs. ( . Here f = μ0MS(1+G1G2)/aγ, and   12 ( , ( ), ( ) ) n n x q t q t = with q1 and q2 representing two collective coordinates of DW. Multiplying at the two sides of Eq. ( In Eq. ( In a Néel-type DW wall, q1 = q, and q2 = φ, and (sin cos ,sin sin , cos ) n for DW width VIDWM has also been investigated numerically using the micromagnetic simulation software Object-Oriented Micromagnetic Framework (OOMMF). The track dimension is 3000 nm (length) × 1 nm (width) × 0.5 nm (thickness), and the cell dimension is 0.5 nm × 0.5 nm × 0.5 nm. Based on the theoretical analysis and numerical simulation, the influence of dK/dx, α, and A on DW velocity was studied in detail. When dK/dx increases from 0 to 300 GJ/m 4 , a theoretical stable DW velocity increases monotonously to around 200 m/s (α and A are 5 × 10 -4 and 5 × 10 -13 J/m, respectively.). When α increases from 1 × 10 -4 to 8 × 10 -4 , the DW velocity decreases from around 200 m/s to about 80 m/s (dK/dx and A are 200 GJ/m 4 and A = 5 × 10 -13 J/m, respectively.) (Fig. . This indicates low damping is favorable for fast DW motion. Such a low α of around 10 -4 has been observed in NiO experimentally Owing to the secondary differential of q, AFM DW motion exhibits inertia, i.e., DW experiences an acceleration/deceleration stage after the voltage is turned on/off. To investigate this inertial DW motion, the constant dK/dx was replaced by a pulsed dK/dx. As a representative example for DW motion driven by a single pulse (dK/dx = 200 GJ/m 4 ) with a duration of 50 ns, a gradual acceleration and deceleration for around 20 ns appears soon after the pulse for generating this dK/dx is turned on and off (Fig. The temporal velocity of DW motion under a pulsed dK/dx with the duty ratio between 5 : 5 (constant dK/dx = 200 GJ/m 4 ) and 5 : 10 (5 ns for dK/dx = 200 GJ/m 4 and 5 ns for dK/dx = 0 GJ/m 4 ) shows that the DW keeps moving at an average velocity of around 50 m/s when the zero-dK/dx stage lasts as long as 5 ns (Fig. The mechanism of inertia can be understood using the Lagrangian approach. The Lagrangian density Ω equals T -V with T and V representing kinetic and free energy density, respectively. V is the integrand in Eq. ( Here, ρ is a constant that is proportional to spin angular momentum ) Here  is a phenomenological factor. The Lagrangian (L) and Rayleigh dissipation function F were derived via integrating T and R throughout the AFM nanowire, and they satisfy the Lagrange-Rayleigh equation: Here , and are canonical momentum (P), canonical force, and dissipation force, respectively. Combining Eqs. ( In Eq. ( Here, C1 is an integral constant Eqs. In addition to inertia, motion of AFM DW also usually experiences Lorentz contraction, i.e., DW width decreases with DW velocity that increases towards a limit value determined by the group velocity of spin wave (vg) In summary, we have derived the dynamics equation describing DW motion in an AFM nanowire under a moderate gradient of magnetic anisotropy energy. The solution indicates that enhancing the exchange stiffness constant, reducing damping coefficient, or increasing the slope or reducing the intercept of the coordinate dependence of anisotropy energy, increases DW velocity. Because of inertia, the DW is able to keep moving for several nano-seconds after retreating the gradient of magnetic anisotropy energy, and a low damping coefficient is vital to the DW motion at a sustainable high velocity. This DW inertia can be interpreted from the dynamics of canonical momentum that is derived from the Lagrangian approach. On the other hand, even though spin wave is emitted, the DW velocity still keeps increasing under a high gradient of anisotropy energy, showing that the gradient of anisotropy energy offers more energy than the energy loss from emission of spin wave.