We present fast tunable superconducting microwave resonators fabricated from planar NbN on a sapphire substrate. The 3λ/4 wavelength resonators are tuning fork shaped and tuned by passing a dc current which controls the kinetic inductance of the tuning fork prongs. The λ/4 section from the open end operates as an integrated impedance converter which creates a nearly perfect short for microwave currents at the dc terminal coupling points, thus preventing microwave energy leakage through the dc lines. We measure an internal quality factor Qint > 10 5 over the entire tuning range. We demonstrate a tuning range of > 3% and tuning response times as short as 20 ns for the maximum achievable detuning. Due to the quasi-fractal design, the resonators are resilient to magnetic fields of up to 0.5 T. Superconducting microwave resonators are versatile devices with applications ranging from signal conditioning in Purcell filters The base frequency of any microwave resonator is defined by its geometry and can therefore be adjusted by varying the geometrical parameters. In practice, purely mechanical designs are bulky, challenging to implement Conveniently, superconducting design elements provide an alternative option: any superconductor possesses kinetic inductance (KI), which can be tuned with either external magnetic field or dc bias current. The first approach does not require any tweaks to a standard coplanar resonator design and was presented already a decade ago by Healey et al. A standard way to achieve fast frequency control via KI tuning is by integrating a pair of Josephson junction elements in the form of a Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) loop in the resonator design. The highly nonlinear loop inductance can be controlled with a magnetic flux generated by a dedicated current control line, such that no external field is needed. Devices of this type achieve tuning speeds faster than the photon lifetime Q/f 0 As an alternative to SQUIDs as lumped KI elements, one can exploit the kinetic inductance of the superconducting film itself. This approach does not introduce the extra internal dissipation associated with SQUIDs, but generally does increase radiation losses: the microwave energy leaks from the cavity through the dc terminals. An obvious way to minimize the losses is to couple the dc leads at the nodes of the microwave voltage, but, due to fabrication tolerances, one does not reach Q > 1000 in a practical device. The leakage can be further suppressed by supplying the bias current through low pass filters. The simplest of such filters, capacitors, provide a shunt to ground for microwaves, thus effectively decouplindg dc lines. With this design, internal quality factors up to 10 4 in tunable coplanar resonators were demonstrated in Here, we present a novel resonator design which incorporates an impedance converter as an integral part of the resonator circuit. The converter provides a nearly perfect short circuit for microwave currents at the dc terminals insertion points thus preventing an energy leakage into terminals. By design, this solution imposes no limits on the frequency tuning rate and we report dissipative Q-factors above one million at high photon populations and up to 2 × 10 5 at single photon level, approaching that of standard non-tunable superconducting coplanar resonators. The resonator design is sketched in Fig. We exploit the 3λ/4 mode of the tuning fork. The current/voltage nodes/antinodes of this mode are depicted in Figs. Another dissipation channel appears if the resonator mode couples to some parasitic resonance supported by the ground plane or the enclosure. For a fixed-frequency resonator the odds that the resonance frequency will match some parasitic resonance are relatively low, and, if such unlikely collision does take place, the problem could be eliminated by a few extra wire-bonds across the chip which will shift the parasitic resonance in frequency. For tunable resonators this simple solution obviously does not apply: all ground plane resonances present within the full tuning range (100-200 MHz for the presented design) should be either eliminated or decoupled from the resonator. In the presented resonators this challenge is conjointly addressed by a set of design solutions listed below. Firstly, the tuning fork geometry ensures that the microwave mode is localized in-between the prongs. Secondly, the fractalized prong-to-prong capacitor provides per unit length capacitance much higher than that of a regular coplanar line; this translates into a very slow phase propagation velocity (∼ 4% of the speed of light) and a short resonator length of about 1.5 mm for resonance frequency of 6 GHz. The transverse dimension is also rather compact: the prong-to-prong distance is 34 μm only. As the coupling to environmental resonances is proportional to the square of the dipole moment, our resonators are much more resilient to parasitics than the regular coplanar lines. Finally, elimination of dedicated dc lines and the simplest ground plane topology mini-mizes the spectral density of parasitics. In practice, we achieve above 75% yield: out of four resonances on a chip no more than one typically suffers from collision with parasitics within the full tuning range. The resonators described here were fabricated from 140 nm NbN film deposited on a 2-inch sapphire substrate. The desired structure is patterned with electron beam lithography and etched in a Ar : Cl 2 reactive ion plasma. The fabrication procedure is broadly similar to Based on the normal state sheet resistance of the film, the kinetic inductance can be estimated as L k = R N /π∆ 0 , where is the reduced Planck constant, R N is the sheet resistance, and ∆ 0 is the superconducting energy gap at 0 K. This corresponds to a kinetic inductance of 4 pH/ for the 50 nm thick film. This formula is approximate but allows an estimation of L k which can be used to model the resonator design with the Sonnet Electromagnetic Simulation Software The fabricated devices were initially characterised in a 2 K LHe cryostat. A vector network analyser (VNA) was used to record the forward transmission (S 21 ) of the device; the measured S 21 data is shown in Fig. For further characterization, we used a single shot 3 He cryostat with a base temperature of 0.3 K. S 21 scans were recorded at different temperatures, microwave excitation power levels, and dc tuning currents. From the recorded S 21 scans, the internal and coupling quality factors were extracted by fitting the data to the model provided in Fig. An interesting feature in Fig. To determine the tuning speed of the resonator we followed the same methodology as in Ref. Previously we have demonstrated that the field resilient fractal resonators can be used as a core of on-chip Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) spectrometers In summary, we have presented a superconducting microwave resonator design which allows for frequency tuning without substantial compromise of the resonator quality factor. We demonstrate that the internal Q-factor holds the value above 10 5 down to the single photon limit over the entire tuning range up to 200 MHz. The dominant loss mechanism is residual radiation through the current bias control lines which could be further suppressed with low-pass filters. We demonstrated that a full-scale frequency shift can be performed in a time shorter than a 10 -3 fraction of the photon lifetime. The quasi-fractal resonator design allows for operation in high magnetic fields. Here we demonstrated the magnetic field resilience up to 0.5 T. We argue that by shrinking the minimum design features in the design down to ∼ 100 nm or by introducing high-density perforation of the superconducting film the resonators can be made operational in magnetic fields above 5 T, as previously demonstrated in When the resonator is used for ESR spectrometry, the frequency tuning allows for determination of the effective g-factor of the spins. Owing to a high quality factor of our resonators, the g-factor can be reliably measured on spin ensembles as small as ∼ 1000 spins, which is close to state of the art in the field 