The thermophotovoltaic cells which convert the low temperature radiation into electricity are of significance due to their potential applications in many fields. In this work, Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells which work under the radiation from the blackbody with the temperature of 300 K-480 K are presented. The experimental results show that the cells can output electricity even under the radiation temperature of 300 K. The band structure of Bi2Te3/Si heterojunctions and the defects in Bi2Te3 thin films lower the conversion efficiency of the cells. It is also demonstrated that the resistivity of Si and the thickness of Bi2Te3 thin films have important effects on Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells. Although the cells' output power is small, this work provides a possible way to utilize the low temperature radiation. Thermophotovoltaic cells have attracted much attention in recent years because of their ability to convert thermal energy into electrical energy directly So far, most of the researches about the thermophotovoltaic cells focus on those which work well under the high temperature radiation To make use of the low temperature radiation, in our previous work To improve the performance of the cells, in this work we demonstrate the thermophotovoltaic cells which include Bi2Te3/Si heterojunctions by substituting the p-type Sb2Te3 thin films with p-type single crystalline Si wafers. Because the difference between the Fermi levels of Bi2Te3 thin films and Si is about 0.67 eV-0.89 eV (much higher than that between Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 thin films), the introduction of Si brings the cells a built-in electric field which is strong enough to separate the photogenerated electron-hole pairs. Here, the output current of Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells under the radiation from a low-temperature heat source (300-480 K) is explored. The effects of Si wafer's doping concentration and the thickness of Bi2Te3 thin films on Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells are also discussed. This kind of cells provide a convenient method to convert low temperature radiation into electricity and to broaden the application of thermophotovoltaic cells. The schematic structure of Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells is shown in Fig. Figure In general, the measurement of the external quantum efficiency is necessary for a thermophotovoltaic cell so that its response to the infrared photons with different wavelength can be known. However, for Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells, the lack of control detectors working in the long wavelength range makes the test difficult. Here, to know the spectral response of the cells, the output current under different wavelength radiation is tested instead of measuring the external quantum efficiency, as shown in Fig. The reflection and transmission of the cells in the wavelength range of 2.5-8 μm are given in Fig. The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics for Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells under the radiation from the blackbody (with an emissivity of 0.95) with different temperature are shown in Fig. The variation of the cells' output can be attributed to the increase in the number of absorbable photons. According to Planck's Law The fill factor of the cells can be calculated from Fig. Compared with Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 cells Figure Because the infrared photons from the radiation source cannot be absorbed by Si, all of the electron-hole pairs are generated only in Bi2Te3 thin films. It can be seen in Fig. The effects of thickness of Bi2Te3 thin films on the thermophotovoltaic cells is also investigated. Figure On the basis of the data in Fig. While, if the thickness of Bi2Te3 thin films is larger than 310 nm, the excited electrons have to travel over a longer distance and have more chances to be recombined. However, according to classical theory Although the conversion efficiency of Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells is low and the output power is small, the results show that the low temperature radiation can be converted into electricity. Especially, when the temperature of the radiation source is 300 K, the cells can still convert the weak radiation into electricity. This is the advantage of Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells which provides a convenient method to make use of low-temperature radiation and demonstrates that obtaining energy from roomtemperature surroundings is possible. Furthermore, compared with currently used thermophotovoltaic materials like GaSb, InSb, InAs, etc., Bi2Te3 is more inexpensive and its thin films are easy to be fabricated by vacuum deposition. In addition, reducing the distance between the cells and the heat source can improve their performance further due to near-field effect As mentioned above, Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells have a low conversion efficiency which results from the valence band offset at the interface and the carrier recombination in the polycrystalline Bi2Te3 thin films. Therefore, substituting Si with the semiconducting materials of a suitable energy band might lower the potential barrier at the interface and improve the transport of holes. To reduce the carrier recombination, it is necessary to decrease the number of defects by improving the crystallinity of Bi2Te3 thin films and passivating their surface. Another challenge which Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells face is how to enhance the absorption of the long wavelength photons by Bi2Te3 thin films. Fig. These problems restrict seriously the performance of Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells. But, on the other hand, they also indicate that a big potential improvement is possible. Therefore, our next efforts will focus on finding the solutions to enhance the cells. In conclusion, it has been demonstrated that Bi2Te3/Si thermophotovoltaic cells can output electrical power by absorbing the radiation from the heat source with temperature from 300 K to 480 K. The barrier at the interface of the junction, the defects in Bi2Te3 thin films and the less absorption reduce seriously the output power. The higher doping concentration of Si leads to a higher output of the cells, and the optimal thickness of Bi2Te3 thin films is around 310 nm when the resistivity of Si is 0.001 Ωcm, which might also be the width of the depletion region in Bi2Te3 thin films. Although there exist still some challenges, this work provides a possible method to generate electricity through absorbing the radiation from low (or room) temperature surroundings. lcg@seu.edu.cn