We discuss the unconventional magnetic response and vortex states arising in noncentrosymmetric superconductors with chiral octahedral and tetrahedral (O or T ) symmetry. We microscopically derive Ginzburg-Landau free energy. It is shown that due to spin-orbit and Zeeman coupling magnetic response of the system can change very significantly with temperature. For sufficiently strong coupling this leads to a crossover from type-1 superconductivity at elevated temperature to vortex states at lower temperature. The external magnetic field decay in such superconductors does not have the simple exponential law. We show that in the London limit, magnetic field can be solved in terms of complex force-free fields W , which are defined by ∇ × W = const W . Using that we demonstrate that the magnetic field of a vortex decays in spirals. Because of such behavior of the magnetic field, the intervortex and vortex-boundary interaction becomes non-monotonic with multiple minima. This implies that vortices form bound states with other vortices, antivortices, and boundaries. Macroscopic magnetic and transport properties of superconductors have a significant degree of universality. For ordinary superconductors, the magnetic field behavior in the simplest case is described by the London equation [1-3] This dictates that an externally applied magnetic field B decays exponentially in the superconductor at the characteristic length scale called magnetic field penetration length λ. The equation relating the supercurrent to magnetic field ∇ × B = J dictates that the supercurrent should decay with the same exponent. Within the standard picture, this type of behavior describes the magnetic field near superconducting boundaries and in vortices, with microscopic detail, only affecting the coefficient λ. The single length scale associated with magnetic field behavior enables the Ginzburg-Landau classification of superconductors Indeed Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free-energy functionals describing these, so-called noncentrosymmetric, superconducting systems were demonstrated to feature various new terms In the Section II we discuss the microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model. A reader who is not interested in technical details can proceed directly to the section Section III. In the Section III, by rescaling we cast the GL model in a representation that is more convenient for calculations and analysis. In the Section IV we describe a method that solves the hydromagnetostatics of a noncentrosymmetric superconductor in the London arXiv:2003.10918v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Dec 2020 limit in terms of complex force-free fields. A reader not interested in the analytical detail can proceed directly to the next section. In Section V we obtain analytic and numerical vortex configuration with a spiral magnetic field. In Section VI we calculate the temperature dependence of the single vortex energy to show how a crossover to type-1 superconductivity appears at elevated temperatures in a class of noncentrosymmetric superconductors. In Section VII we consider intervortex forces and show that system forms vortex-vortex and vortex-antivortex bound states. In Section VIII we consider the problem of a vortex near a boundary of noncentrosymmetric superconductor and show that vortex forms bound states with it. Here we present a microscopic derivation of the GL model in the case of chiral octahedral O or equivalently tetrahedral T symmetry from the microscopic model. A reader, not interested in the technical derivation of the model can skip this section and directly proceed to the next sections that analyze the physical properties of the model. Typically quoted phenomenological GL models, have unphysical unboundedness of the energy from below , where V is potential. Consider the case of O or T symmetry given by K ij = δ ij K. Then inserting Chandrasekhar-Kendall function which is unbounded from below. That can be seen as follows: by increasing ψ > √ 2 K and setting A 2 → ∞ one obtains infinitely negative energy density. Similarly, consider for example, the case of C 4v symmetry, which corresponds to Rashba spin-orbit coupling Then we can set A = e -Kψ 2 z (const x , const y , 0). This leads to the same unbounded energy density Eq. The unboundedness of the model is associated with divergence of |ψ| and | B|. However, some of the previous works that derived the GL model assuming a finite uniform magnetic field B We will focus on the simplest case with the BCS type local attractive interaction given by strength V > 0 but will include a general space-dependent magnetic field B. Interaction is regularized by Debye frequency ω D such that only electrons with Matsubara frequency < ω D are interacting. We start from the continuous-space fermionic model in path integral formulation, given by the action S and partition function Z: (3) where T is temperature and a α (τ, x), a † α (τ, x) are Grassman fields, which depend on imaginary time τ , three dimensional space coordinates x and spin α. They correspond to fermionic creation and annihilation operators and where σ αβ ≡ ((σ 1 ) αβ , (σ 2 ) αβ , (σ 3 ) αβ ) are Pauli matrices, e is electron charge, μ is chemical potential and μ B is Bohr magneton. Single electron energy is E(-i∇e A( x)) with E(0) = 0, which is E(k) = k 2 2m for quasi free electrons. However, in our derivation, we keep E(k) in general form, also suitable for band electrons. The only term responsible for noncentrosymmetric nature of the system is spin-orbit coupling γ(-i∇ -e A( x)). Let us now consider the case of cubic O or T symmetry with simplest coupling γ( a) = γ 0 a. We will focus on the standard situation where the macroscopic length scale λ, over which the quantities A, B change, is much larger than Fermi length scale ∝ 1/k F , where k F is Fermi momenta. We assume that the following inequalities hold: where T c is the critical temperature of a superconductor to a normal phase transition. We perform Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation by introducing auxiliary bosonic field ∆(τ, x). Hence, up to a constant, interaction term becomes: Next, by introducing b ≡ (a ↑ , a ↓ , a † ↑ , a † ↓ ) T the partition function Eq. ( where we have the matrix H = H 0 + Λ with The symbol with a hat denotes 2 × 2 matrices defined by ĥ = σ • h and δ = σ • (0, 0, i∆, 0). Note, that for any function of operators f , transposition is defined as Integrating out fermionic degrees of freedom b, by performing Berezin integration in Eq. ( In the mean-field approximation, one assumes that ∆ doesn't depend on τ (i.e. it's classical) and doesn't fluctuate thermally. Hence free energy is given by: Tr ln H By Tr here and below we mean matrix trace tr and integration d xdτ . To obtain the GL model we need to expand the second term in Eq. ( where the first equality is defined, up to constant in ∆ and ĝ, through: ) Note, that in Eq. ( The Fourier transform for g: ĝ = σ • g is given by: where w n = 2πT (n + 1 2 ) is Matsubara frequency. Here we used the fact that only electrons with frequency w n smaller than Debye frequency ω D are interacting, and that f is a solution of the equation ĥ f = 1. By using the Fourier transformed h(w n , k) = (-iw n + E(k) -μ, γ 0 kμ B B) we obtain: where h ≡ (h 0 , -h) if h = (h 0 , h). We can rewrite f as: where we use the notations h ≡ | h| and e h ≡ h h . C. Minimal set of terms in the GL expansion for the noncentrosymmetric materials First, we examine the terms occurring in the second order. To that end, by using the Eq. ( where the operator D = -i∇ -2e A( x) is acting only on the gap field ∆ * ( x). The goal here is to simplify f • f term in Eq. Then it is easy to show that up to the second order in D k F and μ B B γ0k F : s • s 0 and s • s 2. Hence using Eq. ( When summing over w n , contribution to integration over momenta in Eq. ( where a = ±1 is the band index. Hence we can approximate By using μ ω D and γ 0 k aF ω D , the integral in Eq. ( where N a is density of states at Fermi level, v aF is Fermi velocity and dΩ k is solid angle. Then we perform integration and Matsubara sum in Eq. ( where Re X ≡ 1 2 (X + X † ) and Ψ is digamma function. Next we expand in D, B and average over e k in Eq. ( ) Note, that the kinetic term is split into two terms corresponding to different bands with covariant derivatives that apart from A have B. If one opens brackets -the only noncentrosymmetric term is proportional to difference of squares of Fermi momenta of two bands: As usual, at the fourth-order, it is sufficient to retain only term ∝ |∆| 4 . Hence we neglect A, B and difference in ∆'s. To that end we consider ν = 2 term in Eq. (25) Here, to go to the second equality we used Eq. The principal difference between the GL model of centrosymmetric and noncentrosymmetric material here is in the form of the gradient term in Eq. ( In this section, we rescale the GL model to a simpler form that is analyzed below. The minimal, microscopically-derived GL model for noncentrosymmetric superconductor reads as a sum of second-order F 2 and fourth-order F 4 terms, given by Eq. ( Importantly, the energy of the model, derived here, is bounded from below i.e. the functional does not allow infinitely negative energy states. This is in contrast to the phenomenological model presented in Chapter 5 of The microscopically-derived model, can be cast in a more compact form by introducing the new variables r, ψ, F , A and performing the following transformation: After dropping the prime , the rescaled GL free energy can be written as: where we define new parameters: Two conclusions can be drawn here: • The noncentrosymmetric term Eq. ( • The parameters γ, ν are proportional to √ -α and hence for T → T c we get γ, ν → 0. Here T c is the critical temperature, defined in Eq. ( ) with J a = Re(ψ * Daψ) κc and boundary conditions for unitary vector n orthogonal to the boundary: In this section, we develop an analytical method for treating Eq. A. Decoupling of fields at linear level First we focus on asymptotic of the Eq. ( where χ = κc 2 + ν 2 . This is accompanied by the boundary conditions Eq. Note, that equation for the matter field ε has the same form as for usual superconductors. That allows us to define the coherence length as ξ = 1 √ 2κc so that it parameterizes the exponential law ψ ∝ e -x/ξ how the matter field recovers from a local perturbation. Importantly the equation for B and j is decoupled from the equation for ε at the level of linearized theory. That means that the London limit is a fully controllable approximation for a noncentrosymmetric superconductor with short coherence length. Namely, when the length scale of density variation ξ is much smaller than the characteristic length scale of the magnetic field decay and we are sufficiently far away from the upper critical magnetic field, so that vortex cores do not overlap, the London model is a good approximation. B. Analytical approach for solutions in the London limit in the presence of vortices. In London approximation the order parameter is set to ψ = 0 at r < ξ to model a core of a vortex positioned at r = 0. Away from the core it recovers to bulk value ψ = e iφ . Taking curl of the second equation in Eq. ( Far away from the vortex core, the right-hand side of Eq. ( Eq. ( To simplify this equation we introduce complex force free field W defined by ∇ × W = η W or equivalently by L W = 0. Using this and Eq. ( where c is arbitrary complex valued constant. Subtracting complex conjugated from Eq. ( Note, that we absorbed multiplicative complex constant into the definition of W in the last step. To obtain a solution for W , one can solve the equation L W = 0. However it is more elegant to employ the trick used by Chandrasekhar and Kendall There is freedom in choosing v: it can be set to, for example, v = const or v ∝ r. We note, that to make resulting equations simpler, if possible, it's convenient to satisfy: v = const ∈ Re, | v| = 1 and v • ∇f = 0. In this work we fix it to v = e z and hence set W to: In a London model a solution for a vortex is obtained by including a source term. Now if we take into account right-hand side of Eq. (35) second equation in Eq. (40) should be modified to include source term δ, which we define by ∇ 2 f + η 2 f = ηδ. For multiple vortices with windings n i , placed at different positions r i , we have The Eq. ( From the Eq. ( This section can be summarized as follows: we justified taking the London limit by decoupling linearized matter field equation from magnetic field equation. We demonstrated that the equation Eq. ( Note, that this representation of B in terms of complex force-free fields is general : i.e. it holds also for the usual centrosymmetric superconductor. But, as will be clear from the discussion below, it is particularly useful for noncentrosymmetric materials. An example where the London model yields important physical information is vortex energy calculations. That allows determining for instance, lower critical magnetic fields and magnetization curves. Free energy Eq. ( where j is found from the second equation in Eq. ( The formalism presented in this section allows a simple solution: Hence energy of any configuration can be written as: Furthermore, by using the Eq. ( We will use the formalism of this section below to analyze the physical properties of noncentrosymmetric systems. A. Analytical treatment in the London limit Earlier, vortex solutions were obtained only as a series expansion Consider a single vortex translationally invariant along z direction and positioned at x, y = 0. Then in order to obtain magnetic field we need to solve second equation in Eq. ( Firstly, let's solve it with zero right-hand side. Then Eq. ( 1 (ηρ) , H Then for ρ → ∞ since H (1) 0 ∝ e iηρ √ ρ magnetic field forms the right handed spirals as in the case of the Meissner state, see below Eq. ( Note, that this is a general observation that decaying magnetic field forms a spiral with handedness determined by the sign of γ. To obtain the vortex solution in the full nonlinear Ginzburg-Landau model, we developed a numerical approach that minimizes the free energy Eq. In this section, we show how noncentrosymmetric superconductors can crossover from vortex states at low temperature to type-1 superconductivity at T → T c . To that end, let us consider the energy of a single vortex with a core parallel to z direction. Recall that first critical magnetic field H c1 is defined such that vortex energy becomes negative for H z ≡ H > H c1 . Namely, vortex energy (per unit length in z direction) is given by F v = 2π (H c1 -H), where H is external magnetic field parallel to z direction. Next, thermodynamic critical magnetic field H c is defined as H when energy of the uniform superconducting state ψ = 1 and A = 0 is zero. In our rescaled units H c = 1. In the usual type-II superconductors vortices form when H c1 < H c . However, as we will see below, the interaction of vortices in this system is non-monotonic and hence lattice of vortices will become energetically beneficial for H c1 < H c1 . Hence in order to show that superconductor has vortex states it is sufficient to find H c1 < H c . To observe a crossover consider a noncentrosymmetric superconductor that has κ c < 1. Then at T → T c , as we showed above, γ, ν → 0 and hence it becomes usual type-1 superconductor described by the GL parameter κ c . In this case H c < H c1 and hence vortices are not present. However, when the temperature is decreased, γ and ν increase. By solving the full GL model Eq. ( Next, we study analytically how vortex states become energetically preferable. Firstly, consider the London limit, disregarding the vortex core energy. Using the previously obtained vortex solution Eq. ( where γ Euler 0.577.. is Euler Gamma. For a single vortex we have n = -1. Let us estimate the core energy of a vortex. Since vortex core is of size ξ then it is πξ 2 ψ 2 const κc since ξ = 1 √ 2κc and ψ 1. Hence the actual first critical magnetic field can be estimated by H c1 H L c1 + const κc . When κ c 1, γ, ν this core energy is indeed relatively small and can be disregarded. However, for studying a crossover to type-1 superconductivity Fig. Finally consider how parameters γ, ν influence length scales over which order parameter and magnetic field change. Namely, we are interested in the ratio of these scales, since for usual superconductor it determines whether it is of type-1 or type-2. As we showed before, Eq. ( Consider superconductor with no vortices occupying half-space x > 0 and external magnetic field H, parallel to the boundary. As usual, we assume that fields depend only on x. Then the second equation in Eq. ( it gives c = -iκc 2χ H, where H = H z + iH y . From Eq. (45) we obtain magnetic field, which can be represented by a linear combination of components of B parallel to the boundary B = B z + iB y : While the magnetic field has a spiral decay, its modulus has an exponential decay, see Fig. B θ numerical GL B z numerical GL B z London limit B θ London limit define the penetration depth for magnetic field as the inverse of imaginary part of η: Importantly, inside a superconductor, the direction of the magnetic field rotates with the period 2π η1 , forming a right-handed spiral (helical) structure. This spiral is shown on Fig. under inversion (parity) transformation P : r → -r and the model is centrosymmetric only if η 1 = 0. It is also apparent from the fact that η 1 ∝ γ, where γ is, as was shown above, the parameter that determines the degree of noncentrosymmetry of the material. The ratio of the magnetic field penetration length and coherence length for the noncentrosymmetric superconductor then reads Note, that γ, ν ∝ ln Tc T strongly depend on T and go to zero for T → T c , see Eq. superconductors H c = H c1 for λ/ξ = 1. Namely, for the parameters in Fig. We obtained crossover Fig. Here we compute the interaction energy of vortices by using Eq. (49). Consider a set of vortices with windings n i placed at r i with cores parallel to e z . Then according to Eq. ( Then by using the Eq. ( where we also used that the flux of the vortices is fixed by δ. The integral in Eq. ( Importantly, the intervortex interaction energy U , see Fig. where Hence the system forms vortexvortex and vortex-antivortex pairs. Those will form stable states at distances R corresponding to local minima in U . Approximately (for big R) these minima appear with period 2π η1 . Note, that for T → T c period 2π η1 → 0. Simplest estimate as minima/maxima of cos in Eq. (63) gives: where R V V is the distance between vortices, R V aV is the distance between vortex and antivortex and k is an integer. This behavior is due to the fact that in noncentrosymmetric superconductor vortices are represented by "circularly polarized" cylindrical magnetic field Eq. ( In the London limit, interaction can be easily generalized to an arbitrary number of vortices. Namely, using Eq. (61) pairwise interaction will be given by the same U Eq. (62). Hence we can suggest that vortices can form lattices with the distance between neighboring vortices given by one of the minima of U Eq. (62). Similarly, lattices of vortices and antivortices can be formed. We obtained the bound states numerically in the full nonlinear GL model given by Eq. ( In this section, we show that in noncentrosymmetric superconductors physics of vortex-boundary interaction is unconventional. Consider a half infinite superconductor positioned at x > 0 and right-handed vortex with winding n placed at x = R and y = 0. Here we study the problem in the London limit and thus neglect the effects associated with the gap variations near the surface supplemented by the boundary conditions that f is zero at x → ∞. From Eq. ( Since Eq. ( where f m and f v were found in the previous sections. Note, that since Meissner state f m satisfies boundary conditions Eq. (66), the vortex and image f v + f i should satisfy Eq. (66) with zero right hand side. Remember that with the London model, for usual superconductor image of the vortex is just its mirror reflection in the boundary, which is modeled by antivortex positioned outside the superconductor, see So to obtain an "image" configuration f i we have to solve explicitly the Eq. ( 68) To obtain energy we integrate by parts Eq. (49) and use Eq. (65), which gives: where we obtain, compared to Eq. (61), the last term which is boundary integral. Now inserting solutions Eq. (67) and Eq. (68) up to constant terms we obtain energy of a vortex interacting with a boundary, see Fig. 70) where F v is energy of a single vortex in the bulk of superconductor Eq. ( We considered the physics of magnetic field behavior and vortex states in noncentrosymmetric superconductors. We microscopically derived a Ginzburg-Landau model for noncentrosymmetric superconductors which does not suffer from unphysical ground state instability, which was present in frequently used phenomenological models. The main conclusion of the microscopic part of the paper is that type of magnetic response in a noncentrosymmetric superconductor has significant temperature dependence and one can expect materials that are type-1 close to critical temperature to exhibit vortex states at lower temperatures. We find that the first critical magnetic field for single vortex entry H c1 becomes equal to the thermodynamical critical magnetic field at very different ratios of magnetic field penetration length to coherence lengths than in ordinary superconductors, and there is no Bogomolny point at λ/ξ = 1. The multivortex states in these systems are unconventional. The demonstrated spiral-like decay of the magnetic field away from a vortex leads to multiple minima in the intervortex interaction potentials and thus the formation of bound states of vortices and stable vortexantivortex bound states. We find that vortices have a similar oscillating sign of interaction with Meissner current close to the boundaries, and form bound states with boundaries. The properties may potentially be utilized for new types of control of vortex matter for fluxonics and vortex-based cryocomputing applications. Note added: Similar results are obtained by Garaud, Chernodub, and Kharzeev in Ref. 