Trions are excitonic species with a positive or negative charge, and thus, unlike neutral excitons, the flow of trions can generate a net detectable charge current. Trions under favourable doping conditions can be created in a coherent manner using resonant excitation. In this work, we exploit these properties to demonstrate a gate controlled trion switch in a few-layer graphene/monolayer WS 2 /monolayer graphene vertical heterojunction. By using a high resolution spectral scan through a temperature controlled variation of the bandgap of the WS 2 sandwich layer, we obtain a gate voltage dependent vertical photocurrent strongly relying on the spectral position of the excitation, and the photocurrent maximizes when the excitation energy is resonant with the trion peak position. Further, the resonant photocurrent thus generated can be effectively controlled by a back gate voltage applied through the incomplete screening of the bottom monolayer graphene, and the photocurrent strongly correlates with the gate dependent trion intensity, while the non-resonant photocurrent exhibits only a weak gate dependenceunambiguously proving a trion driven photocurrent generation under resonance. We estimate a sub-100 fs switching time of the device. The findings are useful towards demonstration of ultra-fast excitonic devices in layered materials. The monolayer semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (MoS 2 , WS 2 , MoSe 2 , and WSe 2 ) exhibit strongly bound two-dimensional excitons with a binding energy on the order of few hundreds of meV, making these ultra-thin monolayers an excellent test bed for excitonic manipulation even at room temperature Recently, this problem has been addressed by creating inter-layer exciton In this regard, the charged exciton or trion (X -) is promising since its intensity can be readily controlled electrically by modulating the doping density using a gate voltage. In addition, the trion, while being optically initiated, can be electrically detected in a spatially nonlocal manner through measuring a charge current Thus trions are excellent candidates for gate controlled excitonic device applications and also for transferring the valley information into electrical domain. In this work, we demonstrate a fast, gate-and light-tunable vertical trion switch where the trion is coherently initialized through resonant excitation followed by ultra-fast inter-layer transfer and electrical detectionthus generating a gate controlled photocurrent governed by inter-layer trion transport. Figure The heterostructure is prepared on a heavily doped Si substrate coated with 285 nm thick thermally grown SiO 2 . The two electrical contacts are deposited to the top and the bottom graphene. More details of the fabrication process are provided in the Methods section. Figure The fabricated device is then placed on a thermal stage and the terminals of the device are connected to Keithley 2636B SMUs through micromanipulators for electrical measurements. The temperature (T ) of the device is then increased from room temperature to 423 K in steps of 10 K. At every temperature, the device is illuminated with a linearly polarized laser beam with photon energy of 2.33 and 1.9591 eV through an objective with numerical aperture of 0.5 at different back gate voltages (V g ) ranging from -40 to +40 V. We record the in situ photoluminescence (PL) spectra and photocurrent at each V g and T steps. During measurement, the incident laser power is kept below 8 μW to avoid any unwanted degradation of the device due to laser induced heating. Figure The difference in doping induced workfunction between the top FLG and the bottom MLG results in an asymmetry in the device along the vertical direction, which results in a built-in electric field, allowing a detectable photocurrent (I ph = I light -I dark ) between the two electrodes under V d = 0 V. This helps us to reduce the average dark current to zero, suppressing the dark noise of the switch dramatically. The sign of the zero-bias vertical I ph at different V g suggests a net electron flow from the top FLG to the bottom MLG. Figure The dashed vertical line in Figure The temperature dependent non-monotonic photocurrent generation mechanism is explained in Figure As the sample temperature reaches a value of around 343 K, the linearly polarized photon creates trions in a coherent manner in K and K valleys, as explained in Figure 2c Each of the trion consists of a bright exciton in one valley electrostatically bound with an electron in the lower spin-split conduction band from the opposite valley. Since inter-layer transfer is ultra-fast (∼sub-ps As temperature increases further, the resonance condition breaks and thus the photocurrent also lowers. Around 393 K , the excitation comes in resonance with X 0 (Figure Figure In order to further justify the point that the observed I ph results from negatively charged trions, we correlate the photocurrent magnitude with the X -peak height obtained under 1.9591 eV excitation. Figure where ∆Γ is the difference in the Lorentzian component of the full-width-at-half-maximum of the X -peaks between the junction and the control sample, after fitting each of them using a Voigt function In summary, we have demonstrated a gate-and light-controlled trion switch, where trion is optically initiated in a resonant manner and the read out is performed electrically. This can lead to a new paradigm of exciton based optoelectronic switches. The proposed technique exploits the vertical inter-layer transfer of excitonic species, which thus can be extremely fast, compared to relatively slow planar transport of heavy excitons. The efficient controllability through both electrical gating as well as photogating marks an important step towards the realization of trionbased transistor. Since trion can be valley polarized, the valley information can be optically initiated, followed by an electrical sensing, thus transferring the valley information into the electrical domain. The proposed technique can also be used for efficient generation and injection of spin current by resonantly exciting the trion using circularly polarized light -an important step toward realizing spintronic devices. 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.0 2. 