We report on electron spin resonance spectroscopy measurements using a superconducting flux qubit with a sensing volume of 6 fl. The qubit is read out using a frequency-tunable Josephson bifurcation amplifier, which leads to an inferred measurement sensitivity of about 20 spins in a 1 s measurement. This sensitivity represents an order of magnitude improvement when compared with flux-qubit schemes using a dc-SQUID switching readout. Furthermore, noise spectroscopy reveals that the sensitivity is limited by flicker (1/f ) flux noise. In recent years there has been an increased interest in using superconducting circuits to perform electron spin resonance (ESR) at millikelvin temperatures due to the improved sensitivity and the highly polarized spins. For example, by inductively coupling a spin ensemble with a superconducting lumped-element resonator with a small mode volume inductor that is combined with a parametric amplifier, a state-of-the-art sensitivity value of about 12 spins Hz -1/2 has been reported 1 . Sensitivity improvements utilizing quantum squeezing have also been achieved In this paper, we report on further improvements in the sensitivity of ESR using a flux qubit, which is achieved by changing the readout scheme. The previous flux qubit ESR spectroscopy was performed using a dc-SQUID switching readout Figure The system was initially characterized by measuring the magnetization induced by the spin ensemble on the qubit at different temperature T and B values. More specifically B was oriented along the D 2 axis of the crystal, where the two subclasses for each site are equivalent. Due to the anisotropy of the g-factor tensor of Er:YSO, there is a nonzero magnetization perpendicular to the chip surface. For each T and B value, the qubit spectroscopy was performed at a range of applied flux bias Φ values and the resultant spectra were fitted for the qubit frequency f q given by the standard flux qubit expression hf q (Φ) = ∆ 2 + [ε(Φ)] 2 , where ∆ is the flux qubit energy gap. The flux-dependent detuning is given by ε Figure For a spin-1/2 system with zero nuclear spin, the spin magnetization follows where Φ s is the saturation magnetization level and g is the g-factor. For μ B gB 2k B T , For 167 Er:YSO contributions from the two sites, the anisotropy of g-factor tensors, as well as the presence of nuclear spins (I = 7/2) need to be considered, but simulations Next, ESR was performed by measuring the change in the qubit spectrum as a function of ESR excitation frequency. Figure where B = B + B ⊥ ≈ B , μ n is the nuclear magneton, S is the electron spin operator, I is the nuclear spin operator, g is the electron g-factor tensor, A is the hyperfine tensor, Q is the quadrupole tensor, and g n is the nuclear g-factor. Moreover, the two crystallographic sites have different sets of anisotropic g, A, and Q tensors. Due to these characteristics, 167 Er:YSO is a prime example of materials that requires frequency-and field-dependent ESR spectroscopy for a full characterization of the spin properties. In fact, recent measurements reported slightly different 167 Er:YSO g, A, and Q values The flux qubit has an area of 6 μm 2 with an effective thickness 5,20 of ∼ 1 μm which yields an effective sensing volume of ∼ 6 fl and thus N v ≈ 6 × 10 6 spins within this volume. The optimal sensitivity of the flux qubit ESR scheme (see also the Supplementary Material) can be expressed as 9 where δP sw is the JBA switching probability noise, V is the measurement visibility, γ q is the line width of the qubit spectrum, δΦ/δN is the magnetic flux generated by a single spin, and δf q /δN is the change in the flux qubit's frequency from the spin magnetization. In the standard flux qubit spectroscopy scheme, optimal values for V ≈ 0.23 and γ q ≈ 32 MHz at temperatures below 100 mK. The spin polarization detection measurement enables δN/δΦ = N v /Φ s to be derived. To estimate δP sw , several hundred sequential measurements of switching probability P sw were performed with varying repetition numbers N rep at similar bias conditions to those used in the ESR spectroscopy where P sw ≈ 0.5. Figure To understand the limiting factor for δP sw at large N rep , a continuous measurement of P sw was performed for approximately 7 hours. Figure where A Psw is the noise level at 1 Hz with a best fit value of α ≈ 0.93 [red dashed line in Fig. As qubit flux noise contributes to γ q in Eq. 4 Although the sensitivity is comparable to the best values for superconducting devices, several approaches to further improve the sensitivity can be identified. For instance, surface spins are thought to contribute to 1/f flux noise In summary, an improvement in the sensitivity of ESR is demonstrated using a flux qubit that is readout via a Josephson bifurcation amplifier which enables the detection of an estimated 20 spins in 1 second measurement. More fundamentally this sensitivity is found to be limited by the intrinsic 1/f flux noise of the dc-SQUID loop of the JBA. See the Supplementary Material for the comparison between the ESR signal detected by flux qubit with the ESR signal detected using a conventional cavity ESR spectrometer, and their dependences to the relaxation time T 1 and coherence time T 2 of the detected spins. The authors thank I. Mahboob for valuable discussions and critical reading of the manuscript and W. J. Munro and Y. S. Yap for valuable discussions. This work was supported by CREST (JPMJCR1774), JST. V. Ranjan, S. Probst, B. Albanese, T. Schenkel, D. Vion, D. Esteve, J. Morton, and P. Bertet, arXiv:2002.03669 (2020).