From the famous 1918 H1N1 influenza to the present COVID-19 pandemic, the need for improved virial detection techniques is all too apparent. The aim of the present paper is to show that identification of individual virus particles in clinical sample materials quickly and reliably is near at hand. First of all, our team has developed techniques for identification of virions based on a modular atomic force microscopy (AFM). Furthermore, Femtosecond Adaptive Spectroscopic Techniques with Enhanced Resolution via Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (FASTER CARS) [1] using tip-enhanced techniques markedly improves the sensitivity. Scanning probe microscopy, especially in combination with plasmon-enhanced near-field spectroscopy, is used to specifically analyze and study objects below Abbe's diffraction limit. The scientific goal is, in addition to virus diagnostics, to identify structural changes of the virus surface at an early stage, using so-called tip enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) together with coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS), see Fig. In the following section II, we demonstrate how the Tip-Enhanced Raman technique can be used to characterize and differentiate between influenza and picornavirus. In section III we explain the instrumentation and show how it provides exciting new tools for viral research and detection systems, e.g. FASTER CARS: Femtosecond Adaptive Spectroscopic Techniques with Enhanced Resolution via Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering. Section IV presents a conclusion and outlook. A virus is an infectious agent that is spread by nano-sized particles, or virions. As the infection propagates, the virus attacks a cell of a living organism by injecting it with genetic material and inducing the cell to make multiple replicas of the virion. The building blocks of a virion (also called a virus, or a virus particle) are either DNA or RNA molecules surrounded by a protective coat of proteins, the so called (nucleo-)capsid. Moreover, there can be a lipid bilayer serving as envelope. Some viruses are pathogenic and can cause severe diseases, which makes accurate diagnostics essential. The goal is to characterize the specific virus based on single virial particles. One common technique is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which has simplified and accelerated the detection of pathogens over culturing techniques Another approach to identifying viruses is the immunoassay-based detection of viral proteins, which is in some cases less sensitive. Thus, the existing molecular analysis tools do not permit a combination of multiplexing and quantitation and in every case the viral components have to be extracted. Working on a single viral particle via the PCR technique is not possible. Ideally, a new technique would combine the ability of qualitative and quantitative analysis at the single virus particle level, rendering the need for separation of the different components unnecessary. A promising technique for that endeavor is tip-enhanced Raman and potentially other nonlinear optical spectroscopies like FASTER CARS. TERS has been demonstrated to operate in a very specific and sensitive mode down to the single molecule level, with nanometer resolution and below The heart piece in TERS is the probe, which generally is a commercial AFM tip (for AFM-based setups) that is commonly evaporated with silver and exactly positioned in the laser focus. Upon laser irradiation of the metallized tip a so-called evanescent field is generated. Molecules located in some nanometer proximity to the tip experience a Raman signal enhancement (up to 10 7 ) of their vibrational modes according to the surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy theory (see for instance refs. Once the tip is positioned in the laser spot, the sample is moved under the tip and the region of interest is selected. After setting a grid of profile lines on the sample, the AFM is coupled to the Raman spectrometer and enhanced Raman spectra are recorded. Such a setup does not need special sample pretreatments or tagging and allows a direct chemical characterization. The same setup also provides topographic imaging of the sample surface in a single experiment. The spatial resolution in TERS is limited by the diameter of the silver particle at the tip, and lately has been pushed down to around 0.5 -1 nm for bio-samples For the present experiments an enveloped influenza A virus H1N1 and a non-enveloped coxsackie virus B3 (CVB3) were chosen. The swine H1N1 influenza virus particle is composed of a 2-6 nm lipid bilayer decorated with viral proteins and eight ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. The RNPs consist of RNA strands, which interact with numerous nucleoprotein molecules and some viral polymerase complexes. The consistency of the lipid envelope depends on the type of cell membrane of host cell the virus originates. The inner surface is covered completely with viral matrix protein. From the lipid layer flexible protein spikes with a protrusion height of 10-14 nm stick out To our best knowledge, tip-enhanced CARS has been demonstrated in early 2000s Combining this technique with modern quantum molecular calculation is natural for studying complex biological systems. Fig. The review article of Lis and Ceccht characterizes this technique nicely; they say "Investigations demonstrated that the electronic background that derives from the water and the metal could also be reduced on such kind of solid substrates. They go on to say that this technique yields "astonishing sensitivity". Indeed, this improvement over our earlier FAST CARS anthrax detection scheme holds real promise for detection and identification of single virus particles such as SARS-COV-2 virus which causes COVID-19. We have shown that on one hand, the Tip-Enhanced Raman technique can be used to characterize and differentiate between influenza and picornavirus. On the other hand, surface enhanced CARS result in "astonishing" enhancement in the sensitivity (Grant No. A-1261), King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation, Grant No. DFG-CRC1375NOA) for support of the work. We also like to thank Drs. G. Agarwal, B. Brick, K. Chamakura, J. Mogford, J. Sharp, R. Young, and A. Zheltikov for stimulating and helpful discussions.