Luminescent colloidal CdSe nanorings are a recently developed type of semiconductor structure that have attracted interest due to the potential for rich physics arising from their non-trivial toroidal shape. However, the exciton properties and dynamics of these materials with complex topology are not yet well understood. Here, we use a combination of femtosecond vibrational spectroscopy, temperatureresolved photoluminescence (PL), and single particle measurements to study these materials. We find that on transformation of CdSe nanoplatelets to nanorings, by perforating the center of platelets, the emission lifetime decreases and the emission spectrum broadens due to ensemble variations in the ring size and thickness. The reduced PL quantum yield of nanorings (~10%) compared to platelets (~30%) is attributed to an enhanced coupling between: (i) excitons and CdSe LO-phonons at 200 cm -1 and (ii) negatively charged selenium-rich traps which give nanorings a high surface charge (~-50 mV). Population of these weakly emissive trap sites dominates the emission properties with an increased trap emission at low temperatures relative to excitonic emission. Our results provide a detailed picture of the nature of excitons in nanorings and the influence of phonons and surface charge in explaining the broad shape of the PL spectrum and the origin of PL quantum yield losses. Furthermore, they suggest that the excitonic properties of nanorings are not solely a consequence of the toroidal shape but are also a result of traps introduced by puncturing the platelet center. The shape and size of a semiconducting nanocrystal is key to determining both its physical and optoelectronic properties via the nature of exciton quantum confinement. Epitaxial semiconductor rings have been shown to exhibit a range of unusual properties including terahertz absorption and the formation of magnetoexcitonic quantum states (Aharonov-Bohm effect). CdSe nanorings as shown in Figure Samples were always measured within 3 days of preparation and stored and measured in an oxygenfree argon environment, to minimize oxidative degradation. Nanoplatelets show excitonic peaks at 2.57 eV and 2.4 eV corresponding to the electron-heavy hole and electron-light hole transitions. In nanorings there is a broad excitonic absorption centered at 2.1 eV. The respective emission spectrum for 405 nm laser excitation is shown in shading Immediately (within 1 min) after reaching reaction temperature it can be seen that the sharp CdSe 1lh-1e and 1hh-1e excitonic transitions To understand this change in the absorption spectra further, we performed DFT calculations. We used a nanoplatelet infinite in lateral dimensions and 2 CdSe monolayers thick to represent the pseudo-2D nanoplatelet synthesized in experiments, which possess lateral dimensions much larger than the Bohr exciton radius (~5.4 nm). Based on our DFT calculations nanorings with a larger radius are expected to have a larger bandgap and contribute to the higher energy emission within the ensemble, with smaller rings showing redshifted emission, potentially explaining the observed variation in emission energies. Alternatively, the distribution in nanoring bandgaps may arise from variations in thickness between rings induced during the etching process, with thicker rings having more red-shifted emission. We note that the observation of a single emission peak in the single-particle spectra suggests any variation in thickness still only leads to a single emissive site. In any case, the narrow single-particle line widths suggest that nanorings have potential for optical applications such as single photon sources, where the emission can be coupled with the unusual radiation pattern (Hartmann et al. showed the transition dipole moments in CdSe nanorings are arranged in a uniaxial, in-plane manner) arising from the annular shape. Although several studies have addressed the steady-state properties of CdSe nanorings, no experiments have been able to elucidate how the exciton dynamics are influenced by their toroidal structure. The positive narrow signal centered at around 580 nm (Figure The bleach red-shifts over a period of ~10 ps before beginning to decay (see Figure Several groups have performed and analyzed the transient absorption spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets. The derivative-like spectrum can be explained well by a model that accounts for state-filling-induced bleach of the electron-heavy hole and electron-light hole exciton transitions, a shift in the center frequency of these transitions due exciton-exciton interactions and bandgap renormalization. In nanorings there is a much weaker derivative-like shape to the spectrum with the negative wing on the red low-energy edge of the GSB decaying rapidly over ~1 ps. The spectrum is strongly reminiscent of that observed in metal halide perovskites, where following photoexcitation there is rapid (sub-500 fs) renormalization of the bandgap, giving rise to an early-time derivative feature, followed by cooling and hopping of excitations to localization sites. Given the significant inhomogeneous broadening in the emission of nanorings, the red-shift (~50 meV) in the center frequency of the GSB over ~1 ps, may also represent energy transfer to the lowest energy nanorings within the solution ensemble with different recombination rates within the manifold. Performing steady-state resonant (532 nm) and off-resonant (633 nm) Raman measurements also shows the 200 cm -1 mode to be present in nanorings but there are no observable modes in the Raman spectra of nanoplatelets, consistent with previous studies where only weak-exciton phonon coupling has been observed. Figure Studies have shown that unpassivated selenium on the surface of nanocrystals can result in the formation of midgap charge carrier trapping states. As a result of this low oscillator strength we do not expect direct absorption from these states to be significant. In nanoplatelets a similar behaviour as to that discussed for absorption measurements is also realised in the emission spectra, with a non-monotonic change in the PL intensity and wavelength with temperature, and a red-shifting zero-phonon line below 80 K (Figure ) (Equation In this equation ΔE is the energy difference between traps and the band-edge excitonic state and g BE and g trap are the band edge exciton and trap state degeneracy respectively. Fitting the PL ratio intensities from these two states as shown in Figure In 0D CdSe (and CdS or CdTe) quantum dots, temperature-dependent emission measurements have revealed trap activation energies of a similar magnitude to those reported here for platelets and rings at 7-50 meV. 180 meV in CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs, In order to understand the loss of emission towards trap states in nanorings and nanoplatelets at room temperature transient photoluminescence measurements were performed (Figure In nanoplatelets the initial fast component of the decay (>10 ns) has been ascribed to cooling, energy transfer and Auger decay which are accelerated due to a 'giant oscillator strength' effect. However, the stability of the single nanoring PL precludes transient photoluminescence measurements to fully characterize this and establish whether the low quantum yield for nanorings results from lower yield for all nanorings, or arises because some are emissive and others are quenched. The results are also consistent with the hypothesis that rings which have a higher band energy (bluer PL) undergo faster radiative recombination. From our DFT simulations (Figure The PL decay of nanoplatelets and nanorings can also be fit to more complex stretched exponential functions (see SI, S13) which allow estimation of the number of traps, trapping and detrapping rates and energy gap between trap sites. shows no change in the PL lifetime on increasing the concentration (SI, S13), further suggesting any stacking does not play an important role in the observations here, e.g. via the formation of an indirect exciton between stacked nanorings which would be expected to have an increased lifetime. The shape and peak positions in the steady-state PL spectrum similarly do not vary with concentration (SI, S13). Furthermore, The energy difference between the excitonic PL and PL attributed to defects is also too large (~0.3 eV) to be as a consequence of excimer formation. Finally, we note atmospheric (gas exposure/light soaking) Kelvin probe measurements additionally reveal poor trap passivation of nanorings as compared to nanoplatelets (SI, Figure We have investigated exciton dynamics in colloidal CdSe nanorings. Using ultrasensitive, scatter-free absorption measurements, we have shown forming these rings from nanoplatelets introduces relatively little disorder into the materials. DFT simulations show the changes in the electronic structure lead to a red-shift in the absorption on etching the central hole of the platelets to form a ring. Variation in the size, thickness, and localization properties of the rings leads to a broad absorption and emission with a large Stokes shift as confirmed by single-particle PL measurements. Following photoexcitation, excitons on the nanoring hop between (surface) trap sites before localising, this is in contrast to the delocalized, band-like picture of excitations in nanoplatelets. These increased exciton localization likely emerges from the localized hole state due to the change in topology and electronic structure from the creation of the nanoring. There is also likely energetic hopping between nanorings of different band energies within the ensemble. The surfaces of nanorings have a large negative charge, suggesting the traps consist of regions of unpassivated selenium. In contrast to nanoplatelets, there is strong coupling between excitons and a LO-phonon mode at 200 cm -1 , which we suggest plays a key role in localising excitations. However, the shape does not necessarily appear to play a significant role in altering the exciton-phonon coupling as one might expect. In-situ characterization of nanorings during their formation from nanoplatelets suggests this enhanced exciton-phonon coupling is introduced during the etching process. Using low-temperature absorption and emission, we confirm this equilibrium between trap and excitonic emission, with the former dominating at low temperatures. Transient measurements as a function of temperature further demonstrate that despite a similar steady-state PL response to nanoplatelets the band-edge electronic structure in nanorings cannot be treated simply in terms of a bright-dark doublet. Analysis of steady state and transient PL data gives a semi-quantitative picture of surface traps and free energies in both nanoplatelets and nanorings and suggests potential couplings between the exciton and surface states. These results have several implications for the engineering of 2D colloidal CdSe nanorings. Firstly, they suggest that passivation of negative selenium anion traps is key. This might be achieved either via appropriate surface ligands, core-shell structures, or by better removing excess selenium from the etch process. Given exciton-phonon scattering is a major PL loss pathway in these materials, our results additionally suggest that tuning of the material structure is required. This could perhaps be achieved by alloying the material, 115 to reduce coupling with phonon modes and alleviate strain in nanorings, an approach which has had success in some 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. As active materials for quantum dot LEDs, the strong exciton-phonon coupling in nanorings is not advantageous, due to the asymmetry and PL broadening introduced. For application in solar cells, the high trap density and the fact that the main carriers are excitons as opposed to free charges, limits the use of nanorings, although these materials would be optimal over nanoplatelets. However, if the PL quantum yield can be enhanced significantly using approaches proven for colloidal quantum dots, nanorings might find effective use in luminescent solar concentrators, where a large Stokes shift between absorption and emission coupled with the potential for highly directed emission is desirable. In terms of applications that exploit the nanoring shape, our results suggest that surface traps introduced by etching of the platelet center might be a limiting factor. For the extraction, a 30 mL glass syringe with 14 or 16 gauge stainless steel needle was used to expedite the transfer time. The needle and syringe was purged with nitrogen using the receiving flask, also preperforating the septum to facilitate rapid insertion. The cloudy solution was allowed to settle for 3 hours then transferred to an Ar glovebox then centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the precipitate was resuspended in 4 mL MCH and filtered through a 0.2 μm PTFE syringe filter, to remove large aggregates. The crude solution was purified twice by precipitation with ethanol, centrifugation and resuspension in MCH. The purified NPLs were stored in MCH. NPLs were colloidally stable in MCH but would eventually precipitate in hexane. A quantity of purified nanoplatelets was dispersed into degassed ODE (3 mL) and degassed OAm (1 mL). These were stored as three separate stock solutions in the glovebox and could be mixed together before transferring to the flask. The absorption spectrum of the NPLs in MCH was used to determine the amount of stock solution to be used. When the sharp absorption feature at 511 nm for a solution of NPLs diluted by a factor of 300 was 0.2 A in a 1 cm cuvette, 1 mL of the undiluted solution was used for the ring etch procedure. A convenient method of dilution was to disperse 6.6 μL of stock solution into 2 mL additional solvent. The quantity of NPL stock was varied linearly according to absorbance, thus for a diluted stock measured at 0.4 A, one should use 0.5 mL of NPL stock solution. The NPL solution in ODE/OAm was transferred to a 25 mL 3-necked flask purged with N2. The solution was heated to 80 °C under N2 for 15 minutes to evaporate the MCH then the flask was slowly degassed whilst being allowed to cool to room temperature. The heating allowed faster and more complete removal of excess MCH solvent. Selenium powder (Alfa-Aesar, 7.9 mg, 325-mesh) was dispersed and sonicated in degassed OAm (1 mL) and 0.2 mL of this suspension was added to the degassed NPL solution. The finer powder mesh was used to achieve more reproducible results, allowing for better initial dispersion in OAm, and to improve dissolution rate when reaching solubility temperature. Selenium may also be pre-dissolved in OAm by heating the suspension on a hotplate within the glovebox at 180 °C overnight, resulting in an orange-brown solution to be used instead of the powder suspension. Vortexing the powder suspension with fast extraction before sedimentation was useful in ensuring a correct amount of Se was used. The flask was degassed at room temperature for 10 minutes before heating to 140 °C under N2. The temperature was maintained at 140 °C for 10 minutes, then trin-butylphosphine (0.2 ml) was injected into the flask and the temperature was increased to 220 °C. A visible darkening of the solution was observed during the temperature plateau, which lightened following injection of tri-n-butylphosphine, darkening again upon heating to 220 °C. The heating mantle was removed immediately upon reaching 220 °C and the flask was allowed to cool to room temperature. At 37 °C, finely ground cadmium formate (MP Biomedicals, 10 mg) was added to the flask, and the mixture was stirred for 1 hour. The solution was transferred to an Ar glovebox and purified by precipitation with a mixture of ethanol/acetone, centrifugation and resuspension in hexane. Bright-field transmission electron microscopy was performed with a FEI Tecnai F20 TEM at 200 kV operating voltage. Samples were prepared by deposition of diluted nanocrystals in hexane onto carboncoated Cu grids (Agar AGS160). Photoluminescence Quantum Efficiency (PLQE) Photoluminescence quantum efficiency was performed on a home-built measurement setup consisting of an integrating sphere (Labsphere 4P-GPS-053-SL), collection fibre (Andor SR-OPT8019), spectrograph (Andor Kymera-328i) and detector (Andor iDus 420). The setup was calibrated for spectral sensitivity with a NIST-traceable quartz-tungsten-halogen lamp (Newport 63967-200QC-OA). Excitation was performed with a 520 nm temperature-controlled diode laser (Thorlabs). PLQE values were determined via the integrating sphere method. Linear absorption spectra of colloidal nanoplatelets solutions, placed in a 1 mm path length cuvette (Hellma), were measured using a commercial PerkinElmer Lambda 750 UV-vis-NIR setup equipped with a 10 cm integrating sphere module attachment. A Xe lamp was used as an excitation source, and all measurements were performed under standard ambient conditions. In order to collect the scattered light, the sample cuvette was placed on the front window of the sphere. The spectra were measured simultaneously with the solvent hexane to correct for its absorption. The samples were prepared by dropcasting a diluted solution of nanorings (dilution up to 5000 times) onto ~ 5 x 5 mm glass slides. They were then mounted on the cold finger of a cryostat (Oxford Instrument) allowing the control of the temperature from ≈ 4 K to room temperature. The samples were excited with a continuous wave diode-pumped solid state laser (Thorlabs DJ532) emitting at 533 nm, mounted in its temperature controlled laser mount (Thorlabs TCLDM9). The excitation was focused using a microscope objective (NA = 0.6, spot size ≈ 1 μm). The incident power density was kept around 5 μW/μm2. The luminescence was collected using the same optic and spectrally analyzed with an ACTON SP2760i Roper Scientific-Princeton Instruments spectrometer coupled to a nitrogen-cooled SPEC10-2KB-LN (RS-PI) CCD camera (1200 lines per mm grating). An Agilent Cary 6000i UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer with blank substrate correction was used. Spin-coated samples on fused silica substrates were placed in a continuous-flow cryostat (Oxford Instruments Optistat CF-V) under a helium atmosphere. We allowed the sample temperature to equilibrate for 30 min before taking data. All DFT calculations were performed using the Quantum Espresso suite (v6.4). The fs-TA experiments were performed using an Yb-based amplified system (Pharos, Light Conversion) providing 14.5 W at 1030 nm and a 38 kHz repetition rate. The probe beam was generated by focusing a portion of the fundamental in a 4 mm YAG substrate and spanned from 520 to 1400 nm. The pump beam was generated in a home-built noncollinear optical parametric (NOPAs; 37° cut BBO, type I, 5° external angle) pumped with either the second or third harmonic of the source. The NOPAs output (∼4-5 mW power) was centered at either 520, 660, or 860 nm, and pulses were compressed using a chirped mirror wedge prism (Layterc) combination to a temporal duration of 12 and 17 fs, respectively (upper limit determined by SHG-FROG). The white light was delayed using a computercontrolled piezoelectric translation stage, and a sequence of probe pulses with and without pump was generated using a chopper wheel on the pump beam. The pump irradiance was at 19 μJ/cm 2 . After the sample, the probe pulse was split with a 950 nm dichroic mirror (Thor Laboratories). The visible light (520-950 nm) was then imaged with a silicon photodiode array camera (Stresing Entwicklunsbüro; visible monochromator 550 nm blazed grating) with the near-infrared proportion of the probe seeded to an IR monochromator (1200 nm blazed grating) and imaged using an InGaAs photodiode array camera (Sensors Unlimited). This technique allows simultaneous collection of the entire probe spectrum in a single shot. Offsets for the differing spectral response of the detectors was accounted for in the postprocessing of data. Raman measurements were performed with a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope under ambient conditions. Excitation was provided by 532 nm and 633 nm laser lines. The Raman emission was collected by a Lecia 100× objective (N.A. = 0.85) and dispersed by a 1800 lines per mm grating. Measurements were performed on thin films of nanoplatelets and nanorings atop a glass microscope slide. Zeta-potential and size distribution measurements were performed on a Malvern Zetasizer NanoZSP, equipped with a 633 nm He-Ne laser with a maximum power of 10 mW. A glass cuvette (PCS1115) was loaded with 400 μL of QDs in hexane (1 mg/mL), and a Malvern Universal Dip Cell (ZEN1002)was used for measurement of zeta-potential. All measurements were performed at 25 °C, with a minimum equilibration period of 2 minutes following sample loading. Zeta-potential distributions were averaged over 5 measurements, each of which consisted of between 50 to 100 runs.