Electron tomography, as an important 3D imaging method, offers a powerful method to probe the 3D structure of materials from the nano-to the atomic-scale. However, as a grant challenge, radiation intolerance of the nano-scale samples and the missing-wedge-induced information loss and artifacts greatly hindered us from obtaining 3D atomic structures with high fidelity. Here, for the first time, by combining generative adversarial models with stateof-the-art network architectures, we demonstrate the resolution of electron tomography can be improved to 0.71 Å which is the highest three-dimensional imaging resolution that has been reported thus far. We also show it is possible to recover the lost information and remove artifacts in the reconstructed tomograms by only acquiring data from -50 to + 50 degrees (44% reduction of dosage compared to -90 to +90 degrees full tilt series). In contrast to conventional methods, the deep learning model shows outstanding performance for both macroscopic objects and atomic features solving the long-standing dosage and missingwedge problems in electron tomography. Our work provides important guidance for the application of machine learning methods to tomographic imaging and sheds light on its applications in other 3D imaging techniques. As the archetectural complexity of integrated circuits and functional nanomaterials advances into the atomic region, owing to its high resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has become an essential tool in validating the structure of nanomaterials and devices. In contrast to conventional TEM imaging which only provides projected two-dimensional (2D) information, electron tomography is a powerful tool that can probe the 3D internal structure and chemistry of materials at the nano-and the atomic scale. Due to its high resolution, it has been widely used in biological Mathematically speaking, when there are insufficient number of projections, the inverse problem of tomography is ill-posed because the solution is non-unique. Therefore, to constrain the solution space, strong priors need to be used to regularize the problem. For example, total variance minimization (TVM) combines iterative reconstruction and regularization of total variance to recover the lost information and reduced the artifacts introduced by the missing wedge Based on this consideration, for the first time, we introduced a deep-learning-based informationrecovering model to recover the lost information and remove artifacts in the reconstructed tomograms of atomic electron tomography. Compared with the conventional methods, our deep learning model has free parameters and shows outstanding performance on both macroscopic and atomic objects. Particularly, we show that this method has improved the resolution of atomic electron tomography to 0.71 Å which is the highest resolution achieved by any 3D imaging method thus far. Training pipeline and model evaluation. To train a deep learning model for information-recovery and artifact removal, a training library with a range of missing wedge and a collage of spatial features is built (Supplementary Table Next, based on the training library, we constructed a information recovery and de-artifact model (IRDM) by combining GAN and U-Net++ Based on a training dataset (D2 in Supplementary Table Performance of IRDM model. To test the influence of the composition of training features and the included range of missing wedges in the library on the performance of IRDM, datasets (see details in Supplementary Table Moreover, by adding more diversity to the training dataset with ImageNet data labeled with dog, the IRDM3 model trained on D3 yeilds higher NRMSE, thereby reduced information-recovering and de-artifacting capability for data with missing wedge from 40° to 60°. Notably, however, for data with larger missing wedge beyond the training range, e.g., more than 65 ̊, IRDM trained on D3 shows much lower NRMSE than that trained on D2, which means although adding diversity to the training datasets may slightly degrade the performance of IRDM on data within the range of trained missing wedge angles, it will certianly improve the robustness of IRDM model in a larger range of missing wedge. Furthermore, we explored the influence of the training range of missing wedge on the performance of the IRDM. From D5→D4→D3→D6, the training ranges of missing wedge are gradually widened. Figure To confirm the validity and robustness of our deep learning model, for the first time, we applied IRDM to information-recovery and deartifact for atomic electron tomography with a missing wedge of approximately 40°. Fig. The performance of the deep learing model, i.e., IRDM is dependent on both the type and diversity of the training data. As shown in Fig. With large increase of missing wedge, the feature of the objects will be significantly changed by artifacts. For example, the reconstruction of the brain with the missing wedge of 40° shows a rounded shape similar to the original one. In contrast, with the missing wedge increased to 80°, the bottom of the brain turns into a sharp ridge which significantly deviates from the original shape of the brain. Different from Gaussian noise, the distribution of this kind of artifacts introduced by missing wedge will remarkably change with missing wedge angles, it can not be effectively eliminated by appling the IRDM model trained on a dataset with missing wedge far different from that of the data. Therefore, to get better performance of IRDM, training data sets with specific range of missing wedge angles in line with that of the data should be applied. To make our deep learning model generally applicable to various objects with different features, the training database should be as large and diverse as possible, which will comsume massive computing resources and data sources. In practice, if the database is not big and diverse enough, the optimal strategy to get the best information-recovery and de-artifact effect is to try to find a minimum inclusion matrix (training dataset) which shares the highest feature similarity with the data. For example, for 'phantom faces' with missing wedge between 40° and 60°, training dataset (a) as indicated in Fig. In this paper, we demonstrate a deep learning-based inpainting method enables us to achieve a record-high spatial resolution, 0.71 Å, for 3D imaging. The 0.71-Å resolution will significantly improve our capabilities to localize and differentiate atoms with different atomic numbers and local coordination environment. It opens the possibility to measure materials or even biological specimens atom by atom. This development thus has important applications in biological, physical and materials sciences. Structure of generator and discriminator. The IRDM is trained by GAN structure with U-Net++ as generator. U-Net++ is a encoding-decoding structure with cross-layer connections to compensate the feature information loss during the encoding-decoding process. The cross-layers 