The superconducting transmon qubit is a leading platform for quantum computing and quantum science. Building large, useful quantum systems based on transmon qubits will require significant improvements in qubit relaxation and coherence times, which are orders of magnitude shorter than limits imposed by bulk properties of the constituent materials. This indicates that relaxation likely originates from uncontrolled surfaces, interfaces, and contaminants. Previous efforts to improve qubit lifetimes have focused primarily on designs that minimize contributions from surfaces. However, significant improvements in the lifetime of two-dimensional transmon qubits have remained elusive for several years. Here, we fabricate two-dimensional transmon qubits that have both lifetimes and coherence times with dynamical decoupling exceeding 0.3 milliseconds by replacing niobium with tantalum in the device. We have observed increased lifetimes for seventeen devices, indicating that these material improvements are robust, paving the way for higher gate fidelities in multi-qubit processors. Steady progress in improving gate fidelities for superconducting qubits over the last two decades has enabled key demonstrations of quantum algorithms The lifetimes of current 2D transmons are believed to be limited by microwave dielectric losses To fabricate qubits We observe reproducible, robust enhancement of T 1 across all devices fabricated with this process. The lifetime of a given qubit fluctuates over time, with a standard deviation of around 7% of the mean (Fig. In addition to the eight qubits presented in Fig. Iterative improvements to processing, including the use of wet etching to pattern the tantalum layer and the introduction of additional cleaning steps, further improved qubit lifetimes to the levels reported in Fig. In addition, we find that the introduction of an optimized wet etch process to pattern the tantalum resulted in improved edge morphology compared with reactive ion etching. Of the ten devices measured prior to the optimized wet etch, none had a T 1 in excess of 200 μs; of the eight patterned with the optimized wet etch and fabricated with our substrate cleaning procedure, six had a T 1 greater than 200 μs. We speculate that metal residue and poor edge morphology may limit qubit lifetimes Because the crystal structure of thin tantalum films sensitively depends on deposition param-eters We also study properties of the native tantalum oxide in our devices using photoelectron spectroscopy to probe large areas and electron microscopy to directly image the oxide layer in a small cross section. XPS shows a set of four peaks with binding energy between 20 and 30 eV, assigned to the Ta 4f core ionization. The two lower binding energy peaks are spin-orbit split peaks associated with Ta metal, while the two higher binding energy peaks are consistent with Ta 2 O 5 (Fig. We directly image the interface between the sapphire surface and the sputtered tantalum using integrated differential phase contrast imaging (iDPC) under STEM (Fig. We have demonstrated that tantalum 2D transmon qubits exhibit longer T 1 and T 2 than the previous state of the art with remarkable consistency. Building on these relatively simple materials improvements, there are several areas of future exploration. First, T 2,Echo is shorter than T 1 for all tantalum devices measured. Combining our devices with recent improvements in shielding More broadly, our results demonstrate that systematic materials improvements are a pow-erful approach for rapid progress in improving quantum devices. We have recently employed similar targeted materials techniques to improve spin coherence of shallow nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond 1 Supplemental Information The 2D transmon qubits are fabricated on c-plane sapphire substrates (Crystec GmbH) that are 0.53 mm thick and double-side polished (Fig. Tantalum is deposited on the sapphire substrate at high temperature (approximately 500 • C, Star Cryoelectronics). Before photolithography, the tantalum-coated substrates are placed in a 2:1 mixture of H 2 SO 4 and H 2 O 2 for 20 minutes (hereafter "piranha-cleaned) then heated on a hotplate for 5 minutes at 140 • C before AZ 1518 resist is spun (Merck KGaA). The resist is patterned using a direct-write process (2 mm write head on a Heidelberg DWL 66+ Laser Writer). After developing (85 sec in AZ 300MIF developer from Merck KGaA), the resist is hard-baked for 2 min at 115 • C. Unwanted residual resist is removed using a gentle oxygen descum (2 min in 30 mTorr O 2 with 20 W/200 W RF/ICP coil power in a Plasma-Therm Apex SLR). Next, the tantalum is etched in a 1:1:1 ratio of HF:HNO 3 :H 2 O (Tantalum Etchant 111 from Transene Company, Inc.) for 21 sec. After stripping resist, the device is solvent-cleaned by sonicating in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropyl alcohol ("TAMI-cleaned) then piranha-cleaned. The patterned tantalum is prepared for electron beam lithography to define Josephson junctions (MMA 8.5 MAA, 950 PMMA, with a 40 nm layer of evaporated aluminum to dissipate charge), then the chips are diced into 7x7 mm squares. Liftoff patterns for Manhattan junctions Immediately after, 15 nm of aluminum is deposited at 0.4 nm/sec at a pressure of approximately 10 -7 mBar, followed by a 15 min, 200 mBar oxidation period. Finally, 54 nm of aluminum is deposited to form the second layer of the junction, with the same evaporation parameters (for Device 18a, 15 nm and 19 nm of aluminum are deposited, respectively). The resist is then removed by soaking the sample in Remover PG (Kayaku Advanced Materials, Inc.) for approximately 3 hours at 80 • C, briefly sonicating in hot Remover PG, then swirling in isopropyl alcohol. Initially we etched tantalum using a reactive-ion etch (8:3:2 CHF 3 :SF 6 :Ar chemistry at 50 mTorr, RF/ICP power of 100 W/100 W). However, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed rough edges as well as small pillars and boulders near the sidewalls, likely due to micromasking (Fig. We use aggressive cleans and etches to remove the contaminants on our samples after dicing, stripping resist, and sonicating in solvents. In particular, AFM reveals an abundance of particulates on the surface (Fig. Additionally, the carbon signal in XPS is attenuated by a factor of 5 after piranha cleaning, illustrating a reduction in carbon contamination (Fig. We prepare the sapphire surface using this sulfuric acid etch in Devices 9-14 and 17. In these devices, the wafers are covered with a protective layer of photoresist and then diced into 1 inch squares. After removing resist, the squares are TAMI cleaned and piranha cleaned. Next, the sapphire is placed into a quartz beaker filled with H 2 SO 4 sitting on a room temperature hotplate. The hotplate is set to 150 • C for 20 minutes, followed by a 10 minute cooldown period before removing the device. We estimate less than 1 nm of the surface is removed through this procedure Calibrating the time and temperature of the sapphire etch is critical to maintaining a smooth surface morphology while still removing zinc. In particular, polycrystalline aluminum sulfates form on the sapphire surface after heating in sulfuric acid for too long and at too high of a temperature (Fig. We note that Devices 16 and 18 were not processed using the sapphire etch, and they ex-hibited T 1 over 0.2 ms. In the future we are interested in studying the impact of sapphire material properties on device performance. We plan to fabricate devices on higher-purity sapphire, remove polishing-induced strain by etching a more appreciable amount of the substrate, and anneal to form an atomically smooth surface The completed devices are first mounted to a printed circuit board (PCB). The edge of the tantalum ground plane is firmly pressed against the PCB's copper backside, sandwiched between the PCB and a piece of aluminum-coated oxygen-free copper. The device is then wirebonded (Fig. We note that all of the double-pad transmons presented in this text are positioned approximately 2 mm away from the copper traces on the PCB (Fig. Each transmon is capacitively coupled to a microwave resonator, allowing the state of the qubit to be measured dispersively Table First we minimized losses unrelated to the qubit materials and interfaces. We reduced the density of photonic states at the qubit frequency by means of a Purcell filter (Device 2a and all subsequent devices) Next we focused on reducing material contaminants. XPS measurements revealed significant carbon residue that persisted after solvent-based cleaning. Accordingly, we reduced carbon contamination by adding a piranha clean before spinning e-beam resist (Device 4a and all subsequent devices). As mentioned above, we also cleaned the sapphire substrate prior to tantalum deposition. For Devices 1-8, 15-16, and 18 as well as Nb1, Nb2, and 3D1, the sapphire substrate was dipped in a piranha solution and cleaned with an oxygen plasma (Technics PE-IIA System) immediately before loading into the sputterer. For the rest of the sapphire devices, we cleaned the substrate with the sapphire etch described above (Section S1.1), packaged and shipped the samples, then deposited the tantalum. We then focused on the tantalum etch, described in more detail above (Section S1.1). Devices 1-6, Nb 1-2, Si1, and 3D1 were all fabricated with reactive ion etching. Devices 7-10 and 3D2 were made using initial versions of the wet etch (using different resists, etch times, and acid concentrations), where the etch clearly roughened the sidewalls (Fig. We measured two different geometries of transmons: devices with double-pad capacitors, where neither pad has a direct ground connection (Fig. We fabricated a 2D, double-pad, tantalum transmon on silicon (Device Si1) with a similar design to that used for the devices on sapphire. The primary elements that changed during the fabrication process were: (i) a different plasma etch time to avoid overetching into the silicon, (ii) no aluminum layer was deposited on top of the e-beam resist prior to e-beam lithography, and (iii) the e-beam intensity was adjusted during the lithography step. We found that reactiveion etching severely roughened the silicon surface (17 nm RMS surface roughness, measured with a Keyence Optical Profilometer). We plan to optimize this fabrication process in the future. We mounted our 3D transmons in an 8.0 GHz aluminum rectangular cavity with a 250 kHz linewidth For Device 3D1, our measured cavity resonances were significantly different than expected. We attribute this to a thin layer of aluminum that was deposited on the side of the sapphire chip during the double-angle Josephson junction evaporation. On later devices, we cleaned the metal from the side of the chip and our measured resonance was as expected. We measured a mean T 1 of 0.20 ± 0.02 ms for Device 3D1 (Fig. We fabricated a light fluxonium qubit (57) made using tantalum capacitor pads and aluminum junctions. Our qubit has a Josephson energy of 0.92 GHz, a capacitive energy of 3.6 GHz, and an inductive energy of 0.53 GHz. We found a plasmon T 1 of 0.063 ± 0.004 ms and a maximum fluxon T 1 of 1.9 ± 0.2 ms, although we saw time fluctuations in the fluxon T 1 on the order of a millisecond. The resonant frequency of a fluxonium qubit is flux-tunable. By fitting T 1 as a function of resonant frequency, we deduced a dielectric loss tangent of 1-3•10 -6 (58) (Fig. We use XRD to study the crystal structure of our films over a much larger area than is feasible with STEM images (Fig. We further interrogate the grain boundaries visible in a plane-view image (Fig. We find a uniform distribution of tantalum (Fig. A high-resolution STEM image of a grain boundary elucidates the crystal structure at the boundaries (Fig. An atomic-resolution STEM image of a 50 nm region of the tantalum surface reveals an amorphous oxide that is 2-3 nm thick (Fig. We corroborate this estimation using angle-resolved XPS (ARXPS), where we vary the angle between sample and detector, changing the relative distances that the emitted photoelectrons travel through the metal and oxide layers to reach the detector (Fig. To investigate the variability of oxide thickness between devices, we show normal incidence XPS data from three devices from different tantalum depositions with different surface cleaning fabrication procedures (Fig. For completeness, we include an iDPC STEM image showing the interface between sapphire and tantalum viewed from 1 100 sapphire and 100 tantalum zone axes (Fig. All XPS, AFM, and XRD data were acquired using tools in the Imaging and Analysis Center at Princeton University. XPS was performed using a Thermo Fisher K-Alpha and X-Ray Spectrometer tool with a 250 μm spot size. The data shown in Fig. The angle-resolved XPS (ARXPS) spectra shown in Fig. SEM and STEM images were also collected at the Imaging and Analysis Center at Princeton University. STEM thin lamellae (thickness: 70-1300 nm) were prepared by focused ion beam cutting via a FEI Helios NanoLab 600 dual beam system (FIB/SEM). All the thin samples for experiments were polished by a 2 keV Ga ion beam to minimize the surface damage caused by the high-energy ion beam. Conventional STEM imaging, iDPC, atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM imaging and atomic-level EDS mapping were performed on a double Cs-corrected Titan Cubed Themis 300 STEM equipped with an X-FEG source operated at 300 kV and a super-X energy dispersive spectrometry (super-X EDS) system. Lithography and etching process development SEM images were collected with a FEI Verios 460XHR SEM and a FEI Quanta 200 Environmental SEM. Various tilt angles, working distances, and chamber pressures were used to eliminate charging effects. To reduce our devices' low-frequency noise sensitivity we applied a sequence of π-pulses Each pulse had a Gaussian envelope with σ around 20-50 ns and was truncated at ±2σ. Due to the large number of sequential pulses, we found that reducing gate error through frequent calibration was important. To derive the qubit's noise spectral density (Fig. We fit our transmon T 1 data to f (∆t) = e -∆t/T 1 , where T 1 is a fit parameter and the function represents the population in the excited state. We fit any T 2 data taken with fringes to the fit f (∆t) = 0.5e -∆t/T 2R cos(2π∆tδ + φ 0 ) + 0.5 where T 2R , δ, and φ 0 are fit parameters. For echo and CPMG experiments, we fit our T 2 data with a stretched exponential, f (∆t) = 0.5e -(∆t/T 2 ) n + 0.5, where T 2 and n are fit parameters. If n < 1, the data is refit to a pure exponential. Fig. 