Nanoscale optical thermometry is a promising non-contact route for measuring local temperature with both high sensitivity and spatial resolution. In this work, we present a deterministic optical thermometry technique based on quantum emitters in nanoscale hexagonal boron-nitride. We show that these nanothermometers exhibit better performance than that of homologous, all-optical nanothermometers both in sensitivity and range of working temperature. We demonstrate their effectiveness as nanothermometers by monitoring the local temperature at specific locations in a variety of custom-built micro-circuits. This work opens new avenues for nanoscale temperature measurements and heat flow studies in miniaturized, integrated devices. The ability to measure and control temperature at the nanoscale is critical to several areas of research, The motivation is two-fold. The first is practical: to drive the design of devices performing at the cusp between top performance and critical failure. The second is fundamental: to explore the complex thermal dynamics at play when circuitry is miniaturized and become quasi-twodimensional. The technique relies on color centers in layered two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). These are atom-like defects that show ultra-bright, The blue solid line is a linear fit to the experimental data (black squares). d) Variation of the ZPL barycentre wavelength as a function temperature. The blue solid line is a linear fit to the experimental data (black squares). Each data point in (c) and (d) was extracted by fitting a Lorentzian function to the ZPL. Error bars are calculated using the standard deviation for five consecutive 10-s spectral acquisitions performed at each value of temperature. A 20-min waiting time was allowed for thermal stabilization at each temperature. Figure It should be noted that the observed linearity might not extend beyond the investigated range of temperatures. In fact, in semiconductors, temperature-driven variations of the bulk lattice constant commonly produce shifts for an intraband defect's ZPL that scale as ~T3 . Simultaneously, the ZPL linewidth of hBN emitters is expected to broaden following a nearly exponential dependence with temperature due to the interaction of the defect's transition dipole with lattice acoustic phonons. To demonstrate the utility of hBN-based nanothermometers we employed them to monitor the temperature of custom-designed micro-circuits. These circuits were patterned by electron beam lithography (EBL) with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as the resist, followed by development with methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) to form the resist pattern. The metal deposition (gold, chromium or nickel) was performed before the lift-off process took place using warm acetone to remove metal and resist residues. A key feature of our thermo-sensing method is that we can monitor the temperature in specific points of interest of the circuit as the hBN nanoflakes can be positioned deterministically with respect to a target object. This is achieved via an align dry-transfer technique for two-dimensional (2D) materials that we modified (cf. Supporting Information Figure illustrates the transferring process of a single hBN nanoflake onto a targeted position of the microcircuit. We first fabricate a custom-made, dry stamp consisting of a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)-coated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) hemisphere (3 mm in radius and 1 mm in thickness) by consecutive depositions of PDMS and PVA on a glass slide. The transparency of the PDMS/PVA stamp allows us to align its center to a selected hBN nanothermometer situated on a silicon substrate with the aid of a long-range objective lens mounted on a CMOS camera. The silicon substrate is then heated up to 70 °C and the stamp is brought into contact with the hBN nanothermometer. Since the temperature is close to the glass transition temperature of PVA (80 °C), the polymer is softened, which causes the hBN nanoflake to partially set in the PVA polymer. The hemispherical shape of the stamp allows for the selective pick-up of the hBN nanothermometer with an effective contact area of ~50 × 50 μm 2 . Upon reducing the temperature to ambient conditions, the PVA-plus-hBN stamp solidifies. It is lifted and is ready to be moved over the target sample circuit, which is treated beforehand in a commercial UV ozone cleaner for 5 min to remove surface contaminants and render the surface highly hydrophilic. The stamp-plus-hBN flake is aligned to the target location of the circuit, brought into contact, and heated at 110 °C at which the PVA liquifies releasing the hBN nanothermometer; the temperature is kept at 110 °C for a minute to ensure complete release. The stamp is then lifted from the sample, leaving the hBN nanothermometer on the circuit. The PVA layer is easily washed off with warm water. Notebly, our method is universal and can be applied for a wide range of target materials possessing different surface energies. To demonstrate this point, we will perform the deterministic transfers on circuits made from three representative metals, namely gold, chromium and nickel. The details will be discussed in the later section of the text. showing g Figure Note that using a single emitter rather than an ensemble offers a series of advantages. Besides the aforementioned and obvious benefit of the reduced size of the nanosensor, working with a single emitter should also reduce the error on the measured observables-ZPL position and linewidth in this case. The photoluminescence spectrum of a single emitter, for instance, is not subject to inhomogeneous broadening; and whilst an individual emitter can still be affected by local fluctuations, e.g. strain, nearby trapped charges and other lattice defects these can be more easily accounted for when selecting the hBN candidate nanothermometer prior to pick-up. show the schematic and the actual picture of the circuit we used to conduct our thermosensing experiments. We gradually increased the current flown through the circuit to create realistic working conditions. Upon flowing current through it, the circuit is heated up by the Joule effect. Each value of the current was held for 10 minutes to guarantee thermal equilibrium was reached, after which five consecutive 10-s spectra were acquired. Each spectrum was fitted with a Lorentzian, and the corresponding ZPL position was extracted. Figure Figure Each hBN-nanothermometer was a single quantum emitter. Their photoluminescence and temperature calibration is shown in the Supplementary Information, Figures S4g (Position 1), S4e (Position 2), and S4d (Position 3). Figure We finally turn our attention to comparing the performance of our hBN nanothermometers to that of other homologous nanoscale thermal probes. The comparison is conducted only considering other nanothermometers which are, like ours, all-optical and specifically map temperature values onto spectral shifts in photoluminescence. Figure The single nature of the emitter results in smaller nanosensor sizes (thus potentially better spatial resolution), while still achieving better sensitivities over a large temperature range, 0 K < ΔT ≲ 800 K. Furthermore, the 2D nature of hBN grants these nanosensors excellent thermal contact and compatibility with the measurement of temperatures in stack of heterogeneous 2D materials. We have also shown the versatility of the technique by measuring the temperature of selected target points in a series of custom-built micro-circuits made of gold, chromium and nickel. Our results offer an intriguing alternative to other nanothermometry methods especially in the context of characterizing the performance of high-power electronics as well as investigating the complex thermal dynamics of miniaturized, quasi-two-dimensional electronic devices. Preparation of hBN nanoflakes on silicon (Si) substrate. The commercial solution of 200nm hBN nanoflakes (Graphene Supermarket) is dropcast onto a Si substrate. The substrate is then annealed for 1 hour in vacuum (5 mTorr) in a tube furnace (Lindberg/ Blue Minimite) at 1000 °C with Argon flow rate of 50 sccm, which is used to activate and stabilize the hBN quantum emitters. Preparation of the microcircuit on the SiO2/Si substrate by electron beam lithography (EBL). An amount of ~0.1 ml of 950 PMMA is dropcast on the thermally grown SiO2 (~300 nm) on Si substrate and spun for 1 min at 3000 rpm to get an homogeneous PMMA coating (thickness ~200 nm). Microcircuits are patterned using a conventional SEM (Zeiss Supra 55VP) equipped with the Raith EBL system. The pattern PMMA is removed via immersion into MIBK/IPS (1:3) solution. The substrate is then coated with a metal (gold, chromium or nickel) film (thickness ~60 nm) using a lab-built plasma sputter deposition chamber. After immersion in high-purity warm acetone, the metal parts on the PMMA are washed off together with the PMMA itself leaving behind the patterned metal microcircuits (thickness ~60 nm). Align transfer. The deterministic transfer was conducted by a lab-built align-transfer setup which includes a conventional optical microscope equipped with a long working distance objective, a digital camera connected to a computer and two micropositioners (one controlling the sample and the other the stamp) as shown in Figure Optical characterization. The substrates and microcircuits with hBN nanoflakes are mounted onto a three-dimensional micropositioner in a lab-built photoluminescence (PL) confocal microscopy setup. The system is equipped with a 532-nm continuous wave (Gem 532, Laser quantum Ltd.) laser and a long working distance air objective (numerical aperture 0.7, Olympus). The emitted photons are collected through a graded-index multimode fiber with an aperture of 62.5 μm. A 20% / 80% fiber-splitter directs the photons (20%) to an avalanche photodiode (APD) (Excelitas Technologies) and (80%) to a spectrometer (QEPro, Ocean Optics). In the experiments hBN emitters are pre-characterised, with the samples being mounted on the heating stage connected to the SMU (for heating) and the thermocouple (for measuring the sample temperature). Second-order autocorrelation measurements are conducted in a Hanbury Brown-Twiss interferometer equipped with two APDs and a time-correlated single-photon counting module (PicoHarp 300, PicoQuant). Raman spectroscopy is carried out with a Renishaw in Via Raman TM microscope equipped with a 633-nm laser source. Timeresolved fluorescence measurements are performed using picosecond pulses at 510 nm, pulse width 100 ps and repetition rate 80 MHz (PiL051XTM, Advanced Laser Diode Systems A.L.S. GmbH).