Traditional silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform based on-chip photonic interconnects have limited energy-bandwidth scalability due to the optical non-linearity induced power constraints of the constituent photonic devices. In this paper, we propose to break this scalability barrier using a new silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) based photonic device platform. Our physical-layer characterization results show that SOSbased photonic devices have negligible optical non-linearity effects in the mid-infrared region near 4μm, which drastically alleviates their power constraints. Our link-level analysis shows that SOSbased photonic devices can be used to realize photonic links with aggregated data rate of more than 1 Tb/s, which recently has been deemed unattainable for the SOI-based photonic on-chip links. We also show that such high-throughput SOS-based photonic links can significantly improve the energy-efficiency of on-chip photonic communication architectures. Our system-level analysis results position SOS-based photonic interconnects to pave the way for realizing ultra-low-energy (< 1 pJ/bit) on-chip data transfers. With rapidly increasing demand for data-centric high-performance computing, future manycore processors will require exceedingly high communication bandwidth from the on-chip interconnection networks. However, traditional electrical networks-on-chip (ENoCs) already consume extravagantly large amount of chip area and total system power, which makes the energy-efficient scaling of their bandwidth improbable. This motivates the need for a new interconnect technology that can be leveraged to realize extremely high-throughput (>1 terabits/s) and energy-efficient (<1 pJ/bit) interconnects for future manycore computing architectures. Recent advancements in CMOS-photonics integration A critical parameter for designing a high-throughput SOI-based photonic (SOIPh) link is its optical power budget (OPB), which determines the upper limit of the allowable signal losses and power penalties in the link for the given aggregated data rate (#DWDM channels (Nλ) × channel bitrate) of the link. The OPB of a SOIPh link is the difference between the photodetector noise floor (i.e., detector sensitivity which has a dependency on bit-rate In this paper, we present silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) based photonic platform as a potential solution that can mitigate the TPA related shortcomings of the SOIPh platform. The fact that underpins our rationale is that SOS-based photonic (SOSPh) waveguides and MRs have been shown to exhibit low absorption losses and no TPA for the operating wavelengths in the mid-infrared region near 4μm • We characterize different types of losses and optical properties of SOSPh waveguides and MRs to derive compact design models; • We use our developed compact models to derive a new set of guidelines for designing SOSPh links and PNoC architectures; • We utilize our developed guidelines to optimize the designs of SOSPh links, and then compare their aggregated data rate and energy-per-bit values to the optimized designs of SOIPh links; • We evaluate the impact of optimized designs of SOSPh and SOIPh links on the performance and energy-efficiency of a wellknown Clos To demonstrate the limitations of the SOIPh device platforms in general, we used different SOIPh platforms from It is established from prior works (e.g., We use Fourier and finite difference time domain (FDTD) analysis methods using a commercial grade tool from Lumerical In this subsection, we present our compact models that relate an MR's Q-factor with its radius (R) and coupling gap size (g) (i.e., gap size between the rectilinear waveguide and MR) (Fig. As a first step towards deriving our intended compact models, we analyzed coupling coefficient (κ) of an MR as a function of R and g. As g increases, the power coupled into the MR from the rectilinear waveguide decreases, which in turn decreases κ. For SOS and SOI MRs, κ can be calculated using Eq. ( Where L is the MR circumference given as L = 2 × π × (MR radius (R)), λ rrrrrr is the MR's resonance wavelength, n eff,even is even-mode effective index and n eff,odd is the odd-mode effective index. We used FDTD simulations to extract n eff,even and n eff,odd values. Fig. This type of intricate behavior of κ results into an elaborate relation of MR Q-factor with R and g. To characterize this relation, we plugged our obtained κ values from Table Where n g is group index of silicon, r is cross coupling coefficient (r = √1 -κ 2 ) , a is round-trip loss coefficient, with other symbols defined with Eq. ( Active tuning of MRs' resonance wavelengths is required not only for realizing active devices such as modulators and switches Where V is the tuning voltage across the MR core required to effect the desired change in free-carrier concentration inside the MR core, n g is group index of silicon, q is charge of an electron, JJ is the bulk volume of the MR core in which the change in free-carrier concentration occur, λ rrrrrr is MR resonance wavelength, Γ is the mode confinement factor (typically Γ = 0.8), n f is the ratio of Δn for silicon to the electron-hole pair density that can be evaluated using the formula give in Using the device-level compact models derived in this section, we develop new physical-layer design guidelines for SOIPh and SO-SPh on-chip links, as described in the next section. Using these guidelines, we evaluate the achievable aggregated datarate and energy-per-bit values for SOIPh and SOSPh on-chip links. From To evaluate the impacts of SOS and SOI devices on the data rate and EPB of links, we use the guidelines given in Where λres is MR's resonance wavelength and ng is MR's group index, which we evaluate using finite difference element method in Lumerical's MODE tool We use the values from Table Fig. Excellent link-level results for SOSPh platform cannot guarantee good performance at the system-level, especially for the real-world traffic scenarios of on-chip communication. Therefore, to establish a clear winner between the SOIPh and SOSPh platforms, we present benchmark-driven system-level analysis in the next section. We have done our evaluation on a 256-core system implementing 8-ary 3-stage CLOS topology PNoC We performed benchmark-driven simulation-based analysis to evaluate the impact of SOSPh and SOIPh links from Table Fig. As evident from Fig. Significant research work (e.g., Several SOS-based photonic devices have already been prototyped to be operated near 4μm wavelength. These prototypes include on-chip quantum cascade laser sources (e.g., To compare the footprint area of SOS and SOI variants of CLOS PNoC architecture from Table To support our SOSPh platform for realizing communication architectures, heterogeneity needs to be introduced in the already established hierarchy of interconnection networks. Traditional fiber optics systems for inter-cluster, inter-datacenter, and long haul networks still running on O, L and C optical bands. In contrast, SOSPh platform operates with wavelengths between 2.5μm-4μm. Therefore, additional specialized equipment and support are needed to introduce SOSPh interconnects in this established hierarchy, which is likely to incur extra cost. Nevertheless, it is worth bearing this extra cost, especially considering the energy and performance benefits of SOSPh platform shown in this paper. Conventional SOI-based photonic interconnects have limited bandwidth-energy scalability due to the optical non-linear effects in silicon, especially the two-photon-absorption (TPA) effect. In this paper, we presented silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) device platform as a solution to the scalability limitations of SOI-based interconnects. We developed new compact models for SOS devices, utilizing which we formulated new guidelines for designing SOS links and PNoCs. Our link-level analysis showed that SOS links can achieve aggregate data rate of >1Tb/s, which is significantly better than SOI links. Our system-level analysis with CLOS PNoC architecture showed that PNoCs that are designed using SOS devices and links can achieve up to 45% lower latency and 37% lower EPB compared to the PNoCs implemented using the conventional SOI devices and links. These promising results prove that SOS-based PNoCs can achieve high-bandwidth data transfers with low latency and greater energy-efficiency, compared to the traditional SOI-based PNoCs.