Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) allows for imaging, diffraction, and spectroscopy of materials on length scales ranging from microns to atoms. By using a highspeed, direct electron detector, it is now possible to record a full 2D image of the diffracted electron beam at each probe position, typically a 2D grid of probe positions. These 4D-STEM datasets are rich in information, including signatures of the local structure, orientation, deformation, electromagnetic fields and other sample-dependent properties. However, extracting this information requires complex analysis pipelines, from data wrangling to calibration to analysis to visualization, all while maintaining robustness against imaging distortions and artifacts. In this paper, we present py4DSTEM, an analysis toolkit for measuring material properties from 4D-STEM datasets, written in the Python language and released with an open source license. We describe the algorithmic steps for dataset calibration and various 4D-STEM property measurements in detail, and present results from several experimental datasets. We have also implemented a simple and universal file format appropriate for electron microscopy data in py4DSTEM, which uses the open source HDF5 standard. We hope this tool will benefit the research community, helps to move the developing standards for data and computational methods in electron microscopy, and invite the community to contribute to this ongoing, fully open-source project. In a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) experiment, a beam of high energy electrons is focused to a very fine probe -on the order of or, often, smaller than the atomic lattice spacingand rastered across the surface of the sample In four dimensional STEM (4D-STEM), we replace the standard STEM detectors, which integrate all electrons scattered over a large region, with a pixelated detector that captures the electron flux scattered to each angle in the diffraction plane collapsed in real space to yield information comparable to more traditional electron diffraction experiments. Alternatively, it can be collapsed in diffraction space to yield a variety of "virtual images," corresponding to both traditional STEM imaging modes as well as more exotic virtual imaging modalities Redundant information in overlapping Bragg disks can be leveraged to deconvolve the electron beam shape from the sample structure, yielding the sample potential itself The price paid for the versatility of 4D-STEM is new complexity in both the raw experimental data and in the computational processing required to extract meaningful measurements. Maximizing the impact this new generation of STEM experiments will have on structural characterization research now requires that the computer processing methods which enable the various 4D-STEM characterization modalities are accessible to as broad and diverse a segment of the scientific community as possible. Fortunately, a new generation of open source tools for electron scattering experiments is presently on the rise, such as hyperspy, pyXem, liberTEM, ncempy, and others Here, we present free and open source software for analysis of 4D-STEM data. The aim of the Python-based project py4DSTEM is threefold: The organization of this document is as follows: following this introduction, Sec. II discusses the nature of 4D-STEM data, and how data is structured in py4DSTEM. Section III discusses basic processing algorithms which will typically be performed as precursors to the final measurements of interest, including locating Bragg disks, calibration, polar transformations, and classification. Section IV covers various 4D-STEM measurements that can be performed in py4DSTEM, including virtual imaging, phase mapping, strain mapping in amorphous or crystalline materials, short and medium range order analysis in amorphous materials, and phase retrieval in very thin samples. Conclusions are in Sec. V. Throughout, we have aimed to keep discussion qualitative in the main text, and have also included mathematical details for the interested reader in a number of appendices, referenced in the relevant sections. Fundamentally, most 4D-STEM is just many electron diffraction experiments being run sequentially. The nature of the diffraction pattern obtained at each scan position depends on the sample structure and the illumination conditions of the microscope, as illustrated schematically in Fig. A complete discussion of the many experimental conditions to attend to in devising a given 4D-STEM experiment is beyond our scope, however, there is one parameter which stands apart in its centrality to both acquiring and understanding 4D-STEM data: the convergence semiangle, α. When examining a diffraction pattern, α corresponds to the radius of the bright-field disk in the diffraction plane, and therefore also the radius of each refracted Bragg disk in a crystalline sample. In real space, the probe size is inversely related to α; larger convergence angles correspond to finer probes, and overlapping disks are required to generate sub-lattice sized probes and therefore allow atomic resolution imaging In extracting a strain map, for example, non-overlapping disks are important, both to facilitate the detection of the disk positions, and also because strain is a physical quantity only defined on length scales equal to or larger than single unit cells. For a ptychographic reconstruction of the atomic potentials of very thin materials, overlapped disks are essential, as they provide the redundant information required to extract the phase of the electron wavefunction and the sample electrostatic potential A major advantage of 4D-STEM is the ability to perform a single experiment from which many distinctly meaningful structural measurements can be made. We take as our guiding example the Gd 2 Ti 2 O 7 (GTO) crystal shown in Fig. A selection of the types of measurements that can be performed from this dataset are shown in the figure. These include: virtual imaging spanning bright field images, annular dark field images, and dark field images of individual or multiple Bragg reflections (see Sec. IV A); differential phase contrast imaging, whereby shifts in the center of mass of the beam are used to back out the sample structure DataCube, DiffractionSlice, RealSlice, PointList, and PointListArray. DataCube instances contain a 4D data array corresponding to the complete 4D-STEM dataset. DiffractionSlice and RealSlice instances contain one or more 2D arrays with shapes corresponding to that of diffraction space (i.e. the detector shape) or of real space (i.e. the raster scan shape), respectively. A DiffractionSlice might contain a single diffraction pattern, an image of the probe over vacuum, or the average background noise on the detector. A RealSlice might contain a virtual image, a Boolean mask indicating scan positions to be included or excluded in an analysis routine, or the x and y components of a lattice vector calculated at each scan position. This last example describes a RealSlice of depth 2, i.e. the data contained in the RealSlice class instance is two distinct 2D arrays (x and y of the lattice vector); in general DiffractionSlice and RealSlice objects can have arbitrary depth. The PointList class is flexible, containing a set of points of arbitrary length in an arbitrary number of dimensions. On instantiation of a PointList, a set of coordinates must be specified -e.g. to specify the positions and intensities of the Bragg disk positions detected in a single diffraction pattern, ('qx', 'qy', 'intensity') might be used. Points may then be added or removed from the PointList, e.g. as Bragg disks are detected and then thresholded. Data in PointLists can be easily extracted or sorted by chosen coordinates. PointListArray instances are 2D arrays of PointLists, organized in memory to facilitate quick access of the PointList corresponding to a single array element, and are useful when storing a PointList for each scan position. All these datastructure classes inherit from a parent class called DataObject which facilitates basic searching, storing, and saving functionality for all data generated by py4DSTEM, as well as linking to any relevant metadata. py4DSTEM saves data in the HDF5 format, described on the HDF5 website This structure makes it possible to bundle all elements of one or more data processing pipelines pertaining to a single raw dataset in a single location, and simplifies reuse between measurements of any shared datastructures. Loading data necessarily varies based on the input file type. For its native HDF5 files, py4DSTEM supports scanning the contents of a file before pulling anything into memory, so the entirety of large files need not be loaded if only some subset of smaller dataobjects are required. For very large datasets, memory mapping of datacubes is supported, whereby the contents of a loaded datacube object are left in non-volatile storage, and individual diffraction pattern are pulled into RAM only as they are accessed, enabling analysis of datasets that are larger than available system RAM. Binning during loading is also supported. For non-native files, many of the file types used in electron microscopy are proprietary and the contents are not publicly described, which hinders scientific progress within electron microscopy. py4DSTEM therefore relies on the i/o components of two other open source projects, hyperspy and openNCEM. Most electron microscopy file formats are currently supported, and to-date the py4DSTEM reader has been tested and works successfully for 4D-STEM data in .dm3, .dm4, etc., formats. The metadata group contains 5 subgroups: microscope, sample, user, calibration, comments, and original. The microscope group contains information related to the microscope setup and acquisition parameters, such as the accelerating voltage of the beam, the camera length, the convergence angle, and so forth. The sample group stores information such as the material imaged, synthesis information, and any sample preparation. The user group is for information related to the scientist or scientists who obtained the data, including names, institutions, and contact information. The calibration group contains the pixel sizes (in real and diffraction space), as well as any additional calibration information such as rotational offsets, diffraction shifts, and elliptical distortions, which will be discussed in more detail in Sec. III C The comments group is for any miscellaneous comments. The original group contains any raw metadata scraped from the original data file. More details about the program structure, interface, implementation, and usage, including its data handling, modules, the 4D-STEM HDF5 file structure, logging, and metadata handling is available in the py4DSTEM documentation, or in the py4DSTEM repository. In this section, we discuss the basic processing required for most datasets, namely: preprocessing in Sec. III A, Bragg disk detection (for crystalline samples) in Sec. III B, calibration in Sec. III C, polar transformations (for amorphous samples) in Sec. III D, and classification in Sec. III E. These processing steps are basic in the sense of underpinning all subsequent analyses, rather than in the sense of simplicity; these methods are not aimed at producing a final measurement or plot, but rather are the necessary preparatory work to ensure such ultimate measurements are possible, and are optimally accurate. Measurements and applications are addressed in Sec. IV. This section discusses several preprocessing steps that may be performed on a 4D-STEM dataset. None of these steps are universally required, however, care in preprocessing can significantly speed up subsequent processing, and lead to higher accuracy and precision in final analyses. Figure In 4D-STEM data with a sufficiently low electron dose, it is possible to detect individual electron strike events. Electron counting, i.e. determining and recording the diffraction space positions of each electron incident on the detector, is beneficial for both noise reduction and data compression. In py4DSTEM, this is implemented by first calculating a dark reference for the detector. A histogram of pixel intensity values is then generated from a random sampling of detector frames, and is used to calculate an upper intensity threshold (for excluding xray strikes) and a lower intensity threshold (for excluding the background). In Fig. The most basic preprocessing functions include reshaping, binning, and cropping data. Binning and cropping can be performed in either real or diffraction space, and allow large datasets to be reduced to more manageable sizes. For selected file formats, py4DSTEM also supports data binning on import. Figure For crystalline or semi-crystalline data, analysis generally begins by identifying the locations of all the Bragg disk reflections in each diffraction pattern, which correspond to the reciprocal lattice points of the crystal. In py4DSTEM, we find the Bragg disk positions in two steps: first, we extract the structure of the probe over vacuum in diffraction space to use as a template. We then find the Bragg disks by determining all the positions in each diffraction pattern that match the structure of this template py4DSTEM includes 3 methods for generating vacuum probes. Ideally, we use an image or averaged image stack of the probe over vacuum. Alternatively, if an experimental 4D-STEM scan contains a vacuum region, or a region with only very thin material (e.g. amorphous carbon support), this can be used to generate a vacuum probe. In this case, the probes from each vacuum scan position should be aligned, to correct the translation of the diffraction patterns as the beam is scanned, and then averaged. Finally, if neither of these options is possible, a synthetic probe can be generated. Once a vacuum probe has been obtained, two additional processing steps are applied, with the purpose of generating a kernel for cross correlative template matching with the individual diffraction patterns. First, the center of the unscattered electron probe is found and shifted to the origin. Without this step, all measurements will have an offset, leading to incorrect results. Second, a Gaussian wider than the probe is subtracted, leading to a region of negative intensity surrounding the probe itself, such that the total integrated intensity of the kernel is zero. This has two advantages: first, it ensures that the cross correlation of noisy data is, on average, zero where there are no Bragg disks. Second, the negative kernel intensity penalizes cross correlation values where a Bragg disk and a template are slightly misaligned, enhancing the detectability of correlation maxima where disk/template alignment is perfect. While subtraction of a Gaussian is a useful heuristic, other approaches are possible, for instance those described in The Bragg disks are located by calculating the cross correlation of the probe kernel with each diffraction pattern, and then locating the correlation maxima. The disk positions can be located with subpixel precision via local Fourier upsampling in the region about each maximum The detected Bragg disks in each diffraction pattern are a stored in a PointList instance with three coordinates specifying the disk position in the diffraction plane and its cross correlation intensity, (q x , q y , I). The Bragg disks from the complete datacube are stored in a PointListArray instance, with one such PointList for each scan position. For many analyses, such as strain or orientation mapping, all subsequent computation can be performed on this PointListArray alone, as it contains the most crucial scattering information. The data compression here is significant, as only 3 numbers are now required to store each Bragg disk. For a datacube consisting of 512×512 pixel diffraction patterns with a bit depth of 16, 20 detected disks in an average diffraction pattern, and using 64-bit floating point numbers for the disk coordinates, this scheme compresses the data by a factor of approximately 1000. Once the Bragg disks have been detected, all peaks from all scan positions may be collapsed into a single image in the shape of the diffraction plane. The resulting object is roughly interpretable as a position averaged probability distribution of reciprocal lattice points, and is defined carefully in Appendix C. Figure BVMs are a useful tool in 4D-STEM data processing. In py4DSTEM they are used in processing pipelines including calibration (see Fig. Calibration is the single most important step of any quantitatively meaningful 4D-STEM data analysis, as all subsequent measurements hinge on the accuracy of the calibration. In 4D-STEM a number of calibrations are desirable. These include correcting shifts of the diffraction pattern from the raster of the beam, correcting elliptical distortions of the diffraction patterns, calibrating the rotational offset between real and diffraction space, and calibrating the pixel sizes. Which calibrations are required will generally depend on the sample being imaged, the measurements being made, and the required precision. The data required to perform calibrations is similarly contingent, and depends on the structure of the sample, and which calibrations need to be performed. An image or a stack of images of the STEM probe over vacuum should always be acquired, and is important for analyses including Bragg disk detection, calibration of the convergence semiangle, and deconvolution of the probe. Scanning a standard calibration sample of known structure at the beginning or end of a microscope session is highly recommended, and will typically ensure the most accurate calibration of pixel sizes. Using a standard calibration sample which is polycrystalline is also highly recommended, to facilitate calibration of inevitable elliptical stretching of the diffraction patterns due to imperfect optics and alignments Figure Elliptical distortions, in which circular features about the optic axis are stretched into ellipses, are generally experimentally unavoidable There is in general some angle of rotation between the electron beam in the sample plane and in the detector plane. Thus in order to correctly map orientations measured in the diffraction plane into real space, it is necessary to measure and account for this rotational offset. The simplest and most robust way to measure the offset is to compare a STEM image to a defocused probe shadow image. Any STEM image will suffice, provided that the same features are visible in the STEM and shadow images, and in Fig. Calibration of the diffraction space pixel size minimally requires measuring a single diffraction vector with a known spacing. More accurate measurement is possible by fitting to several known spacings. Figure Ideally, the real space pixel size is determined by the distance the electron probe is rastered by the scan coils between detector frames, and is therefore equivalent to the size calibration of the instrument's STEM scan. For this reason, processing tools for recalibration of the real space pixel size are not provided. However, should such calibration be desired, it is straightforward to edit the py4DSTEM metadata based on independent measurement of the real space pixel sizes. When specimen drift leads to large deviations of the pixel size and scan direction angles, further pixel size measurements and drift correction may be required Transformation from Cartesian to polar coordinates is an important operation in many 4D-STEM analyses, Figure Radial integration of a single or averaged diffraction pattern is an important operation, providing higher SNR information about electron scattering at each spatial frequency, at the expense of losing any orientation information. The polar-elliptical transform makes elliptically corrected radial integration easy -just sum along the theta axis of the transformed data. Figure In the context of 4D-STEM, classification refers to assigning one or more integer values to each scan position, which identify this position with associated classes. Ideally, each class corresponds to a type of diffraction pattern, or to structurally meaningful features or motifs, such that a scan position will be included in a given class if and only if its diffraction pattern contains these features. Virtual imaging, and thoughtful combination of virtual images and colormaps, is often the easiest way to visually differentiate distinct structural regions, and can be a powerful tool for microanalysis Figure The algorithm proceeds as follows. First, all Bragg disks are located, as described in Sec. III B. Next, the BVM is calculated, after any relevant calibrations such as diffraction shift correction have been performed -see Fig. In this section, we build on the techniques described in Sec. III to make various measurements of physical interest from 4D-STEM datasets. In Sec. IV A we generate virtual images. In Sec. IV B we apply the classification algorithm discussed in Sec. III E to the GTO dataset to retrieve maps of various crystalline and amorphous phases present in the complex, nanostructured sample. In Secs. IV C and IV D we calculate strain maps from crystalline data, and from amorphous data respectively. In Secs. IV E and IV F we further analyze amorphous samples, calculating radial distribution functions in the former section and performing fluctuation electron microscopy analysis in the latter section. We conclude with two phase retrieval methods for reconstructing the sample potential, demonstrating differential phase contrast imaging in Sec. IV G 1 and ptychography in Sec. IV G 2. In a traditional STEM experiment, many imaging modalities are possible, by placing detectors of different geometries in different positions in the diffraction plane Figure Figure An important problem in many applications is mapping distinct structural phases, and potentially many phases, present within a single sample We return to the GTO dataset as an example. The results are shown in Fig. We then additionally identified two amorphous phases (Fig. In this dataset, we find a single crystal region which appears to transition smoothly from a pyrochlore structure ( The diffraction pattern of a crystalline sample from a low index zone axis contains a grid of Bragg disks given by the reciprocal lattice of the sample. Therefore the spacing of the Bragg disks is inversely proportional to the real space atomic spacing. Precise measurements of the reciprocal lattice vectors can therefore be used to map the local strain present in a crystalline sample, given by the deviations of the lattice from the ideal spacing and angles In Fig. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. The choice of reference lattice is crucial to obtaining meaningful strain maps. In the simplest case, the experimental 4D-STEM scan contains a region of known undeformed lattice, which can be used directly to define the reference lattice. Alternatively, it is possible to obtain a separate scan of unstrained material to use as reference, however in this case, good calibrations are essential -see Sec. III C. With good calibrations and a known crystal structure, it is also possible to define a reference lattice by hand. In the case of the GTO dataset, in which there is a parent crystal at the top of the image and a region of recrystallization below, the parent crystal can be used as reference. Strain tensor values depend, in general, on the choice of coordinate system. It is therefore necessary to specify coordinates; without this specification, e.g. by including the coordinate axes on the plots, strain maps are not physically interpretable. Because there is some arbitrary rotation between real and diffraction space in 4D-STEM data, it is also important to show the orientation of the axes in both real and diffraction space. In Fig. In a strain mapping workflow in py4DSTEM, calculating the strain from the reference lattice produces a strain map with respect to a coordinate system oriented along the detector frame (Fig. Electron diffraction experiments of amorphous materials, or materials containing a substantial fraction of an amorphous phase, will typically include ring-like features with a radius given by a characteristic scattering length. Similarly to crystalline materials, a local increase or decrease in the average atomic spacing (i.e. strain) in amorphous materials will cause a decrease or increase respectively in the amorphous ring radius. By fitting an elliptical function to each diffraction image, we can directly measure these deviations due to local strain. This has been demonstrated both in individual TEM diffraction images In py4DSTEM, we have implemented strain measurements of amorphous materials using the same elliptic fitting routines described in Sec. III C and Appendix D. Figure Figure The radial distribution function (RDF), or g(r), describes the relative density of atoms some distance r from a given atomic position. Thus the RDF characterizes the distribution of distances between atoms in a given material. It can serve as an important fingerprint for amorphous materials, as it gives information about the distance and density of neighboring shells of atoms, which depend on the material's structure, chemistry and defect density The RDF can be directly determined from the average diffraction pattern of an amorphous material, as long as enough counts / images are collected to average out any local density fluctuations, and the probe convergence semiangle is sufficiently small to not blur out the diffraction pattern An example of the mean diffraction pattern from amorphous silicon is shown in Fig. We ultimately invert the structure factor, a diffraction space quantity, to retrieve the RDF, a real space quantity. The sampling of the RDF is thus determined by the maximum k values in the experimental data. In py4DSTEM we therefore upsample by padding the structure factor with zeros before inversion, which allows extraction of an RDF which is in principle arbitrarily smooth. However, that smoothness should not be over-interpreted: the highest frequencies at which true V (q) I(q) 2 , a measure of short and medium range order which becomes larger with increasing order. Note the two peaks in blue (mean statistics) which become a single broad peak in red (median statistics). These come from Bragg scattering, suggesting the median statistics are superior for evaluating the amorphous structure. information has been transferred is set by the maximum k from the experimental data. In gathering data for RDF analysis it is important to capture high scattering angles to use in fitting the atomic scattering factors, therefore fairly short camera lengths are recommended. Fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM) is a method which, like RDF analysis, is used to characterize the structure of amorphous materials. In RDF analysis structure is typically considered out to distances of perhaps the first few shells of neighboring atoms, considered the "short range order" regime. However, many amorphous materials have a substantial degree of structural ordering beyond the first few shells This property is referred to as "medium range order" in materials science The technique of quantifying the degree of variability as a function of scattering angle and probe size is called fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM) Our approach follows the methods of Figure Figure G. Phase retrieval py4DSTEM includes two methods for reconstruction of the sample potential: differential phase contrast (DPC) and ptychography. Broadly, the idea in both methods is to extract the amount of extra phase that has been added to the electron beam at each scan position. That phase is then taken to be the total (i.e. projected) sample potential at this scan position times a constant which encodes electron-charge interaction strength. Figure These methods make the transmission function approximation and the projection approximation, and thus can be expected to be most reliable for thin, low-Z samples. In cases where these conditions don't hold, phase retrieval should be interpreted cautiously. Differential phase contrast (DPC) uses the fact that, for a sufficiently thin object, the mean deflection of the electron probe at each scan position in the STEM raster is related to the specimen electric and magnetic field components transverse to the beam propagation direction. Examples of material science applications of this technique include the study of built-in electric fields in semiconductor devices Figure The rotational offset between real and diffraction space needs to be correctly calibrated to perform the Fourier integration step. One possibility is to use the method discussed in Sec. III C. In the context of DPC, alternative approaches to this calibration are also possible. In one, the beam deflections are assumed to be a conservative vector field, which must be true if they are the gradient of a scalar field. However, if the coordinate systems of real and reciprocal space contain a relative rotation, the measured beam deflections will all be similarly rotated, resulting in general in a nonconservative field. The correct rotational offset can thus be identified by finding the relative rotation which results in beam deflections which are conservative, which can be identified by minimizing the curl as a function of the rotation. In another approach, we note that the contrast of a DPC reconstruction, that is the contrast of the scalar field which results from Fourier integration of the beam deflections, is typically maximized when the rotational offset is correct. Thus the calibration may also be performed by maximizing the DPC contrast as a function of real/diffraction space rotation. Note that this method permits a 180 degree ambiguity in the rotational offset, corresponding to a contrast reversal in the DPC image. Finally, we note that Fourier integration effectively applies a low pass filter (see Appendix I). Some amount of low pass filtering is therefore inherent in DPC imaging as implemented in py4DSTEM. Phase retrieval is difficult because phase is never directly recorded; instead, the detector only captures the square modulus of the electron wavefunction. In electron ptychography of crystals, the idea is that with a large enough convergence angle, the central disk will begin to overlap with other Bragg disks. In the overlap regions the phases of the two beams add coherently, and consequently phase reconstruction is possible by analyzing these regions. The method is analogous to holography, which combines a scattered beam and a reference beam to create an interference pattern, except that the 'scattered' and 'reference' beams are now the central beam and the Bragg reflected beams. Variations in these regions of interference as the beam is scanned enable phase retrieval. Ptychography was first suggested as a method to solve the crystallographic phase problem by Hoppe In this paper, we have presented the py4DSTEM software package written in Python, for analysis of 4D-STEM experiments. We have described the program's purpose and structure, including an HDF5 based file standardization for 4D-STEM. We've described how py4DSTEM can be used for preprocessing and calibrating data, finding Bragg disk positions, transformation into polar-elliptical coordinates, and for classifying diffraction patterns based on commonalities in their diffraction patterns. We demonstrated measurements including virtual imagining, phase mapping, mapping strain in crystalline and amorphous materials, RDF and FEM analyses, and phase reconstruction with DPC and with ptychography. The analysis here spans 8 datasets, including seven experimental and one synthetic dataset. The py4DSTEM codes and many examples are freely available in the py4DSTEM repository on Github. As an open source project, both new users and new contributors are enthusiastically encouraged to try the code, use it in your own work, or make a pull request. where r and k denote coordinates in the real space image and diffraction space planes, respectively, and the diffraction plane coordinate |k| = α λ for scattering angle α and relativistically corrected electron wavelength λ. In a STEM experiment, scan coils are used to move the probe to a given position R, denoted by ψ 0 (r -R). In this appendix, we first describe a simple model for 4D-STEM datasets, which primarily refers to the diffraction plane wavefunction Ψ(R, k). We then briefly discuss the more general question of how the wavefunction evolves from the initial probe Ψ 0 to the final probe Ψ on the detector. A 4D-STEM dataset typically takes the form of a fourdimensional array of intensity values, Here, each I i,j,n,m is a scalar and (i, j, n, m) ∈ N, i.e. the dataset is a discrete 4D grid of numbers. The correspondences between (i, j) and scan position R = (R x , R y ) and between (n, m) and diffraction coordinate k = (k x , k y ) are determined by the real and diffraction space pixel size calibrations. The value of each I i,j,n,m is given by the electron flux passing through the appropriate detector pixel, or by the square modulus of the beam wavefunction integrated over the detector pixel at k when the beam raster position is R. Thus the 4D-STEM dataset may be modelled by where the approximation is exact in the limit of infinitesimally small detector pixels. Note that this simple model does not account for finite information transfer in the microscope, which could be included with a multiplicative transfer function M (k). In a STEM experiment with an integrating detector (ADF, BF, etc.), the image I(R) can be modeled as where D(k) reflects the detector geometry. For some 4D-STEM signal I(R, k) we can write down an equivalent virtual image I v (R) as: If Eqs. A1 and A2 look similar, it's because they are. The key difference is in the meaning of the integration over D(k): in the former equation, it describes the action of the detector, and the integration occurs in hardware during data acquisition; in the latter equation, it is a prescription for which pixels of the 4D datacube need to be summed in post-processing. The evolution of the probe is comparatively simple from the probe forming aperture to the sample plane, and from the sample plane to the detector -both are given by Fourier transforms: where F r→k is the forward transform from the real to diffraction domain, and F k→r is the inverse transform from the diffraction to real domain. The most common initial condition for the electron probe in 4D-STEM is given by a circular aperture in a condenser plane where A(k max ) is the 2D "top hat" function, and k max is the maximum scattering vector of the probe. The probe incident on the sampe is then an Airy disk function where J 1 is a Bessel function of the first kind, and the peak amplitude is equal to √ πk max . This function is shown graphically in the upper right corner of Figure The change in the wavefunction from ψ 0 (r) to ψ(r), as the beam passes through a sample is, in general, analytically intractable, so numerical methods are typically used. Using some approximations described in where i is the imaginary constant, σ is the relativisticallycorrected electron-matter interaction constant, and V (r) is the electrostatic potential inside the sample. Because the two operators on the right-hand side of equation A6 do not commute, it is typical to use a split-step method to numerically solve this equation called the multislice method, first derived in By assuming each slice has infinitesimal thickness, the solution to the transmission operator is given by Between each slice, we assume zero electrostatic potential and can therefore advance the electron wave by using the free-space propagation operator, which can be efficiently applied in Fourier space Note that the propagation operator e iλ∆z|k| 2 uses the 2D inverse spatial coordinate We alternate the application of the transmission and propagation operators to calculate the final wavefunction after interacting with the sample, F r→k e iσVn(r) ψ 0 (r), which is typically referred to as the exit wave. This method requires N transmission operations and N -1 propagation operations. The multislice method is often used for modeling 4D-STEM experiments, but can require a prohibitively high amount of computation time for very large simulations. Recently, a more efficient method has been developed to simulate 4D-STEM experiments called PRISM B. Cross, phase, and hybrid correlations Cross-correlative template matching is a standard tool in image processing, and is widely used in computational analysis for electron microscopy For functions f and g, written in one dimension for simplicity, the cross correlation is defined as where * indicates complex conjugation. The key idea here is that if f (x -a) = g(x), then (f g)(x = a) will be a maximum, because the integrand then becomes |f (y)| 2 and two functions are perfectly overlapped. Therefore, the cross correlation of the vacuum probe template with a diffraction pattern can be used to extract the Bragg disk positions simply by identifying the cross correlation maxima. Computationally, this is implemented via the cross correlation theorem, which states that where F is the Fourier transform. This follows directly from the Fourier transform of Eq. B1 and the change of variables x = x + y. Equation B2 therefore allows the integral of Eq. B1 to be computed efficiently via a few FFT operations, which is important because performing the cross correlation on each diffraction pattern (often 10,000 or more) is the most computationally intensive step of many analysis workflows. In contrast to Eq. B2, the so-called phase correlation normalizes by the amplitude in Fourier space before applying the inverse transform: This leads to an analytically pleasing result: now, if f (x -a) = g(x), then (f g) phase (x) = δ(x -a). The result follows directly from substituting f (x -a) = g(x) in to Eq. B3 and making use of the Fourier shift theorem. Thus where the cross correlation simply has a maximum where f and g best overlap, the phase correlation yields a delta function which selects the point of interest. As a practical matter, however, phase correlations are also highly sensitive to noise, and this application tend to lead to many false positives when used with real data. An intermediate approach is possible using a hybrid correlation, in which a normalization somewhere in between a phase and cross correlation is used, as follows: Here, n ∈ [0, 1]. For n = 1, the result is a cross correlation, and for n = 0, the result is a phase correlation. Intermediate values may be thought of is applying intermediate weighting to the amplitude versus phase components of the signals in Fourier space. While the hybrid correlation is a heuristic approach, it is often effective. Giving more weight to the phase components (lower values of n) increases sensitivity to edges and can do a better job of identifying faint Bragg disks, however, the trade off is typically an increase in falsepositives. Experience with many datasets indicates that an n value in the neighborhood 0.85 or 0.9 -similar to a cross correlation, but with a slightly increased sensitivity to edges -frequently yields good results. The noisier the data, the more caution is in order in using lower n values, and for very noisy data pure cross-correlations are recommended. Figure Let us refer to the i'th Bragg disk detected in the diffraction pattern at scan position (R x , R y ) as B Rx,Ry,i . In computer memory, this might be thought of as a length 3 tuple: B Rx,Ry,i = (k x,i , k y,i , I i ), where the subscript i indicates the i'th peak, and the three values are the coordinates of the disk center in diffraction space and the disk's intensity. Analytically, we can think of the B Rx,Ry,i as Kronecker deltas of strength I i : The delta function specifies where the Bragg condition is met for parallel illumination; Bragg disks are formed by translating each point in the central disk by this vector, and may be thought of as the convolution of the aperture function with Eq. C1 Let's denote the set of all Bragg disks detected at a scan position (R x , R y ) as B Rx,Ry . For N disks in B Rx,Ry we can write Taking a summation over all scan positions gives B is the Bragg vector map. Physically, is interpretable as a (unnormalized) distribution of measured Bragg vector directions found within the sample over the area of the 4D-STEM scan. In this appendix we describe various elements of py4DSTEM that make use of or relate to elliptical coordinates. First we discuss elliptical fitting, which is important for correction of elliptical distortions. We then briefly describe and relate the two elliptical parametrizations used in the code. Finally, we describe polar-elliptical transformations and radial integration. Two primary elliptical fitting routines are available in py4DSTEM. The first is appropriate for data that is well-described by a 1D elliptical curve -for instance, a Bragg vector map from a sample with many randomly oriented grains will typically contain elliptical rings associated with each characteristic spacing of the material. The second is a sum of two Gaussian functions, a simple Gaussian and a 'double-sided' Gaussian, and is appropriate for fitting amorphous diffraction patterns, and is a two-dimensional fit designed to capture the first amorphous halo. For 1D elliptical curve fitting, we first define some annular region of our 2D dataset containing pixels (k xi , k yi ), each with intensity I i . We then determine the ellipse that most closely fits this data by computing arg min kx 0 ,ky 0 ,A,B,C i The double-sided Gaussian function for amorphous halo fitting is defined as where (k x , k y ) are the coordinates and (I 0 , I 1 , σ 0 , σ 1 , σ 2 , c, R, k x0 , k y0 , B, C) are parameters, where N (r; R, σ, I) is a Gaussian centered at R with standard deviation σ and with maximum amplitude I, where Θ is the Heaviside step function, and where r is the radial coordinate of an elliptical system given by When performing a fit, as before we first define an annular region in the dataset to fit, typically about the first amorphous halo. The first term is meant to fit the decaying background, while the second and third terms fit the amorphous halo, while allowing for an asymmetrical shape on the inner/outer sides of the ring. When fitting ellipses we use the parametrization D1) for numerical stability. However the parameters of this form are not the most easily geometrically interpretable, so for this reason we also make use of the alternate parametrization where (k x , k y ) are cartesian coordinates, (r, θ) are polarelliptical coordinates, and (A , B , φ) are parameters corresponding to the two semi-axis, and the tilt of the A -axis with respect to the k x -axis. Equations D1 and D2 are related by Once the appropriate elliptical parameters are known, polar-elliptical transformations may be performed. After specifying a range and sampling the new polar coordinates, each point (r, θ) is mapped to some (k x , k y ) position in Cartesian space, from which a bilinear interpolation is then used to compute the value at (r, θ). In py4DSTEM, arrays returned after polarelliptical transformation are numpy masked arrays, to ensure that coordinates beyond the frame of the raw data are correctly handled, and also facilitating masking data where necessary, e.g. from a beamstop. Radial integrals are calculated by first computing the polar-elliptical (or polar) transformation then summing along the θ-direction. The underlying principle of the classification scheme described in Sec. III E is the definition of a particular feature vector, which is useful because it efficiently encodes the key physical features of crystalline electron scattering -the Bragg vectors. It therefore massively reduces the size of the data before classification, while honing in on the most physically relevant element of the diffraction data. For a calibrated Bragg vector map containing N delta-like peaks, we associate with each such peak an integer i ∈ {0, ..., N -1}. For each diffraction pattern we generate a length-N vector v. The i'th element of v is defined in one of two ways: (1) a Boolean value indicating whether this diffraction patterns contains this Bragg peak, or (2) a floating point value of the intensity of this Bragg peak in this diffraction pattern. With these feature vectors in hand, we use matrix factorization methods to complete the classification. First we construct the matrix X which has the feature vectors v as its columns. For data with R N = R N x ×R N y diffraction patterns, X has dimensions N ×R N . X is then written as where W has shape N × C, H has shape C × R N , and C is the number of classes. W may be thought of as a collection of C column vectors, each describing a class in terms of weights for the various possible Bragg vectors observed over the entire dataset. H may be thought of as a set of column vectors which describe how to obtain, through linear combination of the classes, good approximations for each of the observed diffraction patterns. Alternatively, the row vectors of H may be thought of as an image (albeit reshaped): there are C of them, and each describes how much to weight the corresponding class in each of the R N positions of the electron beam. In Secs III E and IV B we use an algorithm based on the frequency of co-occurance of Bragg peaks across diffraction patterns to set initial values for W and H. We then optimize using nonnegative matrix factorization In this appendix we discuss how the crystalline and amorphous strains are calculated in Secs. IV C and IV D. We're interested in the infinitesimal strain matrix, where the deformed lattice differs very little from the undeformed lattice. For a material with a deformed state characterized by some displacement field u, and considering the system in a coordinate system with abscissa and ordinate (x 1 , x 2 ), the infinitessimal strain matrix is and is typically accompanied by θ R = 1 2 ∂u1 ∂x2 -∂u2 ∂x1 . The ii terms represent the compressive/tensile strain along the x i directions, with positive values corresponding to tension. 12 represents the shear strain, and our sign convention is chosen such that positive values correspond to the angle spanned from x 1 to x 2 becoming more obtuse in the deformed body. θ R represents the rotation of the material, with positive values corresponding to counterclockwise rotation of a right-handed coordinate system. For both crystalline and amorphous strain, the strain matrix is calculated at each beam position by comparing two comparable measurements: one of the local structure, and one of an undeformed reference structure. For crystalline strain, the measurement we use is a pair of reciprocal lattice basis vectors. For amorphous strain, the measurement is a transformation of the ellipse fit to the (first) amorphous halo. For crystalline strain, consider a real space lattice with reference basis vectors a 0 = (a 0 1 , a 0 2 ) and local, deformed lattice vectors a = (a 1 , a 2 ). The transformation matrix T a 0 →a describes the linear deformation of the space, and given the lattice vectors is calculable via a = T a a 0 The strain matrix in Eq. F1 is defined with respect to some arbitrary area element of the material under study, so we consider a square unit area element with sides ( e 0 1 , e 0 2 ) = ( x 1 , x 2 ). The transformation T a maps these to a new set of vectors (e 1 , e 2 ). In the limit of small area elements, the relevant derivatives are then expressible as can then be retrieved from T a . In practice, we calculate basis lattice vectors of the reciprocal lattice g = (g 1 , g 2 ), by performing an intensity-weighted fit to measured Bragg peak positions at each scan position. The corresponding reference vectors g 0 = (g 0 1 , g 0 2 ) can be determined several ways, including defining a reference region, dataset, or using a known crystal structure. At this point it is possible to use g to determine a, then compute with the methods above. Alternatively, assuming sufficiently small deformations that we may discard terms of second order and higher in a Taylor expansion in both rotation and scaling, it is possible to compute directly from the transformation T g 0 →g , describing the linear deformation of reciprocal space, with remarkably little alteration to the above equations. In this case, the final expressions for the strain are To measure strain from the diffraction pattern of an amorphous material, we fit ellipses at each probe position using the methods described in Appendix D. After shifting the origin of each ellipse to k = (0, 0), we have where q ref is a reference radius, which defines an undeformed (circular) amorphous halo given by Because the measurement takes place in reciprocal space, it is more convenient to define the transformation matrix from the measured ellipse given by Eq. F4 to the reference circle given by Eq. F3, which is given by where This expression is valid as long as the roots are real, i.e. 4AC -B 2 > 0. To calculate the strain deformation tensor, we proceed in a similar manner to F2, althrough we note the direction of the transformation has already been changed to the real space transformation directions, The full expressions for the strain tensor components are Taking a first order Taylor expansion about A = 1, C = 1, and B = 0 yields the linear strain approximation for amorphous silicon. Next, we estimate the structure factor using the expression where I BG (q) is a background intensity estimate, f (q) 2 and I BG (q). Figure Next, we obtain the reduced radial distribution function (RDF) g(r) by taking the discrete (type II) sine transform of Φ(q), equal to G2) where q max is the maximum q where Φ(q) is non-zero, and ∆q and ∆r are the pixel sizes in diffraction and real space respectively. g(r) should ideally approach 0 as r → 0 within the nearest neighbor shell, and approach 1 as r → ∞, but errors in the above fitting procedure can cause deviations from these results. Finally, we can also compute the atomic density ρ(r) of our sample using the expression where ρ 0 is the bulk atomic density of the sample. This expression can be used to determine the coordination number of neighboring shells of atoms, by integrating over the distances r corresponding to a specific shell. The FEM computation here follows the methods of (H1) In order to reduce the effect of thickness when comparing multiple datasets, we then compute the normalized variance V norm (q) as V norm (q) = V (q) I(q) 2 φ,R (H2) The RDF measurement described above is primarily sensitive to the 2-body atomic pair correlations, whereas the FEM variance is more sensitive to 4-body pair-pair correlations In this appendix we summarize the mathematical underpinnings of the differential phase contrast method, adapted from Ref. Following from Appendix A, we select for the STEM detector in Eq. A1, the so-called first moment detector function D(k) = k. Note that, in contrast to Eq. A1, here we use a vector valued detector function, yielding a vector valued image: Physically, this distinction reflects that such a detector is sensitive to deflections of the total intensity of the electron beam, which is itself a vector quantity. A good approximation to Eq. I1 is possible using a segmented detector geometries × F * r→k (ψ(r, R)) dk where * indicates a complex conjugation, and in the last line the derivative property of the Fourier transform has been invoked. 2 So far no assumptions have been made. If a thin specimen is assumed Continuing from Eq. I2 and again using the phase object approximation, we find where * denotes a convolution, and we've made use of the fact that E = -∇V . To solve for V given I requires that we integrate Eq (I3), and we follow Technically a quantitative measurement of V (R) also requires deconvolution of the probe wave function In this appendix we summarize the mathematics of the ptychographic reconstruction method implemented in Fig. (J1) The goal is to retrieve T from I. We first consider the transformed datacube I(k, K) = F R→K I(k, R), where K is the reciprocal coordinate to scan position R. Thus this is the datacube has been written in terms of scan frequencies. Assuming the sample is a weak phase object, this may be written as where T (k) = F r→k T (r). The latter two terms in this expression each contain two copies of the aperture function, one centered at the optic axis and one shifted by the scan frequency K. For some given K, these terms can each be nonzero only at values of k where both disks are nonzero; that is, in the overlap between the shifted and unshifted disks. By looking only at the nonzero overlap between two disks, it is possible to simplify and solve Eq. J2 by eliminating one of its terms. To eliminate the third term, define the set of pixels where ∧ is the logical and operation and the maximum disk size is k 0 = α λ for convergence semi-angle α and electron wavelength λ. Here, the first line requires that k is inside the central disk, the second line requires that k is inside the disk shifted by -K, and the third line requires that k is also outside the disk shifted by K. Thus K selects a region of double overlap while also excluding the region of triple overlap. If only data from k ∈ K is used, the third term in Eq. J2 vanishes, so that and T (r) can be obtained with a subsequent inverse Fourier transform. Since this uses only data from a single double-overlap region, this method has been dubbed single-sideband reconstruction. This approach can be extended to include data from the whole bright-field in the reconstructions. If the sample is a weak phase object, it obeys Friedel symmetry, so that T (k) = T (-k) * where Γ is the disk-overlap function Γ(k, K) = Ψ 0 (k)Ψ * 0 (k + K) -Ψ * 0 (k)Ψ 0 (k -K). (J5) Note that while DPC provides useful image contrast in a fairly wide array of contexts, physical interpretation, and in particular interpretation in terms of the local sample potential, should be undertaken with care. In this dataset, for instance, the presence of non-overlapping Bragg disks indicates that there exists sample structure (the atomic lattice) which is too fine for our probe to resolve, and which will not be reflected in a DPC reconstruction. Moreover, the spatial sampling here is larger than probe width, so any variation in the potential between sampling points will be effaced in the reconstruction. Thus this DPC image, though still informative to a point, has no simple physical interpretation. Images in this category might be referred to as "pseudo-DPC". For more discussion, and an example where the DPC image is well thought of as a reconstructed sample potential, see Sec. IV G 1 and Appendix I. I.e. F r→k (∇f (r)) = 2πikF r→k (f (r)) A necessary but not sufficient condition is that the probe depth of field (equal to 1.7λ/α 2 ) is much greater than the specimen thickness.