Since the liquid flow rate of the annular flow is closely related to the heat exchange efficiency, it has great significance to measure the liquid flow rate of the annular flow in vertical tee junction. In order to acquire the liquid flow rate of the annular flow in vertical tee junction, a measurement method has been designed, which implements the digital subtraction method to measure the thickness of the liquid film under the visible light and to apply the image feature matching algorithm to obtain the liquid velocity field. Moreover, the accuracy of the liquid film velocity field as well as the spatial and temporal stability of the mass flow rate is tested by proposed algorithms in this study. Experimental results show that the measurement error of our method is approximately 5% in the lower section of the main pipe and the branch pipe, and lower than 15% in the upper section of the main pipe. Therefore, this method has a high accuracy in comparison with other measurement approaches. Our method can be applied to measure and analyse the shape and property of the annular flow in the vertical tee junction. The annular flow in the vertical tee junction is widely existed in heat exchange equipment such as refrigeration equipment and chemical engineering equipment In recent years, a lot of methods have been designed to measure the flow rate of two-phase flow. In accordance with whether separating the two-phase flow into single-phase in the measurement, these methods can be divided into separation and non-separation methods The separation method is the method which firstly employs a separation device to separate the gas and liquid and then measure them separately A large number of non-separation approaches have been proposed in recent years. Some representative methods are listed below: a. The approaches using a single flowmeter, such as the laser Doppler velocimeter b. The measurement method which employs combined flowmeters. For example, the throttling element -volumetric flowmeter, double slotted plate, throttling element -gear flowmeter, target flowmeter -turbine flowmeter, Venturi tube -turbine flowmeter, and orifice -Venturi tube c. A combination of the conventional flowmeter and phase retention meter. Some two-phase flow measurement devices measure the flow rate of two-phase flow by first determining the velocity of each phase and the phase holdup and then calculating the flowrate of each phase G. B. Zhang et al designed a combination meter using turbine flowmeter and flap -type shunt conductance sensor is another representative method d. Digital subtraction method. With the development of optical technology, digital subtraction method has been developed to measure the liquid film thickness, especially in the falling film flow analysis Dupont et al In addition, the capacitance tomography method In this work, a measurement method based on the digital subtraction method has been proposed to acquire the liquid flow rate of the annular flow in the vertical tee junction. For this purpose, firstly a digital subtraction method is implemented to measure the thickness of the liquid film under the visible light field, next the perspective transformation method is designed to correct the deflection of the image, then the liquid velocity field is calculated via the image feature matching algorithm, finally the accuracy of the liquid film velocity field and the spatial and temporal stability of the mass flow rate are tested by proposed algorithms in this study. Experimental results show that the measurement error of our method is approximately 5% in the lower section of the main pipe and the branch pipe, and lower than 15% in the upper section of the main pipe. Therefore, this method has a high accuracy in comparison with other measurement approaches including the method based on the combination instrument of turbine flowmeter and conductance sensor in Reference The average flow rate of the upper section and the lower section of the main pipe (denoted by QMT and QMB, respectively) as well as the branch pipe (denoted by QBR) is acquired in this study where ρ, v and S are the mass density, average flow velocity and the average cross-sectional vector area of the liquid film, respectively. According to Equation The experimental system is shown in Figure In this section, the digital subtraction method is applied to extract the thickness of the liquid film. After that, the cross-sectional area of the liquid film in each cross section of the tee junction can be calculated. However, the wavelength of the ambient light must be tightly constrained when using the traditional digital subtraction method. It greatly increases the difficulty of the experiment and limits the application of the method Since the fill light is a non-coherent light source, the brightness of the empty tube's photo (the reference luminance Iref) can be defined as a superposition of the luminance of light under each wavelength contained in the filled light (defined as Iref{0}, Iref{1}, Iref{2}, ..., respectively). According to Beer-Lambert's law, the relationship between the transmission of light under a certain wavelength (defined as I{n}) and the average thickness of the liquid film (defined as d ) on a certain pixel of image is: where d1 and d2 are the thickness of the liquid film at the given pixel and kn is the attenuation coefficient of water at the given wavelength. Furthermore, the brightness of the corresponding pixel in the subsequent image, Figure Equation ( Since the attenuation coefficient of our stained water at visible wavelengths is less than 1 cm -1 due to our experiment, and according to the reference Since the value of ∑ (I ref {n} × k n ) n is independent of the film thickness, a proportional coefficient k can be introduced to further simplify Equation The average thickness of the liquid film can be calculated using the following equation to further reduce the error: Since the background light may be converged by the liquid film in some regions due to the lens phenomenon, the brightness of these regions in Figure where d ′ is the average thickness of the liquid film at these bright regions. Thus, the average thickness of the liquid film can be calculated as: A method which is shown in Appendix A is employed to obtain the value of k before the experiment, since the composition of light varies under different light sources. k is determined to be 0.1cm -1 under the operating condition of our experiment. Moreover, the liquid film was doped with colouring agent in our experiment to improve the accuracy. The perspective transformation method is implemented to eliminate tilt and rotation of the image where r denotes the radios of the tee junction, d q (i) denotes the thickness distribution on the cross- section and n is the number of cross-section. In this section, the feature-matching algorithm based on cross-correlation analysis The average flow velocity of liquid film in a square window Wn with side lengths m and starting point (x1, y1) in figure D1 can be calculated by the following equation: where (x2, y2) denotes the starting point of the matched region wn in figure The liquid film velocity field with the side lengths of 32 pixels and 64 pixels are shown in Figures In this part, the average flow rate of the upper section and the lower section of the main pipe, as well as the branch pipe can be obtained by Equation Q MT = Q MB -Q BR (13) Furthermore, the proposed method is verified through measuring the true value of the average flow rate in each section of the tee junction and calculating the percentage error ε between measured values and true values The flow chart of the liquid flow rate calculation of the annular flow in the tee junction is shown in Figure Experiment under three groups of experimental conditions is designed and implemented to verify our method. The inlet air flow rate ranges from 1 to 2.5 m 3 min -1 , and inlet liquid flow rate is between 100 and 300 mLmin -1 . The experimental conditions are shown in Table The calculation results of average mass flow rate in each section of the tee junction is calculated by Equation ( As shown in Table The accuracy of the obtained liquid film velocity field needs to be confirmed, since the liquid film at different locations has different velocity, and the thickness of boundary layer In order to get the accuracy of the calculated velocity, a novel parameter Φn is employed in this work, which quantitatively describes the percentage of water in two matched regions whose velocity is equal to the calculated value of these regions. The detailed derivation of n is shown in Appendix C. The distribution map of Φn among the data in Figure According to the Φn distribution maps in Figure The stability of mass flow rate is of great significance when calculating the mass flow rate accurately. The spatial and temporal stability of the mass flow rate is used to evaluate the stability of the flow rate. The spatial stability is defined by the variance of the cross-sectional area of the liquid film in each section of the tee junction, which reflects the spatial deformation regularities of the liquid film. A high spatial stability indicates that the velocity of liquid film tends to be stabilized. Therefore, the high spatial stability part of each section is employed in the calculation of mass flow rate to get high-precision results. The temporal stability is the changing rate of the liquid film's mass flow rate in each section of the tee junction. Since the changes of mass flow rate will inevitably lead to the change of liquid film's volume in the lumen, the changing rate of liquid film's volume per unit length of the tee junction at time t (denoted by u(t)) is applied to measure the temporal stability of the tee junction. It is obvious that a smaller u(t) denotes a slower changing rate of the liquid film's mass flow rate, which also means a higher temporal stability. Moreover, with the help of u(t), the temporal stability can also be measured quantitatively. The equation to calculate the temporal stability is shown in Equations ( Experimental results show that the measurement error of our method is around 5% at the lower part of the main pipe and the branch pipe, and around 15% at the upper part of the main pipe. In comparison with the existing models, this method has a high measurement accuracy It should be noticed that tee junction is more complex than the pipe applied in these study, thus the mass flow rate is much more difficult to be extracted. Furthermore, none of these methods can provide the distribution map about either the thickness or the velocity field of the liquid film. In this study, a method for acquiring the liquid flow rate of the annular flow in the vertical tee junction has been proposed. The digital subtraction technique under the visible light field is applied to extract the thickness distribution map, and the cross-sectional area of the annular flow is obtained. Then, the measurement of the liquid velocity field is implemented by the feature-matching algorithm based on cross-correlation analysis. After that, the mass flow rate of liquid film in branch pipe and the upper and lower sections of main pipe under different experimental conditions is acquired. Furthermore, the spatial and temporal stability of the mass flow rate is employed to evaluate the stability of flow rate. Experimental results show that the measurement error of our method is approximately 5% in the lower section of the main pipe and the branch pipe, and lower than 15% in the upper section of the main pipe. Therefore, this method has a high accuracy in comparison with other measurement approaches. Future work in this area could involve the measurement of the irregular flow pattern such as the slug flow; applying the method to the research of other common type of cell structures; and analysing the spatial and temporal variation tendency on different flow parameters of liquid film under certain working condition; as well as the variation of flow parameters in the tee junction under different inlet conditions 