Spatial light modulators (SLMs) are devices for modulating amplitude, phase or polarization of a light beam on demand. Such devices have been playing an indispensable influence in many areas from our daily entertainments to scientific researches. In the past decades, the SLMs have been mainly operated in electrical addressing (EASLM) manner, wherein the writing images are created and loaded via conventional electronic interfaces. However, adoption of pixelated electrodes puts limits on both resolution and efficiency of the EASLMs. Here, we present an optically addressed SLM based on a nonlinear metasurface (MS-OASLM), by which signal light is directly modulated by another writing beam requiring no electrode. The MS-OASLM shows unprecedented compactness and is 400 nm in total thickness benefitting from the outstanding nonlinearity of the metasurface. And their subwavelength feature size enables a high resolution up to 250 line pairs per millimeter, which is more than one order of magnitude better than any currently commercial SLMs. Such MS-OASLMs could provide opportunities to develop the next generation of high resolution displays and all-optical information processing technologies. More than forty years ago, enthusiasm for large-screen display and optical data processing in parallel architectures promoted invention and development of spatial light modulators (SLMs). In contrast, in the OASLMs, light modulation is fulfilled in an all-optical manner by irradiating a writing light beam rather than applying the electronic signal. Here, we present a novel OASLM based on the metasurface framework (MS-OASLM). The operation principle of our device relies on giant nonlinear polarization control over the signal light by another pump light using the chiral metasurfaces. Both electrodes and photosensing layers are not needed at all, which provides the device with advantages of compact profile and easy fabrication. Our MS-OASLM works in an all-solid-state fashion by escaping from long lasting tradition of constructing the SLMs using the LCs. The structure of the metasurface is shown in Fig. of the nanostructure are composed of "L"-shaped slits, each of which was fabricated via focused ion-beam (FIB) milling through a 100 nm thick gold film supported by a 500 μm thick fused quartz substrate. The nanostructure lattice constant is 300 nm, with an entire array footprint of 40×40μm 2 . Because the nanoblocks are chiral in geometry, an initially linearly polarized wave would become elliptically polarized with its azimuth rotated after passing through such medium. The polarization changes are characterized in terms of azimuth rotation φ and ellipticity angle χ (defined in Fig. The most widely application of SLM belongs to the image projections. To accomplish this goal, a MS-OASLM image projecting system was built, as illustrated in Fig. The final images are given in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate here a novel ultracompact OASLM based on the nonlinear metasurface. Benefiting from the outstanding light manipulation capacity at nanoscales of the metasurfaces, the MS-OASLM acquires a merit of unprecedented compactness with thickness of about 400 nm, which is less than one tenth of thickness of the traditional LC based EASLMs. And the subwavelength sized features in the metasurface render the MS-OASLM diffraction free leading to improved light utilization efficiency and suppressed diffraction noise in the readout light. In addition, because no electrode and photosensing layer is needed, the structure of the MS-OASLM is much simpler than the traditional OASLMs, thus significantly simplify the manufacturing process. We escape from the long lasting reliance on the LCs in manufacturing SLMs. This not only avoid sophisticated rubbing and sealing processes, but also endows the allsolid-state feature to the MS-OASLMs. Thus they become applicable in rigid environments, for example vacuum. And we demonstrate the application of image projection by our MS-OASLMs, whose resolution is shown to be one order of magnitude higher than the traditional SLMs devices. Our results would provide a new configuration for constructing the OASLMs. And the MS-OASLM would provide a great opportunities for novel optical displays and all-optical data processing techniques.