We report a statistical analysis of some highly infected countries by the novel coronavirus . The cumulative infected data were fitted with various growth models (e.g. Logistic equation, Weibull equation and Hill equation) and obtained the power index of top ten highly infected countries. The newly infected data were fitted with Gaussian distribution with the peak at ~40 days for the countries whose infection curves are seem to be saturated. The similarity in growth kinetics of infected people of different countries provides first-hand guidelines to take proper precautions to minimize human damage. The outbreak of coronavirus (COVID-19) from Wuhan, China, that causes severe respiratory tract infections in humans has become a global health concern Based on the WHO data (till date), we investigate the behaviour of COVID-19 spread for various countries to take precautions. This can provide first-hand guidelines for strategically controlling the epidemic. We have taken the data from World Health Organization website (WHO) for all the COVID-19 infected countries The cumulative infected data were analyzed based on various growth models (e.g. Logistic equation, Weibull equation and Hill equation) to obtain the power index. The newly infected data were fitted with Gaussian distribution function. The COVID-19 is spreading rapidly all over the world and WHO declared it as "public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC)". Globally there are 292142 confirmed cases and death is 12784 till the date March 21, 2020 We have also fitted the cumulative infection curve with Logistic and Weibull equations to compare the results with Hill equation and calculated the power index (m) which gives the information about the infection rate. We observed that the values are very close to each other for all the models (see Fig. The present work discussed the statistical analysis of COVID-19 infection data. The cumulative infection of top ten highly infected countries data are fitted with different equations and the power index are estimated. There is a similarity in the growth kinetics of infected people although the rate of infections is different due to various reasons. The infection curve of China and Republic of Korea has almost reached to its saturation value because of various reasons, for example medical facilities, prevention and public awareness etc. Further, the distribution of daily infected people is well fitted with Gaussian function. The cumulative infection data shows the scale invariance property. All the statistical analysis will provides firsthand guidelines to take proper precautions to minimize the infection rate. 