Recent observations of selective emergence (suppression) of superconductivity in the uncollapsed (collapsed) tetragonal phase of LaFe2As2 has rekindled interest in understanding what features of the band structure control the superconducting Tc. We show that the proximity of the narrow Fedxy state to the Fermi energy emerges as the primary factor. In the uncollapsed phase this state is at the Fermi energy, and is most strongly correlated and source of enhanced scattering in both single and two particle channels. The resulting intense and broad low energy spin fluctuations suppress magnetic ordering and simultaneously provide glue for Cooper pair formation. In the collapsed tetragonal phase, the dxy state is driven far below the Fermi energy, which suppresses the lowenergy scattering and blocks superconductivity. A similar source of broad spin excitation appears in uncollapsed and collapsed phases of CaFe2As2. This suggests controlling coherence provides a way to engineer Tc in unconventional superconductors primarily mediated through spin fluctuations. Through careful control of growth and annealing conditions, LaFe 2 As 2 (LFA) can be grown in the tetragonal phase with markedly longer c-axis than the value in the equilibrium "collapsed" tetragonal (CT) phase (c=11.01 Å). The "uncollapsed" tetragonal phase (UT) has c=11.73 Å. Moreover, the UT phase is shown to superconduct at 12.1 K, while the CT phase is not a superconductor 1 . A parallel phenomenon was observed in undoped CaFe 2 As 2 (CFA). At room temperature, the equilibrium phase is UT, but it was recently shown that a CT phase can be induced by quenching films grown at high temperature Here we use a recently developed ab initio technique to show that there is indeed a universal feature, namely incoherence originating from the Fe d xy state. By 'incoherence' we refer to the fuzzy spectral features and momentum-broadened spin excitation caused by enhanced single-and two-particle scattering. Superconductivity depends critically on the alignment of this state to the Fermi level. We are able to make these findings thanks to recent developments that couple (quasiparticle) self consistent GW (QSGW ) with dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) We perform calculations in the tetragonal phases of LFA and CFA; in the CT phase (CT-LFA and CT-CFA) and the corresponding UT phase (UT-LFA and UT-CFA). Structural parameters for each phase are given in the SM, Table (T N =170 K in CFA), and we can estimate T c in the hypothetical UT phase of undoped CFA below T N . In brief, we find that the CT-LFA has no superconducting instability, while UT, CT-CFA and UT-LFA are all predicted to be superconducting. All of these findings are consistent with experiment. In the experimentally known cases where the systems do superconduct (UT-LFA and CT-CFA), it appears our estimated T c 's are a factor of two to three times larger than the experimental T c . A similar discrepancy is observed in estimation of T c in doped single-band Hubbard model The three systems predicted to have non-negligible T c (CT-CFA, UT-LFA, UT-CFA) have two things in common. First, the Fe-d xy state contributes to the hole pocket around the Γ point (Fermi surface is shown in Fig. The peak in Im χ(q AFM , ω) can be observed in almost all iron based superconductors In the UT-LFA phase, Imχ(q, ω) has a dispersive magnon branch extending to ∼70 meV. As can be observed in Fig. In Fig. This work was supported by the Simons Many-Electron Collaboration. We acknowledge PRACE for awarding us access to SuperMUC at GCS@LRZ, Germany, STFC Scientific Computing Department's SCARF cluster, Cambridge Tier-2 system operated by the University of Cambridge Research Computing Service (www.hpc.cam.ac.uk) funded by EPSRC Tier-2 capital grant EP/P020259/1. In this supplemental material, we show we list the input structural parameters for our calculations, and the orbitally resolved quasi-particle weight and scattering rates in different compounds, as extracted from QSGW +DMFT. We also show the Imχ(q, ω) upto 500 meV to demonstrate the itinerant character of spin excitations in CT-LFA. We performed calculations with U and J taken from constrained RPA values for the FeSe and LiFeAs. Subsequent constrained RPA calculations on the pnictide considered here (Table We compute the pairing eigenvalues by solving the linearized Eliashberg equation at different temperatures in the normal phase. The temperature at which the leading eigenvalue becomes one, is where the particleparticle ladder sum (superconducting pairing susceptibility) diverges and corresponds to the T c for that material (the entire method is detailed in our recent work The superconducting pairing susceptibility χ p-p is computed by dressing the non-local pairing polarization bubble χ 0,p-p (k, iν) with the pairing vertex Γ irr,p-p using the Bethe-Salpeter equation in the particle-particle channel. Γ irr,p-p in the singlet (s) channel is obtained from the magnetic (spin) and density (charge) particle-hole reducible vertices by Finally, χ p-p can be represented in terms of eigenvalues λ and eigenfunctions φ λ of the Hermitian particleparticle pairing matrix. The pairing susceptibility diverges when the leading eigenvalue approaches unity. When the particle-particle ladder sum χ p-p = ((χ 0,p-p ) -1 -Γ p-p ) -1 diverges, the normal state becomes unstable towards superconductivity. In a temperature dependent calculation this corresponds to the T c where the leading eigenvalue of the matrix Γ p-p χ 0 reaches one (as shown in Eqn. ( The matrix that needs to be diagonalized has a size (norb 2 * nomega * nkp) * (norb 2 * nomega * nkp). In case of our materials, we find that even at β=20, which is roughly T = 580 K, the matrix size that we need to diagonalize is of the size (norb=5, nomega=200, nkp=1000) size (25*200*1000)*(25*200*1000). So we employ BCS low energy approximation to diagonalize the matrices at different temperatures and extract the eigenvalue spectrum. The BCS approximation amounts to using the Γ p-p strictly from the lowest energy (ν = 0 + , ν = 0 + , ω=0). However, Γ p-p contains all relevant momentum and orbital structure, and bubble contains information from all energies, momentum and orbitals. This appears to be reasonable approximation as the vertex contains essential features of superconductivity which is a low energy phenomenon. Additionally the pairing vertex also shows the essential temperature dependent enhancement that is prerequisite to Cooper pairing. We project the computed bubble and vertex functions on to the leading superconducting pairing symmetry channel ∆ k ∼ (cosk x + cosk y ) and show their temperature dependent behaviour. Further, we suppress the charge (density) component of the Γ p-p to show that the eigenvalues (λ -c ) only get very weakly affected. This is in complete consistency with what we show in the main paper that the superconducting instability is in one-to-one correspondence with the spin instability and the pairing is primarily mediated via spin fluctuations. 