Conventional optical lenses have been used to focus light from outside without disturbing the medium. The focused spot size is proportional to the focal distance in a conventional lens, resulting in a tradeoff between depth of penetration in the target medium and spatial resolution. We have shown that virtual ultrasonically sculpted gradient-index (GRIN) optical waveguides can be formed in the target medium to guide and steer light without disturbing the medium. Here, we demonstrate that such virtual waveguides can relay an externally focused beam of light through the medium beyond the focal distance of an external physical lens to extend the penetration depth without compromising the spot size. Moreover, the spot size can be tuned by reconfiguring the virtual waveguide. We show that these virtual GRIN waveguides can be formed in transparent as well as turbid media to enhance the confinement and contrast ratio of the focused beam of light at the target location. This method can be extended to realize complex optical systems of external physical lenses and in situ virtual waveguides to extend the reach and flexibility of optical methods. Light-matter interaction has been used in different applications, ranging from biological imaging and manipulation to metrology, material processing, and machine vision In this paper, we demonstrate that the virtual ultrasonically sculpted GRIN waveguides can be employed to relay an externally focused beam of light through the medium, non-invasively, without compromising the spot size. Our simulation results suggest that by sculpting the appropriate refractive index pattern within the target transparent medium, light focused by an external lens can be relayed through multiple pitch lengths of a virtual GRIN waveguide while maintaining or even decreasing the focal spot size. Therefore, using this cascade system of an external physical lens and the virtual GRIN waveguide, the tradeoff between the focal distance and the focal spot size of the external lens can be overcome. Moreover, by translating and reconfiguring the pattern of ultrasonic waves, the beam of light can be confined at different locations within the medium, and the confined beam spot size can be tuned. We show that virtual GRIN waveguides can also be formed in scattering media to relay an externally focused beam of light through the medium. The overall contrast between the intensity of light at the focal point and the surrounding local background within the scattering medium is enhanced using this technique instead of an external physical lens with a similar focal length, suggesting that the distribution of both ballistic and scattered photons is affected by the virtual waveguide. These results inspire the tantalizing notion of designing complex optical systems of multiple virtual optical elements sculpted within the target medium in tandem with external optical components to enable unprecedented control over the trajectory of light within the target medium in a noninvasive way. Imagine light generated by an external source is supposed to be confined and focused to a point P at a depth d inside a medium with a negligible level of scattering (Fig. where 2w is the focused beam waist, and λ is the wavelength of light FIG. We used a commercial optical design software (OpticStudio 20.1, ZEMAX LLC) to perform ray tracing analysis and also calculate the spot size using the Physical Optics Propagation module. First, we simulated an external lens with a long focal distance (LF) of f1 = 50 mm (in air) to directly focus the input collimated beam of light through a non-scattering medium (water) with a refractive index of n = 1.333. Taking into account that the lens has to be placed outside the medium at ΔL = 11.27 mm and also the elongation of the focal distance in water (due to the higher refractive index of water compared to air), the beam was focused at a depth of d = 47.22 mm into the medium. The axial ray paths and the focused beam profile at the focal plane are shown in Fig. Next, a cascade optical system of a short focal distance (SF) external lens with f2 = 25 mm (in air) in tandem with an in situ GRIN waveguide was simulated. Such GRIN waveguide was assumed to possess a cylindrically-symmetric parabolic refractive index profile along the radial direction with a maximum refractive index contrast of Δn = 6×10 -4 . The simulation results in Fig. We performed experiments to demonstrate the concept of non-invasive relaying of an externally focused beam of light using the virtual GRIN waveguide both in a transparent and also in a scattering medium. First, we performed an experiment using an external aspherical lens (49102, Edmund Optics Inc.) with a short focal distance (SF) of f2 = 25 mm (in air) cascaded with a virtual ultrasonically sculpted GRIN waveguide to relay the focused beam of light to a depth of d = 47.1 mm into deionized (DI) water as a transparent medium. The lens was placed at a distance ΔL = 11.27 mm outside a container made of 3 mm thick acrylic filled with DI water (Fig. FIG. We also performed another set of experiments in a medium made of a higher concentration of Intralipid with a slightly higher reduced scattering coefficient of μ′s = 1.05 cm -1 . The optical beam profiles through the medium with an optical thickness of OT = 4.95 TMFP are shown in Fig. In this paper, we showed that ultrasonically sculpted virtual GRIN waveguides can be formed deep in a medium non-invasively for in situ relaying and manipulation of light. In particular, we demonstrated that when the virtual waveguide is used in tandem with an external lens, the focal distance can be extended without sacrificing the spot size. In this cascade system of a short focal distance external lens and a virtual ultrasonically formed GRIN waveguide, the tightly focused beam of light by the external lens at shallow depth is relayed to a deeper region within the medium. We should note that a similar relaying effect could be achieved by placing a second physical lens, which can be a bulk GRIN lens, into the medium to extend the focal distance of the whole optical system without compromising the spot size. However, this would involve disrupting the medium by placing a physical optical component. More complex optical systems, including compound lenses made of a cascade of physical elements have been designed for microscopy and photography An additional advantage of the presented technique is reconfigurability that opens up new opportunities for in situ non-invasive beam steering and beam forming inside the target medium. We demonstrated that the size and the peak intensity of the focused beam of light can be tuned by reconfiguring the pattern of ultrasound. This idea can be extended, for example, by combining the cascading method presented in this paper with our former work on spatial beam forming The comparison with a single long focal distance external lens to focus light through the medium at the same depth as the cascade system showed that the achieved level of confinement and the peak intensity of the focused beam are much higher when the cascade optical system is used. To ensure a fair comparison, the input beam diameters were kept the same. If the input beam diameter is increased, the spot size is decreased both for the cascade system and the single external lens at the expense of increasing aberrations. Of course, external physical lenses have been optimized (e.g., aspherical lenses) to minimize aberrations. In the case of the virtual ultrasonically sculpted waveguide discussed in this paper, the aberrations might be more pronounced when the input beam diameter is increased. These aberrations can be compensated by using adaptive optical techniques We demonstrated that the presented technique can also be used in scattering media to effectively confine and focus light at depth. We showed that using the cascade optical system, light can be confined and focused through a rather thick scattering medium (OT > 4 TMFP) with a noticeable contrast ratio of 2.86 between peak intensity and background. Moreover, we showed that the virtual GRIN waveguide can enable confinement of light through a scattering medium (OT = 4.95 TMFP), where the long focal distance external lens fails to confine light due to the overwhelming effect of scattering. Understanding the specific mechanisms that contribute to the observed enhancement of the contrast ratio for the light confined in turbid media using the cascade optical system needs further investigation. One of the possible contributing factors can be the geometrical path difference between the cascade optical system and the long focal distance external lens, which affects the number and distribution of both ballistic and scattered photons that reach the focal point and the surrounding regions. Also, some of the scattered photons can be guided and confined through the virtual GRIN waveguide towards the focal point, potentially contributing to the enhancement of the overall light throughput at the target location. The observed unprecedented advantage over conventional external optics for non-invasive manipulation of light in the target medium can enable a plethora of applications involving light delivery and potentially optical imaging, where photons should be collected and relayed through the medium.