Graphene is an atomically thin material that features unique electrical and mechanical properties, which makes it an extremely promising material for future nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). Recently, basic NEMS accelerometer functionality has been demonstrated by utilizing piezoresistive graphene ribbons with suspended silicon proof masses. However, the proposed graphene ribbons have limitations regarding mechanical robustness, manufacturing yield and the maximum measurement current that can be applied across the ribbons. Here, we report on suspended graphene membranes that are fully-clamped at their circumference and that have attached silicon proof masses. We demonstrate their utility as piezoresistive NEMS accelerometers and they are found to be more robust, have longer life span and higher manufacturing yield, can withstand higher measurement currents and are able have been utilized in electromechanical resonators, Recently, graphene ribbons with suspended silicon proof masses have been utilized as piezoresistive electromechanical transducers in NEMS accelerometers with direct electrical readout. To demonstrate the utility of suspended graphene membranes with attached silicon proof masses as piezoresistive NEMS accelerometers, we have realized several device variations with different membrane and proof mass dimensions, all consisting of a suspended double- to suspend larger silicon proof masses, as compared to the previously graphene ribbon devices. These findings are an important step towards bringing ultra-miniaturized piezoresistive graphene NEMS closer towards deployment in emerging applications such as in wearable electronics, biomedical implants and internet of things (IoT) devices. KEYWORDS: graphene, suspended graphene membranes, proof mass, piezoresistive, The monitoring of acceleration is essential in a broad range of applications such as navigation systems, automotive crash detection systems and structural monitoring. Typical microelectromechanical system (MEMS) accelerometers occupy die areas of the order of several square millimetres. Further miniaturization of MEMS accelerometers results in smaller components and packages, and ultimately in reduced costs, which is critical for emerging applications such as wearable electronics, 1 biomedical implants, 2 nanoscale robotics, Graphene, as a two dimensional material, is atomically thin and features high carrier mobility, Due to the complex series-parallel resistance connection in fully-clamped graphene membranes, we developed a resistance model to analyse the resistance change of the suspended sections of the graphene membranes. A schematic of the equivalent resistance model of our devices is shown in Figure Assuming ideal symmetry of the device (Figure The sheet resistance of the double-layer graphene patch is defined as RR SS , and according to the square shape of the graphene areas that define RR 4 and RR 8 , it follows that RR 4 = RR 8 = RR SS . In this configuration, the variable resistances of the suspended graphene sections are RR 5 and RR 7 , while RR 1 , RR 3 and RR 8 are assumed to be constant. For a measurement current I that is applied to a graphene device (Figure (1) (2) The change of the overall resistance R of the graphene device as a result of a change in strain of the suspended graphene sections caused by a deflection of the proof-mass (ΔR) can thus be approximated by From equation (4) as well as equation (S3) in the Supporting Information it can be seen that the influence of the resistance change in the suspended graphene sections across the top and bottom trenches (∆RR 7tt and ∆RR 7bb ) on the total resistance change of a graphene device (∆R) can be neglected, while the resistance changes of the suspended graphene sections over the To evaluate the viability of our devices for detecting accelerations we used an air-bearing shaker (PCB 396C11, The Modal Shop) with a built-in high-precision reference accelerometer to expose our devices to accelerations at defined frequencies. In all experiments, the devices were placed with the sensitive axis in the direction of the earth gravitation, providing a 1 g acceleration bias. The packaged graphene NEMS devices were connected to signal read-out circuitry. The total resistance of a graphene device was the input resistance in the measurement circuit and the corresponding voltage output signal from the amplifier circuit (amplification factor of approximately 500) was recorded by a dynamic signal analyser (HP 35670A, Agilent Technologies Inc.) (Methods and Supporting Information Figure The spectra of the amplified output voltages (amplification factor of approximately 500) from seven accelerometer devices (devices a1 to a7) and one reference device (reference) exposed to an acceleration of 1 g at a frequency of 160 Hz are shown in Figure Thus, no change in strain was introduced in the graphene patch of the reference device when exposed to accelerations. The output signals of devices a1 to a7 correlated with the acceleration, while no visible signal was observed in the output of the reference device. This confirmed that it was indeed the displacement of the proof mass of the accelerometer devices that caused the measured resistance change of the graphene and that there were no significant parasitic noise signals picked up by the graphene devices. SEM images of devices a1 to a7 and the reference device are shown in Figure In order to compare the influence of the geometric design of the graphene patch of a device on the resulting output signal, we performed corresponding acceleration measurements of "type b" devices that feature wider graphene patches than the "type a" devices (Figure Consequently, our devices occupy at least two orders of magnitude small die areas, thereby demonstrating the huge potential of this approach for device scaling and cost reduction. In addition, there is further potential for reducing dimensions in our graphene devices by minimizing the electrical contact areas and by using state-of-the-art device packaging strategies. The proposed fully-clamped graphene membranes with attached silicon proof masses for use in piezoresistive NEMS accelerometers feature excellent characteristics, including improved robustness, improved manufacturing yield, longer life time, the capability to withstand higher measurement currents and the potential to suspend larger proof masses than similar structures previously reported. These characteristics will contribute to bringing ultra-miniaturized piezoresistive graphene NEMS closer towards deployment in potential applications, spanning several important scientific and technological areas, such as IoT, biomedical implants, nanoscale robotics, and wearable electronics. Devices were fabricated from a SOI wafer in which the silicon device layer was 15 μm thick, the BOX layer was 2 μm thick and the handle substrate was 400 μm thick (Figure First, a 1.4 μm thick layer of SiO2 was thermally grown on both the front and the backside of the SOI wafer (Figure RIE was used to etch through the 1.4 μm thick SiO2 layer and DRIE was used to etch through the 15 μm thick silicon device layer (Figure Using this mask, the 1.4 μm thick SiO2 layer was etched by RIE. Next, the handle substrate was etched by DRIE until reaching the BOX, using both the photoresist and the SiO2 as masking layers, thereby forming the channel to release the proof mass in a later process step. Photoresist residues were removed by O2 plasma etching, which finalized the pre-processing of the SOI device substrate (Figure Commercially available CVD single-layer graphene on copper foil (Graphenea, Spain) was used in this work. Double-layer graphene was obtained by transferring a single-layer graphene to another single-layer graphene on a copper foil. Therefore, a poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) solution (AR-P 649.04, ALLRESIST, Germany) was spin-coated on the front-side of the first graphene/copper foils at 500 rpm for 5 s and at 1800 rpm for 30 s and then baked for 5 minutes at 85°C on a hot plate to evaporate the solvent and cure the PMMA, resulting in a PMMA film thickness of about 200 nm. Carbon residues on the backside of the copper foil were removed using O2 plasma etching at low power (50-80 W). In order to release the graphene/PMMA stack from the copper, the foil was placed onto the surface of an iron chloride (FeCl3) solution with the graphene side facing away from the liquid, resulting in wet etching of the copper. After 2 hours, the PMMA/graphene stack was transferred onto the surface of deionized (DI) water, then diluted HCl solution and, back to DI water for cleaning, removing the iron (III) residues and removing chloride residues, respectively. A silicon wafer was used for handling and picking up the PMMA/graphene stack from the liquids. A second graphene on copper foil was used and the PMMA/graphene stack floating on the DI water was transferred to the second graphene on copper foil and subsequently put on a hotplate at 45°C to increase the adhesion between the two graphene layers. Carbon residues on the backside of the copper foil were removed using O2 plasma etching. Again, the same processes were performed to remove the copper substrate from the double-layer graphene and transfer the final PMMA/double-layer graphene stack to the pre-processed SOI device substrate. The SOI device substrate was then baked for ~ 10 minutes at ~ 45°C in order to dry it and to increase the bond strength between the double-layer graphene and the SiO2 surface. Next, the SOI device substrate was placed in acetone to remove the PMMA and subsequently in isoproponal to remove acetone residues. It should be noted that even after an exhaustive rinse with organic solvents, there are some PMMA residues (long-chain molecules) remaining on the graphene (Figure In order to release the proof masses and suspend them on the double-layer graphene membranes, the BOX layer (2 μm thick SiO2) was partly etched from the backside of the SOI substrate by RIE, followed by vapor HF etch to remove the remaining SiO2 layer (Figure This two-step etching process was employed to minimize the risk of damaging the graphene. For etching the BOX layer, the device substrate was attached to a 100 mm diameter silicon carrier wafer and the 4 edges on the sides of the device substrate were sealed with a tape. Then RIE etching was employed to etch approximately 1.9 μm of the BOX layer, leaving a ~100 nm thin BOX layer that was suspending the silicon proof masses. Vapor HF was then used to etch the remaining BOX layer using a custom-build vapor HF etching setup. 25 % of HF was used in the vapor HF chamber and the temperature was set to 40°C. The etching of the ~100 nm thick BOX layer typically took 5-10 minutes. Once the device fabrication was complete, the chips were glued in a ceramic chip package with an open cavity. Next, gold wire bonding was used to connect the electrode pads on the device substrate to the bond pads in the chip package as shown in Figure Optical microscopy, white light interferometry (Wyko NT9300, Veeco), and SEM imaging were used to observe and characterize the morphology of the devices during and after device fabrication (Figure Raman spectrometry (alpha300 R, WITec) was used to verify the presence and quality of the double-layer graphene of a fabricated device (Figure In all experiments we used an acceleration frequency of 160 Hz with a 1 g gravitation bias. The acceleration frequency of 160 Hz was used because on one hand, this frequency is sufficiently high to obtain relatively low 1/f-noise and is sufficiently close to 159.2 Hz, which is a commonly used frequency for accelerometer calibrators and is equivalent to a radian frequency of 1000 rad/s (equivalent to 2 × π × 159.2) Rödjegård and Guillermo Villanueva for helpful discussions, Cecilia Aronsson for support with the device processing and Mikael Bergqvist for assistance with the measurement setup. (a-h) Measured spectra of the output voltage of devices a1 to a7 and of the reference device when exposed to an acceleration of 1 g at a frequency of 160 Hz. In devices a1 to a7, the acceleration caused a deflection of the proof masses, and consequently the strain and resistance changed in the suspended graphene sections. This dependence on applied acceleration is not observed in the reference device. (i) Corresponding SEM images of devices a1 to a7 and the reference device. In all devices there are one or more small holes in the suspended graphene sections that were caused during devices fabrication, which could not be avoided. Devices a1 and b1 had identical proof mass dimensions of 10 μm × 10 μm × 16.4 μm and similar trench widths (3 μm for device a1 and 4 μm for device b1), but device a1 was a "type a" device design (device with a narrow graphene patch) while device b1 was a "type b" device design (device with a wide graphene patch). The results of (e) illustrate that "type a" designs typically featured higher signal responses than "type b" designs under identical conditions. (f) Comparison of the calculated relative resistance changes of the suspended graphene section (ΔRSB/RSB) of devices a1 and b1, when exposed to an acceleration of 1 g at a frequency of 160 Hz, respectively. (g) SEM images of devices b1 and b2 ("type b").