We present a newly developed facility, comprised of a combinatorial laser molecular beam epitaxy system and an in-situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). This facility aims at accelerating the materials research in a highly efficient way, by advanced high-throughput film synthesis techniques and subsequent fast characterization of surface morphology and electronic states. Compared with uniform films deposited by conventional methods, the so-called combinatorial thin films will be beneficial to determining the accurate phase diagrams of different materials due to the improved control of parameters such as chemical substitution and sample thickness resulting from a rotarymask method. A specially designed STM working under low-temperature and ultra-high vacuum conditions is optimized for the characterization of combinatorial thin films, in an XY coarse motion range of 15 mm × 15 mm and with sub-micrometer location precision. The overall configuration as well as some key aspects like sample holder design, scanner head, and sample/tip/target transfer mechanism are described in detail. The performance of the device is demonstrated by synthesizing high-quality superconducting FeSe thin films with gradient thickness, imaging surfaces of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, Au (111), Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (BSCCO) and FeSe. In addition, we have also obtained clean noise spectra of tunneling junctions and the superconducting energy gap of BSCCO. The successful manufacturing of such a facility opens a new window for the next generation of equipment designed for experimental materials research. The emergence of exotic electronic states relies on an exact control of physical parameters, both in synthesis and manipulation The combinatorial method first introduced by Hanak in 1960s supplies a high-throughput approach to synthesize samples efficiently Overcoming the drawbacks of nonlinear and uncontrollable composition gradients in the first-and discrete stoichiometric ratio in second-generation techniques, Combi-LMBE technique could provide one or two-dimensional composition-spread films by a horizontal mobile mask system. Most established Combi-LMBE systems use reciprocating motion of the mask by a precisely controlled motor Besides the challenges in synthesis, the lack of proper characterization tools for the combi-film severely limits the wide applications of the high-throughput methods in materials research, where a probe with high spatial resolution is necessary. There are some commercial instruments available, e.g. wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS) There are quite a few of MBE-STM systems that have been implemented previously In this paper, we describe the design, the build, and the performance testing of a newly developed combined system of Combi-LMBE and low-temperature ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling microscopy (LT-UHV-STM). The system aims at synthesizing combi-films and characterizing their surface morphology and electronic states in-situ with high efficiency and precision. Compared with the commercial Combi-LMBE system, we used a rotatable circular mask to avoid the accumulative error from reciprocating motion of the flat mask. Within the STM unit, we designed a scanner head with large XY coarse motion range (15 mm × 15 mm) and a positioning resolution which is better than 1 μm at liquid helium temperature. In order to test the performance of the system, we deposited FeSe film with gradient thickness by utilizing the rotation mask. The thickness-gradient samples show high quality and nearly linear-in-position thickness ranging from 28 nm to 280 nm, with the superconducting transition temperature between 8 and 10 K. Besides, we obtained high-quality images on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), Au (111), Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (BSCCO), and FeSe surfaces, as well as dI/dV spectra of BSCCO. The system exhibits good stability both, with respect to combi-film deposition and STM measurements. Its features should prove especially advantageous in superconductivity research. Figure To obtain ultra-high vacuum, a multi-level pump system is used including mechanical pumps, turbomolecular pumps, sputter-ion pumps, titanium-sublimation pumps (TSP), and non-evaporable getter (NEG) pumps. A 1600 L/s turbo-molecular pump is installed between the RTTA and the Combi-LMBE chambers, which pumps these two chambers as well as the STM chamber. Another 300 L/s turbomolecular pump, responsible for pumping the preparation and the load-lock chambers, is mounted under the preparation chamber. In order to reach a higher vacuum level, the outlet of these two turbo-molecular pumps is connected to the buffer chamber, with an 80 L/s turbo-molecular pump and a 40 m 3 /h mechanical pump installed to achieve a vacuum better than 10 -5 Torr. When carrying out the STM characterization, all the turbo-molecular pumps and mechanical pumps are turned off to minimize vibrations. Instead, the UHV environment is maintained by three ion pumps of 400 L/s (integrated with TSP and Cryoshroud), 300 L/s (integrated with NEG) and 300 L/s (integrated with NEG), which are mounted under the Combi-LMBE chamber, the RTTA chamber and the STM chamber, respectively. Three 5 kW heaters are used to bake the system (see the rounded light brown colored parts in Fig. As described in the previous section, this is a complex system which has six chambers with multiple functions. Thus, it is crucial to carry out a reliable protocol for a smooth transfer of sample, substrate, tip, and target among different chambers. Figure All the samples/substrates/tips mounted on the holder can be loaded on the storage carousel from the load-lock chamber, and then be further delivered into the preparation chamber by pushing the transfer rod. A wobble stick installed on the preparation chamber is used to move the samples/substrates/tips to the manipulator or the other storage carousel on the RTTA arm. The other two main functional chambers connected to the RTTA chamber have wobble sticks as well. Those wobble sticks fulfil samples/substrates/tips transfer between the RTTA storage carousel and the manipulator or the STM scanner head. The transfer of target is straightforward. As shown in the insert in Figure The circumferential arrangement of the three main function chambers around the RTTA chamber presents three advantages: 1) Higher space efficiency, making the whole system more compact; 2) Higher transfer efficiency, so samples/substrates/tips transfer can be realized between any two chambers; 3) Extendibility, permitting new functional chambers to be easily added to the spare ports of the RTTA chamber. Both the sample holder and the sample holder dock designs are critical for this system. Special requirements have been considered for extended function. First of all, the sample holder should be compatible with other systems, so that other in-situ characterizations can be done as well. Secondly, the sample holder should be able to bear a wide temperature range (from liquid helium temperature up to 1000 • C). Thirdly, physical and chemical properties, including thermal and electrical conductivities, chemical stability in high oxygen environment at high temperature, etc. should be taken into account. Finally, we must position the sample holder precisely in different chambers, so that reliable and reproducible data can be obtained. We have chosen the popular flag-style shape for the sample holder as can be seen in Fig. The temperature of the sample holder is measured by infrared thermometer, mounted on the Combi-LMBE chamber focusing at an angle of 45 degrees. For the STM sample holder dock (Figure The Combi-LMBE chamber is equipped with three customized UHV stages (from UHV design Ltd.), ). Thus, we can obtain a unit-cell thin film with composition continuously varying from A to B. Repeating the above procedure, one can get combi-films of desired thickness. For example, a 100 nm thick (00l)-oriented (La,Ce)CuO 4 film (the c-axis lattice constant ~ 1.2 nm) needs more than 80 periods. Following a similar procedure, one can also get thickness-gradient samples or superlattices by controlling the motion sequence of masks and targets using a home-made LabVIEW program. The STM chamber is equipped with a commercial bath-type cryostat, a double layer cold room and a home-made scanner. The cryostat consists of two vessels, i.e. a 17 L liquid nitrogen vessel and a 4 L liquid helium vessel. The cold room is mounted at the bottom of the cryostat to isolate from ambient thermal radiation. The STM scanner head is hung inside the 4 K shield by three Inconel springs which provide vibrational isolation from the cryostat. The total weight of the scanning module is 760 g. The resonant frequency of the suspended scanning module is approximately 2.7 Hz. Eddy current damping is provided by 8 SmCo-magnets mounted on the bottom of the scanner head as shown in Fig. Distinguishing the system from traditional STM systems at both low temperature and room temperature, as shown in Fig. We report the design, assembly and performance of an advanced Combi-LMBE-STM facility, intended to accelerate the materials research by integrating high-throughput film synthesis, in-situ surface morphology and electronic states characterization. Compared to traditional film deposition techniques, combi-films can be deposited with parameters like chemical substitution and sample thickness varied continuously in a single run. A rotary mask is used in our system to reduce the accumulative error from conventional reciprocating motion. After the deposition, the samples are transferred to the specially designed STM chamber for in-situ characterization of surface morphology and electronic states. For compatibility with the combi-film, a large range closed-loop XY coarse positioning module was developed to realize motion in a range of 15 mm × 15 mm but with sub-micro meter precision. With this feature, we can measure the evolution of surface morphology and electronic states as a function of varying parameter (composition or thickness) with high efficiency. The performance of the whole system is demonstrated by the growth of high-quality FeSe film with thickness gradient, and topographic images of various samples including HOPG, Au (111), BSCCO single crystal and FeSe thin film. Clean current noise spectra of the tunneling junction and dI/dV spectrum of BSCCO have also been obtained. We expect that this system will be ideal for a systematic research on superconducting materials. 