Two-dimensional Indium Selenide (InSe) has attracted extensive attention recently due to its recordhigh charge carrier mobility and photoresponsivity in the fields of electronics and optoelectronics. Nevertheless, the mechanical properties of this material in the ultra-thin regime have not been investigated yet. Here, we present our efforts to determine the Young's modulus of thin InSe (~1-2 layers to ~40 layers) flakes experimentally by using buckling-based methodology. We find that the Young's modulus has a value of 23.1 ± 5.2 GPa, one of the lowest values reported up to date for crystalline two-dimensional materials. This superior flexibility can be very attractive for different applications, such as strain engineering and flexible electronics. Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors have attracted the interest of a great deal of the scientific communities due to their interesting electrical and optical properties that make them promising candidates for future electronic and optoelectronic applications. 2D thin InSe flakes were isolated by mechanical exfoliation from high quality single crystalline InSe ingots grown by Bridgman method. This is the authors' version (post peer-review) of the manuscript: Qinghua Zhao et al Nanoscale, 2019,11, 9845-9850 https://doi.org/10.1039/C9NR02172H That has been published in its final form: https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2019/nr/c9nr02172h substrate, we performed a three-dimensional axisymmetric finite element analysis (FEA) using the software COMSOL Multiphysics (version 5.1). The results shown in Fig. In conclusion, we reported the experimental value of the Young's modulus of thin InSe flake using the buckling metrology method. We find an ultralow value in the range of 18 -28 GPa, which makes thin InSe one of the most flexible two-dimensional materials. This low Young's modulus value can result highly valuable in applications such as force sensing (as the same force will produce a larger deformation in InSe than in other 2D semiconductors) or flexible electronic applications (were a small mismatch between the Young's modulus of the substrate and the 2D semiconductor is required to avoid stress accumulation after several flexing cycles). Also, we calculate that such superior flexibility may facilitate more effective strain transfer from a polymeric substrate to InSe flakes deposited on top, making InSe a very interesting material for applications in future straintronic devices. Materials and sample fabrication. The high-quality InSe crystal was grown by Bridgman method. With the atomic ratio In:Se = 52:48, high purity indium (99.9999%) and selenium (99.9999%) elements are sealed into a quartz crucible under the high vacuum conditions (2×10 -5 Pa). Then the quartz crucible was transferred into the rocking furnace and kept swing for 48 h at 650 °C to mix the melt completely. Then a vertical Bridgman furnace with a temperature gradient of 10 °C/cm was used for crystal growth. Detailed characterization of the high-quality bulk materials can be found in Section 1 of the Supplementary Information. The elastomeric compliant substrate used in this work is commercially available polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) supplied by Gel-Pak (WF 4x Gel-Film), whose Young's modulus (Es = 492 ± 11 kPa) has been determined in our previous work. 