A stable suspension of nanoscale particles due to the Casimir force is of great interest for many applications such as sensing, non-contract nano-machines. However, the suspension properties are difficult to change once the devices are fabricated. Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is a phase change material, which undergoes a transition from a low-temperature insulating phase to a high-temperature metallic phase around a temperature of 340 K. In this work, we study Casimir forces between a nanoplate (gold or Teflon) and a layered structure containing a VO2 film. It is found that stable Casimir suspensions of nanoplates can be realized in a liquid environment, and the equilibrium distances are determined, not only by the layer thicknesses but also by the matter phases of VO2. Under proper designs, a switch from quantum trapping of the gold nanoplate ("on" state) to its release ("off" state) as a result of the metal-to-insulator transition of VO2, is revealed. On the other hand, the quantum trapping and release of a Teflon nanoplate is found under the insulator-to-metal transition of VO2. Our findings offer the possibility of designing switchable devices for applications in micro-and nano-electromechanical systems. Micro-and nano-electromechanical systems (MEMS and NEMS), which integrate electrical and mechanical functionality on the micro-and nano-scales, have attracted enormous attention 1,2 . Thanks to small sizes, the MEMS and NEMS exhibit low mass, high mechanical resonance frequencies and quantum effects, leading to a broad range of applications such as biological/chemical detections 3 , accelerometers In order to active modulate the Casimir effect, one straight way is to change the dielectric properties of materials under external means The system in this work is schematically shown in Fig. (1) where h is the reduced Planck constant, A is the in-plane area, k is the parallel wavevector, k 3 = k 2 + ε liq (iξ)ξ 2 /c 2 is the vertical wavevector, c is the speed of light in vacuum, ε liq (iξ) is the permittivity of the intervening liquid evaluated with imaginary frequency ω = iξ, R 1,2 is the 2 × 2 reflection matrix for layered structures, having the form where r j with j=1 and j=2 are the reflection coefficients for the upper and lower layered structures, and the superscripts s and p correspond to the polarizations of transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) modes, respectively. Note that the temperature T for Eq. (1) equals 0 K and it is an effective approximation as the separation d is smaller than 1 μm for finite temperatures where α = s and p, L j is the thickness of the nanoplate, is the permittivity of the nanoplate. The subscripts of r α m,n represent the light is incident from the medium m to n (0 means the liquid). Alternatively, the reflection coefficients for layered structures can be calculated by a transfer matrix method. The general form is given as r = M 21 /M 11 , where M 21 and M 11 are the elements of the M matrix where the transmission matrix D j,j+1 is given as: where η = ε j (iξ)K j+1 /(ε j+1 (iξ)K j ) for p-polarization and η = K j+1 /K j for s-polarization. The propagation matric in the j-th layer (for both s and p polarizations) is written as: For example, we have N = 2 for the multilayered substrate in Fig. Figure 1(b) shows the permittivity for different materials, where the used models and parameters are given in the Appendixes. The dielectric function of VO 2 changes dramatically under different temperatures. For temperature T > T c , VO 2 is in the metallic phase and it acts as a poor metal. For T < T c , it is in the insulating phase (or called semiconducting phase), and the corresponding dielectric function nearly matches that of intrinsic silicon at low frequency Now we consider the Casimir forces as the substrate is composed of a VO 2 film and Teflon (see Fig. To understand the switch transition from the "on" to the "off" state, the contour plots of Casimir pressure are shown in Fig. As d increases further to 150 nm, the Casimir pressure turns out to be dominantly attractive in Fig. The pressure maps between the metallic and insulating phases are almost identical for large energy (e.g., >2 eV), whereas the discrepancy manifests at low energy. The results indicate that the attractive component appears only at low frequency and small k vector for metallic VO 2 , where the field cannot penetrate the metal In addition to the thickness of VO 2 film, the top-layer Teflon can also play a significant role in the Casimir effect. The plots of Casimir pressure via the thicknesses of the coating Teflon L T are shown in Figs. The active control of the low-refractive-index nanoplates can also be significant in many applications. Inspiring by the work As the separation increases, the attractive interaction from Teflon/bromobenzene/Teflon can be dominant instead, resulting in a stable Casimir trapping. To verify the design, the Casimir pressure is given quantitatively in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) as a function of separation. Interestingly, the Casimir pressure shows a long-range repulsive behavior for the metallic VO 2 , which corresponds to the "off" state. The repulsion pressure becomes stronger as the thickness L V enlarges from 2 to 6 nm. For L V = 2 nm, a Casimir equilibria and strong restoring forces can be found when VO 2 is in the insulating phase. Therefore, the quantum trapping and release of a Teflon nanoplate can be achieved under the insulator-to-metal transition of VO 2 . As the thickness is 4 nm, the restoring force decreases and the trapping stiffness drops considerably. The calculation results indicate that the Casimir pressure is quite sensitive to the thickness of VO 2 . Due to the low density of Teflon (2.1 g/cm 3 ), the pressure F GB /A for the Teflon nanoplate is about 0.6 mPa, which is reduced significantly compared with those of gold nanoplates. To achieve the phase transition of VO 2 , the temperatures of the devices need to be changed. We assume that the dielectric functions of the gold and Teflon are temperature-independent. For organic liquids, the change of refractive index due to the temperature where ξ is replaced by discrete Matsubara frequencies ξ n = 2π k b T h n(n = 0, 1, 2, 3 . . .), k B is the Boltzmann's constant and the prime denotes a prefactor 1/2 for the term n=0. The Casimir pressures under different temperatures are shown in Figs. In a real configuration, the position of a nanoplate has a fluctuation around the equilibrium distances due to the Brownian motion. To evaluate the effect of Brownian motion, the total energy of the suspended nanoplate should be known, which are written as U , where E c is the Casimir energy given by Eq. [1], E g = ρ p gL p Ad and E b = -ρ liq gL p Ad are respectively the energies caused by the gravity and buoyancy 52 , ρ p and L p represent the density and thickness of the suspended nanoplate. The coefficient Λ is the parameter depending on the gravity projection. For type I configuration (see the inset of Fig. In summary, the Casimir forces between a nanoplate and a layered structure containing VO 2 films are investigated. In a liquid-separated environment, not only the magnitude of Casimir forces can be modified, but also the sign could be switched (e.g., from attraction to repulsion), due to the phase-transition of VO 2 . Moreover, a stable Casimir suspension of nanoplates and its tunability are revealed. For a gold nanoplate, a switch from the quantum trapping to its release is obtained under the metal-to-insulator transition of VO 2 . In addition, the quantum trapping and release of a Teflon nanoplate are demonstrated with a complementary design. The switching performances due to the layer thicknesses, gravitation and temperatures are discussed as well. Theoretically, the bromobenzene can be substituted by other highrefractive-index liquids (e.g., glycerol and styrene S. E. Lyshevski, MEMS and NEMS: systems, devices, and structures (CRC press, 2018). 2 H. G. Craighead, Science 290, 1532 (2000). 3 K. Eom, H. S. Park, D. S. Yoon, and T. Kwon, Phys. Rep. 503, 115 (2011).