We study superconducting properties of the bulk states of a doped topological insulator. We obtain that the hexagonal warping stabilizes the nematic spin-triplet superconducting phase with Eu pairing and the direction of the nematic order parameter which opens the full gap is the ground state. This order parameter exhibits non-BCS behavior. The ratio of the order parameter to the critical temperature of ∆(0)/Tc differs from the BCS ratio. It depends on the chemical potential and the value of the hexagonal warping. We discuss the relevance of the obtained results for the explanation of the experimental observations. The non-trivial band structure of topological insulators brings fascinating phenomena such as robust gapless surface states and 'topological' electromagnetic response There is a lot of experimental evidence for the nematic superconductivity with the E u pairing in doped topological insulators From the first sight, the origin of the nematic superconductivity in the doped topological insulators is a mystery. In their seminal work 3 , Fu and Berg show that the triplet superconducting order parameter with A 1u representation is always favorable in comparison to the nematic or-der with E u representation and competes with the usual s-wave pairing in topological insulators. Later, it was argued that electron-electron repulsion in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 favors A 1u order In this letter, we calculate the phase diagram of the doped topological insulator with attractive coupling between charge carriers. Following the approach of Ref. We use the low energy Hamiltonian of the bulk states of topological insulator in the k • p model where s i and σ i (i = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices, s i acts in the spin space, σ i acts in the orbital space p = (P 1 , P 2 ), k = (k x , k y ) is the momentum, 2m is a single electron gap, μ is the chemical potential, v is the Fermi velocity in the (ΓK,ΓM ) plane, and v z is the Fermi velocity along ΓZ direction. Hamiltonian Eq.( x -3k x k 2 y )σ z s z , appears in the Hamiltonian It obeys an inversion symmetry P H(k)P = H(-k), where the inversion operator is We apply a U -V model to describe the electronelectron interaction. We write down the corresponding term in the Hamiltonian as Here n i = k,s c † iks c iks and c † iks (c iks ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with momentum k and spin projection s, index i = 1, 2 corresponds to different orbitals P i . The potentials U and V correspond to the intraorbital and interorbital coupling, respectively. We consider the case of attractive interaction, that is, U, V > 0. Inelastic neutron scattering measurements in Sr 0.1 Bi 2 Se 3 reveal that interorbital electronphonon coupling can exceed intraorbital one V > U PARAMETERS. In Ref. The order parameter ∆1 is even under inversion, while ∆2 , ∆3 and ∆4 are odd under this inversion. The nematic phase, that observed in many experiments, corresponds to the vector order parameter ∆4 = (∆ 4x , ∆ 4y ) = ∆ 4 (n x , n y ) in E u representation. Here vector n = (n x , n y ) = (cos θ, sin θ) shows a direction of the nematicity. The hexagonal warping affects the gap in the spectrum for the nematic superconductor where superconducting susceptibilities are (k B =1). the integration is taken over all k. Here α = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4x, 4y, notation mα represents the matrix structure of the superconducting order parameter in the αphase that given in Table . I: m0 = s 0 , m1 = σ x , m2 = σ y s z , m3 = σ z , m4x = σ y s x , m4y = σ y s y . Operator T r[...] is the trace of a matrix and P r k = j=1,2 |φ j,k φ j,k |, φ j,k is an eigenvector of the Hamiltonian, and ξ k is the quasiparticle spectrum in the normal state, (H 0 + H w )φ j,k = ξ k φ j,k . Since k z enters to integrands only with factor v z , integrals (3) are proportional to 1/v z and the phase diagram does not depend on v z . We also compute the system free energy at T = 0 for different order parameter symmetries to verify the results obtained with the help of the superconducting susceptibilities. The phase diagrams near T = T c and T = 0 are the same. Note, that values of the order parameters of competing phases are finite at the boundaries of the phase diagram. A numerical analysis of Eqs. ( We introduce dimensionless parameters: chemical potential μ/m, hexagonal warping λm 2 /v 3 , and interaction U/V . The computed phase diagram of the system is shown in Fig. The phase diagram in the plane (λm 2 /v 3 , μ/m) is shown in Fig. The nematic pairing ∆4 : (c k1↑ c -k2↑ + c k1↓ c -k2↓ ) PAIRING. Here we calculate the absolute value ∆ of the nematic order parameter ∆4 = ∆(0, 1). We choose the Nambu basis as and the superscript t means transposition. In this basis the mean-field Hamiltonian of the topological insulator with the nematic superconducting order can be written as where τ i is the Pauli matrix in the electron-hole space. Taking in mind that in terms of the creation-annihilation operators the nematic order corresponds to c 1σ c 2σ pairing where i (k) is the i-th eigenvalue of H BdG . We compute ∆(T ) by minimizing Ω. This calculations reveal that the ratio ∆(0)/T c is not a constant in contrast to the s-wave BCS superconductivity and depends on the chemical potential and the warping, see Fig. 3 for all range of temperatures and is almost independent of the value of hexagonal warping. In Ref. VI. DISCUSSION. We show that the existence of the hexagonal warping can explain the experimental observations of the E u superconducting pairing in the doped topological insulators if the dimensionless parameters λm 2 /v 3 and μ/m are not small. In the undoped Bi 2 Se 3 , the chemical potential lies near the band edge μ/m = 1.3 and the strength of the warping is estimated as λm 2 /v 3 = 0.11 The gap in the energy spectrum 2 ∆ relates to the order parameter as ∆ = ∆λk 3 F /μ when ∆ v/k F , where k F is the Fermi momentum in the normal state in ΓK direction. In Ref. 15 the superconducting gap in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 was estimated as ∆ ≈ 0.256 meV in sample with T c ∼ 3K. If we take typical values for the nematic superconductivity λm 2 /v 3 = 0.5 and μ/m = 3 (see Fig. The Anderson theorem is valid in the case of considered topological superconductivity We suggest a possible mechanism of the ground-state nematic superconductivity with the spin-triplet E u pairing which observed in doped topological insulators. We show that the hexagonal warping is an essential feature for the realization of the nematic superconductivity. The nematic superconductivity has a non-BCS behavior of the order parameter. In particular, the ratio of the order parameter at T = 0 to the critical temperature is non-universal and depends on the chemical potential and warping.