We demonstrate excitation of phononic frequency combs in a Bulk Acoustic Wave system at a temperature of 20mK using a single tone low power signal source. The observed ultra low power threshold is due to a combination of very high quality factor of 4.2 × 10 8 and relatively strong nonlinear effects. The observed repetition rate of the comb varies from 0.7 to 2Hz and spans over tens of Hertz. The demonstrated system is fully excited via piezoelectricity and does not require mode spectra engineering and external optical or microwave signals. It is shown that the comb profile significantly depends on geometry of excitation and detection electrodes. Observed strong Duffing nonlinearity below the generation threshold suggests that the system is a phononic analogue to Kerr frequency combs excited in monolithic optical microresonators. The ultra-low power regime opens a way of integrating this phononic system with quantum hybrid systems such as impurity defects and superconducting qubits. Photonic frequency comb generators are an important tool used for many scientific applications allowing to couple distant parts of frequency spectrum To excite frequency combs at low power levels, one needs a system with low losses and strong nonlinear a) Electronic mail: maxim.goryachev@uwa.edu.au effects. For these reasons, in this work, we employ a phonon trapping 29 SC (Stress Compensated) cut The experimental setup used in this work is shown in Fig. In the first experiment, the system response in terms of signal Power Spectral Density (PSD) S(f ) is measured as a function of the pump frequency f p in the vicinity of the acoustic resonance f s for the constant signal power P . The result is presented in Fig. The same threshold in comb generation is observed by varying the incident power for the fixed excitation frequency f p ≈ f c , which is shown in Fig. In addition to the PSD of the transmitted signal, one may measure transmission directly in terms of scattering parameters S 21 . For this the signal source and the FFT analyzer are replaced with a network analyzer. For this kind of measurement, one sweeps the frequency of the pump signal and measures the ratio of the transmitted and incident wave. To avoid any distortion due to ringing effect, the sweep time for one trace is taken to be 30 minutes. The result is shown in Fig. (2) (2) ity below the generation threshold that can be seen even for the lowest excitation power. This observation draws an analogy with the photonic frequency comb based on Kerr nonlinearity (due to the third-order χ To understand the comb generation effects in the given acoustic system, one may draw certain analogies and point out some differences with the optical counterparts. Based on the nonlinear elastic equations for a phonon trapping cavity (see Appendix A), one may deduce an equation of motion for a complex envelope of the displacement signal U x (z) (displacement along in-plane co- ordinate x propagating along the thickness coordinate z): Here Ω is a scaled resonance frequency, κ is a loss coefficient, F is a complex amplitude of external excitation, and α and γ are frequency scaled stiffness and nonlinear coefficients. The right-hand side of this equation consists of the following terms: resonance frequency (complex and real parts, i.e. damping and central frequency), dispersion term, nonlinear Duffing term and external forcing. This equation is almost identical to the LugiatoLefever equation To understand the relationship between two types of resonances in the system, we consider a simplified model of a Bulk Acoustic Cavity with additional parasitic capacitance. Such capacitance arises due to excitation electrodes in all types of BAW devices. For an external signal it is composed of parasitic bypass short-circuiting mechanical resonances. To capture the effect of this capacitance and demonstrate how it leads to two mode dynamics of the system, we employ the well known Butterworthvan Dyke model of a BAW device shown in Fig. where q x is a charge on equivalent mechanical capacitor, q 0 is a charge on shunt capacitor and V x is a voltage across the device. Equivalently, the system may be described as follows: where Resonance of the system (3) can be understood as an equivalent voltage resonance or antiresonance: one imposes voltage v i over the plate and detect the current i x . It corresponds to poles of the 3×3 matrix on the left-hand side of this system. The other type of resonance is an equivalent current corresponding to the situation when one injects current and detects voltage. This situation corresponds to zeros of the 3 × 3 matrix on the left hand side. The frequency difference between the two increases with increasing shunt capacitance. This is demonstrated in Fig. x into the second equation of motion in system (3) and simulate the resulting system of nonlinear equations. The simulation is done in the time domain, Power Spectral Densities (PSDs) are calculated for steady state regimes. Stability of the solutions is verified by changing time steps and tolerances of the simulations. The two loss rates are chosen to be much less than g, i.e. γ i = 10 -6 ω 0 and γ i = 10 -4 ω 0 . An external signal is pumped at frequency ω 0 . Note should be taken that all simulation parameters are chosen for demonstration purposes and only roughly correspond to the parameters of the actual system. The resulting PSDs for different values of scaled coupling g/ω 0 are presented in Fig. It has to be emphasised that the comb generation cannot be related to spurious mode coupling. The mode spectrum of the quartz BAW resonators of this kind is well known both from theoretical calculations As suggested above, the observed comb generation is related to the anti-resonance phenomenon, and thus, on the system response should significantly depends on the geometry of the excitation electrodes. To verify this statement the system has been excited with a different type of antenna. In the previous results, the system was excited using L-shaped asymmetric probes. A qualitatively different result is observed when both probe antennas have a metallic disk (1cm diameter sticking 4mm from the copper surface) at their end which is shown in Fig. In summary, experimentally demonstrated tion of ultra-low threshold phononic frequency combs in a cryogenic environment. The result is achieved at very low acoustic loss and strong nonlinearities. The comb generation is supported by the anti-resonance phenomenon due to electrodes that is demonstrated by numerical simulation. The comb profile could be engineered with the electrode geometry. On the other hand the method does not require special designs of mode spectra or external microwave or optical signals. The system demonstrates similarities with optical Kerr effect frequency comb generators based on optical microresonators. Because of its ultra low power, the system becomes compatible with quantum hybrid systems This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Grant No. CE170100009. of the main component of displacement u x , cross nonlinearities between displacements in different directions (all second order). It is widely accepted that the third order nonlinearities in terms of EOMs are the dominant for solids where Ω is a scaled resonance frequency, κ is the loss coefficient, F is a complex amplitude of external excitation, α and γ are frequency scaled stiffness and nonlinear coefficients. The right-hand side of this equation consists of following terms: resonance frequency (complex and real parts, i.e. damping and central frequencies), dispersion term, nonlinear Duffing term and external forcing. Equation (A1) describing spatial and temporal evolution of nonlinear acoustic excitation is analogous to the LugiatoLefever equation 42 used to describe Kerr frequency combs in optical microresonators where E is the complex amplitude of the electrical field. Similar to acoustic equation (A2), the right-hand side of the LugiatoLefever equation consists of resonance frequency (complex and real parts, i.e. damping and central frequencies), dispersion, nonlinear Kerr and external forcing terms. The major difference between the photonic and phononic nonlinear equations (A3) and (A2) is the nonlinear term where one is written in terms of the complex amplitude E and the other is written in terms of the first spatial derivative of the complex amplitude U . The latter arises due to the fact that the nonlinearity originates from the strain rather than displacement itself.