We report the pressure (pmax 1.5 GPa) evolution of the crystal structure of the Weyl semimetal T d -MoTe2 by means of neutron diffraction experiments. We find that the fundamental noncentrosymmetric structure T d is fully suppressed and transforms into a centrosymmertic 1T structure at a critical pressure of pcr ∼ 1.2 GPa. This is strong evidence for a pressure induced quantum phase transition (QPT) between topological to a trivial electronic state. Although the topological QPT has strong effect on magnetoresistance, it is interesting that the superconducting critical temperature Tc, the superfluid density, and the SC gap all change smoothly and continuously across pcr and no sudden effects are seen concomitantly with the suppression of the T d structure. This implies that the Tc, and thus the SC pairing strength, is unaffected by the topological QPT. However, the QPT requires the change in the SC gap symmetry from non-trivial s +-to a trivial s ++ state, which we discuss in this work. Our systematic characterizations of the structure and superconducting properties associated with the topological QPT provide deep insight into the pressure induced phase diagram in this topological quantum material. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted a lot of attention due to their fascinating physics and promising functional applications MoTe 2 exhibits a 1T -T d structural phase transition, on warming, at T str ∼ 280 K Besides the enhancement of T c , pressure causes the suppression of the non-centrosymmetric orthorhombic T d structure, as it was reported by resistivity experiments High quality single crystals and polycrystalline samples were obtained by mixing of molybdenum foil (99.95 %) and tellurium lumps (99.999+%) in a ratio of 1:20 in a quartz tube and sealed under vacuum. The reagents were heated to 1000 o C within 10 h. They dwelled at this temperature for 24 h, before they were cooled to 900 o C within 30 h (polycrystalline sample) or 100 h (single crystals). At 900 o C the tellurium flux was spinned-off and the samples were quenched in air. The obtained MoTe 2 samples were annealed at 400 o C for 12 h to remove any residual tellurium. High pressure neutron diffraction experiments on T d -MoTe 2 were carried out at SNAP beamline of Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. SNS operates at 60 Hz, and SNAP instrument utilizes time of flight diffraction mode. The center wavelength was set to 2.1 Å, corresponding to an incident wavelength spectrum from 0.5 Å to 3.5 Å. Two banks of detectors cover +/-22.5 deg in angular range in and out of plane. Their center was placed at 50 deg scattering angle. This configuration limits the accessible Q-range, but provides increased counting statistics in the region of interest that is most relevant for discriminating between T d and 1T ' phases. Pressures up to 1.6 GPa were generated in a single wall piston-cylinder type of cell made of CuBe material, especially designed to perform neutron diffraction experiments under pressure. Daphne oil was used as a pressure transmitting medium. The pressure was always applied at room temperature, followed by cooling the sample to the base temperature (15 K) and carrying out temperature dependent measurements on warming. The pressure was measured by tracking the Raman spectrum of lead powder as a function of pressure. The diffraction experiments were done on the samples from the same batch as the ones, which we previously studied by μSR experiments Total scattering measurements were carried out on the XPD (28-ID-2) beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II), Brookhaven National Laboratory. A finely ground powder of MoTe 2 was prepared in an inert Argon chamber, and sealed in 1.02mm (OD) polyimide capillary. Diffraction patterns were collected in a Debye-Scherrer geometry with an X-ray energy of 67.13 keV (λ = 0.1847 Å) using a large-area 2D PerkinElmer detector (2048 2 pixels with 200 μm 2 pixel size). The detector was mounted with a sampleto-detector distance of 345 mm, to achieve a balance between q-resolution and q-range. The sample was measured at 100K and 300K using an Oxford CS-700 cryostream for temperature control, allowing ample time for the material to thermalize. The experimental geometry, 2θ range, and detector orientation were calibrated by measuring a polycrystalline nickel standard directly prior to data collection, with the experimental geometry parameters refined using the PyFAI program The orthorhombic (T d ) to monoclinic (1T ) structural phase transition in the MoTe 2 sample at ambient pressure was confirmed by the X-ray total scattering measurements, shown in Fig. Confirming the low temperature T d structure as well as the signature of the structural phase transition in MoTe 2 , we proceed with observations made by neutron scattering measurements under hydrostatic pressure. The most intense peak is (112) at d-spacing of 2.8 Å, which was monitored at various temperatures and pressures. The results are shown in Figure What is the significance of such a strong negative pressure effect on T d structure and the structural QPT in Weyl semimetal MoTe 2 ? Let us start with the fact that T d structure breaks inversion symmetry, while 1T is inversion symmetric. As low pressure as 1.2 GPa is sufficient to wipe out non-inversion symmetric T d phase. One common point of view in MoTe 2 , mostly supported by calculations, is that Weyl Fermions and their underlying non-trivial band topology, exist only in T d phase. Hence, the structural QPT between T d and 1T corresponds to the quantum phase transition between topologically nontrivial and a trivial band structure. One of the consequences of such a topological quantum phase transition is the strong suppression of the magnetoresistance with increasing pressure. For the pressure values p > p cr , MR is fully suppressed Although the topological QPT has a strong effect on MR according to which T c scales with the superconducting carrier density, one can understand the insensitivity of T c to topological QPT. Since there is only a subtle change in the Fermi surface (FS) topology where ∆ j is the pairing gap function on the j-th FS. A TSC is implied by ν = 0. Therefore, as previously discussed In conclusion, we studied the hydrostatic pressure evolution of a monoclinic 1T to orthorhombic T d structural phase transition temperature T str using neutron diffraction. The quantum phase transition from noncentrosymmetric T d to a centrosymmetric 1T structure is observed under pressure with the critical pressure of p cr ∼ 1.2 GPa. No obvious impact of such a QPT on SC critical temperature, the SC gap(s) and the superfluid density is observed, suggesting that only subtle changes take place in the Fermi surface across p cr despite the transition from a topological to a topological-trivial band structure. However, due to the recovery of inversion symmetry above p cr , the trivial s ++ superconducting state should be favoured over the topological s +-state. Hence, this system may likely be the first known example of a pressure induced change between topological (p < p cr ) and trivial (p > p cr ) SC states. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All data supporting the stated conclusions of the manuscript are in the paper. Additional data are available from the authors upon request. 