Majorana fermions is a central challenge in condensed-matter physics. One approach is to use the superconducting proximity effect (SPE) in heterostructures, where a topological insulator contacted with a superconductor hosts an effective p-wave pairing by the penetration of Cooper pairs across the interface. However, this approach suffers a difficulty in accessing the topological interface buried deep beneath the surface. Here, we propose an alternative approach to realize topological superconductivity without SPE. In a Pb(111) thin film grown on TlBiSe2, we discover that the Diraccone state of substrate TlBiSe2 migrates to the top surface of Pb film and obtains an energy gap below the superconducting transition temperature of Pb. This suggests that a BCS superconductor is converted into a TSC by the topological proximity effect. Our discovery opens a route to manipulate topological superconducting properties of materials. Topological superconductors (TSCs) are a peculiar class of superconductors where the nontrivial topology of bulk leads to the emergence of Majorana bound states (MBSs) within the bulk superconducting gap In this work, we present the possibility to realize TSCs by using the topological proximity effect Fabrication and Characterization of Pb film on TlBiSe 2 . The studies of SPE for generating TSCs have often employed a heterostructure consisting of a TI thin film as a top layer and a BCS superconductor as a substrate The QWSs in Pb thin films with various thickness on Si(111) have been well studied by spectroscopies and calculations Topological proximity effect. Next we clarify how the band structure of TlBiSe2 is influenced by interfacing with a Pb film. One may expect that there is no chance to observe the band structure associated with TlBiSe2 because the Pb film (17 ML ~ 5 nm) is much thicker than the photoelectron escape depth (~0.5-1 nm). Figure Alternatively, a calculation that uses a larger in-plane unit cell might be useful to achieve an approximate lattice match between Pb and TlBiSe2. It is noted here that the coherency of electronic states may play an important role for the observation of a coupling with the substrate (i.e. the TPE in this study) as in the case of other quantum composite systems involving metallic overlayer The next important issue is whether the Pb/TlBiSe2 heterostructure hosts superconductivity. To elucidate it, we first fabricated a thicker (22 ML) Pb film on TlBiSe2 and carried out ultrahigh-resolution ARPES measurements at low temperatures. Figure Since the superconductivity shows up on the Pb film, we now address an essential question whether the migrating Dirac-cone band hosts superconductivity. We show in Fig. The present results show that the superconducting gap opens on the entire FS originating from both the Pb-derived QWSs and the migrating Dirac-cone band (Fig. The emergence of an isotropic superconducting gap on the Dirac-cone FS suggests that the 2D topological superconductivity is likely to be realized, since this heterostructure satisfies the theoretically proposed condition for the effectively p-wave superconducting helical-fermion state One can view this effect as a conversion of a conventional superconductor (Pb film without topological SS) to a TSC (Pb film with topological SS) by interfacing. The present approach to realize 2D TSCs has an advantage in the sense that the pairing in the helical-fermion state (and the MBS as well) is directly accessed by surface spectroscopies such as STM and ARPES. The superconducting helical fermions would be otherwise embedded deep at the interface and are hard to be accessed if the TPE does not occur. Moreover, the observed gap magnitude on the topological SS is comparable to that of the original Pb, unlike the SPE-induced gap which is usually smaller. This result tells us that the so-far overlooked TPE had better be seriously taken into account in many superconductor-TI hybrids. Also, the present study points to the possibility of realizing even wider varieties of 2D TSCs by using the TPE. It is noted that the topological states in Pb/TlBiSe2 are electrically shorted out by the metallic QWSs, unlike the case of some TI films on top of superconductors. This needs to be considered in the application because single conducting channel from the Dirac-cone states would be more preferable. In this regard, the present approach utilizing the TPE and the existing approach using the SPE would be complementary to each other. High-quality single crystals of TlBiSe2 were grown by a modified Bridgman method The film thickness was controlled by the deposition time at a constant deposition rate. The actual thickness was estimated by a comparison of ARPES-derived band dispersions with the band-structure calculations for free-standing multilayer Pb. electron analyzer equipped with a high-intensity He discharge lamp. After the growth of Pb thin film by evaporation, it was immediately transferred to the sample cryostat kept at T = 30 K in the ARPES chamber, to avoid the clusterization of Pb which is accelerated at room temperature (note that such clusterization hinders the detailed investigation of the surface morphology by atomic-force microscopy). We used the He-Ia resonance line (hn = 21.218 eV) to excite photoelectrons. The energy resolution of ARPES measurements was set to be 2-40 meV. The sample temperature was kept at T = 30 K during the ARPESintensity-mapping measurements, while T = 4 and 10 K for the superconducting-gap measurements. The Fermi level (EF) of the samples was referenced to that of a gold film evaporated onto the sample holder. Band calculations: First-principles band-structure calculations were carried out by a projector augmented wave method implemented in Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code 