Precise measurements of the thermodynamic critical field (Bc) in type-I noncentrosymmetric superconductor BeAu were performed by means of the muon-spin rotation/relaxation technique. The temperature evolution of Bc can not be described within the single gap scenario and it requires the presence of at least two different types of the superconducting order parameters. The selfconsistent two-gap approach, adapted for analysis of Bc(T ) behavior, suggests the presence of two superconducing energy gaps with the gap to Tc ratios 2∆/kBTc 4.52 and 2.37 for the big and the small gap, respectively. This implies that the superconductivity in BeAu is unconventional and that the supercarrier pairing occurs at various energy bands. BeAu is an old known superconductor with the transition temperature T c 3.2 K. Superconductivity in BeAu was originally discovered by Matthias in 1959, 1 i.e. just in two years after the formulation of the BCS theory. 2 In this short report, Matthias was noted the absence of a superconductivity in a pure Be and Au (Be was later found to have T c 26 mK, Ref. 3) and performed a search within the gold-rich site of the Be-Au phase diagram. The superconductivity was found to appear in a stoichiometric (i.e. 1:1 Be to Au ratio) BeAu sample. 1 Recently, the interest to BeAu was renewed. The previously published papers agreed that BeAu is characterised by an isotropic superconducting energy gap and, predominantly, by an s-wave spin-singlet pairing in the weak coupling regime. The TF-μSR experiments were performed in the intermediate state of BeAu superconducting sample, i.e. when the sample volume is separated on the normal state and the superconducting (Meissner) state domains. is shown in Fig. Bearing in mind the isotropic single gap behavior reported in Refs. 4,6, the initial analysis of B c (T ) dependence of BeAu was performed by means of the phenomenological α-model within the single s-wave gap approach. By taking into account the presence of multiple bands crossing the Fermi level, as is reported in de Haasvan Alphen experiments, Following Refs. 59-61, within the two-gap approach the coupled s-wave gap equations are described as: Here ∆ 1 (T ) and ∆ 2 (T ) are temperature evolutions of gaps within the band 1 and 2; n 1 and n 2 are the partial density of states for each band at the Fermi level (n 1 + n 2 = 1); V 11 (V 22 ) and V 12 (V 21 ) are the intraband and the interband interaction potentials, respectively. For simplicity, it is also assumed that the Debye frequency (ω D ) is the same for both bands. The thermodynamic critical field B c was determined from the normal state (F N ) and the superconducting state (F S ) free energy difference: 46 Considering the presence of two superconducting energy bands, the second term in the right-hand site of the above equation consists of two contibutions: Following Johnston, 56 the individual free energy components are further derived as: and (6) Here, ∆ 1 = ∆ 1 (T = 0) and ∆ 2 = ∆ 2 (T = 0) are the zero-temperature values of the superconducting enery gap. During the fit the following parameters were varied: B c (0), n 1 , V 11 , V 22 , V 12 , and V 21 . The fit requires solving two coupled nonlinear equation (Eq. 1). We used Mathcad 15.0 with the Levenberg-Marquardt non-linear equation solver. From the analysis of B c (T ) of BeAu within the twogap approach, the following important points emerge: (i) The partial density of states for the band(s), where the big superconducting energy gap opens, is almost twice as high as that for the band(s) with the small gap: n 1 2 • n 2 . The results of the band structure calculation, presented in Ref. 5, reveal that the partial density of states at the Fermi level is dominated by Be 2p , Au 5p, and Au 6p bands, so that n Au5p n Au6p 0.6 -0.7n Be2p . This suggests that the big gap may be opened in Be 2p and one of Au band (5p or 6p), while the other Au band (6p or 5p) carries the small superconducting gap. (ii) The zero-temperature values of the big and the small gaps were estimated to be ∆ 1 0.62 meV and ∆ 2 0.32 meV. The corresponding gap to T c ratios are: 2∆ 1 /k B T c 4.52 and 2∆ 2 /k B T c 2.37. Such values suggests strong-coupling within the first and weakcoupling within the second band, respectively. (iii) The interband coupling potentials V 12 0.321 and V 21 0.0727 have relatively high values. In particular, V 12 is comparable to V 22 and is even higher than V 11 . This suggests strong coupling between the bands, which also results in an almost identical temperature dependencies of the big [∆ 1 (T )] and the small [∆ 2 (T )] gap, see Fig. It is worth to note here that due to the noncentrosymmetric crystal structure of BeAu, the phase of the super-conducting order parameter may change between the different energy bands. In relation to the two s-wave gap behaviour reported here, both s ++ and s +-scenarios could be realised in BeAu. The above presented self-consistent model is, however, 'phase unsensitive' and does not allow to distinguish between them. An additional check could be performed by studying the influence of nonmagnetic impurities on the supercondcuting transition temperature. As shown in Refs. 65 and 66, the transition temperature T c in s +-superconductors is fast suppressed due to the pair-breaking promoted by interband impurity scattering, while it remains only marginally affected for s ++ materials. A series of T c and B c (T ) measurements of BeAu samples with a different amount of nonmagnetic impurities could be highly reliable and may help to clarify this question. To summarise, the precise measurements of the thermodynamic critical field B c in noncentrosymmetric BeAu superconductor were performed by means of the muonspin rotation/relaxation technique. The main results are the following: (i) Within the full temperature range studied, the superconductivity in BeAu remains of a type-I. No indications of type-II superconductivity for T 1.2 K and at least down to T 0.25 K was detected. (ii) The value of the thermodynamic critical field at T = 0 and the transition temperature T c were found to be B c (0) 26.04 mT and T c 3.232 K, in agreement with the previously published data. 