Reservoir computing is an emerging methodology for neuromorphic computing that is especially well-suited for hardware implementations in size, weight, and power (SWaP) constrained environments. This work proposes a novel hardware implementation of a reservoir computer using a planar nanomagnet array. A small nanomagnet reservoir is demonstrated via micromagnetic simulations to be able to identify simple waveforms with 100% accuracy. Planar nanomagnet reservoirs are a promising new solution to the growing need for dedicated neuromorphic hardware. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are neural networks (NN) that allow for feedback loops within the NN. Unlike conventional feedforward NNs that use only the current inputs, RNNs use current inputs in conjunction with the history of previous states to determine the network output. Reservoir computing (RC) Recently, spintronic devices exhibiting nanoscale magnetic phenomena have been developed that provide opportunities for applications in computing, especially in RC. Magnetic memory devices using magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) Various hardware RC implementations have been proposed The internal dynamics of the reservoir layer state are described by: where u(t) are the inputs, W in are the input weights, x(t) are the reservoir states, W res are the reservoir weights, and τ is the sample period where denotes the transpose, λ is the regularization factor, and I is the identity matrix. During testing, the actual reservoir output ŷ(t) is calculated as This work proposes a novel reservoir composed of a planar arrangement of nanomagnets each having perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). Fig. Information is input by stimulating individual nanomagnets or portions of the nanomagnet reservoir with external magnetic fields. The magnetodynamics within the reservoir propagate the input information non-linearly throughout the reservoir. The z components of the magnetizations of various nanomagnets are read electrically via MTJs. A complementary single layer circuit is used to perform vector-matrix multiplication on the magnetization values and output weights to obtain the output vector. Only this final layer needs to be adjusted to train the neural network, which may be performed with a memristor crossbar array (MCA) with current sense amplifiers at the output A reservoir layer based on planar nanomagnet arrays is simulated and trained with a simple waveform identification task. At each time step, the RC is tasked to determine whether a pair of inputs are from a square or triangle wave. These waves are quantized to two bits Immediately before every input, the z component of the magnetization of each nanomagnet is recorded as the reservoir state, x(t). At the end of the simulation, the output weights, W out , are calculated in a single calculation step, Eq. ( Micromagnetic simulations are performed with MuMax3 The nanomagnet reservoir was simulated with an input stream comprised of 25 triangle or square wave periods, with 6 input pairs per wave, for a total of 150 input pairs. 120 of these were used to train the output weights and the remaining 30 were used to test the RC. The reservoir identified the waveforms with 100% accuracy for both the training and testing data. Fig. RC is a methodology for neuromorphic computing wellsuited for dedicated hardware implementations in SWaPconstrained environments. This work presents a hardware implementation of an RC using a planar nanomagnet array that is demonstrated to identify simple waveforms with 100% accuracy. Further work will be done to prove that these reservoirs will be successful on more complex tasks with many inputs. Passive planar nanomagnet arrays are therefore a promising solution for dedicated neuromorphic hardware.