We numerically examine the dynamics of a skyrmion interacting with a two-dimensional periodic substrate under dc and biharmonic ac drives. We show that the Magnus force of the skyrmion produces circular orbits that can resonate with the ac drive and the periodicity of the substrate to create quantized motion both parallel and perpendicular to the dc drive. The skyrmion Hall angle exhibits a series of increasing and/or decreasing steps along with strongly fluctuating regimes. In the phase locked regimes, the skyrmion Hall angle is constant and the skyrmion motion consists of periodic orbits encircling an integer number of obstacles per every or every other ac drive cycle. We also observe phases in which the skyrmion moves at 90 • with respect to the driving direction even in the presence of damping, a phenomenon called absolute transverse mobility that can exhibit reentrance as a function of dc drive. When the biharmonic ac drives have different amplitudes, in the two directions we find regimes in which the skyrmion Hall angle shows a sign reversal from positive to negative, as well as a reentrant pinning effect in which the skyrmion is mobile at low drives but becomes pinned at higher drives. These behaviors arise due to the combination of the Magnus force with the periodic motion of the skyrmions, which produce Shapiro steps, directional locking, and ratchet effects. There are a number of systems that can be modeled effectively as a particle moving over a two-dimensional (2D) periodic substrate under a dc drive. Such systems include vortices in type-II superconductors interacting with 2D pinning arrays Under a dc drive, a particle experiencing a circular ac drive moving over a 2D periodic substrate can not only exhibit phase locking effects in the direction of drive, but in certain cases can move transverse to the dc drive, leading to a finite Hall angle due to the chiral nature of the motion Skyrmions driven over a one-dimensional (1D) periodic substrate under a combined dc and ac drive exhibit a number of phase locking phenomena including Shapiro steps, which occur when the ac and dc drives are parallel; however, due to the Magnus force, skyrmions can also show Shapiro steps in the velocity transverse to the drive In previous work, we examined skyrmions interacting with a 2D obstacle array under only dc driving, where we found a series of directional locking effects that depend upon the size of the obstacles or whether the pin-Fig. ning sites are attractive or repulsive We model a two-dimensional system of size L × L with periodic boundary conditions in the x and y directions containing a square array of obstacles with lattice constant a. We place a single skyrmion in the system and apply both a dc drive and a biharmonic ac drive which creates a circular motion of the skyrmion, as illustrated in Fig. Here α d is the damping term which aligns the velocities of the skyrmions with the net applied forces, while α m is the Magnus term which produces skyrmion velocities that are perpendicular to the net forces experienced by the skyrmion. The term F obs on the right represents the interaction force between skyrmions and obstacles, The obstacle potential energy is U o = C o e -(rio/ao) 2 , the potential strength is C o , the distance between skyrmion i and obstacle o is r io , and the obstacle radius is a o . We cut off the skyrmion obstacle interaction at r io = 2.0, since beyond this length the interaction is negligible. The obstacle density is fixed at 0.093/ξ 2 and the obstacle radius is fixed at a 0 = 0.65. The term F DC represents the dc driving force applied along the x direction, as indicated in Fig. Here, A and B are the ac drive amplitudes and ω 1,2 are the ac drive frequencies. In the first part of the work we fix A = B = 0.5 and ω 1 = ω 2 , and throughout the work we fix ω 1 = 2 × 10 -4 in inverse simulation steps. We measure the skyrmion velocity parallel, V , and perpendicular, V ⊥ , to the dc drive. In the absence of obstacles, strictly dc driving combined with the Magnus force causes the skyrmion to move at an intrinsic Hall angle of θ int sk = arctan(α m /α d ). When pinning or obstacles are present, the skyrmion Hall angle develops a drive dependence that can be measured using the ratio of the velocity transverse to the drive to the velocity parallel to the drive, θ sk = arctan V ⊥ / V . In Fig. In general, the locking steps arise due to a combination of effects. The first is the directional locking associated with the drive dependence of the skyrmion Hall angle that occurs in the presence of pinning and in the absence of ac driving In Fig. We next consider the effect on the velocity-force curves of varying the ac drive amplitude over the range A = 0.0 to A = 0.5 for a fixed driving frequency. Due to the very large number of different locking effects that arise, we summarize the results for only a few selected locking phases and disordered phases. In Fig. We next consider the case where the ac drive amplitudes are different in the two directions, A = B. In Fig. In Fig. We next consider the effect of holding the ac drive amplitudes fixed at A = B but varying the ac drive frequencies so that ω 1 = ω 2 . In Fig. In this work, we neglected temperature; however, thermal effects can be important in certain skyrmion systems. Thermal fluctuations can wash out directional phase locking, but in some cases they can also induce other types of phase locking effects We examined a skyrmion interacting with a 2D periodic array of obstacles under an applied dc drive and biharmonic ac drive, and find a rich variety of nonlinear dynamical effects due to the presence of the Magnus force and the velocity dependence of the skyrmion Hall angle. A biharmonic ac drive alone creates a circular skyrmion orbit in the absence of obstacles or a dc drive. Under only dc driving and in the presence of the periodic obstacles, the skyrmion passes through a series of directional locking phases due to the velocity dependence of the skyrmion Hall effect. When a finite biharmonic ac drive is included, we find that the velocity-force curves show a series of jumps and locking intervals in which the skyrmion motion locks to specific symmetry directions of the substrate. Within these locking phases, the skyrmion can encircle multiple obstacles during each ac drive cycle. We also observe regimes in which the skyrmion motion is disordered and the motion is not locked to a fixed direction. We find that the locking phases can be associated with both increases and decreases in the skyrmion Hall angle. Many of the locking phases are reentrant and recur repeatedly for increasing dc drive. In general, as the Magnus force increases, the skyrmion encircles a larger number of obstacles during each ac drive cycle, and for large Magnus forces, we observe a series of absolute transverse mobility phases in which the skyrmion moves at exactly 90 • with respect to the dc driving direction. We find reentrance in both the transverse mobility and the pinning phase. We show that it is possible to have oscillations in the transverse mobility where the skyrmion Hall angle switches between θ sk = -90 • and θ sk = 90 • . We also find that the transverse mobility can be enhanced when the two ac drives have different amplitudes or different frequencies so that the driving is no longer circular. This work was supported by the US Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Los Alamos National Laboratory is operated by Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U. S. Department of Energy (Contract No. 892333218NCA000001). N.P.V. acknowledges funding from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo -FAPESP (Grant 2018/13198-7).