High-index dielectric metasurfaces featuring Mie-type electric and magnetic resonances have been of a great interest in a variety of applications such as imaging, sensing, photovoltaics and others, which led to the necessity of an efficient large-scale fabrication technique. To address this, here we demonstrate the use of single-pulse laser interference for direct patterning of an amorphous silicon film into an array of Mie resonators. The proposed technique is based on laser-interference-induced dewetting. A precise control of the laser pulse energy enables the fabrication of ordered dielectric metasurfaces in areas spanning tens of micrometers and consisting of thousands of hemispherical nanoparticles with a single laser shot. The fabricated nanoparticles exhibit a wavelength-dependent optical response with a strong electric dipole signature. Variation of the pre-deposited silicon film thickness allows tailoring of the resonances in the targeted visible and infrared spectral ranges. Such direct and highthroughput fabrication paves the way towards a simple realization of spatially invariant metasurface-based devices. High-index materials, such as silicon (Si), have been established as an alternative to plasmonic materials in the field of nanophotonics. Even-though Si is a well-known and CMOS compatible material, Si metasurfaces are usually fabricated by complex lithographic techniques, such as electron beam lithography followed by reactive ion etching Direct patterning using high-peak-power laser interference has been previously shown as a suitable tool for large-area microstructuring of metals, 30-39 organic materials, In this paper, laser interference is applied for direct patterning of Si films. It is demonstrated that Si-based Mie-resonant metasurfaces can be fabricated in a single step by singlepulse laser interference. The obtained submicrometer Mie resonators are tailored via control of irradiation conditions and initial film thickness. The structural and spectral analysis of the fabricated metasurfaces is used for the evaluation of scalability and applicability of the proposed technique. We show that single-pulse laser interference is a technique for a direct and high-throughput fabrication of dielectric metasurfaces, and we introduce guidelines for its potential applications. The mechanism of laser interference patterning of thin films can be understood as a templated dewetting, but instead of pre-patterning by ion milling, In general, interference of electromagnetic waves appears when two or more coherent laser beams overlap with each other. For a number of beams N with the same optical frequency, the interference intensity profile can be expressed as follows: 55 where E 0i and E 0j represent the electric fields, k i and k j are the wavevectors, and φ i and φ j are the phases of the respective beams. The laser interference was realized using a picosecond laser with a pulse duration of τ = 300 ps and a wavelength λ = 532 nm, generated by a second-harmonic generation from a 1064 nm laser system, as shown in Figure By the increase of laser energy density F with respect to the material threshold, different nanostructures can be obtained. In this work, we will focus on the regime of Mie-resonant nanoparticles (Mie resonators), see Figure In the experimental demonstration, all four laser beams were incident at θ ≈ 41 • with respect to the surface normal of the sample, thus a submicrometer period P = 570 nm was obtained, which is sufficient for the aforementioned applications in the visible and near infrared spectral range (see Supporting Information, S2, for more details on angle tunability). The intensity peaks of the interference pattern correspond to hotspots, as indicated in Figure where θ is the equilibrium contact angle, γ f and γ s are the surface tensions of the film and the substrate, respectively. When heated to sufficiently high temperatures, the continuous film breaks into nanohole-like periodic structures, shown in Figure Furthermore, if the ablation threshold is reached, a part of the sample is locally ablated and some of the material gets redeposited on the surface. The redeposited particles are spread irregularly based on the chaotic nature of evaporation and are significantly smaller compared to the ordered elements of the metasurface, thus their influence on the optical response is negligible. The ablation does not have a prominent influence unless the majority of the material is evaporated, subsequently destroying the ordered metasurface. Properly chosen irradiation conditions result in a large-area Mie-resonant metasurface, see exemplary scanning electron microscope (SEM) image in Figure An essential advantage of direct laser interference patterning is the ability to obtain a relatively large area of periodic structures from a thin film or a bulk material by just a single laser pulse. In general, the envelope of the spatial energy distribution of the interference resembles the spatial energy distribution of the initial Gaussian beam, The development of the metasurface elements was investigated by observation of the central part of the patterned area while changing the applied laser energy density F , see Figure Increasing the laser energy density F , the photothermally induced heat is sufficient to melt the Si film within the whole range of the unit cell. At such condition, the surface of the Si film is discontinued and an array of round nanoparticles is formed due to the surface tension, as in the previously introduced model of templated solid-state dewetting. A challenge for direct laser interference patterning is the homogeneity over a large area. It is fundamentally limited by the Gaussian spatial energy distribution of the laser beam. Nevertheless, even without a complex beam shaping approach, a significant part of the patterned area is uniform. For example, the patterning with the laser energy density F = It is worth to note that a metasurface of tens of micrometers in lateral size is already applicable in Raman spectroscopy, fluorescence or refractometry measurements, and, if required, has the potential to be spatially extended further by a partial interference spot overlap. In the intent to access a large parameter set of Mie-resonant metasurfaces, the previously described methodology was repeated for amorphous Si films of different thickness h. In total, the Si film was deposited with the following thicknesses: 30 nm, 50 nm, 70 nm, and 90 nm. The patterning was carried out using the same experimental conditions (see Methods for more details on experimental setup). At each thickness h, the laser energy density F was gradually increased till the consecutive development of the Mie resonators. The process of the direct laser interference patterning is dependent on the film thickness h, as is the laser ablation of thin films using a single laser beam. the assumption of a homogeneous energy distribution along the film thickness h can be made. Next, an in-depth geometry analysis of the metasurfaces is performed. The high index metasurfaces were obtained with their elements varying in diameter D and height H, depending on the film thickness h and the laser energy density F . The geometry parameters after the patterning were determined by analysis of SEM images and complimentary AFM measurements (see Methods for more details). A typical measured cross-section of a unit cell is shown in Figure As can be visually identified in Figure where the volume of a single hemisphere V is equal to a certain fraction ξ of the film volume within the unit cell, V f = P 2 • h. Subsequently, the radius R of the Mie resonator can be defined by a function: in our case, with the period P being fixed and a cube-root relation to the film thickness h. Here, it should be noted that the volume fraction ξ is not equivalent to the efficiency of the patterning, meaning the amount (mass) of the material transformed into Mie resonators. The density of the porous amorphous Si is 5-25 % lower than the crystalline density, On a side note, in the necessity of having multiple metasurfaces with different-size elements on the same sample, one may want to control the radius R of the Mie resonators by changing the period P , i.e. changing the radiation wavelength λ or the incidence angle θ. The wavelength change can be achieved by using achromatic optical elements and different laser harmonics or a tunable-wavelength source. For more tunability of the angle of incidence θ one may consider a different interference setup like the beam splitter and mirrors setup, though it is less robust in the spatial and temporal alignment (further discussion on period tunability is in Supporting Information, S2). The optical response of Si film is wavelength-dependent, but even sharper spectral features appear after the patterning. This is demonstrated by the measured transmittance priorand post-patterning of a Si film with thickness h = 70 nm, see Figure Due to the sinusoidal interference intensity distribution, the sidewalls of the nanoholes are inclined and uneven across the surface, see the sketch in Figure The ED resonances originate from the collective polarization induced in the dielectric nanoparticle, while magnetic dipole (MD) resonances are driven by the electric field coupling to the displacement current loops. However, the latter are not as prominent when compared by the scattering efficiency Q scat (scattering cross-section normalized to geometric crosssection), because of a relatively short height H = D/2 and intrinsic Si losses. Moreover, a suppression of the ED scattering at λ ≈ 850 nm may relate to a non-scattering anapole mode. In perspective, the presented technique could be extended towards different and more complex shapes of the metasurface elements and their geometrical distribution by manipulation of phase, High repetition rates of pulsed lasers and speeds of high-accuracy positioning stages already allow processing speeds within the mass-production scale, up to 1 m 2 /min, 79 while the fabricated large-scale uniform metasurface could be equipped with local functionalities by the complimentary process of photothermal reshaping. We have introduced a single-step for the fabrication of Mie-resonant metasurfaces. For the first time, direct laser interference patterning has been applied for fabrication of high-index nanostructure arrays on a glass substrate. The area of the obtained metasurface spans across 10 2 -10 4 μm 2 and, subsequently, consists of thousands of polycrystalline Si nanostructures distributed in an ordered rectangular lattice with a period P = 570 nm. The technique is carried out using only a single 300 ps laser pulse, thus shows a very large throughput compared to other existing laser-assisted fabrication techniques. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the hemispherical Mie resonators can be tailored by the pre-selection of the initial Si film thickness h and control of the irradiation conditions. The variation of the film thickness allowed us to obtain Mie resonators with diameters D ranging from less than 260 nm to almost 400 nm, with their electric and magnetic resonances covering the visible and the near infrared spectral range. Last but not least, the technique is transferable to other high-index dielectrics, e.g. titanium dioxide (TiO 2 ) and gallium phosphide (GaP). The presented analysis serves as a strong building block in bridging the gap between high-index dielectric metasurfaces and their implementation in mass-produced devices. The experiments were done using a high-power picosecond laser (Atlantic HE, Ekspla, Ltd.) with a pulse duration of τ = 300 ps and a repetition rate of ν = 1 kHz. The fundamental wavelength λ = 1064 nm was transformed into its second harmonic λ = 532 nm to be in the high-absorption range of amorphous Si. The diameter of the Gaussian beam at the output was d out ≈ 1.9 mm at 1/e 2 , as measured with a CCD camera, but expanded by a factor 2 using an optical telescope. The laser beam was divided into multiple beams using a multi-spot diffractive optical element (DOE) with a 10 • full angle (HOLOEYE Photonics AG). The 1st order beams were directed to the sample plane by using a system composed of two plano-convex spherical lenses (L 1 = 100 mm and L 2 = 15 mm), while the 0th diffraction order and the higher order beams were blocked by a metal aperture. The laser power was controlled by an attenuator based on a polarizer, a beam splitter and a heat sink. The setup was used to pattern Si films of four different thicknesses: 30 nm, 50 nm, 70 nm, and 90 nm, which were fabricated on top of glass substrates by ion-beam deposition. The samples were positioned using a translation stage (Aerotech, Inc.). All of the experiments were carried out in ambient conditions. The spectral analysis was done with a plane-wave illumination using an inverted optical microscope system (Axio Observer D1, Carl Zeiss AG) with an integrated broad-band VIS/IR imaging spectrometer (iHR320, HORIBA Jobin Yvon GmbH). In addition, SEM images were taken (Helios NanoLab G3 UC, FEI Co.) and the surface topology was measured by an AFM with incorporated peak force tapping technology (Dimension Edge, Bruker Co.). The Raman spectra were taken using a commercially available confocal Raman system (WITec GmbH) equipped with a 785 nm laser. The light was focused onto the sample and the scattered light was collected with the same microscope objective (NA = 0.95). The measurements were taken with laser power of 1 mW and integration time of 1 s with 5 accumulations. Measured spectra were background corrected using the statistics-sensitive non-linear iterative peakclipping (SNIP) algorithm with 100 iterations. The transmittance was calculated using a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (Lumerical, Inc.). A 3D model of an infinite array of amorphous Si nanostructures was emulated by a unit cell with boundary conditions (PBC) on the sides and perfectly matched layers (PML) on the top and the bottom of the simulation domain. The unit cell was illuminated by a normally-incident linearly-polarized plane-wave source. Frequency domain field and power monitors were placed to record transmittance and reflectance. The Mie resonators were constructed as ideal hemispheres with a certain radius R. The intermediate regime of nanoholes was implemented by a sinusoidal layer, characterized by a period P in the transverse directions, a distance from the glass surface z, and an amplitude A of the sinusoidal wave. The refractive index of Si is given in Supporting Information, S1. The refractive index of glass was set to n = 1.46. The electromagnetic fields for the mode decomposition was calculated by a finite element method (COMSOL, Inc.). The scattering efficiency of various modes were computed from the current density (see Supporting Information, S5, for details).