Metal intercalation into layered topological insulator materials such as the binary chalcogenide Bi2X3 (X=Te or Se) has yielded novel two-dimensional (2D) electron-gas physics, phase transitions to superconductivity, as well as interesting magnetic ground states. Of recent interest is the intercalation-driven interplay between lattice distortions, density wave ordering, and the emergence of new phenomena in the vicinity of instabilities induced by intercalation. Here, we examine the effects of Cu-intercalation on the ternary chalcogenide Bi2Te2Se. We report the discovery, in Cu0.3Bi2Te2Se, of a periodic lattice distortion (PLD) at room temperature, together with a charge density wave (CDW) transition around Td = 220K. We also report, for the first time, a complete study of the CuxBi2Te2Se system, and the effect of Cuintercalation on crystal structure, phonon structure, and electronic properties for 0.0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5. Our electron diffraction studies reveal strong Bragg spots at reciprocal lattice positions forbidden by ABC stacking, possibly resulting from stacking faults, or a superlattice. The caxis lattice parameter varies monotonically with x for 0 < x < 0.2, but drops precipitously for higher x. Similarly, Raman phonon modes A 1g 2 and E g 2 soften monotonically for 0 < x < 0.2 but harden sharply for x > 0.2. This indicates that Cu likely intercalates up to x ~ 0.2, followed by partial site-substitutions at higher values. The resulting strain makes the 0.2 < x < 0.3 region susceptible to instabilities and distortions. Our results point toward the presence of an incommensurate CDW above Td = 220 K. This work strengthens prevalent thought that intercalation contributes significantly to instabilities in the lattice and charge degrees of freedom in layered chalcogenides. Further work is required to uncover additional density wave transitions, and possible ground states such as superconductivity. Quantum Materials such as Bi-based topological insulators (TI) continue to generate interest among condensed matter physicists due to their non-trivial electronic structure, and possible applications as materials for quantum computing and spintronics The topological insulator Bi2Te2Se (BTS) is isostructural with Bi2Te3 and Bi2Se3, but with a better ordered structure, and larger bulk resistivity As shown in Figure Single crystals of CuxBi2Te2Se (x=0, 0.08, 0.12, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5) were prepared by melting high-purity (99.999%) powders of Bi, Te, Se and Cu in stoichiometric ratios. Stoichiometric mixtures of 2.5g batches were sealed into highpurity quartz tubes in vacuum after being weighed and sealed in an inert glove box, taking care to never expose to air. The crystals were grown from a melt using a two-step process. The mixtures in sealed quartz tubes were heated up to 850 C and maintained at that temperature for 48 hours. They were then cooled to 450 C at 0.1 C/min, followed by cooling to room temperature at 0.8 C/min. The tubes were subsequently resealed under vacuum and re-annealed at 600 C for two weeks before being quenched into tap water at room temperature, yielding high-quality single crystals. Powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using a Bruker D8 Discover x-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Powder X-ray diffraction data were collected from pieces of single crystals powdered inside an inert glove box. Rietveld refinement was performed using GSAS (General Structure Analysis System) and the EXPGUI interface. Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed on a Renishaw Inc. 1000B, 1800 grating Raman spectrometer equipped with a microscope. Samples were measured at room temperature using an excitation wavelength of 632 nm through a 20x microscope objective lens, resulting in a laser spot of 4 μm 2 with power of 35 mW at 100%. Data presented here were collected using 1% power (0.0875 mW/μm 2 and 10% power (0.875 mW/μm 2 ), while keeping the same microscope objective and laser spot size. The polarization configuration used in our measurements was: Z(XX)Z. Phonon peaks were fitted as Lorentzian functions. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was performed with an Mg anode source in a Perkin Elmer PHI 5440 ESCA System in ultra-high vacuum. Surfaces were prepared by cleaving the crystal surface in inert atmosphere. However, we believe that the transfer process resulted in some exposure to air. For this reason, we studied the Cu oxidation state using depth profiling by ablating with an Ar-ion gun. XPS was then used to study the oxidation state of Cu with increasing ablation of the top layer. XPS spectra up to 1000 eV were fitted using a Lorentzian fitting function convolved with a Gaussian after subtracting the baseline. Selected Area Diffraction (SAED) was performed at room temperature with a Hitachi H-9000NAR high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) operating at 300kV. For this, crystals of CuxBi2Te2Se (0 < x < 0.5) were mechanically ground in an inert glove box and dispersed on to Lacey-carbon grids. Variable temperature resistivity studies down to 1.8 K were performed using 4-probe silver paste contacts on single crystals surfaces and placed in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) equipped with a 9T magnet. Previous work Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) studies were carried out in order to further assess the crystallinity and morphology of CuxBi2Te2Se samples. Figure It is important to examine whether the forbidden diffraction spots that appear in Fig. Let us now consider the effect of disorder on CDW periodicity such that the periodicity is not represented in the reciprocal lattice by specific vectors k ⃗ ⃗ , but rather one that exists over an entire range of vectors k ⃗ ⃗ +k ⃗ ⃗ , on either side of k ⃗ ⃗ . This would then lead to diffraction patterns with "diffuse" intensity centered around k ⃗ ⃗ . In the case of large k ⃗ ⃗ , it is possible to have a scenario in which diffraction patterns appear as diffuse streaks between Bragg reflections, with the CDW maintaining the overall symmetry of the underlying lattice but not commensurate with the lattice periodicity. This is the basis of the idea of an incommensurate CDW, or I-CDW In an effort to minimize strain energy, cooling below a certain temperature Td could cause an incommensurate CDW (I-CDW) to lock-in to a period commensurate with the period of the lattice or the PLD. Such a transition from an I-CDW to a CDW can be likened to a temperature-driven disorder-toorder transition. An I-CDW, usually observed in diffraction patters as diffuse patterns and streaks, acts as a precursor to a CDW One of the questions about integrating Cu into the sample during crystal growth is whether Cu actually intercalates into the van der Waals layers or substitutes into the main lattice. Intercalated Cu has been shown to have oxidation states of either 0 or 1+, whereas substitution into the Bi site would yield Cu 2+ . Figure A comparison of BE for Bi 5d between x=0 and x=0.2 in CuxBi2Te2Se samples is also shown in Figure We now examine the effect of Cu on phonon modes in CuxBi2Te2Se. Figure 1 mode in Bi2Se3 shifts to lower frequency with increasing Cu intercalation. In contrast, substitution of lighter atoms at the Bi site has been found to result in A 1g 1 , A 1g 2 , E g 1 and E g 2 modes shifting to higher frequency We now return to discuss the origin of the CDW observed in Cu0.3Bi2Te2Se. A typical CDW phase transition is accompanied by the opening of a gap at the Fermi level, resulting in a metal-to-insulator like transition in resistivity as a function of temperature. In most microscopic models, a CDW transition is understood as being driven by either an electron energy instability near the Fermi level, or due to Fermi nesting The presence of diffuse scattering in Figure In summary, we used a self-flux method to grow single crystals of CuxBi2Te2Se and examined the effect of Cu on crystal structure, phonon and electron properties. X-ray photoelectron studies show that Cu exists in the intercalating spaces as Cu 1+ . Increasing Cu concentration leads to an increase in the c-axis length up to x=0.2. Beyond x=0.2, the caxis drops to lower values. Similarly, Raman modes A 1g 2 and E 2 g soften up to x=0.2 and harden for higher values of Cu. This points to the possibility that, while lower concentrations of Cu for x < 0.2 end up with Cu in the intercalating spaces, higher concentrations end up as substituents. This conclusion is consistent with previous observations in CuxBi2Se3, and also makes the 0.2 < x < 0.3 region in the CuxBi2Te2Se phase diagram a region of much interest due to the presence of possible instabilities and distortions. The observation of a charge density wave (CDW) transition in the x=0.3 sample is therefore interesting. In particular, Cu0.3Bi2Te2Se reveals diffuse order in electron diffraction together with CDW-like transitions in resistivity near 220 K. In addition, we also find the existence of reflections forbidden by ABC stacking. These are indicative of a periodic lattice distortion (PLD), often observed as harbingers of a CDW transition in other layered di-chalcogenides. Our work provides strong indications that the Cu-intercalated ternary chalcogenide Cu0.3Bi2Te2Se, upon cooling below 220K, undergoes a transition from an incommensurate charge density wave (I-CDW) to a charge density wave (CDW) state. Further work is needed, with temperature-dependent electron diffraction, in order to confirm this. Additionally, it is important to study this system further in order to uncover the possibility that an incommensurate CDW with a weak electron-phonon coupling could eventually lead to the discovery of superconductivity in CuxBi2Te2Se.