Propagation of backward magnetostatic surface spin waves (SWs) in exchange coupled Co/FeNi bilayers are studied by using Brillouin light scattering (BLS) technique. Two types of SWs modes were identified in our BLS measurements. They are magnetostatic surface waves (MSSWs) mode and perpendicular standing spin waves (PSSWs) mode. The dispersion relations of MSSWs obtained from the Stokes and Anti-Stokes measurements display respectively positive and negative group velocities. The Anti-Stokes branch with positive phase velocities and negative group velocities, known as backward magnetostatic surface mode originates from the magnetostatic interaction of the bilayer. The experimental data are in good agreement with the theoretical calculations. Our results are useful for understanding the SWs propagation and miniaturizing SWs storage devices. Spin waves (SWs) in magnetic films have attracted much attention in recent years because of great potential applications in spintronic devices. Our Co(30)/FeNi(t) bilayer films were deposited on single-crystal Si (111) substrates by radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering. The numbers in parentheses are the film thicknesses in nanometers. The FeNi layer thickness t varied from 30 to 50 nm that was controlled by varying the sputtering time. The base pressure of sputtering chamber was about 5 × 10 -5 Pa. The pressure inside the chamber was 0.3 Pa and the RF power was 50 W during sputtering process. Static magnetization of Co(30)/FeNi(t) bilayer were measured by a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). Figure BLS measurements were performed for the Co/FeNi bilayer at room temperature. BLS is very effective for achieving the vector resolution of surface waves. The dispersion relation of FeNi (30) single layer and Co(30)/FeNi(t) bilayers with various FeNi thicknesses of t = 30, 40, and 50 nm was measured by BLS. Figure To further substantiate our results, we theoretically calculate the spectrum of MSSWs of Co/FeNi bilayer. The sample is schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. where where A i are the intralayer exchange interactions in FeNi and Co,and α i is the damping. If we do not consider surface effects such as surface anisotropy or surface spin transfer torque, where A 12 is the interfacial exchange interaction in units of J/m 2 . We expand M i and H i around their equilibrium values, and keep only linear terms in the small quantities m 1,2 and h i . By assuming a harmonic form m 1,2 , h i ∼ e i(ωt-ky) and applying the boundary conditions, we obtain a secular equation whose solution is the dispersion relation. We show the two lower frequency branches which are MSSWs in Fig. In summary, we observed the BMSSWs in exchange coupled Co/FeNi bilayer by BLS. The results were further confirmed by theoretical calculations. We revealed that coupling of two counter propagating MSSWs at the interface, through the magnetostatic interaction between two layers, is responsible for the BMSSWs. Furthermore, the largest magnitudes of negative group velocities increase with the thinkness of FeNi. See the supplementary material for several experiments and detailed procedures of the derivation. While the main article contains the best representative data, other data are presented in the supplementary material. Part 1 is the ferromagnetic resonance(FMR) data and the relevant experimental parameters. Part 2 is the data of frequency varies with wave vector at magnetic field H = -500 Oe. Part 3 is the detailed procedures of the derivation of spin wave spectrums.