We investigate the Cu L3 edge resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) spectra of a quasi-1D antiferromagnet Ca2CuO3. In addition to the magnetic excitations, which are well-described by the two-spinon continuum, we observe two dispersive orbital excitations, the 3dxy and the 3dyz orbitons. We carry out a quantitative comparison of the RIXS spectra, obtained with two distinct incident polarizations, with a theoretical model. We show that any realistic spin-orbital model needs to include a finite, but realistic, Hund's exchange JH ≈ 0.5 eV. Its main effect is an increase in orbiton velocities, so that their theoretically calculated values match those observed experimentally. Even though Hund's exchange also mediates some interaction between spinon and orbiton, the picture of spin-orbit separation remains intact and describes orbiton motion in this compound. The importance of the Hund's exchange and the multiorbital character of the states lying close to the Fermi level go hand in hand in the correlated electron systems Consequently and especially once the typically strong Jahn-Teller effect is included, various transition metal oxides or fluorides show strongly anisotropic magnetic ordering The Goodenough-Kanamori rules are intimately related to the Hund's exchange. The crucial observation is that Hund's exchange is responsible for the ferromagnetic correlations suggested by the Goodenough-Kanamori rules for alternating orbital order. Without it, the singlet and triplet 'virtual' states occurring in the spin-orbital ('Kugel-Khomskii') exchange processes along an alternating-orbital bond, illustrated in Fig. Despite the fundamental importance of Hund's exchange for the ground-state ordering, little is known about its signature in dispersive collective orbital excitations (orbitons). Such excitations were observed in quasi-1D copper oxides with almost decoupled S = 1/2 antiferromagnetic chains The question of Hund's exchange becomes particularly salient in the 1D case, where the picture of spin-orbital separation was based on the above analogy to a hole: whereas an orbiton always strongly couples to the elementary spin excitations of an antiferromagnet, it can effectively separate from the spin excitation ('spinon') in a similar manner as a 'holon' separates from the spinon when a single hole is introduced into a 1D antiferromag- Figure net In this paper we present a systematic and detailed high-resolution resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) study at the Cu L 3 edge on the quasi-1D spin S = 1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg chain Ca 2 CuO 3 . We assess the importance of Hund's exchange in modeling the experimentally observed orbital excitations and conclude it to be necessary for a quantitative description. To this end, we firstly discuss the experimental methods and present the main RIXS spectra in Sec. II. We start the discussion with analyzing the spin excitations in great detail, see Sec. III A. Next, we introduce an appropriate spin-orbital model in Sec. III B and compare the experimental and theoretical results in Sec. III C, paying particular attention to the role of the finite Hund's exchange in obtaining the results which well-describe the experiment. The paper is summarized in Sec. IV and supplemented by three Appendices A-B-C, in which details about Ca 2 CuO 3 and of the theoretical model are discussed. Together with Sr 2 CuO 3 , Ca 2 CuO 3 (from now on Ca21) represents one of the best prototype of the quasi-1D spin 1 /2 AFM strongly anisotropic Heisenberg chain RIXS 20 measurements were carried out at the beamline ID32 The spectra displayed in the waterfall plots of Fig. We also exploited the unique capability of the ERIXS (European-RIXS) spectrometer, to perform polarizationresolved RIXS measurements The overall energy resolution was ∼ 60 meV for the unpolarized spectra, while we relaxed it to ∼ 80 meV for the polarimetric measurements in order to maintain an acceptable count rate. Each RIXS spectrum shown in Fig. Spin excitations in quasi-1D systems have been intensively studied in the last decades due to their importance in the realization of the 1D Heisenberg AFM model. The anisotropic AFM interaction of Ca21 comes from the Cu atoms within the chains, along the b axis. The coupling along the other crystallographic directions is negligible, making Ca21 a 1D magnetic system with a Néel temperature of only 9 K 17 despite the large nearest neighbor superexchange interaction along the chains. In fact, RIXS spectra measured along the [1 0] direction do not show any dispersive spin excitations. A clear signature of the 1D nature of Ca21 comes directly from the momentum dependence of spin excitations along the [0 1] direction. Indeed, in these systems the elementary magnetic excitations with S = 1 fractionalize into the two-spinon continuum carrying a spin quantum number of S = 1 /2 Regarding the line shape, the obtained intensity of our fitting is given by the following formula where * is the convolution and is the approximate expression for the two-spinon dynamic structure factor reported in Ref. 28. Here Θ represents the Heaviside step function, while ω L (q) = π /2 sin(q) and ω U (q) = π sin( q /2). Finally, the overall experimental energy resolution is taken into account by convolving S(q, ω) with the following gaussian line shape with σ= 55 meV (overall energy resolution) and ω 0 is the peak energy. In the two right panels of Fig. dd excitations in 1D systems feature the fractionalization of spin and orbital degrees of freedom. To model the fractionalization previous studies used an effective t-J model, which accurately described the experimental spectra. We go one step further and include the effect of Hund's coupling, which should be finite in realistic materials. Note that finite Hund's coupling preserves fractionalization To verify the spinon-orbiton separation, we employ a Kugel-Khomskii-type Hamiltonian 1 , which can be written in the following general form: Here S i describes a spin S = 1/2 at site i and T α i is a pseudo-spin T = 1/2 with component α ∈ {x, y, z} to describe the orbital degree of freedom between the ground state d x 2 -y 2 and one of the excited orbitals d xy , d xz and d yz (note that the 'nondispersive' d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital is not taken into account in the analysis). Bonds i, j take nearest neighbors into account and ∆ CF is the crystal field splitting. Operators A(T β i , T α j ) and K(T β i , T α j ) only depend on the orbital degrees of freedom and account for onsite repulsion U , Hund's coupling J H and nearest-neighbor hopping t 1 and t 2 for the ground state and the excited orbital, respectively (see Appendix B for details). Note that for the ferro-orbital ground state, Hamiltonian (4) reduces to the Heisenberg model, which describes the spin excitations discussed in the previous section. To model the orbital excitation in the RIXS spectrum, we calculate the orbital spectral functions O(q, ω) and the spin-orbital SO(q, ω) with exact diagonalization and cluster perturbation theory for each orbital separately. The exact diagonalization results are broadened by a Lorentzian line shape of 120 meV FWHM to account for finite size effects (for details see Appendix B). For direct comparison with the experiment, they have to be multiplied by the RIXS 'matrix elements' that can easily be obtained using the so-called fast collision approximation to the Kramers-Heisenberg formula for RIXS (for more details, see Refs. 20, 22, and 23). Finally, the results are convoluted with a Gaussian function (FWHM = 60 meV) to account for experimental resolution. Even in the presence of Hund's coupling, the spinonorbiton fractionalization is preserved for the (bare) orbiton dispersion, which is given by ε orb (k) = -2 t sin(k) [see Ref. 14 or Appendix C] with the orbiton hopping t = 2t 1 t 2 /(U (1 -J H /U )) (see Appendix C for details). Note that this intuitive picture is supported by numerical calculations which makes it possible to calculate J H from the bandwidth of the excitation. This implies that a theory for spinon-orbiton separation which ignores Hund's coupling always overestimates the hopping constant of the excited orbital t 2 . In Fig. The theoretical RIXS spectra calculated with the 'best fit' model parameters from Table We have studied in detail the RIXS response at the Cu L edge of the quasi-1D antiferromagnet Ca 2 CuO 3 . We observed a clear signature of the dispersive spin and orbital 3d xy and 3d yz excitations, at first sight qualitatively resembling the ones recently found in other quasi-1D copper oxides Next, we performed a detailed quantitative analysis of the experimental data. First, in addition to the previous studies, we exploit two distinct incident photon polarizations in our analysis. Moreover, for both polarizations we successfully reproduced the experimental RIXS spectra using a theoretical model based on the well-established Kugel-Khomskii Hamiltonian. Specifically, the crucial finding of this paper is that a detailed modelling of the orbital spectrum requires a finite Hund's exchange J H in the Hamiltonian. Specifically, for Ca 2 CuO 3 we obtain that a moderate, and realistic, value of J H 0.5eV best explains the experimental data. Here the main role of the Hund's exchange is to increase the velocity of the orbiton so that the theoretically predicted one matches well with the experimentally observed one. We note that the assumed value of the Hund's exchange is relatively small with respect to the calculated spin-orbital exchange constants, so that the interaction between orbitons and spinons is not that large and thus the spin-orbital separation picture can still approximately describe the physics present here, cf. Ref. 16 for details. Altogether, this means that the Hund's exchange plays a vital role in the propagation of an orbiton. to the LSAO (2 0 0) reflection, i.e. to the normal direction of the substrate (q Ca21 = q LSAO ). This occurrence, together with the full width at half maximum of only ≈ 0.03 • for the Ca21 (0 0 2) reflection [see Fig. The Cu21 and LSAO lattice parameters, in bulk form as well as in our films, are summarized in Table To calculate dd-excitation spectrum probed by RIXS we define the spectral function for orbital excitations and spin-orbital excitations. The orbital spectral function is where T x k is the Fourier transform of T x i , |gs is the ground state of Eq. ( The 'best fit' microscopic parameters for the Kugel-Khomskii Hamiltonian as well as the corresponding error range listed in Table I are obtained by direct comparison of the second derivative RIXS intensity maps. This is illustrated in Fig. (C7) This relation can be used to extract Hund's coupling from the bandwidth of the excitation spectrum. Fig. 