The need for solving optimization problems is prevalent in a wide range of physical applications, including neuroscience, network design, biological systems, socio-economics, and chemical reactions. Many of these are classified as non-deterministic polynomial-time (NP) hard and thus become intractable to solve as the system scales to a large number of elements. Recent research advances in photonics have sparked interest in using a network of coupled degenerate optical parametric oscillators (DOPO's) to effectively find the ground state of the Ising Hamiltonian, which can be used to solve other combinatorial optimization problems through polynomial-time mapping. Here, using the nanophotonic silicon-nitride platform, we propose a network of on-chip spatial-multiplexed DOPO's for the realization of a photonic coherent Ising machine. We demonstrate the generation and coupling of two microresonator-based DOPO's on a single chip. Through a reconfigurable phase link, we achieve both in-phase and out-of-phase operation, which can be deterministically achieved at a fast regeneration speed of 400 kHz with a large phase tolerance. Our work provides the critical building blocks towards the realization of a chip-scale photonic Ising machine. The processing speed of modern computers are limited by the fact that program memory and data memory share the same bus. While processors have become faster, the overall speed is limited by the data transfer rate, known as the von Neumann bottleneck Recently, there has been considerable interest in using photonic processors to realize a novel form of coherent computing by simulating the Ising model An alternative approach to realize a DOPO is to use a χ (3) nonlinearity in which a frequency degenerate signal/idler pair is generated via parametric fourwave mixing (FWM) In this paper, we demonstrate an integrated photonic circuit which consists of spatial-multiplexed DOPO's on a single SiN chip and present the first demonstration of a coupled-DOPO system using continuous-wave pumping. We experimentally show reconfigurability of the coupling phase between the DOPO's through thermal control of the coupling waveguide between the two DOPO's and show interference measurements between the DOPO's indicating in-phase and out-of-phase operation. In our system, we solve at a 400 kHz rate with a convergence time of <310 ns. In addition, we numerically model the coupled-DOPO system and con-firm the behavior for in-phase and out-of-phase operation and explore the transition region between the two phase states. A distinct transition region between two states is revealed both numerically and experimentally, suggesting a tremendous phase tolerance of such parametric process. We also describe the scalability of such a system to a large number of oscillators on chip and the challenges to achieving a large-scale integrated system, offering the building blocks toward the realization of a fully photonic coherent Ising machine. The key components for realizing a network of coupled DOPO's on-chip are, 1) power splitters for routing the pump fields to the microresonators, 2) nonlinear microresonators designed for DOPO generation, and 3) the N ×N photonic coupling system between the different microresonators. A microscope image of the SiN device is shown in Fig. Figure We theoretically investigate this coupled DOPO system using coupled Lugiato-Lefever equations with two pump waves where t R is the roundtrip time in the resonator, α is the total roundtrip loss, δ 0 is the effective phase detuning, δ 1 is the mode-dependent detuning, Ω 0 corresponds to the pump offset frequency from the degeneracy point, θ is the transmission coefficient between the resonator and the bus waveguide, L is the cavity length, γ is the nonlinear parameter, and β k corresponds to the k thorder dispersion coefficients of the Taylor expansion of the propagation constant. Here, τ represents the temporal coordinate within the time scale of a single round trip and t represents the long-time-scale evolution over many round trips. The term with A in describes the bichromatic pump waves, and κ represents the complex coupling coefficient from the primary DOPO (DOPO 1 ) to the secondary DOPO (DOPO 2 ) (see Supplementary Information). We add a noise of one photon per spectral mode with random phase onto the pump Lastly, we discuss the potential of a large-scale DOPO photonic system in light of power consumption and computing speed. Figure In conclusion, we demonstrate phase reconfigurable all-optical coupling between microresonatorbased DOPO's in an integrated silicon nitride platform. We observe that the system is highly tolerant to the coupling phase between the DOPO's, offering flexibility in setting up the system when scaling to larger number of DOPO's. Since the system does not rely on timemultiplexing, and the computation time is comparable to the build-up time of a single DOPO, it is possible to rapidly test the fidelity of the final state. To enable reconfigurable coupling between arbitrary DOPO's, a fraction of the DOPO power will be sent to a matrix of 2N ×2N Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZI's) to perform N ×N arbitrary linear transformations To achieve this on a single device layer, intersections between waveguides are required. Our transmission measurements (see Supplementary Information) indicate 0.45 dB loss per intersection which can be further optimized. In addition, we are investigating a multilayer design Our results provide the initial building blocks toward the realization of a photonic coherent Ising machine for solving combinatorial optimization problems. The setup is shown in Fig. 