We study a two-dimensional heterostructure comprised of a monolayer of the magnetic insulator chromium triiodide (CrI3) on a superconducting lead (Pb) substrate. Through first-principles computation and a tight-binding model, we demonstrate that charge transfer from the Pb substrate dopes the CrI3 into an effective half-metal, allowing for the onset of a gapless topological superconductivity phase via the proximity effect. This phase, in which there exists a superconducting gap only in part of the Fermi surface, is shown to occur generically in 2D half-metal-superconductor heterostructures which lack two-fold in-plane rotational symmetry. However, a sufficiently large proximity-induced pairing amplitude can bring such a system into a fully-gapped topological superconducting phase. As such, these results are expected to better define the optimal 2D component materials for future proposed TSC heterostructures. Topological superconductivity (TSC) remains one of the most intriguing concepts in modern condensed matter physics, with useful properties such as robust, low-energy edge modes and quasiparticles that exhibit non-Abelian statistics One promising theoretical proposal for realizing a chiral TSC phase involves a half-metal (HM), a metal with only one spin component at the Fermi energy due to a strong exchange field, in proximity with a s-wave superconductor substrate (described in 1D by Our goal is to design a 2D heterostructure of this type, making use of the specific band structures of currentlyrealizable materials. We chose lead (Pb), a material with large SOC interactions, as the substrate, and monolayer CrI 3 (either exfoliated The presence of topological edge modes requires an odd number of effectively spinless bands at the Fermi energy in this scheme Since the first-principles density functional theory (DFT) simulation does not support superconductivity, we examine the effects of superconductivity in a twostep process. First, we create a tight-binding model that captures the salient features of the first-principles results (Sec. IV). Then, we extend this model to include the superconductivity of the Pb substrate via the addition of a phenomenological pair potential ∆ using the Bogoliubovde-Gennes (BdG) formalism. (Sec. IV A). When we add superconductivity in this way, we observe that, rather than forming a fully-gapped TSC phase, this system will induce topological gaps only in small regions of its Fermi surface. This realizes a gapless TSC phase similar to those described in The phase arises due to a property shared by the majority of magnetic monolayers discovered so far -an absence of C 2 symmetry (symmetry under 180 • in-plane rotation). Without this symmetry, electrons with wave vector k do not have a partner state at the same energy at -k with which to form a superconducting pair (see Figs. Here, we discuss the theoretical framework in which we expect the interface between Pb and CrI 3 to allow for a chiral TSC phase. We define our system in terms of the creation operators c † ks , with momentum k = (k x , k y ) and spin s, of a single hybrid band that crosses the Fermi energy, composed of states lying primarily within the interface between the two materials. The Hamiltonian of this system can be described by: Here, the surface of the superconductor and the 2D half-metal monolayer coupled to it both contribute terms to the hybrid system Hamiltonian via proximity. H 0 describes a single effective spinful band with dispersion k and chemical potential μ. ∆ is an effective s-wave pair potential at the surface, which we take to be on-site (constant in momentum-space). The half-metal contains a large exchange potential J, causing the band to become strongly spin-polarized (σ i represent Pauli matrices in the spin degree of freedom), where the spin quantization axis is perpendicular to the surface. A Rashba-type spin-orbit interaction Chiral topological superconductivity requires that opposite-momentum states of a single band at the Fermi energy be paired by ∆; the above Hamiltonian accomplishes this by gapping out one of the spin bands through the half-metal's large exchange interaction. Though the remaining band contains only spin-up states, SOC interactions (α) cause them to take on a small in-plane component, of order α/J. Since, for this particular type of spin texture, states at opposite momenta have opposite in-plane spins, they can be coupled by the ∆ term in Eq. 1. The resulting effective p-wave pair potential scales as ∆ ∼ α J ∆. This framework characterizes the important features of the Pb-CrI 3 interface system: a large exchange potential, which originates in the CrI 3 monolayer, SOC from both materials, and superconductivity from the Pb substrate. Crucially, we find via DFT (see Sec. III) that charge transfer from the Pb to the CrI 3 raises the Fermi energy, causing the CrI 3 to change from a ferromagnetic insulator to an effective half-metal. Formally, the first conducting band above the gap now crosses the Fermi energy. As we will see in Sec. III, due to symmetry breaking when the Pb is brought into contact with the CrI 3 , the dispersion becomes inversion-asymmetric. In general, when k = -k , then the superconducting gap may be misaligned with the Fermi energy, leading to gapless superconductivity. We illustrate this with a simple parabolic dispersion in Fig. cease to be fully protected from disorder (since there are nearby bulk states at the same energy for them to scatter to), but they do not disappear altogether. In this section, we describe the first-principles calculation that is used to derive the band structure of the hybrid system, which will be used as the basis for a tight-binding model in proximity to superconductivity. Our simulations made use of density functional theory (DFT), employing the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) A 2-by-2 super-cell of the Pb (111) plane has a closelymatching lattice constant (1.4% larger) to the primitive unit cell of CrI 3 . Thus, we constructed the interface from a CrI 3 monolayer on top of the (111) surface of a slab of Pb, assuming that the monolayer would expand to match the lattice constant of the substrate. We carefully tested 13 to 31 atomic layers of Pb and obtained qualitatively the same results for the band structure. The DFT results shown in Figs. All band structure calculations were preceded by ionic relaxation, in which the surface monolayer and substrate bonded in the manner shown in Fig. In the band structure, contact with the Pb surface causes the CrI 3 bands to hybridize with the superim-posed Pb bands, as shown on the right-hand side of Fig. A salient feature is that the lowest CrI 3 conduction band becomes partially doped by electrons transferred from the metal substrate, raising the Fermi energy. Charge density maps suggest that electrons from the Pb are drawn to the surface when the materials are coupled (Fig. Changing the number of Pb layers does not change this general conclusion; the Fermi energy varied by approximately ±10 meV between different Pb slabs relative to the CrI 3 bands, but was an average of about 30 meV above the bottom of the lowest monolayer band. In this way, we have shown that charge transfer can in principle be employed to achieve the proposed half-metalsuperconductor hybrid system TSC without an intrinsic half-metal. Crucially, the distortion to the Fermi surface from coupling with the Pb also reduces the symmetry, as shown in Fig. Specifically, the CrI 3 monolayer has M y M z T symmetry, where M i is a mirror symmetry in the x i direction about a hexagon center and T is time-reversal symmetry. This symmetry, together with M x T symmetry, makes CrI 3 inversion-symmetric, and in particular, M y M z T enforces the relation ε n (k x , k y ) = ε n (-k x , k y ). The presence of the Pb substrate breaks M y M z T , and thus when inversion overall is lost, so is inversion in the plane. Such in-plane inversion-breaking is a generic feature of 2D magnetic heterostructures where one of the layers lacks two-fold in-plane rotational symmetry (C 2 ). This is because the only symmetries that protect ε n (k) = ε n (-k) (in-plane inversion symmetry) are time-reversal, inversion(including out-of-plane), and C 2 . However, the magnetic moment of the half-metal breaks time-reversal, and the layering along the z-axis breaks inversion. As a consequence, in the absence of C 2 , not all bulk states at the Fermi energy can pair when a superconducting pair potential is introduced to the system. C 2 is not present in monolayer CrI 3 , and as we will see in Sec. V, this is directly responsible for the gapless TSC phase. Figures Here, we form a tight-binding model that reflects the band structure of the heterostructure. States in the relevant bands are tightly-bound to surface Cr atoms, and thus it suffices to consider on-site and nearest-neighbor interactions only, where each Cr atom represents a site. There are two sites per unit cell, and each site hosts two spins (up and down) and two orbitals (d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 ), for a total of eight bands. Only the lowest-energy of these eight bands crosses the Fermi energy, so free parameters that do not vanish due to symmetry are chosen so as to match the DFT result for the lowest-energy band. For details, see Appendix A. This model can recreate the spin textures obtained through DFT for isolated CrI 3 as well as the full interface system, as can be seen by comparing the DFT results (Figs. We add superconductivity to this model by including a phenomenological pair potential ∆ using the BdG formalism. We assume that the Pb contributes an s-wave pairing potential that affects only opposite spins on the same site and in the same orbital (in Appendix B, we extend this model to allow for the possibility of samespin pairing interactions arising at the surface of the SC substrate). This results in the following 16-band Hamiltonian: Here, λ i , σ j , and ω k are Pauli matrices in the sublattice, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom, respectively. The 8-band Hamiltonian in the absence of superconductivity is parametrized by the momentum-dependent terms H ijk (k) of our tight-binding model. We apply our model to indicate the behavior of the interface system when the Pb is made to superconduct. As shown in the modeled Fermi surface at low energies (Fig. Despite not being fully gapped, this system still displays topological features. We demonstrate this in Fig. The plots show the edge-projected density of states where k is momentum along the edge and G 00 is the edge-projected Green's function derived using the method of As expected from a fully-gapped chiral TSC, this system supports chiral edge states. As the gap size is decreased to realistic values, the edge states remain, though they are now accompanied by bulk states at the Fermi energy. These edge states, which can be seen in the density of states plot (Fig. Since the spins at opposite momenta contain only a small component (∼ 1%) pointing in opposite directions, the effective superconducting gap is two orders of magnitude smaller than ∆, the pair potential in the Pb substrate. For this reason, only the bottom-right plot in Fig. However, even at realistic values of ∆, these topological edge modes are present. Though they are not visible in the heatmap when the system is modeled realistically, they result in a slight (order 1%) trough in the density of states in a small section of the Fermi surface (Fig. For the gapped TSC phase to exist in a hybrid system, its effective pairing would need to be comparable to the energy scale of its in-plane C 2 -breaking terms. However, the former is a superconducting energy, on the order of k B T c ∼ 10 -1 -10 0 meV (where k B is Boltzmann's constant and T c is the critical temperature of the superconductor). Meanwhile, the latter is a band structure feature, and as such is typically on the order of 10 1 -10 3 meV. Thus, topological phases in HM-SC interfaces will typically be gapless unless the HM is symmetric under in-plane C 2 , forcing the latter terms to vanish. We have demonstrated the existence of a gapless topological superconducting phase in a Pb-CrI 3 interface, and, more broadly, in similar 2D systems that do not have an in-plane C 2 symmetry. As a consequence, our finding identifies a significant restriction on the magnetic monolayers that may host a fully-gapped TSC where topologically-protected chiral Majorana modes may be measured. Very few magnetic monolayers that do not break C 2 symmetry have been found as of yet; thus, this study motivates the search for 2D magnetic materials with this symmetry, such as rectangular-lattice monolayers. In addition, the possibility of inducing a ferromagnetic insulator to become a half-metal via charge transfer vastly expands the number of potential hybrid TSC candidate materials. Insulators with spin-polarized bands represent a promising direction in realizing topological Orbitals are with respect to the iodine basis, so the relevant orbitals for this system are d (x ) 2 -(y ) 2 and d (z ) 2 . Though the iodine atoms do not form perfectly orthogonal axes after ionic relaxation, this effect is not large enough to be relevant to the model. For ease of interpretation, rather than performing a fit across the full parameter space, we choose a minimal number of terms to reproduce qualitative features of the band structure, and set the rest to 0. The coefficients t 1 100 , t 1 102 , t 1 103 , t 1 130 , and t 1 133 contribute the inversion-preserving elements of the band shape, since they are invariant under M y M z T , while the single coefficient t 1 202 breaks inversion, reducing the rotational symmetry from 6-fold to 3-fold. The inversion-symmetric spin coefficient t 1 111 determines the magnitude of the inplane spin texture that winds twice around the Fermi surface. Similarly, t 1 211 determines the magnitude of its inversion-breaking equivalent, the in-plane Rashba texture. The values of the nearest-neighbor hopping terms, as well as the on-site chemical potential μ and exchange field J, were determined by qualitatively matching the band structure to that given by DFT. The on-site pairing amplitude ∆ was assumed to be of the same order as that of isolated Pb, which is ∼ 1 meV. The spin-texture terms (t 1 111 and t 1 211 ) are proportional to the in-plane fraction of the spin (∼ 1%) times J (735 meV). For t 1 111 , we take the average component of the spin which is parallel to its oppositemomentum state, and t 1 211 is in principle calculated using the in-plane component perpendicular to its oppositemomentum state. However, this underestimates the value of t 1 211 , since the states at the Fermi surface lie far from any Pb band in our finite DFT simulation, artificially suppressing terms induced by coupling with the Pb [29]. We instead choose a value of t 1 211 of the same order as t 1 111 . To put this value in experimental context, the proximity Rashba energy between a Pb substrate and a chain of Fe atoms is believed to be approximately 50 meV Values given to the nonzero parameters in this work are summarized in Table In this Appendix, we consider the effect of intrinsic same-spin pairing in the SC substrate on our model. Such pairing, which couples states in the same out-ofplane spin direction rather than states of opposite spin, may arise at the Pb substrate surface as part of a triplet superconducting term Fermion anticommutativity requires that same-spin pairing is antisymmetric in momentum space. The sim-plest C 3 -symmetric tight-binding term which accomplishes this is the next-nearest neighbor term where the vectors a β connect sites in the A (B) sublattice to all next-nearest neighboring A (B) sublattice sites. Here, τ i is a Pauli matrix in the particle-hole Nambu space. The factor of 1 6 normalizes the tunneling gap to ∆ p . When we add this term to our Hamiltonian from Eq. ( Figure Symbol Value (meV) Here, ∆p = 1 meV. Note that the separation between the particle and hole bands at any given momentum is significantly larger than that for a ∆ = 1 meV s-wave pairing interaction (Fig. bution could have relatively large effects on the system's edge states. Thus, we conclude that while intrinsic same-spin pairing in the substrate would not affect the phase of the system, it may enable its topological features to be more readily detected.