This article proposes a concept for dynamically reconfigurable distributed microwave circuits by leveraging the abrupt conductivity transition in phase-change materials (PCM). Metallic surface-inclusions ( λ) are embedded in the PCM film-vanadium dioxide (VO2)-to provide low-loss and reconfigurability. To validate this concept, a variety of co-planar waveguide transmission lines are designed and fabricated with metallic surface-inclusions in VO2 films, and the lines' performance are characterized up to 50 GHz. The measured results are used to develop a transmission-line based model and an equivalent circuit model of the VO2 with surface-inclusions to aid in the rapid design of new structures. Additionally, an electromagnetic model was developed and indicates that loss can be close to that of conventional metallic distributed circuits with 100 to 200 nm thick VO2 films. With these thicker films, two practical realizations of this concept were designed and simulated: a tunable dipole from 2.13 to 9.07 GHz and a tunable triple-stub matching network from 5 to 40 GHz with high |Γ|. Therefore, the proposed method appears viable for the realization of arbitrary programmable distributed circuits and antennas in the microwave and lowmillimeter-wave bands. D ISTRIBUTED microwave circuits and antennas derive their functionality and performance from their geometry with respect to an electromagnetic wavelength. Such geometries are typically defined through a material contrast in order to efficiently guide, confine, radiate or otherwise manipulate electromagnetic energy. At microwave and millimeterwave frequencies, the material contrast for passive microwave circuits (e.g., microstrip, co-planar waveguide) and antennas (e.g., dipoles, loops, bow-ties, spirals, patches, etc.) is predominantly realized through geometric patterning of metals on insulating substrates. Because metallic geometry is defined at fabrication time, microwave circuits and antennas are not fieldreconfigurable. And yet, nearly every other electrical component from a microprocessor to a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) to a switched analog circuit is field-programmable on some level. It is the fundamental link between functionality and geometry which makes the realization of programmable microwave circuits very challenging. In order to realize fully programmable distributed microwave circuits and antennas, there is a need to locally and dynamically set a circuit's conductivity between that of a metal and that of an insulator. The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556 USA (e-mail: dconnel7@nd.edu, jchisum@nd.edu). Fig. In this article we will present a concept for the dynamic reconfiguration of microwave circuits (including antennas) which leverages the abrupt conductivity transition in phasechange materials (PCM), as depicted in Fig. The family of PCMs, including vanadium dioxide VO 2 Past efforts to achieve a programmable conducting surface generally fall into two categories: either patterning a PCM film with a spatially programmable heater array as was simulated in Pure PCM thin films (Fig. In between these two approaches is a third option (Fig. Figure Both Fig. Figure Unfortunately, the necessary integration of PCM and metallic surface-inclusions in order to overcome significant RF loss introduces a trade-off between reducing loss in the metallic state (ON-state) and increasing isolation in the insulating state (OFF-state). Capacitive coupling between metal surfaceinclusions in regions of insulating VO 2 results in reduced isolation that degrades with increasing frequency. Effectively, the boundary between conducting and insulating regions of the reconfigurable surface becomes poorly defined. To achieve a low-loss distributed circuit, the percentage of metal must be high and yet, to achieve sufficient reconfigurability, the percentage of metal must be small enough so as to present a well-defined and finely discretized reconfigurable current path. The purpose of this article is to provide the first demonstration of microwave performance for a VO 2 structure with metallic surface-inclusions here after also referred to as inclusions in order to i) determine the feasibility of such a structure for distributed circuits and antennas, ii) explore the tradeoff between loss and isolation versus inclusion geometry, iii) to develop models for design and simulation purposes, and iv) to demonstrate reconfigurable circuits with this concept. To this end, we designed and fabricated unit-cells comprising various percentages of VO 2 film and conductive inclusions, and we performed measurements from 10 MHz to 50 GHz. Based on these measurements, we develop models for circuit, transmission-line, and full-wave electromagnetic simulations. The electromagnetic models are based upon low-frequency material parameter extraction and achieve good agreement with measurement except for minimal tuning of these parameters. Parasitic circuit models are developed which explain the difference between ideal distributed circuit elements (e.g., stubs) and the same structures realized with the proposed VO 2 film with metallic inclusions. In order to simplify the structure for fabrication and measurement, we have reduced the twodimensional (2D) reconfigurable surface to a one-dimensional (1D) reconfigurable transmission line. We note that the models developed from measured 1D structures are still relevant to 2D structures-specifically, full-wave EM model parameters are identical if the VO 2 film quality is the same. Section II presents the fabricated test structures and section III presents measurements, calibration, de-embedding, unitcell model extraction, dispersion analysis, and maximum operating frequency. Section IV extends the present work with a discussion of practical requirements on film and metallization thickness for the realization of high-performance structures, as well as a preliminary yet quantitative thermal control study. Section V presents simulated demonstrations of a tunable dipole and triple-stub matching network, and ends with a discussion of a two-dimensional reconfigurable switch matrix. Final conclusions and future work are presented in section VI. To investigate the trade-off between ON-state loss and OFFstate isolation as a function of unit-cell parameters (Fig. A THRU standard to de-embed the launches was also included. Due to the size of the 50 GHz RF probes used in this work (150 μm pitch), a transition from CPW geometry (S, W) = between the mode of the smaller and larger geometries. ADS Momentum was used to confirm that the mode transition maintained |S 11 | < -20 dB across the band (0.01-50 GHz). All experimental work shown here was done using a nominally 20 nm thick VO 2 sample on r-plane sapphire grown using the method of Typical cleanroom processes, when performed for extended periods of time, seem to affect the quality (stoichiometry), thickness, and conductivity of VO 2 Once the fabrication was complete, s-parameter measurements were taken well above and below the VO 2 transition temperature of ∼68 • C (hot: ∼85 • C, cold: ∼25 • C) from 10 MHz to 50 GHz with an IF bandwidth of 100 Hz using a Keysight PNA. The sample temperature was measured by a Fluke IR meter and heated well beyond the temperature at which s-parameters stabilized. The sample was placed on a carbon-impregnated AlN absorber (Fig. While a multi-line calibration kit (e.g,. multi-line TRL) would enable s-parameter measurements calibrated to the edge of the 8 unit-cells, limited space on the VO 2 sample chip prevented patterning more than a single THRU standard. Therefore, the measurement setup's systematic errors were calibrated out up to the probe tips using LRRM standards on an impedance standard substrate (ISS) and launches were de-embedded with an assumption of symmetry. However, the ISS has different pad parasitics than the fabricated sample: the ISS has different fringe (shunt) capacitance due to different dielectric constant and waveguide dimensions, and different series inductance and contact resistance due to thicker metalization and different waveguide dimensions. While it is not straightforward to de-embed all the remaining pad parasitics, de-embedding the contact resistance is simple. At DC, a transmission line is simply a series resistor R, whose ABCD matrix directly gives this resistance and is of the following form: At frequencies slightly higher than DC, the resistance of a short ( λ) transmission line will increase slightly, becoming complex, yet will remain an excellent representation of the line. Therefore, the THRU standard was modeled electromagnetically at 10 MHz, the series R was extracted, and the contact resistance was de-embedded. This contact resistance was assumed to be the same for all structures. To extract the unit-cell response, the whole structure was treated as a linear system of cascaded individual, symmetric structures represented by transmission parameters. In this paper, T represents ABCD parameters. The unit-cell was then solved for using matrix inversion and matrix square root operations. After removing contact resistance, the launches and (remaining pad parasitics) were de-embedded using (2) by taking the matrix square root of the entire THRU structure and assigning identical left and right launches to the postprocessing of all consequent structures: This assumes that the left and right probe landings were exactly repeatable for all structures. This procedure is summarized in Fig. To obtain individual unit-cell parameters, the remaining 8 unit-cell structure was processed using (4). Since taking the matrix square root is equivalent to obtaining the parameters for half the original length, taking the matrix square root 3 times gives parameters for 1 2 3 = 1 8 length or one unit-cell; this is the advantage of measuring lengths that are powers of 2. [ The assumption here is that there are no differences between unit-cells; in reality, any existing differences due to fabrication are averaged across all unit-cells. Using the above approach, the unit-cell s-parameters of all structures were de-embedded. In order to understand the unitcell response in detail, we first focus on a single structure, #2 (Table In general, the measured and simulated values are in good agreement, indicating that the VO 2 film parameters used in the EM models as summarized in Fig. There are three observable resonances (1.5, 15.35, and 26.4 GHz) in the measured results, and each of these correspond to calibration and de-embedding limitations, not to the unit-cell structures. The resonance seen near 26.4 GHz is due to differences in pad parasitics between the ISS structures and the test structures on sapphire which manifest when computing The S 21 of the VO 2 unit-cell of structure 2 (Fig. The lines' phase progressions (Fig. Nonetheless, low ON-state insertion loss is not the only criterion necessary to render this concept practical: high OFFstate isolation is also essential to create well-defined current paths. The isolation of a VO 2 unit-cell (Fig. Because a VO 2 unit-cell in the OFF-state is supposed to approximate a metallic open stub with fringe capacitance, a comparison of the phase of the reflection coefficient is also very indicative of the OFF-state behavior. In order to compare with a 1-port metallic open stub, the 2-port OFF-state unit-cell was converted to a 1-port measurement. However, the original 2-port OFF-state unit-cell measurement did not include fringe capacitance, so the second port was terminated in a simulated fringe capacitance. In the case of an entire chip of embedded metallic inclusions in a PCM film, the OFFstate phase of the unit-cell is not only determined by the first OFF-state gap but also by all the consecutive unit-cells which will couple through fringing fields. Each unit-cell will provide isolation but also add slightly to the phase of S 11 because field lines will also terminate on conductors in distant unitcells (albeit with diminishing proportion). Fig. Thicker films and smaller gaps (bottom left half of Table A circuit model (bottom right figure in Table While ON-state insertion loss is relatively low and constant versus frequency up to 50 GHz (see Fig. In order to determine the maximum operating frequency f max versus unit-cell length, we first compute the number of unit-cells required to achieve a particular isolation specification (here 20, 30, 40, 50 dB) at a given frequency and then compute the required unit-cell length so that the overall length is less than λ/20 at the chosen frequency. Figure The previous results highlight the need for thicker films and smaller gaps to make this concept feasible. Consequently, two additional 10 μm unit-cell structures with realizable gap sizes and reasonable film thicknesses are simulated and presented in Fig. As expected, thicker films and smaller gaps dramatically reduce the loss. A film thickness of 200 nm and gap of 100 nm yield at most 0.012 dB/UC insertion loss from 0.01-5 GHz and a maximum loss of 0.028 dB/UC at 50 GHz, much closer to the metal's 0.0022 dB/UC, in contrast to 0.867 dB for structure 2. The price paid for this in the OFF-state is reduced isolation: 20 dB/UC from 0.01-1 GHz, 11.8 dB/UC at 10 GHz, and 2.3 dB/UC at 50 GHz. The metal thickness for all structures plotted in Fig. Because distributed circuits are functional at lengths comparable to a wavelength, it is most useful to see the loss incurred per the guided wavelength at each frequency. This is plotted in Fig. Up to now, the CPW geometry used in the measurements and simulations has been quite small in order to maintain a quasi-TEM mode at 50 GHz, but such a small size has prohibitive insertion loss at low frequencies. Thus, a much larger geometry (S = 4.7 mm, W = 2 mm) was simulated to target the band below 1 GHz with a 500 μm unit-cell and plotted (aqua) alongside its metallic reference (black, circular marker). This geometry maintains losses less than 5 dB/λ even down to 44 MHz. While the primary purpose of this work is to explore the electrical performance of the PCM-metal surface-inclusion concept across the microwave and low-millimeter-wave band, we also provide a preliminary, quantitative study of a thermal control system similar to the heater array depicted in Fig. Nonetheless, because the transition region is not instantaneous versus temperature, we have thermally simulated a 1D array of heat sources using an FEM heat-flow simulator (Ansys IcePak) to determine the heat profile in the substrate and the number of unit-cells needed to span the VO 2 transition region. Figure The transition distance between fully ON and OFF unit-cells adds an effective length and resistance to the line. As a worst case, if we consider these unit-cells in the transition region to be fully on (maximum conductivity), this added length will only begin to matter at the frequency at which the length is λ/20 (according to the f max criterion we defined above). These frequencies are calculated and given in Table Another consideration for a thermal control system is the significant temperature variation across a substrate due to, for example, hot-spots caused by power dissipation in active components. If such a hot-spot temperature is greater than the critical temperature of 68 • C and very close to a VO 2 unitcell, then the cell may be unintentionally activated. Based on the same thermal simulations on sapphire discussed above, a heat source at 71 • C, which is ∆T = 46 • C above ambient, required 100 mm of distance for the substrate to reach ambient temperature (25 • C). This result can be used to estimate that 100 mm is also required between an active component with a junction temperature of 117 • C (which is ∆T = 46 • C above 71 • C), and the first OFF-state unit-cell after a heater. In reality, the distance required will be less than this, because the active component's ∆T from ambient (92 • C) will increase its heat dissipation rate and cause the temperature to decay faster. Furthermore, in typical scenarios for the proposed VO 2 circuits, the VO 2 would be on a separate passive-only substrate from active devices (e.g., an impedance tuner wirebonded to a PA). Therefore the sapphire-to-PCB transition would present a thermal discontinuity which would provide significant insulation, further mitigating this issue. Therefore, so long as VO 2 unit-cells are not placed in close proximity to heat sources, this problem can be mitigated. Fabrication of a heater array should not require expensive or novel clean-room processes since it can be realized with standard lithographic processes and metal depositions (electronbeam evaporation or sputtering). A low-cost solution would be to fabricate the heater array on a separate, thin wafer, since this will eliminate the need for back-side wafer processing of the sample with the VO 2 film. An estimated power consumption from a thermal simulation of heaters on a 50 μm sapphire reveals that 1.6 μW was required to heat an area of 0.4 mm 2 to 71 • . This is similar to thermal simulations in stub matching network presented in section V. As seen in Fig. As observed in Fig. Fig. In general the VO 2 dipoles exhibit reasonable match and a dipole radiation pattern at each frequency but they resonate with a lower Q, at a slightly lower frequency, with less gain, and higher input impedance than their metal counterparts. Figure LC frequency where the VO 2 dipole resonances actually occur are 2.13, 5.24, and 9.07 GHz. The smaller the VO 2 dipole, the greater the shift for two reasons: the OFF-state unit-cells have less isolation with higher frequency, and their physical extent comprises a larger fraction of the total length for shorter dipoles. The VO 2 dipole gain patterns, efficiencies, radiation resistance R r and the conductor resistance R s are calculated at 2.13, 5.24, and 9.07 GHz. The gain patterns are identical to the metal patterns in shape, as seen in Fig. In addition to the reconfigurable dipole, we have simulated the performance of a triple stub matching network utilizing the circuit models developed from EM simulations of T VO2 = 100 nm and gap size of G = 100 nm from 10 MHz to 50 GHz. Because a triple stub tuner is capable of transforming a source impedance to any region of the Smith chart, this is an excellent one-dimensional application of our PCM-metal surface-inclusion concept. We chose to use the circuit model because (i) this allows us to simulate all possible stub length combinations over a wide band incredibly more efficiently than with EM simulations, (ii) the unit-cell length can easily be varied, and (iii) this demonstrates the usefulness of the circuit models for rapidly prototyping new distributed circuits. A possible scenario for a triple-stub tuner can be seen in Fig. The above one-dimensional demonstrations of reconfigurable circuits testify to the efficacy of this approach by achieving significant reconfigurability within a single application. To obtain full programmability of distributed circuits, a two-dimensional reconfigurable surface is needed. The performance of this reconfigurable surface is fundamentally linked to the primitive's (unit-cell) Figure of Merit (FOM), which means that, even for the best of switches, a reconfigurable surface will never achieve the same performance as a dedicated metallic circuit. Rather, the benefit of a reconfigurable surface with high FOM primitives is that a circuit can be tuned or reconfigured in near-real-time to meet changes in requirements or changes in a radio's environment. While VO 2 has a high FOM comparable to state-of-theart switches (see Table We have characterized, for the first time, transmission lines made of thin VO 2 films with metallic inclusions and have found that thicker films (100-200 nm) and lower percentage of VO 2 ( 5 %) are required to realize low-loss reconfigurable distributed circuits. While this blend of PCM material and metal is the first step in enabling low-loss, fully programmable distributed circuits, the trade-off is a reduction in current confinement that degrades with frequency. We have also successfully modeled these structures with EM simulations, and have extracted both a transmission line model at 50 GHz and a lumped-element circuit model of the VO 2 gaps that is valid from 0.01-50 GHz. We have concluded with a demonstration of a reconfigurable dipole at 2.14, 5.24, and 9.07 GHz, and a tunable matching network with high-|Γ| at 5, 10, 20, and 40 GHz. Arbitrary 2D designs will benefit from our EM model parameters for full-wave simulations, whereas 1D structures can be rapidly prototyped using the transmission line and circuit model parameters. Future work to expand this concept to 2D will require studying the characteristic impedance of poorly defined conductors as well as investigating and comparing the performance of different waveguides. Microstrip, for example, is likely to perform better than planar waveguides, such as slotlines and CPW, given that the entire ground plane can remain metal and that the OFF-state VO 2 will not increase shunt conductance between signal and ground.