Halide perovskites are a promising optical gain media with high tunability and simple solution synthesis. In this study, two gain regimes, namely amplified spontaneous emission and random lasing, are demonstrated in same MAPbBr3 halide perovskite single crystal. For this, photoluminescence is measured at a temperature of 4 K with pulsed femtosecond pumping by UV light with a 80 MHz repetition rate. Random lasing is observed in areas of the sample where a random resonator was formed due to cracks and crystal imperfections. In more homogeneous regions of the sample, the dominant regime is amplified spontaneous emission. These two regimes are reliably distinguished by the line width, the mode structure, the growth of the intensity after the threshold, and the degree of polarization of the radiation. The spectral localization of the stimulated emission well below the bound exciton resonance raises a question concerning the origin of the emission in halide perovskite lasers. Halide perovskites have emerged recently as a new class of photovoltaic and optoelectronic semiconductor materials. In short time the effectiveness of halide perovskite solar cells has reached 25.2% The laser generation manifest itself in different ways. In most of the works the main conclusion about the lasing nature of the emission is made based on the narrow line width and threshold behavior and the spatial coherence of the lasing emission was shown only in In this study we present the observation of ASE and RL in the same MAPbBr3 halide perovskite single crystal. A reliable separation of the two emission regimes was achieved by comparing the emission line width, mode structure, the growth of the emission intensity after the threshold, and its polarization degree. Low temperature optical measurements (T = 4 K) allowed us to identify the gain region spectral position at defect-related states below the bound exciton resonance. MAPbBr3 halide perovskite single crystals were synthesized using the solution method. Figure An essentially different behavior is observed in RL regions, where the random resonator is formed by cracks and inhomogeneities of the sample crystal. Due to the multiple passage of emitted light in the resonator with the gain medium, the emission spectrum above the threshold is dominated by a set of narrow modes (Figure Another feature of the RL modes is the much faster intensity growth after the threshold, compared to the ASE. Figures A direct comparison of the emission growth after the threshold is not entirely correct, since the result will also depend on the directional diagram of the emission. However, in the ASE regime, it is expected that the emission is non-directional. Therefore, faster emission intensity growth in the RL regime indicates a greater gain due to multiple light passages of the resonator. The emission polarization allows to distinguish ASE and RL regimes. The inset in the Figure where is the analyzer rotation angle, representing the combination of the non-polarized background and the polarized emission determined by the Malus's law. Table In this study we have shown that emission from the MAPbBr3 single crystal induced by pulsed UV pumping at 4 K can be divided in two well distinct groups: ASE and RL, depending on the emission intensity growth after the threshold, quality factor and emission polarization degree. Moreover, utilization of the low temperature (4 K) let us observe the fine structure of the emission. The formation of resonators for RL is a random process, however, it helps to study the nature of laser generation in the highest quality single crystal material. Both types of the emission were found to be spectrally located below the bound exciton transition in the defect-related emission region. Therefore, our observations of emission spectral localization and its fine structure raise new questions about the underlying emission mechanisms, which are important for deeper understanding of the gain medium properties of these novel halide perovskite materials. These questions could be resolved only in further low temperature studies of halide perovskite single crystals by photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy and other methods. Chemicals: Methylammonium bromide (98 %, Sigma Aldrich), lead bromide (≥ 98 %, Sigma Aldrich) and dimethylformamide (DMF) were used as received without further purification. Synthesis: 1M solutions of methylammonium bromide and lead bromide were prepared by dissolving both compounds in 3 ml DMF. After stirring for some minutes the solution was filtrated using a 0.2 μm PTFE filter. The solution was transferred into a vial, which was closed with a glass cap and sealed with Parafilm. Afterwards the vial was placed in a beaker and heated in a water/ethanol bath to 60°C and the temperature was kept constant overnight. On the next day the temperature was increased to 80°C and after two hours of further heating the crystals were obtained (< 15 crystals). The crystals have been dried and used without further treatment for the measurements. The XRD measurements were performed with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with the Cu Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy images were obtained using a Zeiss Crossbeam 1540XB workstation. 