NdFeAs(O,F) thin films having different fluorine contents were grown on 5 • or 10 • vicinal cut MgO and CaF 2 single crystalline substrates by molecular beam epitaxy. Structural characterisations by reflection high-energy electron diffraction and x-ray diffraction confirmed the epitaxial growth of NdFeAs(O,F). The resistivities of the ab-plane and along the c-axis (ρ ab and ρ c ) were derived from the resistivity measurements in the longitudinal and transversal directions. The c-axis resistivity was always higher than ρ ab , resulting from the anisotropic electronic structure. The resistivity anisotropy γ ρ = ρ c /ρ ab at 300 K was almost constant in the range of 50 ≤ γ ρ ≤ 90 irrespective of the fluorine content. On the other hand, γ ρ at 56 K showed a strong fluorine dependence: γ ρ was over 200 for the films with optimum fluorine contents (superconducting transition temperature T c around 50 K), whereas γ ρ was around 70 for the films in the under-doped regime (T c between 35 and 45 K). The mass anisotropy γ m = m * c /m * ab (m * c and m * ab are the effective masses along the c-axis and on the ab-plane) close to T c derived from the anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau approach using the angular-dependency of ρ ab was in the range from 2 to 5. On the assumption γ 2 m = γ ρ , those values are small compared to the normal state anisotropy. After the discovery of Fe-based superconductors (FBS) 1 , many efforts have been devoted to searching for new FBS, resulting in the discovery of various new superconductors such as FeSe 2 , (Ba,K)Fe 2 As 2 To date, large single crystals of some of the FBS systems have been grown and the temperature dependence of in-plane and out-ofplane resistivity [ρ ab (T ) and ρ c (T )] and the resultant resistivity anisotropy γ ρ (T ) have been measured. A single crystal of FeSe 1-x Te x (x=0.6) with T c =14.2 K grown by a Bridgeman method showed a metallic behaviour for ρ ab below 140 K 7 , whilst it was almost constant above 140 K. On the other hand, ρ c increased gradually with decreasing temperature down to around 100 K and then decreased almost linearly with decreasing T . The resistivity anisotropy γ ρ was 44 and 70 at 290 K and T c , respectively. Song et al. reported on the out-of-plane and in-plane resistivity for a LiFeAs single crystal with T c =19.7 K grown by a Bridgeman method For the BaFe 2 As 2 systems, extensive electrical resistivity measurements on electron, hole and isovalent doped single crystals with various doping levels have been reported On the other hand, the size of available LnFeAsO single crystals is still limited. Only three papers -to the best of our knowledge -regarding the temperature-dependence of γ ρ , PrFeAsO 0.7 As stated above, the anisotropic behaviour of the transport properties of FBS has been investigated using single crystals. However, the number of studies on LnFeAsO systems are limited and the obtained results are different from each other. Additionally, no studies of the doping dependence of γ ρ have been reported. Here, we report on the transport properties of NdFeAs(O,F) thin films with dif-ferent F-doping levels grown on vicinal substrates for which the [001] direction is 5 • or 10 • tilted toward the [100] direction. Using these off-axis grown thin films, we evaluate the resistivity anisotropy, adopting the method that has been employed to study the anisotropy of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 Parent NdFeAsO thin films having a thickness of 28-90 nm were grown on vicinal cut MgO(001) and CaF 2 (001) single crystalline substrates at 800 • C by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The nominal vicinal angle θ vic was 5 • or 10 • measured from the substrate normal toward the [001] directions, as shown in fig. Phase purity and the out-of-plane texture were measured by x-ray diffraction (XRD) in Bragg-Brentano geometry using Cu-Kα radiation. The growth angle α (i.e. offset angle) was determined as the tilt angle where the intensity maxima was observed for the 003 reflection. In-plane orientation of NdFeAs(O,F) was investigated by φ-scans of the 200 peak. After structural characterisations, the films were photolithographically patterned and etched by Ar-ion milling to form micro-bridges TABLE I. Sample name, T dep of NdOF, the ratio of the thickness of NdOF (d NdOF ) and NdFeAsO (d NdFeAsO ), the c-axis lattice parameter, the growth angle (offset angle) and the onset Tc (T onset c ) of the samples used in this study. The sample nomenclature is based on the combination of the doping level, the value of onset Tc and the substrate. "OP" represents the optimum doping level at which the NdFeAs(O,F) films show Tc higher than 46 K. The NdFeAs(O,F) films having Tc below 44 K are defined as "UD". "PC" represents the parent compound, NdFeAsO. for transport measurements. As shown in fig. A precision of 0.005 • /2θ is guaranteed for our XRD device, which yields a relative uncertainty of δρc ρc ∼0.05% estimated using the typical values of ρ T and ρ L of our films. Misalignment may also occur when the sample was mounted on the sample holder. We checked the XRD data of our recent films grown on ordinary single crystalline substrates and found that the misalignment angle was at most 0.020 • /2θ. This yields a relative uncertainty of δρc ρc ∼0.39%. Together, the maximum uncertainty due to the inaccuracy of α is δρc ρc ∼0.50% in our measurements. The bridges had dimensions 50 μm-wide and 0.5 mm-long. For measuring the angulardependence of ρ ab , a magnetic field, H, was applied in the maximum Lorentz force configuration (H perpendicular to the bias current) at an angle θ measured from the c-axis. For some of the NdFeAs(O,F) films, Hall resistance was measured in the field range of μ 0 H = ±9 T to evaluate the carrier concentration. The samples studied here are summarised in table I. The RHEED image of NdFeAsO during the film growth of OP49/MgO showed long streaky patterns tilted by ∼5 • , indicative of an epitaxial growth with a smooth surface [fig. For the parent NdFeAsO and under-doped NdFeAs(O,F) films, a kink in the temperature dependence of ρ c due to the structural transition was observed at around 150 K. Below the structural transition temperature (T str ), ρ c decreased with lowering T . Here, a distinct feature was observed for the films on CaF 2 substrates: For both PC/CaF 2 and UD0/CaF 2 ρ c started to increase at around 30 K with decreasing temperature. Such behaviour was not observed for the corresponding films grown on MgO substrates. For all superconducting UD samples ρ c (T ) decreased below T str , and a gradual decrease of dρ c /dT close to T c was recognised. Similar behaviour was observed in other FBS single crystals like Ba 0.81 K 0.19 Fe 2 As 2 , BaFe 2 (As 0.77 P 0.23 ) 2 (i.e. under-doped regime) In fig. For the under-doped superconducting samples except UD36/MgO, γ ρ increased monotonously with decreasing T down to T c irrespective of the substrate. The increase was especially strong for the OP series samples, and showed an exponential-like T dependence. For OP49/MgO and OP56/CaF 2 , γ ρ were more than 220 near T c , which were quite large values compared to single crystals. Note that ρ c (T ) was metallic for both OP49/MgO and OP56/CaF 2 , and the increase of γ ρ (T ) with lowering T is because the rate of decrease of ρ ab (T ) was much faster than ρ c (T ). In order to evaluate the mass anisotropy in the superconducting state, the angular dependence of resistivity ρ ab (θ) was measured below T c . Figure where γ m is the mass anisotropy By assuming ρ ab = m * ab /ne 2 τ and ρ c = m * c /ne 2 τ , where n is the carrier density, e the electric charge, and τ the relaxation time of carriers, the mass anisotropy γ 2 m should be equal to γ ρ at T c . The mass anisotropy and square root of γ ρ as a function of temperature are shown in fig. NdFeAs(O,F) epitaxial thin films having different F contents were grown successfully on vicinal cut MgO and CaF 2 substrates by MBE. Using these films the anisotropy of the electrical transport properties were investigated. The c-axis resistivity was always higher than ρ ab irrespective of the F content, resulting from the anisotropic electronic structure. The temperature-dependent ρ c (T ) for superconducting films was metallic at low temperature, which differs from the other reports on the LnFeAsO system. In the superconducting state, the mass anisotropy for the superconducting thin films were derived using the anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau approach. Near T c , the resultant values are different to these obtained from the resistivity anisotropy, which may be due to the multi-band nature of Nd-FeAs(O,F). To investigate whether the presence of NdOF affects the superconducting properties, the NdOF over-layer was removed by Ar ionbeam etching. It is clear from fig. Figure 