With demonstrated applications ranging from metrology to telecommunications, soliton microresonator frequency combs have emerged over the past decade as a remarkable new technology. However, standard implementations only allow for the generation of combs whose repetition rate is tied close to the fundamental resonator free-spectral range (FSR), offering little or no dynamic control over the comb line spacing. Here we propose and experimentally demonstrate harmonic and rational harmonic driving as novel techniques that allow for the robust generation of soliton frequency combs with discretely adjustable frequency spacing. By driving an integrated Kerr microresonator with a periodic train of picosecond pulses whose repetition rate is set close to an integer harmonic of the 3.23 GHz cavity FSR, we deterministically generate soliton frequency combs with frequency spacings discretely adjustable between 3.23 GHz and 19.38 GHz. More remarkably, we also demonstrate that driving the resonator at rational fractions of the FSR allows for the generation of combs whose frequency spacing corresponds to an integer harmonic of the pump repetition rate. By measuring the combs' radio-frequency spectrum, we confirm operation in the low-noise soliton regime with no supermode noise. The novel techniques demonstrated in our work provide new degrees of freedom for the design of synchronously pumped soliton frequency combs. Ever since their first demonstration [1], microresonator optical frequency combs ("microcombs") Soliton microcombs are conventionally generated by driving a high-Q Kerr microresonator with a continuous wave (CW) laser In a pioneering recent work, Obrzud et al. demonstrated that some of the limitations of CW-driven systems can be overcome by driving the resonator with a train of pulses synchronized to the round trip time of the cavity In this Article, we propose and experimentally demonstrate novel pulsed driving techniques that allow for the deterministic generation of soliton frequency combs with discretely controllable repetition rate. In particular, leveraging knowledge from the field of actively modelocked lasers We consider a Kerr nonlinear microresonator driven with a train of pulses whose temporal duration is much shorter than the cavity round trip time (but much larger than the temporal width of the solitons). The repetition rate f in of the input driving pulse train is set close to a rational fraction of the cavity FSR, i.e., where m and n are integers with no common factors. In steady-state, the intracavity field is comprised of m equally spaced pulses, each of which is repumped by the driving pulse train once every n round trips [see Fig. Each of the intracavity pulses can independently support a single soliton that is temporally locked at a set position along the pulse envelope Figure Before proceeding to our experimental demonstrations, we comment on two salient technical details. First, when n > 1, the solitons circulating in the cavity are not repumped every round trip, which leads to a reduction in the system's effective driving power where P , γ, and θ correspond to the peak power of the input pump pulse, the Kerr nonlinearity coefficient, and the input coupling coefficient, respectively. (Solitons can exist only for X 2 For experimental demonstration, we use an integrated waveguide ring resonator (WRR) formed from a buried Ge-doped low-loss silica-on-silicon waveguide [see Fig. Figure In order to first verify that our system can deterministically generate single soliton frequency combs, we set the pump's average power to 26 mW (corresponding to a peak power of about 4 W) and repetition rate close to the fundamental cavity FSR (3.23 GHz). Figure To demonstrate harmonic driving, we set the pump repetition rate close to an integer multiple of the cavity FSR, and increase the average power so as to maintain peak power suitable for comb generation. For each of the repetition rates tested (up to six times the cavity FSR), we have identified and been able to manually tune into the low-noise soliton regime exactly as described above for the case of synchronous driving. Figures To demonstrate rational harmonic driving, we set the pump repetition rate close to a rational fraction of the cavity FSR. As for synchronous and harmonic driving discussed above, we have observed the characteristic soli- ton step signature that can be manually accessed for all the rational fractions that we have tested. Note that the RF spectrum of the output comb is measured through a band-pass filter that excludes the pump, explaining why harmonics of the pump repetition rate that are not multiples of the cavity FSR do not appear in that spectrum. Finally, the results shown in Fig. We have proposed and experimentally demonstrated harmonic and rational harmonic driving as flexible schemes to generate low-noise soliton microcombs with comb spacings that are close to integer multiples of the cavity FSR (and exactly locked to an external RF signal). Experimentally, using a single integrated silica waveguide ring resonator, we have demonstrated output combs with discretely adjustable frequency spacings between 3.23 GHz and 19.38 GHz. Moreover, we have shown that rational harmonic driving allows for the generation of output combs with multi-FSR frequency spacings whilst driving at sub-FSR frequencies. Measurements of the combs' RF spectrum confirm operation in the low-noise soliton regime with no supermode noise. We believe that the new driving schemes demonstrated in our work could find useful application in areas, such as reconfigurable optical communication networks, where the ability to dynamically adjust the comb spacing of a transmitter or a receiver could prove beneficial. In addition, our results further underscore the fact that pulsed driving can enable soliton microcombs in resonator platforms that have not previously been considered suitable for that purpose, but that may nevertheless offer benefits in terms of ease-of-fabrication, absolute linewidth, or operational flexibility. As a forward-looking example, combining the novel driving schemes demonstrated in our work with high-finesse macroscopic optical fiber ring resonators could allow for the realization of novel sources of ultrashort pulses with GHz repetition rates discretely tunable in MHz steps.