High-temperature superconductors are reviewed in light of the fact that their binding energy is ionic. The conducting electrons are dominated by the much larger energy scales coming from ligand Coulomb integrals, including the out-of-plane ones, which are responsible for the Fermi arcs. The historic reinterpretation of Hund's rule from an intraelectronic to a central mean-field effect is applied to compare the cuprates to the pnictides. It is argued that the cuprates conform to the now-standard central-field paradigm, while the generally abandoned intraelectronic mechanism is exceptionally applicable to the pnictides. A non-adiabatic Fermi liquid paradigm is inferred from the phenomenological evidence. Glueless superconductivity is interpreted as the limiting case of Cooper-pair scattering in cuprates when the Cu ion is perfectly rigid. No generally accepted explanation exists for the superconductivity (SC) of cuprate perovskites There is an alternative approach, also as old as cuprate research itself, of enriching the context, in the hope of reaching a complete physical narrative before reduction. One considers the actual chemical composition of the hightemperature superconductors in an attempt to establish the main features of the physical regime required for high-T c superconductivity to occur Metallic binding means that the only way to provoke a metal-insulator transition is to evaporate the sample. Mott The term Mott transition usually refers to a different mechanism Between the 1930's and the 1960's, it was generally believed that the ubiquitous Hund's rule had been understood along the lines originally proposed by Slater Based on the above insight, one may distinguish two kinds of strong electronic correlations in ionic metals. One is radial or mean-field, encoded e.g. by the +U correction in DFT calculations. The other is angular, or strongly correlated in the strict sense, typically described by dynamic mean-field theory (DMFT). It will be argued below that the first is dominant in the cuprates, the second in the pnictides. Landau by adding a fermionic correction (1 -n) ln(1 -n) to Boltzmann's H-theorem. It refers to thermodynamic quantities Eq. ( The full 3D structure of cuprates was taken into account in a comprehensive study The first departure from chemical realism is to drop the 4s orbital, giving the well-known three-band Emery model One can reduce further to a one-band model with more than nearestneighbor hoppings, the so-called t-t ′ or t-t ′ -t ′′ model. Here the t ′ term is required for particle-hole symmetry breaking, due to the O orbitals in reality. It must change sign between the hole-and electron-doped cuprates in order to fit ARPES 2 Strong correlations in high-T c superconductors Fermi arcs in cuprates have been the object of much scrutiny The key to such a construction is to model the out-of-plane dopands as real physical atoms, which is quite demanding computationally because it involves large unit cells in a DFT calculation. Such a large cell corresponds to a small Brillouin zone in the plane. In this zone, there are numerous Fermi surfaces which are all closed or touch the edge, because DFT is a one-body approach. In order to map the results onto the usual large zone of the CuO 2 planes, a standard band-unfolding algorithm is used, originally developed for disordered alloys The logic of a counterexample turns any criticism of DFT on its head here: the more physically limited the calculation, the more difficult to escape the conclusion that the carriers in the real arcs are a Fermi liquid. The Brillouin zone is a kinematic construction, while the band-unfolding is just a projection, so the only physical requirement for the calculation to be realistic is for the Coulomb field of the dopands to reach the planes, i.e. be unscreened between them, because that is how the dopand (large) unit cell becomes relevant for the in-plane carriers. The calculated wave functions verify this requirement. One finds, in laboratory space, a local polarization response in the atomic charge densities, stopping abruptly at both nearest CuO 2 planes, which screen the dopands efficiently in the perpendicular direction. Notably, in wave-function space, the Cu component of the metallic electrons on the arc consists of planar d x 2 -y 2 orbitals only, while the antinodal gapped state contains an essentially random superposition of various planar and perpendicular orbitals. The physical picture emerging from this calculation is that the arcs are a simple kinematic effect. The antinodal gap is not due to 2D intraelectronic correlations, but rather the opposite, the Fermi liquid in the arcs appears where the 3D charge-transfer insulator ("rock salt"), which would normally be expected to gap the whole zone, cannot make itself felt. Experimentally, it is possible to manipulate arc length by out-of-plane dopands at fixed carrier concentration The small Brillouin zone pertaining to the large dopand unit cell is not observed because of dopand disorder, which was not included in the calculation In the above calculation, the large on-site repulsion U within the copper d orbital was treated with the usual +U correction where the trace is over the d orbitals only. Because the total density matrix is idempotent, ρ 2 = ρ, the trace is identically zero if extended over all orbitals in the calculation. As it stands, the correction penalizes departures from the idempotent occupation numbers, zero and one, in the d orbitals only, thus pushing the Cu orbitals towards the ionic limit. With a value U = 4 eV, known to give the correct formation energy of LSCO, the measured optical gap of 1.8 eV was obtained at half-filling, a useful reality check on the calculation In the context of Hund's rule, the success of the +U correction means that the Cu orbital has compensated the strong intraatomic correlation radially, by transferring charge to the ligand oxygen, which is itself not strongly correlated. The crucial requirement for this effect is structural, namely that the O sites bridge the Cu sites, as they do in the cuprates, precluding a direct Cu-Cu hybridization. This structure is reflected in a 2p-3d overlap, which in turn allows the correction (2) to be non-zero, because the sum over d orbitals does not include the oxygen p ones, required to establish the idempotence of the density matrix. Notably, the same Cu-O bond determines the size of the unit cell in the plane, so the standard Hund's rule driving mechanism, namely the size of the atom, can be said to be active here as well, mutatis mutandis. Compare this to the pnictides, specifically (Ba,K)Fe 2 As 2 (KFeAs) With radial relaxation turned off, the strong correlation effects in the t 2g bands are driven solely by intraelectronic repulsion. They are expected to be angular, as in the original explanation of Hund's rule. Consistently with that interpretation, a 0.2 eV discrepancy with experiment in the position of a t 2g band maximum Notably, the measured effect of strong correlations is nearly ten times smaller than in LSCO, where the optical gap of 1.8 eV, and the arcs, are accounted for by the +U correction There is little doubt at present, that the mechanism of SC in sulphur hydride (H 3 S) In the 200 K phase, the H atoms bridge positions of S atoms in a cubic lattice. It is obvious from this structure that pressure affects the H-S charge transfer through the corresponding interatomic overlap, responsible for the lattice constant. This "radial" situation is directly analogous to the cuprates. On the other hand, the 100 K phase consists of individual H 3 S tetrahedra, themselves arranged in a cubic lattice. Again, it is clear from the structure that pressure will affect the distance between these tetrahedra before it changes the the H-S distance within them. The S atom is in the fixed-size, or "angular", situation now, like in the pnictides -and T c drops by half. In light of the program outlined in the introduction, one should ask, does materials science bring us any closer to understanding high-T c superconductivity. There are several questions involved. Is the high-T c mechanism in the cuprates and the pnictides the same, or different? Are the strong correlation effects essential to it, or just a distraction? Is the BCS mechanism relevant, or not? A basic property of the BCS mechanism is that it can use any scattering in the particle-particle channel as long as it affects free carriers on the Fermi surface, i.e. is not gapped. If there are several such mechanisms, they add up to raise T c . The physical reason for this lack of discrimination is that Cooper pairs are not bound, so the carriers travel as free particles between scattering events Models with bound pairs are alternatives to BCS, in which the condensate is a superfluid of such pairs. They have mostly been based on a polaronic mechanism The other two questions can be coupled. Suppose one were told that the SC mechanism in cuprates and pnictides is the same. Would one be forced to conclude that the strong correlations were a distraction? The materials-science analysis allows one, somewhat surprisingly, to answer in the negative. One can imagine instead, whatever the Coulomb correlations are doing well in the radial channel, they are doing half as well in the angular one. This conjecture is in accord with the history of Hund's rule, where the radial mechanism was hidden in plain sight for forty years, simply because the weaker angular mechanism provided the same outcome. It brings into focus a distinction between two issues concerning the SC mechanism. One is the reason for T c > 0, i.e. that SC appears at all, the other the reason why T c is high. The first issue centers on the carrier states involved. For example, alkali metals are Fermi liquids which do not superconduct. Strikingly, they become superconducting under moderate pressure just as their band structure departs from the free-electron picture, by acquiring a significant p or d component, due to overlap of ionic cores The second issue centers on the SC scattering mechanism. The traditional reason to connect strong correlations with high T c is that they are obvious candidates to provide a high-energy scale for the SC scattering. The comparison of cuprates and pnictides suggests that one needs to take into account both structural and dynamic roles of the large Coulomb integrals in the search for a high T c . In both classes of materials, the structure ensures that the metallic carriers are not slowed down by polaronic effects. Specifically, in the cuprates the O-O hopping is mostly by a virtual highenergy process Concerning dynamics, the cuprates and pnictides are different, but not essentially so. In the cuprates, a recent systematic study In the pnictides, the dominant interactions are intraelectronic, of the kind called angular here. The ensuing elaborate correlations give rise to effective magnetic terms up to next-nearest neighbors It is encouraging that the ten times lower scattering scales in the pnictides translate into a SC T c only 2-3 times lower than in cuprates. This indicates that even a lower-energy scattering mechanism may be enhanced by a propitious chemical structure, which enforces the Fermi-liquid properties kinematically, decoupling them from the low-energy feedbacks relevant for normal metals. Indeed, when scaled to the number of carriers, resistivity in the cuprates follows a pure T 2 law over a much wider temperature range The natural framework for the SC mechanism in high-temperature superconductors is the BCS mechanism in its wider sense, with Cooper pairing but not necessarily via phonon interactions. Under the usual adiabatic Fermi-liquid construction, the SC scattering mechanism feeds back into the effective mass, leading to instabilities if it is too strong. An ideal scenario for high-temperature SC emerges from the comparative study of ionic metals, in which this feedback does not happen. Observations indicate a Fermi liquid interacting via a high-energy scattering mechanism, while its own properties are determined kinematically by the much-higher-energy ionic background. In the cuprates, the unscreened dopands are a critical part of that background. This scenario extends the Fermi-liquid concept into the non-adiabatic regime, accounting in particular for the Fermi arcs. In the SC state, a difference between cuprates and pnictides is that in the cuprates, not only the Fermi-liquid, but also the SC scales are affected by the structural ones, in particular the size of the unit cell.