We performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) studies of the electronic structure of the nematic phase in LaFeAsO. Degeneracy breaking between the dxz and dyz hole bands near the Γ and M point is observed in the nematic phase. Different temperature dependent band splitting behaviors are observed at the Γ and M points. The energy of the band splitting near the M point decreases as the temperature decreases while it has little temperature dependence near the Γ point. The nematic nature of the band shift near the M point is confirmed through a detwin experiment using a piezo device. Since a momentum dependent splitting behavior has been observed in other iron based superconductors, our observation confirms that the behavior is a universal one among iron based superconductors. The discovery of iron based superconductors (IBS) over a decade ago brought renewed interest in high T C superconductivity research A number of angle-resolve photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments have been conducted to investigate the rotational symmetry broken electronic states. However, interpretations of experimental data differ from each other, making the origin of the nematic phase a more controversial issue. Various scenarios were proposed as the origin of the nematic phase based on ARPES results, such as simple Ferro-orbital order In resolving such issue, confirming if the behavior of the nematic electronic structure is universal among IBS should be an important step. Despite the intensive research on the nematic phase, there is a lack of APRES study on the nematic phase of LaFeAsO even though it is the first IBS that was discovered We performed temperature dependent experiments presented to gain more information. Experiments were done 1 hour after cleaving the sample at 30 K to remove the surface reconstruction effect Detwinning was done by using a piezo stack based strain device which was adopted in previous FeSe studies The discovery of the nematic band shift near M was taken to be an evidence for a Ferro-orbital order which in turn was considered to be the origin of the nematic phase. It is theoretically suggested that a nearly constant band splitting is expected in the entire Brillouin zone when Ferro-orbital order exists In conclusion, we report the detailed electronic structure of the nematic phase in LaFeAsO. We observe momentum dependent d xz /d yz band splitting behavior near the Γ and M points in temperature dependent experiments. The splitting size near the M point decreases as the temperature increases, while it is less temperature sensitive near the Γ point. We confirmed the nematic nature of the band splitting near M by piezo detwin method. Our observation establishes the momentum dependent splitting as the universal behavior of the electronic structure in the nematic phase of IBS. Our result suggests that instability causes the observed universal momentum dependent band splitting should be the true origin of the nematic phase.