Solar still is a convenient off-grid device for desalination, which can provide fresh water for families, ships, islands and so on. The conventional inclined solar still (ISS) suffers from low efficiency and low productivity. To improve the performance of solar still, a flat solar still (FSS) is proposed, which has a working principle similar to the solar cell. The condensate water in FSS is collected by the capillary grid attached under the ultra-hydrophilic glass cover, instead of by gravity. Therefore, FSS avoids the inclined structure and is much more compact than ISS. The daily productivity of FSS reaches up to 4.3 kg/m 2 . Theoretical analysis shows that the enhanced mass transfer in FSS by the compact structure is an important factor for high performance. More interestingly, FSS can also be easily extended to more stage for latent heat recovery. The results show that the daily productivity of a double-stage FSS reaches up to 7 kg/m 2 , which is much higher than the conventional solar still. FSS paves a new way in designing and optimizing of solar still. The fresh water is of major importance to human beings' survival as well as our economic activities such as agriculture and industry. Nowadays billions of people are suffering freshwater scarcity The solar still, a typical small scale solar desalination system, provide a solution for the water shortage problem in remote regions, arid areas, and emergency situation etc. In recent years, many efforts have been done to improve the performance of solar still by using micro/nano structured porous materials Nevertheless, simply applying micro/nano materials to conventional solar stills might obtain a poor productivity. Many works reported that solar stills with advanced micro/nano materials are about 1-4 kg/day and the corresponding efficiency is below 40% under natural sun, which is similar to the solar still without micro/nano materials 19, 28-30 . It is found that the inefficient is resulted from the inherent disadvantages of conventional ISS, such as the inefficient condensation, solar reflection by condensate droplets, large heat loss of system, and so on Therefore, some new kinds of solar stills are studied recently, such as the thermal concentrated or thermally-localized solar still In this paper, by imitating the working principle of solar cell, we propose a high performance flat solar still (FSS) which breaks the stereotype and makes an innovation in solar still. Similar to that electrons are collected by metallic grid in solar cell, water molecules are produced by solar energy and collected by the capillary grid in the flat solar still. FSS is capable of working continuously with neither salt crystallization on the evaporation surface nor necessary of massive metal for cooling. To illustrate the advantages of FSS, firstly, indoor experiments by using solar simulator are carried out to explore the effect of different factors on FSS. Theoretical analysis is also carried out to uncover the advantages of FSS. Lastly, the potential of constructing high efficiency double-stage FSS is verified and discussed. The proposed FSS shows great potential for large scale application and may open a new avenue for solar still system. To show the difference between ISS and FSS, the schematic diagram of ISS and FSS are illustrated in Fig. In FSS, the inclined structure is avoided, due to the condensate water on glass cover is collected by the capillary action of cotton threads. Thereby, the four walls of the basin in FSS have the same height and can be much lower than that in ISS (Fig. The detailed schematic diagram of FSS is shown in Fig. The low contact angle of glass allows vapor to condense into a continuous thin film, which has two benefits. Firstly, the glass will remain clear during the condensation process, hence more solar irradiation will enter the solar still. As shown in Fig. Firstly, mini-prototypes of both FSS and ISS were made and investigated indoor by using a solar simulator. The inner volume of the small FSS is 5 cm (length) × 5 cm (width) × 3 cm (height). The intensity of solar irradiation from the solar simulator is fixed at 1kW/m 2 unless otherwise mentioned. The FSS with ultra-hydrophilic glass and soda-lime glass were compared by the small scale system. The hourly water productivity of the small FSS with UG is 0.75 kg/(m 2 •h) which is 70% higher than that of using SG (Fig. The productivity of a small conventional ISS was also measured. It shows that there is barely fresh water collected after two hours of experiment (Fig. Besides the effect of glass cover, the effect of cotton threads is also studied on the number of parallel thread (Fig. where is productivity; 香 is the total enthalpy of phase change, which contains latent heat and sensible heat. 香 can be obtained according to ref. The temperatures of FSS in laboratory conditions are also measured (Fig. The temperature of both glass cover (Tg) and water at evaporation surface (Tg) raise very quickly during the first several minutes, which indicates a great solar absorption and phase change performance in FSS. After 30 minutes, the temperature is nearly converged and raises very slowly. The temperature of water at the evaporation surface and glass cover reach up to 70 °C and 65 °C , respectively, after two hours of the experiment. The maximum temperature of small FSS in laboratory is similar to that of large FSS in outdoor experiments (Figure The daily productivity of FSS and ISS under different solar irradiation is shown in Fig. Therefore, it can be expected that the productivity of FSS can be further enhanced by replacing the cotton threads with other transparent materials. Besides, FSS shows great salt rejecting ability and there is no salt crystallization in FSS during the experimental days, which enables FSS to work continuously for a long time. Details of salt rejecting analysis can be found in Supplementary Information, Section VI. FSS increase from 53% to 72%. This enhancement is higher than that of single stage FSS and ISS, which indicates that the superiority of a double stage FSS will be more obvious when higher solar intensity is available, such as using solar still with solar concentrator. The productivity also significantly increases by using double-stage FSS (Fig. The daily productivity of double-stage FSS reaches up to 7.02 kg/m 2 under 6.7 kWh/m 2 of solar irradiation, i.e. 1.05 kg/kWh which is around 60% higher than that of single stage FSS. Higher productivity can be expected when the solar irradiation is higher during a clear day. Meanwhile, 2.8 kg/m 2 of fresh water can be obtained even when the solar irradiation is very weak during an overcast day (3.6 kWh/m 2 ). The high productivity of double stage FSS shows the effective and importance of latent heat recovery in solar still. Overall, the FSS proposed in this work shows great performance compared to other conventional solar stills in references. The productivity of conventional solar stills with various modification are usually between 3-5 kg/m 2 which is much lower than the double stage FSS as shown in Fig. In conclusion, based on the ultra-hydrophilic glass, cotton threads, wick materials and nanoparticles, a high efficient and compact flat solar still is proposed. The indoor results show that the wettability of glass is very important factor in FSS. The hourly productivity of FSS using ultra-hydrophilic glass is 70% higher than that of using ordinary glass. Meanwhile, the number of threads attached to the glass for fresh water collection also affect the productivity. The productivity increases a little when the number of threads increases from 0.4 to 1.2 cm -1 . Moreover, the length of thread at vertical direction doesn't affect the productivity for the range from 2 cm to 10 cm. Furthermore, the performance of FSS is studied outdoor under natural solar irradiation. FSS could work continuously without salt crystallization on the evaporation surface. Experimental results show that the compact structure is very important for improving the productivity of FSS. Productivity decreases more than 30% when the height of vapor chamber increases from 2.5 cm to 9.5 cm. Theoretical analysis reveals that the convective mass transfer in the vapor chamber can be enhanced by the compact structure hence higher productivity. The daily productivity of single-stage FSS reaches to 4 kg/m 2 under 6 kWh/m 2 of solar irradiation. Furthermore, due to the latent heat recovery, the daily productivity of double-stage FSS reaches up to 7.02 kg/m 2 under 6.7 kWh/m 2 of solar irradiation, which is significantly higher than the conventional solar still. The high performance of FSS shows its great potential for practical application. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. The setup is shown in Fig S1 . A solar simulator (CEL-S500 + AM1.5 filter) was used to generate the solar beam, the solar intensity was measured by a power meter (PM-150-50C) and adjusted to 1kW/m 2 . FSS was insulated by foam with 3 cm of thickness. 5 mm of saline (3.5 wt.% NaCl) water layer was put inside of the FSS for desalination. The fresh water from cotton thread was collected by a small beaker. The The schematic diagram of measurement setup in laboratory. In this work, the black linen cloth and cotton thread were chosen as the wick material, (shown in Figure The solar absorptivity of black wick material (linen) and wick material with carbon black is measured in our previous study The solar evaporation performance of the small scale FSS. The evaporation performance of the small scale FSS ( 5 cm × 5 cm × 3 cm ) is measured as shown in Fig. The productivity, , of FSS is the amount of condensed water on the glass cover, which is decided by the condition of both evaporation and condensation surface, as well as the structure of the phase change chamber. Based on heat and mass analogy, can be obtained by where is the convective mass transfer coefficient between evaporation surface and glass cover, A is the area of FSS, and are the mass fractions of water vapor in the saturated air at the evaporation surface and the glass cover, respectively. The mass fraction is related to the saturated vapor pressure, , and the total pressure, : where is the density of the moist air, the saturated vapor pressure is determined by the moist air temperature T 7 : 25 31͵ 51 The total pressure P in the vapor chamber is regarded as the ambient air pressure, due to the chamber is connected to the ambient through water feeding and rejecting pipes. The convective mass transfer coefficient can be obtained by using the heat and mass transfer analogy. For heat transfer in a small horizontal chamber with hot surface at the bottom, the Nusselt number is described as where and are the Grashof number and Prandtl number, respectively. and are defined as: where g is the gravitational acceleration, 1 is the volume expansion coefficient of moist air and α is the thermal diffusivity of moist air, is the characteristic size of chamber, which equals to the height of FSS, i.e. . is temperature difference between the evaporation surface and the glass cover, is the kinematic viscosity of moist air. Based on the heat and mass transfer analogy, we have S͵ where is the convective heat transfer coefficient, is the Lewis number: where is the thermal conductivity of air, D is the diffusion coefficient of water vapor in air: where 298 ൌ 256 × 1ൌ m 2 s is the diffusion coefficient at 298K. The thermophysical property of the saturated moist air for calculation can be obtained by the following equations The value of coefficients in the equations are listed in Table The salt rejecting ability of solar still is very important for preventing salt crystallization. The traditional solar still directly heats up the bulk water to evaporate without the problem of salt crystallization. However, the evaporation setup in this works contains very thin layer of water. Therefore, if the evaporation is too fast, the salt concentration will be too high on the evaporation surface, and finally lead to salt crystallization. In order to guide the design of evaporation setup, the effect of the structure parameters of the evaporation setup should be discussed. Fig. Given that the evaporation unit does not change along the Y direction (perpendicular to paper), only x-z section is taken as the analysis object. There are three main structural parameters that affect the salt rejecting, including the half width of evaporation surface L1, the height of evaporation surface L2 and the thickness of wick material δf. During the evaporation process, a salt concentration gradient is formed along the direction of salt diffusion (Direction X). The concentration of salt at three positions are important in analysis, including the concentration of salt in the center of the evaporation surface C1, the concentration of salt at the edge of the evaporation surface C2 and the initial concentration of salt water C3. In analysis, the salt concentration gradient in the direction of thickness of wick material is ignored. The salt rejecting process in the wick material can be described as: Where is the mass flux of salt, m is the diffusion coefficient of NaCl in water. When there is no advection, m 1 99 × 1ൌ In the evaporation process, the mass of salt accumulated on the evaporation outdoor experiments as shown in Figure Salt rejecting during the evaporation process. The comparison between modified FSS and modified ISS is also studied in order to reveal the importance of each modification step by step (Figure Therefore, the better transmittance of glass cover resulted from ultra-hydrophilic treatment is helpful to the improvement. Another important point is FES, which creates heat localization on the evaporation surface and enhances the efficiency of It should be noted that the difference between ISS and FSS should be more obvious if transparent threads are used to avoid blocking the solar irradiation. The cotton threads account for around 10% of the total area hence the input solar irradiation in FSS is 10% less than that in ISS. Besides, the condensation area in FSS is smaller than that of ISS by 15%, which decrease the condensation rate of FSS as compared to ISS. This disadvantage can be avoided if FSS is used in active mode by using external condensation. The outdoor experiments were carried out for many days. Herein, the temperature 