The research on cold-atom interferometers gathers a large community of about 50 groups worldwide both in the academic and now in the industrial sectors. The interest in this sub-field of quantum sensing and metrology lies in the large panel of possible applications of cold-atom sensors for measuring inertial and gravitational signals with a high level of stability and accuracy. This review presents the evolution of the field over the last 30 years and focuses on the acceleration of the research effort in the last 10 years. The article describes the physics principle of cold-atom gravito-inertial sensors as well as the main parts of hardware and the expertise required when starting the design of such sensors. It then reviews the progress in the development of instruments measuring gravitational and inertial signals, with a highlight on the limitations to the performances of the sensors, on their applications, and on the latest directions of research. Interferometry with matter waves nearly dates back to the first ages of quantum mechanics as the concept of matter waves played a key role in the development of the quantum theory, following the theoretical work of de Broglie in 1924 and the ensuing experiments of Davisson, Germer and Thomson with electron beams. Since then, performing interference experiments with various types of matter-waves has driven the efforts of several communities working with electrons, neutrons, atoms, molecules, or anti-matter. The field of atom interferometry has developped rapidly with the advancement of atomic physics, which offers a high level of control and reliability to the experimental physicist. This degree of control has become even more impressive since the advent of laser cooling techniques in the 1980s, which enhance the wave nature of atoms by increasing their coherence length. Since pioneering experiments in 1991 As of 2020, about 50 research groups worldwide are actively developing atom interferometers for different applications, and investigating techniques to improve the performances of cold-atom inertial sensors. Currently, a) Electronic mail: remi.geiger@obspm.fr b) Electronic mail: arnaud.landragin@obspm.fr c) Electronic mail: sebastien.merlet@obspm.fr d) Electronic mail: franck.pereira@obspm.fr the research focuses on three mains aspects: 1. pushing the performances of current sensors; 2. identifying new sensor architectures or generic techniques that can bring performance improvement or simplified architectures; 3. using atom interferometers for various fundamental and/or field applications. Improving the performances of atom inertial sensors covers different aspects: their sensitivity, but also their stability, accuracy, dynamic range, compactness, transportability, ease-of-use and cost. While the first 20 years of research were essentially focused on sensitivity improvements and tests of fundamental physics in laboratory environments, more projects have started to address field applications. In particular, this is the case for inertial guidance, which requires at the same time high levels of stability, wide dynamic ranges and high sampling frequencies, compactness and robustness. For this field of application though, cold-atom sensors are not yet mature enough to compete with other technologies in all these aspects (e.g. ring laser gyroscopes for navigation). In that sense, the course for greater performance is, for example, at the core of the Quantum Sensors and Metrology pillar of the several quantum technology programs over the world. Several reviews of the field have been published in the last 10 years: the review Ref. This article is organized as follows. In section II, we present the principles of light-pulse atom interferometry which are generic to the different sensor architectures described in this review. We explain the main limitations to the sensitivity which drive the design of instruments. Section III presents the most important elements of hardware common to any cold-atom inertial sensor. Section IV shows the developments of cold-atom gravimetry and its applications. Section V focuses on the research on accelerometers and gyroscopes as the potential building blocks of future inertial navigation systems. Section VI briefly presents for completeness an overview of other inertial measurements performed with cold-atom sensors, such as measurement of recoil velocities, prospects for gravitational wave detection or tests of the weak equivalence principle. Section VII describes the latest atomic physics techniques under study in academic laboratories to improve the performances of cold-atom inertial sensors. After the conclusion of the review, a list of summary points highlights the most important ideas of the article and appendix A presents an up-to-date list of the different research groups actively working in the field of cold-atom inertial sensors. In this section, we explain the basic principle of light pulse interferometry with cold atoms, from the description of the light pulse beamsplitters to the creation of an atom interferometer. We consider here the case of beamsplitters based on two photon transitions, such as based on stimulated Raman transitions or Bragg diffraction ; the later being a degenerated case of the former. It represents the vast majority of atom interferometers, because it allows at the same time for very high sensitivities and accuracies, for a good compromise in terms of simplicity. Indeed, the use of optical transitions allows for both a large velocity transfer to the atom (of the order of the cm.s -1 ) needed for the sensitivity, and a very good control of the diffraction process, required for the accuracy. Furthermore, the use of two-photon transitions releases the constraint on the control of the optical phase of the lasers used in the beamsplitters, as only the phase difference between the two laser beams need to be controlled at first sight. In the case of Raman transitions, the atoms interact with two counter-propagating lasers, of angular frequencies ω 1 and ω 2 and wavevectors k 1 and k 2 . These two light fields are detuned from a strong electronic transition (typically a few hundreds of MHz to a few GHz away from the D2 line of alkali atoms) but their frequency difference matches the energy difference between two fundamental atomic states |a and |b , which are then coupled by the light fields in a so-called lambda scheme (Fig. The process being coherent, the system undergoes Rabi oscillations, such that by adjusting the duration and Rabi frequency of the laser pulses, one can prepare the state of an atom in a superposition of the two couple states with controlled weights. In particular, a so-called π/2 pulse acts as a matter wave beamsplitter, placing an atom in a balanced 50/50 superposition of the two couple states. A twice longer pulse is a π pulse, which swaps the two states, acting as a mirror for the matter wave. In the most simple case, a sequence of three π/2ππ/2 pulses (of duration τ -2ττ for a constant Rabi frequency), separated by free evolutions times T -T then realizes the atom interferometer displayed in figure The populations in the two output ports of the interferometer are measured using a state selective fluorescence detection At the laser pulses, the phase difference between the counter-propagating lasers φ gets imprinted onto the atomic wavefunctions, so that in the end, the interferometer phase shift is given by a linear combination of the lasers phase difference φ at the three pulses For free falling atoms, this leads to where a and Ω are respectively the acceleration and the rotation rate of the experiment with respect to a reference frame defined by the purely inertial motion of the atoms. This dependence to inertial forces allows one to actually realize sensitive and absolute atom interferometry based inertial sensors: accelerometers and gyroscopes. The intrinsic sensitivity of these sensors is limited by the noise on the measurement of the transition probability, and ultimately by the so-called quantum projection noise resulting from the projective measurements of the populations in the two ports of the interferometer The hardware common to all cold-atom inertial sensors consists of a vacuum chamber where the atoms are interrogated, a laser system required for cooling, manipulating and detecting them, an automatized control system to operate and interface the instruments, and some auxiliary instrumentation to stabilize the experiment. A general view of the different sub-systems is presented in figure At first, a sample of cold atoms is prepared in an Ultra-High Vacuum (UHV) chamber surrounded by magnetic shields, using standard laser cooling methods. The level of vacuum in the chamber must be below 10 -9 hPa in order to be non limiting for the coherence of the system with atoms evolving freely during hundreds of ms. Such UHV level is reached with combinations of pumping technologies such as turbomolecular pumps during backing of the chamber, and getter and ion pumps after baking. Moreover, the vacuum chamber shall be made of nonmagnetic materials (e.g. Titanium, aluminium, glass ...) in order to limit the magnetic field gradients which are a source of stray forces owing to the second order Zeeman effect (for atom interferometers operating on transitions insensitive to the first order Zeeman effect). When metallic, the chambers are machined to accommodate typically a dozen of optical windows. They are interfaced with coils that generate magnetic fields: a magnetic gradient for the MOT phase and an homogeneous bias field for the interferometer itself. Most often alkali atoms are used, and a preferred choice is Since cooling the atoms and manipulating their quantum state is performed with lasers, the optical system represents a key subsystem of a cold-atom inertial sensor. The choice of laser technology is intimately linked with the nature of the atom used. Since alkali atoms are widely used, in particular Rubidium and Cesium interrogated on their D 2 lines (respectively at 780 nm and 852 nm), semiconductor diode laser technology has been historically vastly deployed The five optical frequencies needed to perform a coldatom inertial sensor are represented in figure Optical collimators are needed to shape and route light beams from the laser system to the vacuum chamber. When only one collimator was used in Ref. The automatized control of the apparatus, in particular of the laser system, shares the same constraints as typical atomic physics experiments: it requires tens of analog and digital outputs with temporal resolution below the μs, agile frequency synthesizers (RF and microwaves) and analog-to-digital converters. An important literature is available on the topic which is a key concern in experiments due to the rapid evolution of hardware control standards as well as operating system versions. We therefore refer the reader to the references in the most recent publications or online materials on this subject, e.g. Refs. When increasing the interrogation time T , phase noise induced by parasitic vibrations (i.e. at frequencies higher that the sampling frequency) rapidly constitutes the dominant limit to the sensitivity. Already when 2T gets larger than a few ms, ground vibration noise will typically limit the sensitivity, to a level of ∼ 10 -5 m.s -2 .τ -1/2 , so that the sensors need to be isolated and/or the vibrations measured to reject them. Different methods have been developed in order to reduce this noise source, which have to be adapted to the environmental conditions, being thus different for static sensors in a laboratory, transportable sensors in outdoor environment, and mobile sensors for onboard measurements. They rely on the use of isolation platforms, and auxiliary sensors like seismometers or accelerometers, eventually combined together, or on the development of better immune interferometer schemes Gravity sensors are without any doubt the most emblematic inertial sensors based on atom interferometry. This stems from their relatively simple interferometer configuration, being a single axis vertical accelerometer, from their heritage, being one of very first demonstration of inertial sensing based on atom interferometry, and from the concrete application fields they address, in particular the field of geosciences. In their seminal paper 1 , Kasevich and Chu used cold sodium atoms in an atomic fountain to realize the first demonstration of the 3-pulses atom interferometer based on Raman transitions, such as described in II. In this early demonstration, the authors anticipated that such sensors could compete with state of the art classical gravimeters, such as based on the precise tracking of a free falling corner cube by optical interferometry. Remarkably, in the following years, the efforts of Chu 's team made this claim become reality. A. Peters et al performed a very comprehensive metrological study of the performances, both in terms of stability and accuracy, of a second generation instrument based on Cs atoms The stability reached a level as low as 20 × 10 -8 m.s -2 at 1.3 s measurement time, and a large number of systematic effects were studied, and evaluated with a combined uncertainty of 3.2×10 -8 m.s -2 . A direct side by side comparison with a commercial corner cube gravimeter, FG5 from the Microg solutions company 50 , showed a 4 times better stability for the atom gravimeter, and agreement between the two determinations of g, within the combined uncertainty of 7×10 -8 m.s -2 . At the same time, pioneering works on atomic gradiometers, which are differential accelerometers, have been conducted in Stanford Early works on gravimeters have triggered a wealth of developments. Projects aiming at more compact and transportable cold atom gravimeters started in the beginning of the 2000s, in particular at SYRTE 53 and HUB In a gravimeter configuration (Fig. Typical interrogation times are in the range 2T = 100 ms to 1 s, depending on the size of the drop chamber (from about 10 cm up to 10 m). As mentioned in part III E for increased T , parasitic vibrations limit the sensitivity. Different isolation methods have been used, based on superspring stabilization The situation is different for gravity gradiometers, for which vibrations are a common source of noise, which is thus rejected in the differential measurement Best differential acceleration sensitivities of 3 -4 × 10 -8 m.s -2 .τ -1/2 have been demonstrated with standard Raman interferometers High accuracy is another appealing feature of atomic gravity sensors. Their scale factor being tied to time and frequency is well defined, which brings intrinsic accuracy and long term stability to the sensors. Yet, a number of systematic effects do bias the measurement, which have to be well measured and/or modelled, in order to correct the gravity measurements. A first detailed analysis, though not completely exhaustive, of systematic effects was carried out in Ref. The first effect is related to the presence of the second pair of Raman lasers, which is frequency detuned by twice the Doppler shift. This is a drawback associated to the use of retro-reflected Raman lasers, which allows on the other hand for reducing the impact of wavefront distortions, as detailed later. This results in a bias that is larger when dropping the atoms than when launching them upwards, and that scales with the Raman coupling. It can thus efficiently be corrected by performing g measurements at different Raman intensities The second is related to residual transverse velocities, which lead to Coriolis accelerations. At μK temperatures, atoms have residual velocities of order of cm.s -1 , which leads to Coriolis accelerations as large as 10 -6 m.s -2 . Hopefully, the net effect results from the average over the transverse velocity distribution. This leads in principle to a cancellation of the effect, provided that this velocity distribution is symmetric and well centered around zero, and that atoms with different transverse velocities do perform the interferometer and are detected with the same efficiency, or at last symmetrically with respect to the center of the velocity distribution. In practice, residual asymmetries and geometrical effects, such as due to laser beams inhomogeneities and finite size of the detection zone, can compromise this cancellation The third effect arises from the deviation of the Raman lasers wavefronts with respect to the ideally flat equiphase surfaces that act as a reference ruler used to measure the position of the free falling atoms at each of the three laser pulses. The required level of flatness is extremely demanding as a distortion as small as 0.1 nm corresponds to a Raman phase difference of about 1 mrad. The net effect results from the averaging of all possible trajectories, which samples differently the phase defects at each pulse. One can calculate that for the simple case of a curvature, and for an atomic temperature of 2 μK, a wavefront flatness of λ/300 PV over 1 cm is required to keep the error on the gravity measurement below 10 -8 m.s -2 (Ref. Even though some of the best atomic instruments have demonstrated performances better than state of the art classical sensors, many of these devices are "laboratory sensors" in the sense that they mostly operate in laboratory conditions, with air conditioning system for example. This is enough for some applications, but not for on field measurements, for which instruments have to be robust, compact and easy to operate for non-physicist operators, and sustain large temperature and humidity changes. Some companies have embarked on this path. AOSense was formed in 2004 to spin-off innovative research developed at Stanford University and delivered its first commercial compact gravimeter to an aerospace customer in 2010 (Ref. Gravity sensors find applications in many fields, ranging from geophysics and geodesy, navigation, civil engineering and fundamental physics. So far, atom gravimeters have been mainly developed in or for laboratorytype environments, where they can reach excellent short term and long term stability, better than classical corner cube gravimeters To address wider applications, engineering and simplification efforts in the sensors or its key subsystems are made in order to allow performing measurements in more aggressive environments Sensing rotations with an atom interferometer belongs to one of the pioneering experiments from 1991 which triggered the field of atom interferometry Following this proof-of-principle experiment, few groups developed interferometers using atomic beams as rotation sensors. The most important achievements were from the Pritchard group at MIT in 1997 103 using nano-fabricated gratings to realize beam-splitters and mirrors, and from the Kasevich group at Stanford 104,105 and Yale 106 using stimulated two-photon Raman transitions as atom-optics. A review on the historical aspects of these developments is presented in Ref. As explained in section II, a phase shift will appear in an interferometer where the atomic wavepacket moves with a velocity v with respect to a frame rotating at an angular velocity Ω, given by where T is the time between the light pulses (Mach-Zehnder geometry assumed here). An argument which is often put forward to explain the potentially very large sensitivity of atomic gyroscopes compared to their optical counterparts is based on the expression of the phase shift of the Sagnac effect 107 : In this expression, which ties to the (special) relativistic nature of the Sagnac effect (pointed out by von Laue 108 ), E is the total energy of the particle associated with the interfering waves and A is the oriented area-vector of the interferometer (the prefactor is 8πE in the case of a full loop interferometer). In the case of non-relativistic atoms, E mc 2 is about 11 orders of magnitude larger than the energy hν of a photon used in an optical gyroscope, yielding a much larger scale factor for atomic gyroscopes. This increase in scale factor has nevertheless to be confronted to the much larger photon flux and the larger area (e.g. in a fiber optic gyroscope) in optical interferometers. While this formulation helps in assessing the potential of an atomic gyroscope over an optical gyroscope, it can lead to controversies in interpretation on the actual origin of the phase shift (see, e.g. Ref. The larger scale factor of the atomic gyroscope over the optical gyroscope at constant interferometer area can be understood from the fact that the atom travels (at velocity v) slowlier than the photon (velocity c) in the interferometer of fixed dimensions, thereby sensing the inertial effect for an increased duration. This consideration on the importance of the interrogation time T drives the design of atomic gyroscopes. We will present below two complementary directions of research: on one side some experiments target large interrogation times in order to increase the physical area, which supposes a large interrogation region since the free fall distance of the atoms scales as T 2 ; on the other side some efforts are conducted to reduce the physical dimensions of the sensor at the cost of a reduced sensitivity. a. First generations of cold-atom gyroscopes. The first cold-atom gyroscope experiment was started at the SYRTE laboratory in 2000 and developed until 2008. It used two clouds of Cesium atoms launched along parabolic trajectories and traveling in opposite directions through a common interrogation region, where three pairs of retro-reflected Raman beams enable to realize a full inertial basis (the three components of rotation and the tree components of acceleration) About at the same time, a cold Cs-atom gyroscope was developed at Stanford University. The experiment volume was comparable to the SYRTE gyroscope but used an architecture dedicated to the four pulse sequence: two clouds of atoms were also prepared in two different regions but launched along a vertical trajectory as in an atomic fountain, and interrogated by four-light pulses (π/2πππ/2, total interrogation time of 206 ms). The details of the apparatus developed during the period from 2002 to 2010 are given in Ref. Few other cold-atom gyroscope projects have been conducted. At the University of Hannover (Germany), a sensor of 13.7 cm length was developed, featuring a Sagnac area of 19 mm 2 (Fig. b. Strategy for improved long-term stability. As identified in Refs. , where δλ is the deviation of the wavefront with respect to a plane wave (for which δλ = 0). Since the inertial signal scales at least with T 2 (see Eq. 3), it is interesting to increase the interrogation time to minimize the bias with respect to the signal, at the cost of increasing the size of the instrument (which scales with v.T or T 2 as a function of the architecture). As a numerical example, achieving long-term stability levels δv 0 < 1 μm.s -1 is technically challenging, which results, for wavefront aberrations δλ = λ/50 over a typical pupil diameter of 1 cm, in an interferometer bias δφ ∼ 15 mrad (T = 50 ms). This bias has to be compared to a signal of about 16 rad for the Earth rotation rate (72 μrad.s -1 ) in an interferometer with T = 50 ms and v 3 m.s -1 . The long term stability is thus constrained to a level of the order of 7×10 -8 rad.s -1 , consistent with the value reported in several articles The phase shift associated with Earth rotation rate (72 μrad.s -1 ) becomes 333 rad (the Sagnac area is 11 cm 2 ). Moreover, due to the folding of the trajectory, some effects of wavefront aberrations are reduced. This setup therefore currently represents the state-of-the-art for atomic gyroscopes, with a long term stability of 3 × 10 -10 rad.s -1 after 10 000 s of integration time (Fig. In parallel to these developments aiming at achieving stability levels that could beat those from other navigation technologies in the future (see section below), efforts are conducted to study simplified architectures of sensors with a smaller volume. As an example, a group at NIST has built an instrument with a glass vacuum chamber occupying a surface of 1 cm 2 (Fig. ? ) in which the rotation (and acceleration) phase shift can be measured by observing its dependence on the individual atom velocities according to Eq. ( While the PSI technique provides experimental sim- plicity, the scale factor of the sensor is dependent on the initial size of the atom cloud which is exaggerated in compact designs where the expansion ratio is small, which leads to instabilities. In Ref. Other efforts by several other teams are ongoing, in order to build complete inertial measurement units (i.e. 3 axes of acceleration and 3 axes of rotation) in a compact system. They will be presented in the section below discussing accelerometer developments V B. We discuss here some applications of gyroscopes and relate them to different technologies in order to appreciate the efforts that must be accomplished by the community to enlarge the potential of cold-atom sensors. The appealing feature of cold-atom gyroscopes relies in their inherent long-term stability associated with the stability of the quantities involved in the gyroscope scale factor. This feature, associated with the complexity of instruments, naturally points for high-performance applications such as strategic inertial navigation, or scientific applications, e.g. in geosciences or tests of fundamental physics. a. High-performance inertial measurement unit. As discussed above, the limit to the stability of cold-atom gyroscopes currently lies between 10 -9 and 10 -10 rad.s -1 for the best instruments 120 . Several other gyroscope technologies address the application of navigation. Current developments of MEMS gyroscopes target instability levels below 0.05 • /h (2.5 × 10 -7 rad.s -1 ) (Ref. Finally, cold-atom gyroscopes have been proposed for tests of fundamental physics. The most accomplished project has been a test of general relativity by measuring the Lense-Thirring effect in space Accelerometers using atom-interferometry are mostly developed for applications to inertial navigation as a building block of a full inertial measurement unit (IMU) A first approach to increase the bandwidth of coldatom sensor consists in reducing the interrogation time and operate with an efficient recapture of the atoms, as explored in several articles from the team at Sandia National Laboratories , following Ref. A more drastic approach is to avoid the production of the cold-atom ensembles by realizing atom interferometry in a vapor cell as demonstrated in 140 . This experiment, realized in Sandia National Laboratories, showed that interference signals may be obtained without laser cooling, by benefiting from the Doppler selectivity of the atom interferometer resonance. With a data rate of 10 kHz and an interrogation time of 15 μs, an inertial sensitivity of 10 -1 m.s -2 .τ -1/2 is demonstrated, with the prospect to improve the sensitivity by 2 orders of magnitude in the future. Although the proposed scheme is much simpler than a cold-atom sensor, the sensitivity is still far from being competitive with that of best MEMS accelerometers than can reach sensitivities in the 10 -6 m.s -2 .τ -1/2 range (see e.g. Ref. 141 and references therein). The heading of this subsection refers to the general motivation for a cold-atom based sensor: its inherent long-term stability. Nevertheless, the dead times in coldatom sensors (associated with cold-atom preparation and detection) leads to a loss of inertial information and strongly mitigates the possibility to realize inertial measurement units (IMUs) based on atom interferometry, as pointed out in Ref. Ref. In the context of onboard applications with high dynamic range and high sensitivity, and in order to overcome the limit from the ambiguity in phase determination and the limit to the sensitivity when the atomic phase shift is closed to a multiple of π rad, different propositions of multi-signal atom interferometer have been demonstrated. A first work analyzes configurations for improving the measurement range and sensitivity by relying on multispecies atom interferometry at ONERA, involving the simultaneous manipulation of different atomic species in a unique instrument to deduce inertial measurements Two other experiments at the Weizmann Institute of Science have been achieved in the same context of operating cold-atom interferometers in mobile environments. First, a technique producing multiple phase measurements per experimental cycle was presented in Ref. In order to realize an IMU, a 3-axis accelerometer and a 3-axis gyroscope is required. Even if multi-axis measurements have already been demonstrated, the possibility of measuring all components of inertia or even the 3 components of acceleration relies on successive measurements over the three directions. A theoretical proposal to extract information along several axis in a single shot was put forward at LP2N, where the authors propose new multidimensional atom optics that can create coherent superpositions of atomic wave packets along three spatial directions 147 . They argue how these tools can be used to generate light-pulse atom interferometers that are simultaneously sensitive to the three components of acceleration and rotation, and how to isolate these inertial components in a single experimental shot. A large part of the works in developing atom accelerometers for mobile applications aimed at mitigating the problem of phase ambiguity and loss of information associated with dead times. The high data rate interferometers using recapture methods partially reduce the problem of dead times but at the cost of strong reduction of sensitivity. On the other hand, the inertial noise aliasing associated with dead times can be alleviated by the hybridization technique, but this method is limited by non linearity in the correlation between both sensors. To solve this problem, combining different approaches will probably be needed. As an example, combining hybridization with continuous operation (i.e. without dead times) and eventually interlevead measurements, already demonstrated for rotation measurements The sensitivity of atom interferometers to inertial forces can also be exploited for precise measurements of fundamental constants and fundamental tests, for the search for new exotic forces, for dark matter detection, for gravitational wave detection. For completeness of this review, we will briefly mention in this section some of these applications, and refer to the review articles cited in the introduction for further details. Atom interferometry is for instance key to precisely measure the change of velocity undergone by an atom after the transfer of momenta of a large number of photons 148 . This is accomplished by using a Ramsey Bordé interferometer 149 , which acts as a sensor for the velocity change between the first and second part of the interferometer, both constituted of a pair of π/2 pulses. This change of velocity is realized by placing the atoms, in between the two pairs of pulses, in an accelerated lattice. There the atoms undergo a large number of Bloch oscillations (up to a thousand), which results in a momentum transfer of N k. This allows for a precise determination of the recoil velocity. Remarkably, and this is the main motivation for such an experiment, this allows for the determination of fine structure constant α, the dimensionless constant that characterizes the strength of electromagnetic interactions, with relative uncertainties below the 10 -9 level 150,151 . This experimental determination can finally be compared with the more indirect determination of α derived from the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, which can be precisely calculated using quantum electrodynamics (QED) theory and out of which a value the fine structure constant can be determined. The comparison between the two determinations is one the most stringent tests of QED today. Another prospected application of cold-atom inertial sensors is the detection of gravitational waves Finally, other tests of gravitational physics can be performed, such as tests of the Weak Equivalence Principle, by comparing the acceleration felt by two different atomic species 157-164 . To push the relative accuracy of these atomic physics based tests below the current limits of experiments involving classical test masses (at the 10 -14 level 165 ), long interrogation times are required. On ground, dedicated facilities are being operated or currently built, where atoms will be launched or dropped over a few seconds. This can be realized in very tall vacuum chambers of typically 10 meters 166 , or even longer, as well as in zero-g simulators, such as drop towers 167 or in zero-g planes 162 . This prepares the ground for future space missions, such as the STE-QUEST mission Though the domain of cold-atom interferometry has gained a considerable maturity, leading, for example, to the industrial transfer of the technology, the performances of these instruments can still be improved significantly for various applications. In the recent years, new methods have been introduced and are still presently being actively investigated. A variety of advanced beamsplitting methods have been demontrated such as double Raman transitions 169,170 and double Bragg diffraction 171 , high order Bragg diffraction 172 , sequences of Bragg pulses 173 , Bloch oscillations in accelerated optical lattices 174 , combination of Bloch oscillation and high order Bragg pulses 175-177 , frequency-swept rapid adiabatic passage A drawback of these methods lie in the existence of diffraction phases, which are parasitic phase shifts due to the beamsplitting process that depend on the depth of the lattice potential In the context of large-momentum transfer beam splitters which require larger laser intensities, schemes to interface an atom interferometer with an optical cavity tuned at resonance have been explored Another important axis of investigation is the improved control over the atomic source, offered by ultracold atoms. Their reduced ballistic expansion allowed for increasing the interrogation time 180 , and their narrow momentum distribution for improving the efficiency of LMT methods 194 . More, lower temperatures also reduce systematic effects, such as related to the exploration by the atoms of intensity inhomogeneities in the spatial profile of the beamsplitters, or to wavefront distortions and Coriolis accelerations. Lensing methods, such as Delta Kick collimation in atom chips 195 and optical traps 196 , allowed for the production of well collimated source, with temperatures lower than 100 pK. New detection methods have been demonstrated which allow for spatially resolv-ing the variations of the interferometer phase across the atomic source, at the output of the interferometer 123,166 , increasing the fringe visibility and the dynamical range of the sensors. Finally, other atom sources are also being used, such as other alkali species (eg. Potassium for tests of the Weak Equivalence Principle), or alkaline-earth atoms, such as Yb 197 or Sr 198 . The latter offer, for their bosonic isotopes having zero spin in the ground state, reduced sensitivity to stray magnetic fields, and a richer electronic structure, with narrow lines that can be used to implement single photon beamsplitters Cold-atom inertial sensors have been developed for nearly 30 years in several groups worldwide, with an acceleration of the research effort and of the industrial transfer in the last 10 years. These sensors are especially well suited for applications requiring high performance in terms of stability and accuracy, while they comparatively currently feature a weak robustness, dynamic range and level of miniaturization. Therefore, they have found up to now natural applications in testing fundamental physics, in metrology and in geoscience. Nevertheless, there is a growing research effort on taking the technology out of the laboratory, in particular on realizing high accuracy inertial measurement units operating in mobile platforms. On the fundamental side, several experiments are being set up to look for new physics, and large-scale instruments for gravitational wave detection are under design and realization in 3 continents. Several atom interferometer architectures have been considered with different atom optics techniques and different atomic species. So far, the best performances have been achieved by cold-atom sensors using alkali atom sources and two-photon stimulated Raman transitions. Several teams are working on techniques to enhance the sensitivity and accuracy, in particular on ways to increase the separation between the two arms of the interferometer, using colder atom samples or atomic species with a richer level structure. Therefore, much improvement in performance can still be expected from this technology. Many groups are also working on simplifying the sensor architecture and subsystems to broaden the scope of applications and making cold-atom sensors compatible with operation in the field. On the industrial side, several companies have started to tackle the challenge of integrating the subsystems and currently concentrate on developing gravimeters or accelerometers with cold Rb atom, for which efficient, robust, and qualified laser sources have been realized. These efforts will ease the deployment of atom interferometer sensors and allow them to address a wide range of new applications, from ground to space, beyond the reach of classical sensors. 1. Atom interferometers use quantum superpositions of different momentum states in atoms. 2. Realizing these superposition states is efficiently achieved by using the interaction of an atom with two counter-propagating laser beams, which realize the role of beam splitter and mirror for the atomic wave. 3. The scale factor of atom interferometers (link between the inertial effect to be measured and the interferometer output phase) is given by the spacetime area of the interferometer, which is proportional to the square of the time spent by the atoms in the interferometer and to the wave-vector of the interrogation lasers. 4. Using cold-atom sources for atom interferometry allows to reach larger scale factors and high levels of stabilitiy and accuracy. Such performance originate from the good control of atomic trajectories associated with low temperatures. 5. The fundamental limit to the sensitivity in these sensors is the quantum projection noise associated with the projective measurement of the atomic state performed at the output of the interferometer for ensembles of typically 1 million of atoms. Nevertheless, this quantum noise limit is often not reached since the effect of vibration noise dominates. 6. The mostly employed atoms are Rubidium and Cesium (Potassium in few cases), cooled by lasers to a temperature of few micro-Kelvins. Interferometers with alkaline-Earth atoms (Strontium and Ytterbium) attract more and more interest. 7. Cold-atom inertial sensors mainly consist of a vacuum chamber hosting the atom source, optical systems to realize the momentum state superpositions, light detectors, real-time control electronics and external instruments such as mechanical accelerometers. Typical dimensions of instruments range from 10 cm (integrated versions for field applications) to 10 m (large-scale experiments for fundamental studies). 8. Gravimeters are the most studied atom interferometers. Best instruments have inaccuracy better than 2×10 -8 m.s -2 and reach stability of 5×10 -10 m.s -2 in 10 5 s of measurement. These sensors were the first instruments to be commercially developed. 9. Other largely studied sensors are accelerometers, rate gyroscopes and gravity gradiometers. Few large scale infrastructures (over 100 m baselines) are developed as prototypes of gravitational-wave detectors in the deci-Hertz frequency band.