Epitaxial graphene on silicon carbide, or epigraphene, provides an excellent platform for Hall sensing devices in terms of both high electrical quality and scalability. However, the challenge in controlling its carrier density has thus far prevented systematic studies of epigraphene Hall sensor performance. In this work we investigate epigraphene Hall sensors where epigraphene is doped across the Dirac point using molecular doping. Depending on the carrier density, molecular-doped epigraphene Hall sensors reach room temperature sensitivities SV=0.23 V/VT, SI=1440 V/AT and magnetic field detection limits down to BMIN=27 nT/√Hz at 20 kHz. Thermally stabilized devices demonstrate operation up to 150 ̊C with SV=0.12 V/VT, SI=300 V/AT and BMIN~100 nT/√Hz at 20 kHz. Based on the classical Hall Effect, solid-state Hall sensors represent a large portion of magnetometers which are extensively used in automotive, marine and consumer electronics applications. Hall sensors based on silicon see widespread use owing to well-established and lowcost production methods, Graphene appears to be a natural candidate for highly sensitive Hall elements due to its high mobility, and the possibility to tune carrier density n down to zero towards charge neutrality (Dirac point). Low carrier density is desirable because it increases the Hall coefficient, R H = 1/(ne). Epigraphene was grown on 4H-SiC chips encased in a graphite crucible and heated using RF heating to around 1850 ̊C in an inert atmosphere of 1 bar argon. Seven epigraphene Hall sensors (Fig. The measurements in magnetic fields are complemented with noise measurements to unveil the minimum detection limit BMIN. Fig. The measured sensitivities for epigraphene Hall sensors and their dependence on doping, collected across all measured devices, are summarized in Fig. Finally, we describe the thermal stability of the molecular-doped Hall sensor through the temperature coefficient ΔT, defined as the percentage change of RH from its room temperature value per degree Celsius. Fig. Table 