Huygens metasurfaces have demonstrated a remarkable potential to perform wave transformations within a subwavelength region. In particular, omega-bianisotropic Huygens metasurfaces have allowed for the passive implementation of any wave transformation that conserves real power locally. Previous reports have also shown that Huygens metasurface pairs are capable of realizing transformations that break the local power conservation requirement by redistributing the total power, while the wave propagates between the two metasurfaces. However, the required separation distance overshadows the low-profile characteristics of the individual metasurfaces and leads to bulky designs, especially for lower frequencies. In this work, we develop a method of designing omega-bianisotropic Huygens metasurface pairs, relying on a point-matching process of the real power at the two metasurfaces. We highlight the versatility of our method by presenting two variations of the configuration, depending on whether the electromagnetic source is located within or outside the metasurface pair. Based on the examples of a cylindricalwave to plane-wave transformation and a beam expander, we examine the impact of multiple reflections, as a way to overcome the size limitations and design compact structures. Moreover, we explore possible beamforming applications through an example of a Taylor-pattern antenna with a single feed-point between the two metasurfaces. Huygens' metasurfaces are electrically thin devices that have attracted considerable attention as an efficient tool to manipulate electromagnetic waves at will In the effort to realize more complicated wave transformations, omega-bianisotropy has emerged as a way to introduce another degree of freedom in the design process, accounting for magnetoelectric coupling Despite the extra degree of freedom provided by the omegabianisotropy, the condition of local power conservation along the metasurface places constraints on the form of the input and output electric and magnetic fields. Several solutions have been proposed as a way to overcome these limitations and achieve nonlocal power conserving transformations. For instance, surface waves have been used either as auxiliary fields to restore power matching locally without interfering with the far-field characteristics of the transformation or as a way to redistribute the power within metasurface systems that are based on the conversion of propagating waves to surface waves and vice versa Recently, two cascaded omega-bianisotropic Huygens' metasurfaces have been studied for performing wave transformations that break the local power conservation condition In this paper, we design pairs of omega-bianisotropic HMS for arbitrary wave transformations that do not conserve local power. As in In this section, the theoretical formulation for designing a pair of passive and lossless omega-bianisotropic HMSs is developed. Two configurations are considered depending on the location of the source, as illustrated in Fig. out } and {E out }, can be supported at the two sides of the metasurface pair. For both geometries, it is assumed that the metasurfaces extend infinitely along the z-direction for simplicity. The distance between them is denoted by d, while L tot stands for the total width of each metasurface. Furthermore, the electric field is assumed to be transverse electric (TE) polarized with the only non-zero component being along ẑ. As observed in Fig. The electric field of the forward-propagating wave E forw z (x, y) is approximated at M1 (y = 0 + ) as a summation of 2N + 1 terms where A f,n are the unknown complex weights, still to be determined. The basis functions g n (x) in Eq. ( where k = 2π/λ is the free-space wave-vector (λ standing for the wavelength of operation) and L = L tot /(2N + 1) represents the spatial shift between two adjacent functions g n (x), as illustrated in Fig. From the selection of the basis functions in Eq. ( x . Subsequently, the forward-propagating electric field at any given y-plane is given as the following inverse Fourier transform x y e -jkx(x-nL) dk x . (4) From Maxwell's equations, the magnetic field component tangential to the metasurface can be calculated as x y e -jkx(x-nL) dk x , where η = μ/ε is the characteristic impedance of the medium. Likewise, the reflected wave is expanded at the second metasurface (y = d -) as where the complex weights A r,n form another set of unknowns. By following a similar approach for the reflected fields (defining in this case the zero-phase plane at y = d and propagating each Fourier component at the -ŷ direction), we arrive at the following expression for the reflected electric field at any y-plane Then, the tangential component of the reflected magnetic field is obtained directly from Maxwell's equations as As stated above, in the case that the source is placed before M1, as shown in Fig. where I n , I ′ n , J n , J ′ n are coefficients that depend on the xcoordinate according to the expressions x e -jkx(x-nL) dk x , (10c) x d e -jkx(x-nL) dk x . (10d) The real power density is then determined as For a given pair of metasurfaces (fixed separation d, width L tot and discretization N ), the coefficients in Eqs. ( where inc,x } and {E inc,x } are the profiles of the incident tangential electric and mangetic fields at M1 and M2, respectively, as calculated from the source in the absence of the two metasurfaces. Regarding the configuration in Fig. Another important aspect is specifying the level of the total output power so that maximum power efficiency is ensured for the designed metasurface pair. Since the metasurfaces are considered lossless, the only loss mechanism is the power escaping from the open sides of the structure. To minimize this leakage, the total output power P tot out is made equal with the total incident power P tot inc from the source, which is or when the source is placed outside or inside the metasurface pair, respectively. The incident power represents the part of the input power that can be handled by the metasurface pair, as it is not directly leaked outside of the configuration. To achieve local power conservation at each metasurface, the input/output power densities at y = 0 -and y = d + are sampled at the locations x = nL, n = -N, ..., N and they are equated with the power densities at the inner boundaries of the two metasurfaces at y = 0 + and y = d -, respectively, as given by Eqs. Due to the quadratic nature of the expressions in Eqs. ( The Jacobean matrix J G , involving the derivatives of each row of the G vector with respect to each unknown is analytically calculated (as a function of the coefficients I n , I ′ n , J n , J ′ n ). Then, at every iteration the vector of the unknowns is updated based on the expression where x (n) is the vector of the unknowns at the n-th iteration and γ represents the learning rate of the optimization algorithm, which is carefully selected for each design problem. Once the optimization algorithm has converged to a solution that minimizes the local power mismatch at the two metasurfaces, the tangential fields at the two sides of each metasurface are used for their design. Due to local power conservation, the field transformations at the two boundaries are guaranteed to be possible with reflectionless and lossless omega-bianisotropic Huygens' metasurfaces Full-wave simulations are performed in ANSYS HFSS by realizing the metasurfaces with a three-layer impedance sheet structure, consisting of three lossless impedance layers, whose values are given by [13, Eq. ( In the first example, the configuration described in Fig. fields, (2) (2) n is the n-th order Hankel function of the second kind and I = 1 A is an arbitrarily chosen current amplitude. The purpose of the designed metasurface pair is to transform the fields into a truncated plane wave, characterized by a constant amplitude along the output aperture. Both metasurfaces have a width of L tot = 6λ and are discretized with 101 unit cells (N = 50). To verify the applicability of our method, we first design a pair of reflectionless (i.e. A r,n = 0, for all n) metasurfaces with a separation distance of d = 1.5λ. Even without multiple reflections, this separation distance is sufficient to achieve acceptable power matching at both boundaries simultaneously. The fields between the two metasurfaces are calculated using the optimization method described in Sec. II-B and the normal real power density at the two sides of each metasurface is depicted in Fig. It should be noted again that the sides between the two metasurfaces are open boundaries that do not confine the electromagnetic power within the width of the metasurface pair. However, by defining the input and the output power distributions to have the same total power, the real power leaking to the two sides is minimized and it is solely attributed to the small power mismatch at the two metasurfaces. In the case considered 95.2% of the incident power, as defined in Eq. ( Further reducing the separation between the two metasurfaces leads to higher power mismatch and gradually degrades the total performance of the field transformation. These effects can be mitigated by allowing multiple reflections between the two metasurfaces. Although the total configuration remains reflectionless, multiple reflections effectively increase the propagation length and lead to better power matching, especially for smaller separation lengths. The same field transformation is examined with a distance d = 0.5λ between the two metasurfaces and the use of multiple reflections. The designed pair of metasurfaces is simulated and the electric field is plotted in Fig. Beam expanders are commonly used in optics to alter the width of collimated light beams In this example, the two metasurfaces are separated by a distance of d = 0.5λ, where λ ≈ 30 mm is the wavelength at the frequency of 10 GHz. Both metasurfaces are L tot = 9λ wide and are discretized with 101 unit cells (resulting approximately at a λ/11 unit cell size). The input wave is assumed to be a Gaussian beam with its focus at M1; thus, the electric field at M1 is the following where w in = 1.5λ is the beam waist and A in = 10 3 V/m is a arbitrarily chosen peak amplitude. By decomposing the electric field in Eq. ( As in the case of the unknown forward and reflected waves, it is assumed that the field spectrum is sufficiently decayed for |k x | > k and the integration in Eq. ( To better evaluate the accuracy of the field transformation, the real power density is plotted at two cuts of the configuration; the first at a distance λ/10 before the first metasurface and the second λ/10 after the second metasurface. This small offset is introduced so that any rapid field oscillations close to the metasurfaces owing to the discretization and the discontinuity of the fields at the boundary are sufficiently decayed. The normalized power densities are plotted together with the theoretical input and output power distributions in Fig. In various antenna applications, radiation patterns with specific characteristics (directivity, side lobe level, main lobe beamwidth, etc.) are required. To this purpose, metasurfaces have been used in different configurations to obtain the aperture fields at the output that would produce the desirable radiation pattern in the far-field region out , H out } below M1 are set to zero. On the contrary, the electric field at the upper output is defined based on the Taylor distribution for a sidelobe level (SLL) of -20 dB where J 0 is the Bessel function of the first kind and zero order, l = 6λ is the total length of the Taylor aperture, B = 0.7386 is a parameter that sets the SLL to the desired level of -20 dB and A is a normalization parameter to equalize the total output power at the upper side with the total incident power, as defined in Eq. ( Having determined the incident and the output fields at the two metasurfaces, the proposed optimization method is used to design the metasurface pair and the total structure is simulated in ANSYS HFSS. The real part of the electric field E z is plotted in Fig. The beamforming example shown in the previous section can be extended so that both output sides support two independent field distributions. This case can be perceived as a generalization of the cavity-based antenna presented in The real part of the electric field, as given by full-wave simulations, is depicted (in absolute values) in Fig. The radiation pattern is calculated independently for the two output sides, by selecting the respective boundaries to perform the near-field to far-field transformation. The simulated results are given in Fig. From the previous examples, it can be observed that the introduction of multiple reflections into the design leads to an energy build-up within the metasurface pair. As demonstrated, this cavity effect is essential to reduce the separation distance between the two HMSs, when designing for wave transformations that do not locally conserve power. However, the internal reflections induced by the two partially reflective HMSs can substantially decrease the bandwidth of the proposed structure and, in general, affect its sensitivity with respect to the geometrical parameters involved. This effect can be interpreted as an outcome of the interaction between the two metasurfaces, as small errors due to variations in the frequency or the geometry will accumulate as the propagating wave reflects multiple times at the two boundaries. Alternatively, perceiving the structure as a cavity, the multiple reflections increase the energy stored within the cavity with respect to the total radiated power, thus resulting in a higher quality factor and a smaller bandwidth. In this section, the trade off between the separation distance and the sensitivity of the structure is investigated, based on the example of the uniform output aperture presented in Sec. III-A. Since a bandwidth analysis would require the dispersion of each unit cell to be taken into account, we choose to study the sensitivity of the structure instead, by varying the distance d between the two metasurfaces in a range around its nominal value. In this way, the parameters of the two metasurfaces remain constant and it is possible to study separately only the effect of multiple reflections in the sensitivity of the structure. Moreover, some intuition into the expected frequency bandwidth can be obtained (disregarding the dispersion of the HMSs), as a change in frequency can be translated into a change of the electrical distance between the two metasurfaces. First, we vary the distance d for the example including multiple reflections, as designed in Sec. III-A for a nominal distance d = 0.5λ. The reduction in the maximum directivity and the power efficiency, defined as the ratio between the total output power and the total incident power at M1, are calculated for each variation and the results are plotted in Fig. Finally, another way to mitigate the cavity effects without changing the separation distance d would be to modify the input power density so that it is more distributed along M1. To explore this possibility, two current line-sources are added at the same distance s = λ/3 from M1, but displaced by ±1.25λ in the x-direction with respect to the center source. In addition, the current amplitude of the edge sources is set to be three times less than the current amplitude of the center one. The optimization procedure is slightly modified, as the structure is first designed with purely transmissive omega-bianisotropic HMS (A r,n = 0). The solution is then used as a starting point for the optimization algorithm including multiple reflections. The outcome of this two-step optimization process is to keep the amplitude of the backward-propagating wave at a relatively low value compared to the forward-propagating wave. The wider illumination of M1 combined with the modification of the optimization process leads to greater immunity of the transformation performance when varying the distance d away from its nominal value, as is evident for this case in Fig. In conclusion, wave transformations that do not locally conserve real power have been designed using pairs of Huygens' metasurfaces. A design method has been developed, based on determining the electric and magnetic fields between the two metasurfaces, so that the power density is matched simultaneously at the two boundaries. The method relies on expanding the field distributions as weighted basis-functions summations and, then, minimizing the power mismatch across the metasurfaces through optimization of the unknown weights. By allowing for multiple reflections, it was shown that the required distance between the two metasurfaces can be significantly reduced, resulting in compact, yet accurate, field transformations. The design method is also adjustable to applications which require the source to be located within the metasurface pair. Through the example of a Taylor-pattern antenna fed by a single line-source, it was shown that a desired output can be supported at one or both sides of the metasurface pair. Finally, the sensitivity with respect to the separation distance between the two metasurfaces was discussed, when multiple reflections are present, revealing a trade off between the bandwidth and the size of the structure.