Inducing a large refractive-index change is the holy grail of reconfigurable photonic structures, a goal that has long been the driving force behind the discovery of new optical material platforms. Recently, the unprecedentedly large refractive-index contrast between the amorphous and crystalline states of Ge-Sb-Te (GST)-based phase-change materials (PCMs) has attracted a tremendous attention for reconfigurable integrated nanophotonics. Here, we introduce a microheater platform that employs optically transparent and electrically conductive indium-tinoxide (ITO) bridges for the fast and reversible electrical switching of the GST phase between crystalline and amorphous states. By the proper assignment of electrical pulses applied to the ITO microheater, we show that our platform allows for the registration of virtually any intermediate crystalline state into the GST film integrated on the top of the designed microheaters. More importantly, we demonstrate the full reversibility of the GST phase between amorphous and crystalline states. To show the feasibility of using this hybrid GST/ITO platform for miniaturized integrated nanophotonic structures, we integrate our designed microheaters into the arms of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer to realize electrically reconfigurable optical phase shifters with orders of magnitude smaller footprints compared to existing integrated photonic architectures. We show that the phase of optical signals can be gradually shifted in multiple intermediate states using a structure that can potentially be smaller than a single wavelength. We believe that our study showcases the possibility of forming a whole new class of miniaturized reconfigurable integrated nanophotonics using beyond-binary reconfiguration of optical functionalities in hybrid PCMphotonic devices. Manipulation of the refractive index forms the backbone of reconfigurable integrated photonics, a notion that constantly seeks alternative material platforms and modulation schemes for achieving new functionalities and better performance measures. Access to such a large ∆n budget enables the design of phase shifters, modulators, and switches with ultra-compact footprints, potentially down to subwavelength scales. Here, we report the realization of a microheater platform that employs optically transparent (i.e., low-loss) and electrically conductive indium-tin-oxide (ITO) bridges for the fast and reversible switching of the GST phase between crystalline and amorphous states. By the proper assignment of width and amplitude of electrical pulses applied to the ITO bridge, we show that our platform allows for the registration of virtually any intermediate crystalline state into a GST film integrated on the top of the designed microheater. Our estimation of energy-per-pulse consumed for the amorphous-to-crystalline phase conversion in GST is ~ 6.5 nJ in our test devices with the possibility of sub-nJ operation in an optimal device configuration. Granted by the low optical loss of the ITO films, we further show that our designed microheater platform can be directly integrated on SiN-based photonic devices for the realization of electrically reconfigurable optical functionalities. In a representative demonstration, we integrate our designed ITO-based microheaters into the arms of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) to realize electrically reconfigurable optical phase shifters. By applying optimized electrical pulses to microheaters, the phase of optical signals can be gradually shifted between 0-50 o with multiple intermediate values corresponding to the intermediate crystalline states of GST. As schematically shown in Figures Subsequently, electrodes are formed by the deposition of a 150/20 nm Au/Ti stack in an electronbeam (e-beam) evaporation chamber at the base pressure of ~ 6×10 Under these conditions, we obtain a deposition rate of ~ 1.7 nm/min (Figure The electrical conductivity of the ITO bridge is an important design parameter that directly affects the efficiency of the Joule heating. The sputtering deposition of ITO typically yields a thin film with relatively small crystalline domains, leading to a suboptimal electrical conductivity in as-deposited films. However, the post-deposition annealing is shown to be effective for enhancing the electrical conductivity of ITO thin films, primarily via increasing crystalline-domain sizes and activating Sn donors. Before testing, we covered the surface of the fabricated device in Figure Accordingly, with the SiO2 capping layer, (i) samples can be kept in the ambient for an arbitrarily long period of time, (ii) the GST patch can be successfully maintained during the full cycle of the amorphous-to-crystalline conversion, and (iii) the applied voltage can be increased to generate sufficient heat for the phase conversion of the GST patch integrated on the microheater. For optical characterization, we primarily rely on the change of refractive index (n) and extinction coefficient (k) of GST as we electrically derive a gradual transition from the amorphous to crystalline phase via Joule heating of the GST patch. Thus, we use optical reflection spectroscopy to demonstrate the electrical control of the GST phase from the amorphous to the full-crystalline state with multiple intermediate states. As shown in Figure The position and amplitude of these reflection features are dictated by the optical constants of various layers in the stack, among which only those of the GST layer alter upon the Joule heating events. Therefore, the modulation of peaks and dips in the reflection spectrum of a device can be used for the back-calculation of the optical properties of the GST layer and to estimate its crystalline phase after each Joule heating event. To extract the degree of crystallization from the measured reflection spectra, we need to benchmark the estimated n and k values of GST against a reference dataset. Thus, following previous reports, To obtain similar references for the intermediate states of GST, we used an effective-medium approximation in which an α fraction of the GST volume is assumed to be in the crystalline state and the (1-α) fraction of it in the amorphous state (0 < α < 1). Thus, using the measured n and k values of amorphous (i.e., α = 0) and crystalline (i.e., α = 1) GST films, we can extrapolate n and k values for any arbitrary intermediate GST state using the Lorentz-Lorenz equation: 40 Eq. ( In Eq. ( To estimate the crystallization level after each Joule heating event, we employ the transfermatrix method to regenerate the experimental reflection spectra shown in Figure constants. We use n eff (α) and k eff (α) as the optical constants of the GST layer, and, following a brute-force approach, we sweep the α parameter from 0 to 1 and look for the best fit to the experimental results. Our calculations show that the reflection spectra displayed in Figure The change of the GST phase can be further studied through monitoring its electrical properties, especially for miniaturized dimensions at which optical characterizations are complicated. As shown in Figure phase, showing that GST can be configured in virtually any intermediate crystalline state through the controlled excitation of the ITO microheater. However, the impact of the pulse amplitude on changing the GST phase is more significant than the number of applied pulses. In fact, at a fixed pulse amplitude, the minimum achievable resistance saturates with the number of applied pulses. This observation suggests that the crystallization of GST is primarily a temperature-driven phenomenon and obtaining higher crystallization levels mandates the temperature increase via the application of an electrical pulse with a larger amplitude. The GST phase can be switched back to the amorphous state by melt-quenching, a process that needs the high-temperature melting and fast cooling of crystalized GST. Thus, we increase the amplitude of the voltage pulse to ~9 V, for melting, and narrow the pulse width down to 50 nsec for the fast cooling of the GST patch. As indicated by an arrow in Figure Figure We further study the spatial and temporal temperature profiles of the device in Figure Elimination of these two factors can potentially lead to sub-nJ energy consumption in our hybrid ITO/GST platform. To show the feasibility of forming miniaturized reconfigurable integrated photonic devices using our developed platform, we integrate the hybrid GST/ITO structure on top of a SiN waveguide, where the phase and amplitude of the optical transmission can be modulated by adjusting the GST crystalline state between the fully amorphous and fully crystalline phases. The SiN waveguide here is fabricated in a 400 nm-thick SiN film deposited by the low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method. The waveguide width is set to ~ 1400 nm to ensure the single-mode operation around the wavelength of 1550 nm. The geometry of the GST nanostructure is tailored to optimize the ratio of the optical phase-shift to the transmission loss upon the full conversion from the amorphous to the crystalline phase of GST, while maintaining a very small footprint. The geometry of the ITO microheater is also designed to grant a uniform temperature profile across the GST patch, rapid thermal reconfiguration, and minimum optical loss. The electrical connections to the ITO bridge are supported by two small SiN sidebars (width ≈ 500 nm), which enables a low-resistance electrical connection to the ITO microheater with minimal extra waveguide loss (< 0.2 dB). The thickness of the ITO and GST layers are 60 nm and 30 nm, respectively. To characterize the waveguide phase and amplitude changes upon the GST conversion, we integrate the designed phase shifter into the arm of a MZI structure. Figures We note that our developed microheater can be used for almost all PCMs, and the change of material will not cause any major change in our proposed fabrication process. A key advantage of our phase-shifter structure in Figure Achieving the same phase shift with similar voltages in lithium niobate (LiNbO3) requires a waveguide length of ~ 2 mm. Thus, our platform offers 3 orders-of-magnitude reduction in the device size at the same operation voltage. This can revolutionize the field of reconfigurable integrated nanophotonics for applications where reconfiguration times of 10's of ns are sufficient. We note that phase shifters using the thermo-optic effect in Si can have one order-of-magnitude smaller size than other conventional mechanisms (e.g., ~ 0.2 mm in this case). However, their excessive power consumption (due to the volatility of the mechanism and the need for constant heating) and slow response hinder their practical use. While the demonstrated results in Figure To obtain a better understanding of the field profile of the structure in Figure In conclusion, we introduced here an ITO-based microheater platform for the fast and reversible switching of the GST phase between crystalline and amorphous states. Our experimental demonstration and thermal analysis confirmed that controlling the Joule heating in ITO heater, by the application of proper electrical pulses, enables recording virtually any intermediate crystalline state into GST films in a reversible way. We further employed this unique feature for the proof-of-concept demonstration of optical phase-shifting via the integration of a GST/ITO microheater on top of a SiN waveguide. We believe that our developed platform can be universally adopted for precise and reversible phase switching in other volatile and nonvolatile PCM materials for realization reconfigurable optoelectronic devices with miniaturized footprints. 