Despite inherently poor interlayer conductivity, photodetectors made from few-layer devices of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as WSe2 and MoS2 can still yield a desirably fast (≤90 ps) and efficient ( >40%) photoresponse. By combining ultrafast photocurrent (U-PC) and transient absorption (TA) microscopy, the competing electronic escape and recombination rates are unambiguously identified in otherwise complex kinetics. Both the U-PC and TA response of WSe2 yield matching interlayer electronic escape times that accelerate from 1.6 ns to 86 ns with applied E-field to predict the maximum device PC-efficiency realized of ∼44%. The slope of the escape rates versus E-field suggests out-of-plane electron and hole mobilities of 0.129 and 0.031 cm 2 /Vs respectively. Above ∼10 11 photons/cm 2 incident flux, defect-assisted Auger scattering greatly decreases efficiency by trapping carriers at vacancy defects. Both TA and PC spectra identify a metal-vacancy sub-gap peak with ∼5.6 ns lifetime as a primary trap capturing carriers as they hop between layers. Synchronous TA and U-PC microscopy show the net PC collected is modelled by a kinetic rate-law of electronic escape competing against the linear and nonlinear Auger recombination rates. This simple rate-model further predicts the PC-based dynamics, nonlinear amplitude and efficiency, over a 10 5 range of incident photon flux in few-layer WSe2 and MoS2 devices. Photodetectors made from few-layer stacked, semiconducting 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) like WSe 2 and MoS 2 can be remarkably fast (sub ∼100 ps) and efficient with internal quantum efficiencies (IQE, ) of photocurrent (PC) collected exceeding 40%. Even under low incident flux and continuous wave (CW) excitation, the interlayer electronic dynamics in TMDs are often dominated by defect-assisted Auger scattering that localize photocarriers in sub-gap defect sites. Prior optical ultrafast studies show fast and slow Auger rate laws dominate the kinetic relaxation in few-layer TMDs over the range of photon fluxes employed. By combining ultrafast photocurrent (U-PC) with transient absorption (TA) microscopy, this work identifies bottleneck-kinetic rate mechanisms that intrinsically limit the maximum PC-IQE achievable in few-layer TMD photodetectors. The integrated U-PC device response is thought to be selective for rate-limiting electronic dynamics forming the primary bottleneck for PC extraction. c. and no robustly-used response-function for extracting first-principle kinetics from U-PC kinetics yet exists. Consequently, we employ synchronous E -field-dependent TA microscopy, to show how both the pure-optical and purely-electronic detection regimes independently predict the same high PC-generation efficiency and fast electronic escape times in TMD-based devices. Experimental Analysis I: Modeling the nonlinear photoresponse of TMDs. We began by fabricating photoconductive devices illustrated in Fig. Fig. In agreement with the early few-layer TMD device studies by Yu et al. To model the nonlinear PC response in few-layer WSe 2 and MoS 2 photodetectors, we first consider a simplified kinetic rate law of the PC-efficiency-limiting rate processes. We approximate the total linear rate, τ -1 l involved in PC generation as the sum of the applied fielddependent electron/hole net escape rate, τ -1 e/h and linear recombination rate, τ -1 r . This approximation ignores explicit spatial and valley dependence. Collectively after electron-hole separation, the rate law for the timeevolution of electron or hole photocarriers density n(t) is simply, The above solution to the rate law predicts that carrier density grows nonlinearly with initial photocarrier density, n o . Unless otherwise specified, the PC and TA signals are collected at resonant excitation at optical gap K A of WSe 2 , and both signals evolve from a linear to nonlinear scaling with increasing photon incident flux (see Fig. This yields a simple, but highly predictive expression showing how the PC collected depends nonlinearly on the initial photoexcited carriers created (n o ). In Fig. For photogenerated carriers, the escapes rates have been previously approximated using the drift velocity, v D = -μ e/h E ∼ = l/τ e/h where μ e/h is the out-of-plane electron or hole mobility, and l is the mean distance to escape. where l is the mean distance of photocarrier transport to the contact Ti/Au contacts. AFM of the WSe 2 device in Fig. The green line in Fig. When photoexcited carriers are directly extracted as a PC, electric field simulations suggest the mean escape distance is approximately l ∼ = L/2. 2 However for a photoconduction response, the electronic carriers must instead hop the device thickness L between all layers. In Fig. Experimental Analysis II: connecting ultrafast TA and PC electron escape dynamics with device efficiency and response time. In section I, the simple kinetic rate law in Eq. 1 predicted both the photon-flux dependent PC and TA absorption amplitude better than any phenomenological power-law fits attempted (shown in supplement S.3). Prior works applying U-PC to graphene, carbon nanotubes, and similar 2D TMDs suggest U-PC is predominately sensitive to the competing kinetic rates that limit PC detection (e.g. extraction vs. recombination). To independently verify the U-PC response function proposed in Eq. 6, we compare the U-PC rates extracted in Fig. r . Strikingly in Fig. Interestingly, Fig. In the time-domain, PC-generation efficiency( ) in Fig. WSe 2 in-plane conduction can approach >350 cm 2 V -1 s -13,27 , whereas the out-of-plane conduction is ∼ 10 4 smaller. Nonetheless, devices made using the interlayer out-of plane conduction mode are often more efficient than reported in-plane conducting devices. At very short delay times, our TA kinetic decay show signatures of the above kinetic rate law associated with electronic scattering and dissociation (e.g. see supplemental section confirming fast photon-flux dependent TA kinetics). In particular, at shot delays the initial kinetics accelerate with the incident photon flux. Fast electronhole dissociation it is not a rate-limiting process for PCgeneration for few-layer WSe 2 and so our kinetic treatment of the carrier dynamics after dissociation used in Eq. 1-2 is justified. As previously shown, defect-assisted Auger scattering dominates TA signal above 10 12 photons/cm 2 . Figure Recent time-domain studies of stacked WSe 2 show TMD devices can be both efficient and fast despite very low out-of-plane mobility. Matching synchronously obtained TA results in Fig. Device preparation: 150 nm thick gold contact pad are patterned on a silicon wafer. Both WSe 2 and MoS 2 was mechanically exfoliated and inspected optically to identify thick that was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Optimal thicknesses ranged from 50 to 100 layers such that > 80% of incident light is absorbed, but the mean path for electron escape is short enough to efficiently collect. Ultrafast photocurrents and transient absorption microscopy: After resonant optical pumping of the K A -point transition shown in Fig. After a mechanical delay stage, both the pump and the probe beams were aligned in a collinear geometry, rasterscanned by piezo-scanning mirror and coupled into a confocal scanning microscope via a 50X IR-region enhanced, achromatic objective (NA= 0.65). Transient absorption signals were detected by measuring the probe beam on with a TE cooled InGaAs detector connected to a Zurich HF2-LI lock-in amplifier with current preamplifier. The pump beam was modulated at either a 25 kHz using an acousto-optical (AO-modulator (Gooch & Housego) to enable high-frequency lock-in detection of the differential reflectivity, ∆R/R. Frequency was swept to ensure beam modulation frequency is independent of the photoresponse measured. Appropriate optical filters or Acton monochromator were used in front of the detector to block the pump beam and select probe spectral window. The pump and probe spot sizes on the sample were determined to ∼1.5 μm, by fitting to a confocal scanning reflection profile of lithographic gold pad edges. All the measurements were done at 295 K. The probe power was fixed at (∼ 0.5 × 10 12 photons/cm 2 ) for the pump power dependence measurements. The steady-state scanning photocurrent geometry discussed above is modified to accommodate simultaneous transient absorption and U-PC measurements. Specifically, a linear delay stage is added to control the relative timing of the two incident laser pulses (one at 780 nm and one 810 nm to present pulse optical interferometry) which are aligned in a collinear geometry before a piezo scanning mirror (PI, #S -334.2SL) and coupled into the microscope (Olympus BX-61WI). Both U-PC and TA microscopy signals are collected as a function of delaytime using lock-in amplifiers and amplitude-modulation the two beam lines shown in Fig. 