Relative bounds on radiation efficiency are established for time-modulated antenna systems where radiation is generated by broadband conduction currents impressed using idealized non-radiating time-varying subsystems, such as those found in direct antenna modulation (DAM) transmitters. Analytical and numerical examples demonstrate that the condition of quasi-resonance, common in nearly all practical direct antenna modulation transmitters, imposes severe restrictions on the otherwise unbounded gains in effective efficiency theoretically achievable by this class of time-modulated transmitters. T HE use of time modulation in an electrically small antenna or its matching network affords the possibility to exceed the strict physical bounds on its linear time invariant (LTI) performance. Notably, direct antenna modulation (DAM) techniques based on the energy-synchronous modulation of time-varying components have been proposed, simulated, and measured as viable strategies for exceeding the conventional bandwidth-efficiency product limitations of small antennas, e.g., the Chu limit With the efficacy of DAM demonstrated by a variety of means, it now becomes necessary to determine whether or not there exist quantitative limits in performance gains achievable by adopting such techniques over traditional transmitters. Here we formulate the question: for a fixed electrical size, how much more efficient could a DAM system be compared to an optimal resistively broadbanded conventional transmitter achieving the same effective bandwidth 1 ? Defined in this Manuscript received March 31, 2020; revised March 31, 2020. K. Schab is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA, USA (e-mail: kschab@scu.edu). 1 Due to their dynamic nature, DAM transmitters do not have a classically defined impedance bandwidth. An effective bandwidth may, however, be defined via a proxy measure such as distortion way, it may appear that relative DAM efficiency increases indefinitely with decreasing transmitter size due to trends in radiation Q-factor. However, upon closer inspection it appears that competing trends in efficiency may limit benefits in DAM efficiency gains in the extreme electrically small limit. The goal of this letter is to calculate bounds on this relative efficiency gain by adapting tools developed for the analysis of classical LTI systems. Namely, we examine low-frequency trends in the efficiency and Q-factor of small antennas to assess the relative benefit of idealized DAM systems over a broad range of scenarios (e.g., electrical size, tuning assumptions, conductivity models). First, in Sec. II, a DAM transmitter is decomposed into non-LTI and LTI components and models are proposed for ideal conventional, ideal non-resonant DAM, and ideal quasi-resonant DAM systems. Then, in Sec. III, we apply these models to three examples of varying levels of abstraction and generality. In all cases, we observe that the condition of quasi-resonance, much like that of self-resonance in classical antennas Throughout this paper we assume that conventional and DAM systems are represented by the block diagrams in Fig. The tradeoff between optimal efficiency and bandwidth for current distributions confined to the design region Ω Non-resonant Pareto Front Self-resonant Pareto Front Resistive Loading Extension prescribed bandwidth B 0 , the maximum efficiency η 0 achievable by an LTI antenna is readily obtained by finding the intersection of the line B = B 0 and the chosen Pareto front, as shown in Fig. We assume that a conventional antenna is matched to a real source impedance via single resonance tuning, see Fig. where η 0 is the efficiency at the intersection and minimization explicitly enforces the right boundary of the self-resonant Pareto front in Fig. Using non-LTI matching and loading networks, it may be possible to impress a broadband signal onto the maximally efficient current distribution feasible within the LTI design region Ω. If this to be (at least hypothetically) true, then an ideal DAM transmitter with no constraint on resonance or quasi-resonance would the achieve arbitrary bandwidth B 0 with efficiency η nr DAM = η nr max . The actual topology of the antenna and non-LTI system that would achieve this performance is unknown, but this proposed model serves as a first upper bound on DAM performance. The aforementioned non-resonant upper bound on radiation efficiency is known to be loose. Additionally, many DAM transmitter architectures rely on resonant tuning to achieve quasi-resonance, e.g., With models for the ideal efficiency of conventional, nonresonant DAM, and quasi-resonant DAM transmitters established, we proceed by studying the relative efficiency of each DAM transmitter with respect to the conventional case, i.e., η nr DAM /η Conv. and η qr DAM /η Conv. . These quotients represent the highest possible relative gain in efficiency feasible by each class of DAM transmitter over a conventional LTI system. In the remainder of this section we study these ratios for three examples with unique characteristics. As a first example, we analytically study the optimal performance of a spherical shell carrying a TM 10 (dipole) modal current distribution. Asymptotic forms for the Q-factor and dissipation factor where R s and Z 0 are the shell's surface resistivity and the impedance of free space, respectively. The non-resonant case is optimal in non-resonant dissipation factor, while the self-resonant case (where the TE 10 mode is used for tuning) represents both minimum Q-factor and minimum self-resonant dissipation factor. It can be shown that the Pareto front between these parameters is linear in δ-Q rad space between these points Pareto fronts for shells of three electrical sizes are shown in Fig. The trends observed in Fig. As a more complex example utilizing the generality of the Pareto front calculation methods in support is considered controllable. The controllable region Ω c over which currents may be optimized is defined as a rectangular region of dimensions h × α . The uncontrollable scatterer Ω u is located a distance g below the controllable region and has dimensions h × , as shown in Fig. Effective efficiency gains for several different values of the parameter α are shown in Fig. As a final example, we step away from Pareto-optimal current analysis and calculate the relative efficiencies of a driven antenna. Here we explicitly require conventional and DAM systems to radiate via the dipole's driven current distribution, though DAM systems may be designed to impress this current distribution over a broad bandwidth, bypassing the dipole's narrow impedance bandwidth (see For a conventional transmitter, the antenna may be tuned to resonance at each frequency via an inductance L with Q-factor Q L , giving rise to the total efficiency As in the previous example, the conventional efficiency is assumed to be tuned and resistively loaded as needed to obtain a target bandwidth B 0 , i.e., where Q Z is the impedance-based Q-factor of the standalone Curves are shown in Fig. We observe the same characteristic features as in the previous examples, where efficiency gains in the non-resonant system are potentially unbounded in the low frequency limit while gains in the resonant system are limited and present only over a finite bandwidth. This example indicates that for realistic loss models, physical size, and frequency ranges, the potential benefits of a DAM transmitter are severely limited when some form of resonance (e.g., quasi-resonance) is required. In the electrically small limit, the dipole antenna's impedance behavior is accurately where R rad,0 , R Ω,0 , and C 0 are the radiation resistance at frequency ω 0 , the ohmic loss resistance at frequency ω 0 , and static capacitance, respectively. Additionally, the antenna's radiation Q-factor may be modeled with the asymptotic cubic scaling in electrical size, i.e., Q a = Q a,0 ω 3 0 /ω 3 , and a general form of by assuming that at this frequency radiation and inductor losses far outweigh ohmic losses. In Fig. IV. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, an effective efficiency ratio is used to quantify the advantage of DAM transmitters over their conventional counterparts. By splitting the system into LTI and non-LTI components, many results from optimal LTI antenna theory are applied. From all reported examples, we observe that the requirement of resonance (e.g., quasi-resonance) severely limits the potential benefits of a DAM transmitter. This implies that quasi-resonant DAM systems, prevalent in the literature, may have limited applicability at extremely low frequencies. The same conclusion holds for any loop based methods, regardless of resonance condition, as their radiation efficiency scales inherently as (ka) 4 . Similar concepts may be applied to the analysis of scattering from non-linear loads By proxy, this includes all possible antennas confined to the region Ω Asymptotic scaling rules for loss for this example are much clearer when expressed in terms of dissipation factor δ, related to efficiency via η = (1 + δ) -1 , see Calculating Q Z requires implicit inclusion of a lossless tuning element in conjunction with measured or simulated impedance data. Note that the skin depth model is used throughout, which is non-physical in the extreme electrically small limit.