Here we propose double-coil setup to allow high signal-to-noise ratio broad-range heteronuclear magnetic resonance imaging experiments: two independent coils, one of them tuned to 1 H frequency to perform anatomical 1 H imaging, and another one, metamaterial-inspired coil, tuned to the X-nucleus frequency. In this work our goal was to design a broad-range X-nuclei coil to cover 2 H, 11 B, 13 C, 23 Na, 7 Li and 31 P nuclear magnetic resonance frequencies, and to combine it with 1 H coil in one setup. The system was designed for 11.7 T scanner, i.e., with 76-203 MHz frequency tuning range for the X-nuclei and tuned to 500 MHz for the proton coil. X-nuclei coil operates via excitation of the fundamental eigenmode of an array of parallel nonmagnetic wires. The excitation of the array is provided via non-resonant feeding loop inductively coupled to the resonator. In order to tune the X-coil over such a wide range, both structural capacitance and inductance of the coil were made variable; narrow range tuning of the 1 H coil is achieved via conventional tuning-matching circuit. Here, the design principle and setup tunability were investigated in simulations and experimentally. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) provides unique opportunities for modern clinical and preclinical biomedical studies. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are two main NMR-based techniques. MRI allows to form images of the anatomy and to observe the physiological processes in the body. Essential MRI system components are the magnet, and the gradient and the radiofrequency (RF) system, the essential part of the latter being the RF coils. The magnet produces strong constant magnetic field B 0 that gives rise to macroscopic nuclear spin magnetization in the sample. The gradient system is used to spatially resolve the source of the NMR signal and thus form an MR image. RF coils, being transmit-only, receive-only or transceiver coils, play an important role of antennas providing alternating RF magnetic field to excite spins in a subject and receiving back weak echo signals at the Larmor frequency. The Larmor frequency of a nucleus (which is the operational frequency of an MRI system) is determined by the nucleus gyromagnetic ratio γ and the static magnetic field strength In clinical and research MRI, hydrogen nuclei (commonly referred to as protons) are most often used to generate a detectable RF signal. However, in addition to hydrogen, several other types of nuclei that provide a useful magnetic resonance response are present in living organisms Whole-body small-animal metamaterial-inspired RF coils were successfully applied for in-vivo 1 H mouse MRI We propose a double-coil setup to allow broad range heteronuclear experiments: two independent coils, one of them tuned to 1 H frequency to obtain anatomical reference images, and another, a metamaterial-inspired coil, tunable to a broad range of X-nuclei frequency. 2 H and 31 P frequencies were chosen as margin frequencies for the X-nucleus coil. The frequency gap between these two nuclei Larmor frequencies at 11.7 T is 127.7 MHz. Such NMR-active nuclei as 7 Li, 11 B, 13 C, 23 Na also fall into this range. We present here the results of numerical simulation and initial experimental implementation of such whole-body small-animal double-coil 1 H-X system with a wide frequency tuning range for the X-nucleus to allow diverse heteronuclear experiments making use of data from multiple X-nuclei, i.e., multiheteronuclear imaging. Our coil system was designed to operate in 11.7 T small-animal scanner. The system incorporates two different RF-coils. One coil is designed to be placed above, the other below the imaged object. Both coils are aimed at producing B + 1 magnetic field orthogonal to B 0 field inside the MR scanner bore. To facilitate the use of the coils they should not be coupled at their working frequencies. The way such decoupling was achieved will be demonstrated. The first, multi-nuclei metamaterial-inspired coil operates via the excitation of hybridized eigenmodes of an array of parallel non-magnetic wires (schematic view is presented in Figure As in the case with previously reported wire array coils The opposing plates of the capacitors are formed by four AD1000 PCBs fully metallized on one side placed above and below PCBs with patches, thus forming an array of two parallel connected distributed capacitances. The substrate thickness of all PCBs is 0.5 mm. The distance between the wires is 10 mm. The wires have a 4 mm overlap with metal patches at both ends. Plastic holders are used to fix four outer PCBs with respect to the inner PCBs with patches. The coil is shown in Figure The second (lower) coil, the so-called butterfly loop coil The radiofrequency coil design was simulated in the commercial software CST Microwave Studio 2017 (Computer Simulation Technology GmbH, Germany) using the Frequency Domain solver. The latter solves a three-dimensional electrodynamics problem by the Finite Element Method. Simulations were performed in the presence of the RF shield model (i.e., copper tube with an inner diameter of 82 mm), which in MRI experiments represents the scanner bore, and the homogeneous cylindrical phantom (70 mm length, 18 mm radius) with dielectric permittivity of 50 and electric conductivity of 0.5 S/m imitating average tissue material properties of a small animal The simulations predicted a shift of the resonance frequency of the coils system when placed inside the RF-shield. This shift was about 6 MHz up for the 76 MHz tuning geometry, and about 20 MHz up for the 203 MHz tuning geometry. The same effect was observed during on-bench measurements. Simulation results and experimental measurements of the system tuning capability are presented in Figure The anticipated coil decoupling due to RF fields orthogonality was confirmed by calculated and measured S 12 parameters of the complete double-coil setup (Figure The magnetic field distribution for both coils was obtained in simulations and experimentally. Since it was demonstrated that there is no interaction between the coils, these results were obtained independently for each coil and without the RF shield. Here we demonstrate the field components for the X-nuclei coil (map size is 80×80 mm) and the proton coil (map size 70×60 mm) (Figure The designed dual coil setup allows RF magnetic field excitation and acquiring signals from protons as well as from several biologically important nuclei at 11.7 T. The latter include 2 H (76.753 MHz), which can be used, for example, to indicate tumor vascularity The S-parameter measurements have shown the butterfly coil to be uncoupled from the X-nuclei coil. This allows independent tuning of the two coils, and thus provides a convenient way to obtain both the reference anatomical 1 H images and functional Xnucleus images on the seleсted frequency. Field distribution for both coils was shown to provide large enough FoV for whole-body small-animal imaging. However, the exact imaging volume has to be determined with animal scanning in an actual MRI scanner. An important detail of this design is that in the tuning process non-overlapped PCB parts effectively act as extensions of the connected wires. Therefore, in order to keep the FoV constant while switching between different X-nuclei, one needs to also keep the total length of telescopic wires and non-overlapped patches, i.e. the distance between outer PCBs, constant. It has been previously demonstrated that, compared to the rectangular loop coils, 1 H 300 MHz metamaterialinspired coil shows a higher magnetic field generated per 1W of accepted power Moreover, the possibility of seamlessly observing the NMR signal from a number of nuclei allows for better spatial localization of the imaging or localized spectroscopy data as well as removes the need to interfere with the studied animal when changing the scanner working frequency. This is expected to provide the ability to assign the obtained data to the same region and metabolic process. Briefly, the keypoints above show the presented coil to be a promising tool to allow previously unattainable practical muliheteronuclear MRI, thus allowing for better differentiation of pathologies, more detailed understanding of tumor metabolism or observing the functional aspects of the therapy progress, which will be shown in further, particularly in-vivo, experiments. The experimental measurements in this work were supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (Zadanie No. 3.2465.2017/4.6). The numerical studies were funded by the Russian Science Foundation (Project 19-75-10104). This project has also received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 736937.