We experimentally and theoretically investigate the spin-orbit (SO) field in a physically-defined, p-type metal-oxide-semiconductor double quantum dot in silicon. We measure the magnetic-field dependence of the leakage current through the double dot in the Pauli spin blockade. A finite magnetic field lifts the blockade, with the lifting least effective when the external and SO fields are parallel. In this way, we find that the spin-flip of a tunneling hole is due to a SO field pointing perpendicular to the double dot axis and almost fully out of the quantum-well plane. We augment the measurements by a derivation of SO terms using group-symmetric representations theory. It predicts that without in-plane electric fields (a quantum well case), the SO field would be mostly within the plane, dominated by a sum of a Rashba-and a Dresselhaus-like term. We, therefore, interpret the observed SO field as originated in the electric fields with substantial in-plane components. fabrication and thus benefits the upscaling and compatibility with classical electronics. On the other hand, a large SO interaction beneficial for qubit controllability might also become a major decoherence source Concerning spin qubits in MOS devices The essential difference of our approach to the majority of recent works is that we do not assume, a priori, a specific form for the SO interactions. They are usually taken as a combination of Rashba and Dresselhaus terms The double quantum dot (DQD) used in the experiment is made on silicon-on-insulator [Fig. We examine the PSB leakage current through the DQD at zero level detuning (ε = 0) while changing the magnitude of the external magnetic field B ⃗ ext (shown as a green arrow) applied in various directions With this formula, we assign the DQD an effective SO field M ⃗⃗ SO , where μ B is the Bohr's magneton, k ⃗ 12 the momentum when tunneling from dot 1 to dot 2, and σ the Pauli vector representing the effective (pseudo) spin of the hole ground state. As will be explained below, the SO field in Eq. ( In Fig. In this formula, B C , δI, and I 0 are fit parameters. We use this formula below to fit all traces such as the one in Fig. We first investigate the in-plane magnetic-field-direction dependence of the crossover field B C . To this end, we measure the I -B ext traces at different θ and a fixed φ = 0. The traces, plotted in Fig. Assuming that the spin-conserving tunneling rates are not influenced by the modest magnetic field B ⃗ ext , Ref. From symmetry analysis we conclude that the g-tensor for holes in our double dot is well approximated by (see In Ref. g̿ ∝ ( 2 0 0 0 γ 0 0 0 1 ) , ( , as the g-tensor in Eq. ( With the model specified by Eqs. ( The best fit is plotted as the orange line in Fig. To increase the estimate precision and resolve the sign ambiguity, we repeat the above procedure for an out-of-plane field, varying it in the y-z plane. Figs. Especially around θ ≈ 0.30π in Fig. IV. In this section, we derive an effective spin-orbit Hamiltonian theoretically, using symmetry analysis. Hence, we make no other assumptions than the ones imposed by the crystal symmetry of silicon and the device geometry. As for the former, the effective SO Hamiltonian for bulk silicon inherits the symmetries of the octahedral point group O h = T d × {I}, where T d and {I} are the tetrahedral and inversion groups, respectively. This decomposition allows to reduce the point group to the simpler T d (the case of GaAs) with the condition that only terms that preserve inversion invariance are allowed Departing from there, we apply the constraints imposed by the geometry of our experimental setup, which encompass: (i) Interested in a low-energy description, we keep only terms linear in the hole wavevector The quantum well confinement splits the four-fold degeneracy of the valence band: At zero magnetic field, the ground state is a Kramers doublet, described by effective spin 1⁄2 operators {σ x , σ y , σ z } (Pauli matrices). We derive a Hamiltonian restricted to this two-dimensional subspace. (iv) There are strong electric fields along the y and z-direction. No appreciable field is expected along the dot axis, E x ≈ 0. (v) The allowed form of the interactions depends on the number of monoatomic layers in the quantum well and the symmetry of its interfaces. Here we give results for the highest symmetry possible (D 2h ) which corresponds to a quantum well with the inversion symmetry (disregarding the electric fields) and the two interfaces "averaged" by monoatomic fluctuations Hamiltonian to the double dot experiment, we illustrate its content considering a two-dimensional hole gas of the quantum well. To this end, we follow the standard procedure and keep only the in-plane momenta k x , k z , and the electric field across the quantum well E y . Putting the remaining momentum and field components to zero we get H SO [110] = E y (c 1 k x σ z + c 2 k z σ x ). To connect to the spin-orbit interactions forms well known from 2DEGs, we cast this Hamiltonian in terms of the Rashba-like and Dresselhaus-like combinations [Footnote5], Parameter space State of the system Basis of Eq. ( Alternative basis of Eq. ( Identifying k ⃗ 12 with k x gives Eq. ( Before concluding, let us make the following comment. We have assumed that the DQD is described by uniform spin-orbit and g-factor parameters. Since they are probably strongly affected by applied electric fields, it is legitimate to consider that these parameters are actually spatially inhomogeneous: in the next level of model refinement, each dot would be assigned its own spin-orbit field and/or g-factor We determined the direction of the spin-orbit field M ⃗⃗ SO from the angle dependence of the PSB leakage current in a physically defined Si p-type MOS DQD on silicon-on-insulator. We also identified the related direction for the external magnetic field B ⃗ ext,|| which minimizes the spin-orbit effects on PSB. The measured spin-orbit field is in good accordance with the theory relying only on the crystal structure, the wafer orientation and the device geometry. By orienting the external magnetic field along B ⃗ ext,|| and reducing the background current further by tuning the tunneling rates (inaccessible in this study due to device instability), we will be able to perform PSB spin readout necessary for spin manipulation measurements. Our results may help to devise ways to increase the hole spin coherence and controllability in Si structures. Further studies will include also investigations of the anomalous leakage behavior to learn more about the strength of any residual spin-lifting mechanisms. To apply the above results for the specifics of our experiment, we start with the largest symmetry group D 2h (number 5 in the list). Namely, as all remaining groups are its subgroups, one might expect that there is a hierarchy of terms: each time the symmetry is lowered, new terms are generated in the Hamiltonian with prefactors somewhat smaller than those corresponding to the preceding higher symmetry (A6) gives Eq. ( 