Using cross-correlation current noise spectroscopy, we have investigated carrier dynamics in methylammonium lead triiodide solar cells. This method provides a space selectivity for devices with planar multi-layered structure, effectively amplifying current noise contributions coming from the most resistive element of the stack. In the studied solar cells, we observe near full-scale shot noise, indicating the dominance of noise generation by a single source, likely the interface between the perovskite and the spiro-OMeTAD hole-transport layer. We argue that the strong 1/f noise term has contributions both from the perovskite layer and interfaces. It displays non-ideal dependence on photocurrent, 1.4 ∝ (instead of usual 2 S I ∝ ), which is likely due to current-induced halide migration. Finally, we observe generation-recombination noise. The relaxation time of this process grows linearly with photocurrent, which allows to attribute this contribution to bimolecular recombination in the perovskite bulk absorption layer. Extrapolating our results, we estimate that at the standard 1 sun illumination the electron-hole recombination time is 5 microseconds. To meet ever-increasing energy needs, a great deal of research has gone into finding cheap alternatives to silicon photovoltaics. One of the most promising materials are hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs), which by now have reached certified power conversion efficiencies of more than 25% While much attention has been given to understanding the physics of the perovskite absorber layer, less is known about the dynamics at the interfaces between this layer and the electron and hole transport layers (ETL and HTL, respectively). One of the most commonly used HTL materials is the organic 2,2',7,7'-tetrakis(N,N-dip-methoxyphenyl-amine)9,9'-spirobifluorene, also known as spiro-OMeTAD. Despite its popularity, there is still a limited understanding of its hole-transport properties. Further, spiro-OMeTAD films tend to be amorphous, leading to lower mobility, requiring doping The ETL is typically comprised of a transition metal oxide, with TiO 2 being the most widely used both as a contact layer as well as a mesoporous scaffolding for perovskite growth. This scaffolding is generally required as electron diffusion length in perovskites is much shorter than that of the holes In this paper, we use current noise spectroscopy to detect and characterize different relaxation processes observed in hybrid perovskite solar cells. We argue that current noise spectroscopy has a certain spatial selectivity, namely that it magnifies contributions from the most resistive elements of the stacked layers. In the case of hybrid perovskites, this appears to be the ETL/perovskite and perovskite/HTL interfaces. Noise spectroscopy analyzes fluctuations of a signal from its steady-state value. It has been used to characterize defects and relaxation processes in semiconducting devices The samples studied in the present paper, as shown in Fig. where the first term is a frequency-independent term, the second represents 1/f flicker noise, and the third is a generalized generation-recombination (GR) noise allowing for the dispersion of the relaxation time . Note that when b = 0, the GR term reverts to the familiar Lorentzian profile. The last term, 2 Af , describes the residual background noise caused by capacitance of the devices as discussed in details in our previous works Th S kTG = and values for an impedance G measured under short-circuit conditions The noise spectra for thinner S7 solar cell are shown in Fig. where T R is the total device resistance. If we assume that all noise generators i n are uncorrelated shot noise sources, the total current noise seen at the electrodes is where the Fano factor, F , is a suppression of the overall shot noise. The sum in Eq. 3 is dominated by the most resistive term; this feature for multi-layered devices provides a space selectivity to the noise signals. Shot noise reflects the discreet nature of electric charge and typically appears due to the random transfer of electrons (or holes) across an energy barrier. In our experiment, the close-to-unity value of the Fano factor indicates the dominant contribution of a single resistive element in stack. Given the abrupt interface between the perovskite and the spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer, as compared to the diffused scaffolding of the TiO 2 , it is likely that the shot noise is dominated by a Schottky barrier at the perovskite/HTL interface. Let us now discuss the other parameters extracted from the noise spectra fits. Fig. , that is that a sample with a smaller volume 3 V generates larger noise signal. This holds for 1/f noise generated by either mobility or concentration fluctuations Phenomenologically, the rate of a recombination process in semiconductor depends on number of carriers involved in the elementary recombination act and, in the simplest case when electrons and holes have the same concentration n , can be written as The noise spectroscopy measures relaxation time of small fluctuations from a steady state value 0 n . So the relaxation time determined by this method is Under steady state operation the photocurrent generated by a solar cell is proportional to the steady state, nonequilibrium concentration of carriers. Hence, the experimentally observed linear dependence of 1 / τ on current allows us to identify the microscopic process as bimolecular recombination. . This number has the same order of magnitude as the lifetime reported for a series of MAPb(I 1-x Br x ) 3 perovskites, 1sun 0.4 2 μs τ ≈ -, under 1 sun illumination While the presense of monomolecular and Auger processes is not directly observed in the ranges of illumination studied, this does not mean that they are completely absent from the device. Monomolecular recombination is known to occur via the Shockley-Reed-Hall mechanism at interfacial trap sites. Due to the energetic distribution of these sites, however, it is likely that they contribute to 1/f noise. Auger recombination is known to be unexpectedly strong in halide perovskites In summary, through noise spectroscopy, we observe a rich set of data highlighting important dynamics inside a modern MAPbI 3 photovoltaic cell. We see shot noise with near-unity Fano factor in devices with 4-fold difference in thickness. This indicates that a single interface or step is the dominating shot noise generator, most probably the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface. The 1/f noise has contributions both from the light-absorbing perovskite layer and interfaces. The dependence of 1/f noise on photocurrent indicates presence of defects induced by light and/or current. In the thicker device, we observe a GR contribution, which we attribute to bimolecular recombination occurring in the bulk perovskite. The extracted relaxation time agrees in order of magnitude with the values reported in literature. In the analysis of the noise data, we used the important advantage of the current noise spectroscopy, namely spatial selectivity in which the most resistive elements in the device dominate the noise profile, a method applicable to other devices with a complex stacked structure. Overall, we see that current noise spectroscopy is a useful and inexpensive method for material and device characterization.