Recent demonstrations of ultracoherent nanomechanical resonators introduce the prospect of developing protocols for solid state sensing applications. Here, we propose to use two coupled ultracoherent resonator modes on a Si3N4 membrane for the detection of small nuclear spin ensembles. To this end, we employ parametric frequency conversion between nondegenerate modes. The nondegenerate modes result from coupled degenerate resonators, and the parametric conversion is mediated by periodic inversions of the nuclear spins in the presence of a magnetic scanning tip. We analyze potential noise sources and derive the achievable signal-to-noise ratio with typical experimental parameter values. Our proposal reconciles the geometric constraints of optomechanical systems with the requirements of scanning force microscopy and brings forth a promising platform for spin-phonon interaction and spin imaging. Nanoscale Magnetic Resonance Imaging (NanoMRI) aims at detecting nuclear spins in three spatial dimensions with sub-nanometer resolution Achieving the necessary sensitivity to detect the magnetic moment of a nanometer-sized nuclear spin ensemble is a formidable task. One candidate technique to achieve this goal is Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy (MRFM) where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the mode temperature. The transducer's dissipation coefficient is γ = √ mk/Q = mω 0 /Q, where m is the effective mass of the mode, ω 0 = 2πf 0 is the angular resonance frequency, k = mω 2 0 is the spring constant, and Q is the mechanical quality factor. In order to reach better sensitivity, much effort is being invested to reduce the dissipation Traditional MRFM setups are constructed around cantilever resonators with very small spring constants is the imaging of biological samples and macromolecules, which are difficult to mount on the tip of a cantilever. Recently, a route towards ultra-low damping coefficients has emerged through the development of soft-clamped silicon nitride membranes and strings, with localized defect modes that feature quality factors up to the Q ∼ 10 9 range Silicon nitride membranes are attractive transducers for spin detection instruments In this paper, we propose a sensing scheme that circumvents the frequency mismatch problem. We employ a parametric upconversion method The working principle of our sensing scheme is outlined in Section II. In Section III, we derive the full equation of motion for the system in the coupled mode basis. In Section IV, we obtain a simple closed form expression for the signal gain in the absence of nonlinearities and noise. The limitations of this scheme due to the onset of nonlinear behavior are explored in Section V, followed by noise analysis and a derived expression for the signalto-noise ratio in Section VI. Finally, in Section VII we present a survey of current state-of-the-art experimental possibilities and evaluate the expected performance of our method. We now present our spin detection scheme based on membrane transducers. Consider an elastic membrane patterned with a hexagonal array of holes (see Fig. We consider two such modes with equal frequencies and effective masses. When in close proximity, the modes are mechanically coupled, giving rise to symmetric and antisymmetric normal modes with frequencies ω S = ω 0 and ω A > ω S [see Fig. An ensemble of spins with magnetization M is placed on one of the defects and is periodically inverted by radiofrequency pulses We model the system as two equivalent interacting resonators with coordinates x 1 and x 2 , corresponding to modes 1 and 2 in Fig. where H 0 describes two non-interacting nonlinear resonators, and contains the linear coupling between the resonators, the field interaction, and the external drive, respectively. The component of spin polarization that is perpendicular to the external field undergoes Larmor precession and does not contribute to the signal. Therefore M(t) • B(x 1 ) = M (t)B(x 1 ) and the corresponding equations of motion in the presence of homogeneous dissipation γ are The function K(x) contains all nonlinear elements, cf. Sec. V. The terms ξ 1,2 (t) and χ 1,2 (t) represent thermal and frequency noise, respectively, whose roles are discussed in Sec. VI. The magnetization M (t) fluctuates with a finite correlation time, known as the spin relaxation time T 1 in NMR experiments. Simultaneously, we apply periodic spin-flipping with frequency Ω, so that where ξ M (t) is a stochastic term with an approximately Lorentzian PSD in the frequency domain. In accord with the frequency mismatch problem discussed above, the spin-flipping rate is slow relative to the membrane mode frequency, Ω ω 0 . Taking the equilibrium point to be x 1 = 0 and expanding B(x 1 ) yields, to second order [36], Substituting Eq. ( For Ω ω 0 , this drive is off-resonant and can be neglected. The second term corresponds to a force that is proportional to the amplitude x 1 , i.e., it corresponds to a parametric drive The key role of the higher field derivatives in Eq. ( yields two normal modes labeled x S (symmetric) and x A (antisymmetric), governed by the two equations of motion with i, j ∈ {S, A}, i = j. The normal modes are split in frequency [42], where we denoted and from now on we use the short-hand notation . The transformed nonlinear terms K i (x i , x j ) further couple the two modes. Note that for resonators with non-identical frequencies and/or masses, a transformation analogous to Eq. ( Before turning to the key performance characteristic of our proposed scheme -the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) -in Sec. VI, we demonstrate its working principle on a simple case. To this end, we neglect nonlinearities and noise terms in Eq. ( It is important to note that δω 2 (t) enters as two different effects. First, it enters Eq. ( Energy upconversion is equivalent to a driving force exerted by one mode onto the other. Taking, without loss of generality, x S as the strongly-driven 'pump' and x A as the 'readout' mode, we set the external force to be F (t) = F cos(ω S t) and write the pump mode amplitude as The oscillating term δω 2 (t)x S (t) in Eq. ( In this way, the driven pump mode generates a magnetization-dependent motion of the readout mode. We can thus detect M by measuring the Fourier component xA (ω A ) (denoted X A ), which is proportional to F spin and has a fixed ratio to the pump mode amplitude X S , where Note that strong parametric coupling of two nondegenerate modes generates doubly-split states [see Fig. In summary, we can see that the strong drive at frequency ω S has been converted into a signal at ω A that depends linearly on M , i.e., it corresponds to the (instantaneous) magnetization of the measured spin or spin ensemble. Measuring the ratio in Eq. ( V. NONLINEAR EFFECTS Inspecting Eq. In line with the contemporary development of defect modes in membrane nanoresonators with our analysis being directly applicable to higher order nonlinear terms. Identifying again x S as the pump mode, we refer to the equations of motion [Eq. x A . The nonlinearity of x S will shift its resonant frequency and induce motion at higher harmonics of the driving frequency However, nonlinearities in the bare resonators x 1 , x 2 couple the motions of x S and x A (cf. Appendix A). The damping term γ nl A and natural frequency ω nl A are hence affected by the large amplitude X S as where S , and The time-dependent terms in Eq. ( which in turn limits the signal gain, cf. Eq. ( In a realistic setting, the bare resonators [Eqs. ( Transformed noise terms. In the normal mode basis, the multiplicative noise is simply while the additive noise has contributions from both additive (thermal) and multiplicative (frequency) noise of the bare oscillators, Specifically, we note the coherent term x S entering the additive noise ξ A -taking x S to be the monochromatic pump [Eq. ( comprising both thermal noise and upconverted frequency noise Effect of frequency noise. In general, colored frequency noise is difficult to treat analytically. Exact results have been obtained for dichotomous and trichotomous Markovian noise with a Lorentzian PSD The frequency variance Var(ω 2 A ) can be obtained via the Wiener-Khinchin theorem by integrating the power spectral density of the dimensionless term χ(t), Apart from the intrinsic frequency noise χ, our system is also affected by the conversion of any noise in the pump amplitude X S into the frequency noise of x A , as shown in Appendix A. However, both sources result in negligible corrections compared to the effect of thermal noise acting on x A and we disregard them from now on. Effect of spin fluctuations. We now study the impact of the finite spin lifetime. During the course of a measurement, the magnetization will fluctuate with a characteristic time T 1 , cf. Eq. ( where F spin is the force originating from parametric driving with a coherent magnetic moment [Eq. ( We start by defining the susceptibility of the mode as with Q fd = Q nl /(1 + p) being the (nonlinear) quality factor damped by a feedback gain p. The mode is driven by the fluctuating force S ξ A (ω) defined in Eq. ( with 0 < η ≤ 1 being the detection efficiency where g 2 p=0 (ω) is the susceptibility without feedback damping. There are three important points to note here: first, we can see from Eq. ( Filtering. In order to reduce the measured displacement noise, we apply a filter to reject noise far off the signal frequency. As a concrete example, we consider a standard Butterworth filter, which modulates the signal with , where ω f denotes the bandwidth and n the filter order. The signal of our experiment corresponds to the displacement variance driven by the spin signal, which is measured together with a noise background of We now assess the feasibility of the proposed measurement scheme using representative experimental parameters of patterned Si 3 N 4 membranes, cf. Fig. First of all, we need to relate σ 2 spin to the number of spins in the measured ensemble. To this end, we utilize the MRFM framework of spin variance sensing where μ = 1.4 × 10 -26 J T -1 is the proton magnetic moment. Assuming M ∼ = 0, the expected spin force is then F 2 spin ∝ N μ 2 . Our aim is to estimate the variance by taking successive noisy readings of M as it fluctuates in time, and hence determine N . For a spin ensemble with lifetime T 1 and matched filter bandwidth ω f = 1/T 1 , in the limits σ 2 spin σ 2 noise , we can represent the SNR after a collection time t c T 1 in the concise form Eq. ( Let us now evaluate the SNR of the feedback-damped system [Eq. FIG. both the signal and the thermal noise PSD scale as X 2 S , resulting in a limiting value of the SNR, lim where is a dimensionless constant, depending solely on the filter order n. Note that Eq. ( Case study. We proceed to calculate the expected SNR [Eq. The current membrane devices typically possess Γ nl ∼ = 1 × 10 14 m -2 s -1 A breakdown of the different noise sources in terms of their impact on the observed displacement is shown in Fig. The SNR results presented in Fig. Our scheme offers significant practical advantages over instruments based on cantilevers or nanowires. (i) The membrane surface is convenient for placement of 'large' samples, such as viruses or biological molecules in the 100 nm range. (ii) The spring constant of the membrane resonator modes is orders of magnitude higher than that of typical MRFM cantilevers, which results in a drastically reduced susceptibility towards spatially varying interaction potentials that affect the sensitivity. The scheme is easily extendable to oscillators with unequal masses and natural frequencies. (iii) Our parametric upconversion scheme does not require any electrical or magnetic signal at the frequency of the detection mode. This will be helpful to avoid spurious driving of the sensor which can make data interpretation difficult. (iv) Finally, the magnetic field gradient source in our scheme is located on the scanning tip, which will allow to utilize commercial magnetic force microscopy (MFM) probes. Membrane-based MRFM thus has the potential to become a mature and versatile NanoMRI platform. In summary, we have theoretically demonstrated the feasibility of using MHz optomechanical membrane resonators as force sensors for nuclear spins. Our work highlights the potential of membrane platforms for sensitive spin detection and should encourage further development of membrane-based NanoMRI instruments and spin-mechanics quantum information platforms. Appendix A: The effect of nonlinearities on normal modes The transformation in Eq. ( x A , we can drop all higher-order x A terms in Eq. (A1). The readout mode thus behaves as a linear oscillator, but with an x S -dependent damping and spring constant. Nonlinearity of the mode x S itself plays no role in the detection mechanism, we can thus continue to write its amplitude as x S = X S cos(ω S t). Eq. (A1) hence simplifies to the form used in Sec. V. We note that in general, the pump mode x S is subject to thermal noise. Looking at the prefactor of x A in Eq. (A1), we see this is converted to frequency noise of x A via the Duffing nonlinearity α Taking δX S = 0 and δX 2 S = k B T /mω 2 S and dropping the oscillatory off-resonant terms, this introduces a variance of the frequency ω 2 A , For the reference values in Appendix E and X S0 = 10 nm, we obtain Var(ω 2 A ) = 1.4 × 10 7 s -4 . While this is far higher than the intrinsic frequency noise, it does not significantly diminish the resonant response of x A [cf. Eq. ( In Eq. ( The magnetic field profile was estimated by modelling a hollow conical tip with a rounded top [cf. Fig. for γ n |B(r) -B 0 | ≤ ∆ω rf and 0 otherwise, with γ n being the nuclear spin gyromagnetic ratio. The bracketed term is an empirical expression describing flipping fidelity, whereby spins further off the central resonant condition produce less signal We plot the PSF in Fig. A conceivable drawback of our scheme is the impact of the high pump mode amplitude, as well as the thermal motion of the membrane, on the spin ensemble. Since the ensemble moves rapidly through a region with a field gradient, its lifetime may be decreased by undergoing non-adiabatic dynamics. In particular, the effect of thermal noise has previously been found important in the context of cantilever-based MRFM We describe the flipping in the frame rotating with the Larmor frequency about the x-axis, where, under the effect of an applied RF field B rf (t) cos[ω rf (t)] êz , the effective field reads with the spin dynamics being governed by the Bloch equation, Starting with B rf (t) parallel to x-axis, a spin-flip is achieved by an adiabatic sweep across the Larmor frequency. For simplicity, we take a sinusoidal RF profile, with B rf = 5 mT Optimizing the pulse profiles will likely provide even more stable spin inversions Motion of the pump mode. When the pump mode oscillates with amplitude X S [cf. Eqs. ( We solve Eq. (D2) numerically with the field B rf (t) + δB(t). From the field modelling in Appendix C, we obtain ∂Bx ∂x = 6 × 10 6 T m -1 . Fig. Finally, to test the flipping fidelity, we integrated Eq. D2 over 250 flips using X S = 10 nm. Starting with a unit vector M(0) = êx , the magnetization M x at the end of each flip never dropped below 0.996. We thus conclude the flipping mechanism remains robust under strong driving of the pump mode. Thermal noise in the membrane. We measured the thermal displacement on one of the defect mode sites of a Si 3 N 4 membrane. At room temperature, a root-mean-square displacement of 150 pm was observed, most of which was due to the many delocalized modes of the membrane. Since cantilever-based MRFM displays high flipping fidelities at comparable displacement noise levels, and since our envisioned operational temperature (0.2 K) will further reduce thermal fluctuations, we do not expect this to be an issue with regards to spin-flipping. Relative to our notation, this scales the cubic nonlinearities α, Γ nl by a factor of 1 2 and the mass m by a factor of 2. This transformation is convenient for experimental use, but requires additional renormalization when dealing with external forces. The magnetic field gradients were estimated by modelling a conical magnetic tip made of saturated NdFeB magnet (such as is used in MFM) with the magnetostatics package RADIA x B. 