The increase of current uniformity along of a resistive type superconductor fault current limiter (R-SFCL) in the design of this type of limiters is well perceived as an important issue. The non-uniform distribution of current in R-SFCL only increases the current in some superconducting regions, as a result, in the fault conditions, only certain parts of the superconductor undergo a phase change that increases the heat pressure in those areas and causes the breakdown and destruction of the device. In this paper, the current density distributions in common patterns used in R-SFCs constructions have been simulated and investigated. To this end, an effective model is proposed for R-SFCL to achieve the highest uniformity of current and harmonic phase change over superconductors compared to other patterns. The simulation results in the Ansys Maxwell Software advocate the appropriate and satisfying performance of the proposed model. In the past few decades, due to the expansion of power systems, the increasing demand and combination of local systems power supplying units in these systems, the level of fault current and short circuit have also increased, resulting in possible the instability and reduced reliability The appearance of varied distributed generators (DGs) ranging from renewable energy sources such as wind turbine and photovoltaics to fossil-fuel based DGs such as fuel cell and micro turbines has caused high short-circuit currents when fault happens at the distribution level. This is not only due to the internal structure of these devices; but is also due to their vicinity to the electrical load centers Depending on the type of construction and performance, SFCL's can be divided into two categories: direct and indirect SFCL However, the main problem with this pattern is the non-uniformity of the current density along the superconductor Ansys Maxwell Software is used to simulate and test the current distribution in R-SFCL. This software is used to simulate both electromagnetic and electrical fields in the electromechanical and electronic systems. In these simulations, the finite element method is assessed, and by solving numerical equations, the variables are calculated In Fig. In order to study the current distribution along the superconductor in our analysis, we divide the weakly superconducting regions for analyzing the current fluctuations as shown in Fig. The electric current density distribution is shown in Fig. Fig. As it is illustrated in this figure the problems with these patterns are the uneven distribution of the electric current density along the superconductor at the sharp points (weak points) is much higher than other points. For this reason, in fault conditions, these points first undergo phase change and have higher resistance that cause increasing the thermal stress on these points, thereby causing superconductor degradation In the following the standard deviation of currents for all patterns are calculated and compared. The standard deviation of the current density is plotted for each line and along the central line (C line) in Fig. As shown in To modify these patterns, the sharp areas were removed, without the change of the superconductor length so that the total resistance remained almost unchanged. the peaks that are clear in Fig. At the end, we introduce a Semicircular Meander Pattern (SMP) pattern that has the highest uniform distribution of current density as shown in Fig. Fig. As shown in Fig. Another feature of this pattern is to increase the superconductor length at a constant level compared to other patterns, which also increases its total resistance after phase change, as well as increasing dissipative energy, which leads to the increase of limited fault current. Furthermore, the important parameter in the construction of R-SFCL is the filling factor. The filling factor is defined as the ratio of the superconducting surface to the substrate surface. The filling factor and superconductor length for all pattern is calculated and is presented in table 2. Unbalanced dispersion of the current density at high currents can lead to device degradation. In this paper, the numerical method is introduced to investigate the distribution of current density for the patterns that be used in R-SFCL fabrication. As the results show, in order to increase the superconductivity stability of the R-SFCL that results in the stability of the power systems, it is better to use modified patterns in the construction of the R-SFCL. Comparison of the modified patterns and the first patterns shows that in the modified patterns the electric current density is more evenly distributed and in addition the filling remains almost constant. Filling factor retention also means that the superconductor resistance remains constant under fault conditions. 