Interpreting the impedance response of perovskite solar cells (PSC) is significantly more challenging than for most other photovoltaics. This is for a variety of reasons, of which the most significant are the mixed ionic-electronic conduction properties of metal halide perovskites and the difficulty in fabricating stable, and reproducible, devices. Experimental studies, conducted on a variety of PSCs, produce a variety of impedance spectra shapes. However, they all possess common features, the most noteworthy of which is that they have at least two signals, at high and low frequency, with different characteristic responses to temperature, illumination and electrical bias. It is shown, by a combination of experiment and drift-diffusion modelling of the ion and charge carrier transport and recombination within the cell, that these common features are well reproduced by the simulation. In addition, we show that the high frequency response contains all the key information relating to the steady-state performance of a PSC, i.e. it is a signature of the recombination mechanisms and provides a measure of charge collection efficiency. Moreover, steady-state performance is significantly affected by the distribution of mobile ionic charge within the perovskite layer. Comparison between the electrical properties of different devices should therefore be made using high frequency impedance measurements performed in the steady-state voltage regime in which the cell is expected to operate. Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) analyses the current response of a (photo)electrochemical system to a small periodic voltage modulation. The corresponding impedance response, which is usually assumed to be linear, is measured as a function of the frequency of the modulation and provides information about the kinetic processes occurring within the system. IS has proven to be an indispensable tool for gaining insight into the physical behaviour of solar cells and other photoelectrochemical devices, and has been widely used to characterize organic solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells. The aforementioned complications associated with PSC physics means that, to date, no well-established simple model is to be found in the literature, although some linear equivalent circuits have been proposed. They basically utilise a combination of at least two resistors and two capacitors in various arrangements, -(RC)-(RC)-, Drift-diffusion (DD) models of solar cells, based upon the coupled set of continuity equations for electrons, holes and ions, and Poisson's equation, provides an alternative (and more fundamental) way of understanding the system and its impedance response. As the parameters of DD models such as diffusion coefficients, lifetimes, dielectric constants, doping densities, work functions, etc., have clear physical meanings, a link between the microkinetic processes taking place in the solar cell and its macroscopic characteristics can more readily be established. DD models have successfully been used to simulate the current-voltage (JV) curves of a variety of perovskite solar cells and helped researchers to understand the origin of the hysteresis observed in many cases in terms of dynamic ionic redistribution over the course of the voltage scan. In this context, Jacobs et al. In this paper we use DD numerical simulations in combination with experimental IS to gain a better understanding of the optoelectronic behaviour of PSCs. We show that our DD model can reproduce the main characteristics found in the impedance spectra, and provides a wide-ranging description of the IS features that actually determine the PSC photoconversion efficiency, noting that the main purpose of IS measurements is to detect and quantify loss mechanisms (e.g. slow transport, high recombination rates and limited internal quantum efficiencies) in a particular device. We emphasise that this can only be achieved using a well-defined electrical model, or if particular features of the spectra can be identified with particular loss mechanisms. The main features of the IS response of PSCs are well summarized in a recent paper by some of the authors. (1) The presence of at least two signals or time constants, embodied as arcs in the Nyquist plot and peaks in the frequency plots, one at low frequencies (0.1-10 Hz, LF) and the other at high frequencies (10 5 -10 6 , HF). (2) The LF signal is independent of the DC voltage, whereas the characteristic frequency of the HF response decreases exponentially with increases in the DC voltage. Furthermore, when an -(RC)-(RC)-equivalent circuit is used to fit the experimental spectrum: (3) The HF and LF resistances associated to these two signals decrease exponentially with DC voltage, but the so-called "ideality factor" of the device can only be extracted from the slope of the logarithm of the HF (not the LF) resistance versus open-circuit voltage (4) The HF capacitance is close to being independent of the DC voltage, whereas the LF capacitance increases exponentially with DC voltage, and with the same slope as the LF resistance, and hence leads to a voltage-independent LF time constant (LF = RLF CLF). In this work we look for the simplest physical model that can reproduce these four key features of the IS of a PSC. In particular we find that a DD model of the PSC can do so provided that it includes: (1) a three-layered planar configuration including n-and p-type selective contacts and a perovskite (active) layer; (2) electrons in the electron transport layer (ETL); (3) electrons, holes and positively charged ionic vacancies in the perovskite active layer, (4) holes in the hole transport layer (HTL), ( Finally, we show that the key properties of the PSC steady-state performance such as recombination character and charge collection efficiency along with the JV curve are captured by the HF impedance response. In contrast, the LF impedance response is associated with ion motion in the perovskite layer only. The ionic features can, however, affect the HF response and the so-called "ideality factor". JV curves and impedance spectra are numerically simulated using a fullycoupled one-dimensional DD model that accounts for the motion of electrons, holes and positive anion vacancies within a planar perovskite solar cell. The cell is modelled as a three-layer structure in which a perovskite absorber layer is sandwiched between doped electron and hole transport layers. Within the perovskite layer all three charged species are present whilst, within the ETL (HTL), the ion and hole (electron) densities are neglected. Since both holes and electrons are only present in appreciable numbers in the perovskite layer, significant charge carrier recombination only occurs within that e layer, or at its interfaces with the ETL and HTL. Within the perovskite layer these losses are assumed to occur via a combination of the bimolecular and Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination mechanisms, whilst on the interfaces with the transport layers only SRH recombination is assumed to occur, consistent with the assumption that the free minority carrier density is negligible in the ETL and HTL . Furthermore, significant photogeneration is assumed to occur only within the perovskite and its spatial distribution is modelled by a Beer-Lambert law. The resulting model of the PSC consists of conservation equations for the three charged species (i.e. electrons, holes and ion vacancies). These couple to the electric potential, within the cell, via Poisson's equation and drift-diffusion laws for the fluxes of the three charged species. Comparison to experiment requires that the model be solved with an appropriate applied potential, V ap (t) (which appears in the form of a boundary condition) that reflects the experimental protocol. We obtain the numerical solution to the model, by using the open-source simulation tool IonMonger Further details of the model can be found in the works of Richardson et al Courtier et al The key model parameters are listed in Table Impedance spectra are simulated by applying a sinusoidal voltage perturbation of the form where V 0 is the DC voltage, V p is the amplitude and ω is the angular frequency of the perturbation. In this procedure the cell is always perturbed about a steady state so that the phase and amplitude of the current response is stable in time. For each frequency, the current response is analysed using a Fourier transform to extract its phase and amplitude. This enables the impedance to be calculated and a spectrum to be constructed by obtaining solutions to the model for 40-100 frequencies over a wide frequency range. In both the simulation and the experiment (vide infra), two situations were In the calculations and the experiments we have considered a regular configuration in which the ETL and HTL are compact TiO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD, respectively. Results are directly compared to our experimental data (see next subsection). A summary of the parameter set used in the simulations together with the source and justification of each value is collected in Table Note that for simplicity the parameters used in Table Width, b 3•10 -7 m Direct measurement, Ref. Ref. Hole diffusion coefficient, D p 5•10 -5 m 2 s -1 Similar value to the perovskite electron diffusion coefficient. Conduction band density of states, g c 8.1•10 24 m -3 Ref. Fermi level (work function), E fE (-) 4.0 eV Ref. Ref. Ref. Ref. Fermi level (work function), E fH (-) 5.22 eV Ref. Effective doping density, Similar value to the effective doping density of ETL. Width, b H 3 • 10 -7 m Direct measurement. Ref. Ref. Numerical simulations are compared to experimental results taken from the literature Experimental current-voltage characteristics of the devices were obtained using a solar simulator (ABET-Sun2000) under 1000 W/m 2 illumination with an AM 1.5G filter. The light intensity was recorded using a reference mono-crystalline silicon solar cell with temperature output (ORIEL, 91150). A metal mask was used to define an active area of 0.16 cm 2 . The current-voltage characteristics were then determined by applying an external potential bias to the cell and measuring the photocurrent using an Autolab/PGSTAT302N potentiostat. The current-voltage characteristics were measured with a scan rate of 100 mV/s and a sweep delay of 20s. The illumination for the IS measurements was provided by blue LED ( = 465 nm) over a wide range of DC light intensities (10-500 W/m 2 ). As indicated above, two types of IS experiments were analysed: (1) at open-circuit (OC) and ( Simulation results for a perovskite solar cell with regular configuration, under blue light illumination, obtained using the DD model discussed above and the parameter set given in Table In Figure The shape of the spectra, the way it changes shape with modification of the illumination intensity and the positions in the frequency domain of the maximum response are all consistent with what is typically seen in experimental impedance measurements of perovskite solar cells, in both regular and inverted configurations. Numerical values associated with the high and low frequency component of the resistance and the capacitance need to be extracted by fitting to an equivalent circuit. Knowing that there are two well defined frequency signals, the simplest (empirical) description is based on a Voight model with two RC elements in series (-(RC)-(RC)-). Alternatively, a "nested" arrangement can be used, which actually provides the same results Results from the simulations performed at open circuit (at V=VOC), and with no series resistance (Rser), are shown in Figure dependence on the open-circuit voltage Voc, (which is a function of the incident light intensity). However, in contrast to some reports (see Figure In order to provide a simple explanation as to why ln(RHF)=nid VOC /kBT +const., where nid is as defined in Eq.( where k rec is the recombination kinetic constant, γ is the reaction order, and b is the perovskite film thickness. Eq. (3) describes electron-limited recombination. Whether perovskites are ntype or p-type is a long debate and depends strongly on the substrate, the particular perovskite formulation and the preparation conditions. On making the assumption that the electrons and holes are in quasiequilibrium, the usual assumption when deriving a diode equation, we obtain the relation where Eg is the band gap, V is the applied voltage and Nc and Nv are the effective densities of conduction band and valence band states. Since the electrons and holes are not the only charged species, indeed they typically occur at considerably lower densities that the ion vacancies, we cannot appeal to charge neutrality to assert p ≈ n. However the density of these two species are usually correlated and so it is not unreasonable to expect that they grow via a power relation p ≈ n -1 , for some constant , such that Thus, under these conditions, the recombination current can be related to the applied voltage, using (3) and ( The derivative of this equation with respect to voltage gives the recombination resistance: On imposing open circuit conditions V= VOC, for which the total charge generation rate across the cell G is equal to the recombination rate, we find that where n id , the so-called ideality factor, is given, as indicated, by n id = /γ. Assuming a reaction order of γ  1 (a limiting case of SRH recombination), and    we would predict an ideality factor of n id  2. Eq. ( It is important to stress that the "ideality factor" is dependent, not only on the recombination mechanisms, but also on the ion vacancy concentration. This is illustrated in the Supporting Information where we re-calculate n id for different ion vacancy concentrations (in Figure Still, the simple model described by Eqs. ( In contrast to low and high frequency resistances, the low and high frequency capacitances exhibit markedly different behaviours. The high frequency capacitance (Figure where A is the geometrical area and b is the perovskite film thickness as specified in Table with   0.41-0.46. Consequently, we are able to define a low frequency time constant which remains constant as the illumination, and hence VOC, is adjusted. This feature, which is systematically observed in the experiments To energetics to MAPbI3, the low frequency signal may not appear The trend of decreasing LF peak (and increasing HF peak) with decreases in the ion vacancy density can be explained if we consider what fraction of the total potential drop occurs across the perovskite layer (as opposed to the electron and hole transport layers). It must be born in mind that the impedance signal is the response of the collection of electronic carriers to an electric potential perturbation , which depends not only on the applied voltage but also on the distribution of ions in the device. For relatively high ion vacancy concentration in the perovskite, the potential drop occurs mainly across the transport layers which act to screen most of the electric field from the perovskite layer (as explained in Courtier et al. In Figures At steady state, all of the potential difference across a PSC occurs across the Debye layers. Additionally, due to the high density of mobile ionic charges, the electric potential across the perovskite layer of a PSC is determined almost solely by the distribution of ions (and not the relatively small density of electronic charges). In Figure Consequently, the potential drops across these four Debye layers also remain fixed. It follows that the periodic perturbations in the applied voltage, induced by the IS protocol, leads to a corresponding periodic change in voltage drop across the central bulk region of the perovskite layer; this manifests itself as a uniform time-periodic electric field that permeates this bulk region. In summary, the HF voltage perturbation leads to an alternating positive/negative electric field (negative/positive slope in Figure The potential drops occurring across these Debye layers can thus adjust quickly enough, over the course of a single period, to offset some of the perturbation in the applied voltage across the cell. Once again, the perturbations in the applied voltage cause increases/decreases in the electric field across the bulk of the perovskite but their size is reduced because some of the perturbation in the applied voltage now occurs across the Debye layers. Indeed, at sufficiently low frequencies, the Debye layers have sufficient time to fully adjust to the perturbation in the applied voltage and so the electric field in the bulk of the perovskite is zero. Reorganization of ions in the Debye layers at LF voltage perturbations cause increases/decreases in the electric field across the bulk of the perovskite which correspond to decreases/increases in the sizes of the potential drops across the Debye layers (i.e. positive bulk fields correspond to underfilled Debye layers which are charging, while negative bulk fields correspond to overfilled Debye layers which are discharging). Therefore, the LF voltage perturbations have opposing effects on recombination, which changes from being in-phase at HF to out-of-phase at LF. Hence, at low frequencies, bulk recombination in combination with large internal electric fields can cause a negative response, while the effects of the interfaces cause a positive response. This is why, in Figure Importantly, as both LF resistance and capacitance contributions arise from the charging/discharging of the same interfacial ionic distribution the voltage dependence is the same. This explains the opposite slopes for the LF components of recombination and capacitance in Figure In the discussion above we state that only the HF signal provides information about recombination and the "ideality factor". To confirm this, we have run impedance The most visible difference with respect to OC conditions is that the low and high frequency resistances, as well as the low frequency capacitance, only vary exponentially with applied voltage in the vicinity of the maximum power point and close to open circuit. At conditions close to short-circuit, these magnitudes reach a plateau and remain effectively constant down to V = 0. In contrast, the high frequency capacitance retains its geometrical character at all voltages. This behaviour is completely consistent with what is observed in IS experiments of perovskite solar cells The following expression has been proposed to estimate the charge collection efficiency from impedance data In Figure We base this assumption on the recombination character of the high frequency signal, as indicated by the discussions above. As expected, CCE is zero at the open-circuit photovoltage (see Figure In a recent experimental work, we carried out a similar analysis of the collection efficiency for MAPbI3 based devices. In this work we have used a drift-diffusion model, which explicitly accounts for the motion of electrons, holes and positive ion vacancies, to interpret impedance spectroscopy data of perovskite solar cells with an ETL/Perovskite/HTL architecture. The main result of the work is to provide a recipe with which to interpret the impedance response data in terms of the physics of its steady-state operation. From a practical point of view understanding the steady-state operation of the cell is key to its development as a useful photovoltaic device. In addition, we have demonstrated how the efficiency-determining parameters of the solar cell can be obtained from experimental data. We were able to show that recombination in the bulk of the perovskite material combined with slow ionic motion is sufficient to reproduce the most common features of the impedance response for a wide variety of perovskite solar cell devices, including flat high frequency capacitance, low frequency negative capacitance features and inductive loops. We found that the electrical properties, that determine device efficiency under operational conditions (i.e. at steady state), can be deduced solely from the high frequency impedance response. This is the case for the recombination resistance, the so-called "ideality factor" and the charge collection efficiency of the device. However, we also showed that these properties depend on the steady-state distribution of mobile ionic charge within the perovskite layer. It follows that, for a fair comparison to be made between different devices, the electrical properties should be deduced from high frequency impedance measurements performed at the values of the applied DC voltage for which the cells are expected to operate (i.e. close to the maximum power point in the IV curve). In contrast, the low frequency impedance response is primarily determined by the charging, and discharging, of the interfacial Debye layers in response to ion vacancy motion within the perovskite. The low frequency impedance response can thus be used as a tool to infer ionic mobility and the capacitances of the Debye layers. In summary, by conducting a side-by-side comparison between theory and experiment, we have provided a sound basis with which to extract information about recombination and charge collection efficiency from actual impedance measurements in perovskite solar cells, regardless of the ionic characteristics of the perovskite material. Deducing the key physical properties of a perovskite solar cell from its impedance response: insights from drift-diffusion modelling -Supporting Information Perovskite solar devices with regular configuration (TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD) Before the deposition, the substrates were cleaned using Hellmanex® solution and rinsed with deionized water and ethanol. Thereupon, they were ultrasonicated in 2propanol and dried by using compressed air. The TiO2 blocking layer was deposited onto the substrates by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C, using a titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) solution (75% in 2-propanol, Sigma Aldrich) diluted in ethanol (1:14, v/v), with oxygen as carrier gas. The TiO2 compact layer was then kept at 450 °C for 30 min for the formation of anatase phase. Once the samples achieve room temperature, a TiO2 mesoporous layer was deposited by spin coating at 2000 rpm during 10 s using a commercial TiO2 paste (Dyesol, 18NR-T) diluted in ethanol (1:5, weight ratio). After drying at 100 °C for 10 min, the TiO2 mesoporous layer was heated at 500 °C for 30 min and later cooled to room temperature. An additional doping treatment using Li + ions (10.04 mg LiTFSI in 1 ml acetonitrile, 35mM) was used for the TiO2 mesoporous layer prior to CsPbBr3 deposition. For MAPbI3 based devices, a pure methylammonium lead iodide solution were prepared to be deposited by spin coating using a methodology previously reported: The simulated device consists of an electron transport layer, perovskite absorber layer and hole transport layer: ETL/MAPbI3/HTL. where q is the elementary charge, G and R the generation and recombination rates respectively, D n,p the respective diffusion coefficients, k B the Boltzmann constant and where F P is the ionic flux and D P is the anion vacancy diffusion coefficient. Equations with where D E is the electronic diffusion coefficient in the ETL and ε E and d E are the permittivity and effective doping density of the ETL respectively. Similarly, the conservation equations for holes in the HTL (b < x < b + b H ) are given by An identical model was previously used by Courtier et al. It is adjusted to give the desired Voc with the 1-sun equivalent as upper limit . Dashed lines in (b) and (d) are linear fits to Eq. ( S7. Steady state anion vacancy densities at different open-circuit voltages with the standard