Beyond the conventional electron pairing mediated by phonons, hightemperature superconductivity in cuprates is believed to stem from quantum spin liquid (QSL). The unconventional superconductivity by doping a spin liquid/Mott insulator, is a long-sought goal but a principal challenge in condensed matter physics because of the lack of an ideal QSL platform. Here we report the pressure induced metallization and possible unconventional superconductivity in NaYbSe 2 , which belongs to a large and ideal family of triangular lattice spin liquid we revealed recently and is evidenced to possess a QSL ground state. The charge gap of NaYbSe 2 is gradually reduced by applying pressures, and at ~20 GPa the crystal jumps into a superconducting (SC) phase with Tc ~ 5.8 K even before the insulating gap is completely closed. The metallization trend remains in the repeated high-pressure experiments but the sign of superconductivity is not well repeated. No symmetry breaking accompanies the SC transition, as indicated by X-ray diffraction and low-temperature Raman experiments under high pressures. The resonating valence bond (RVB) model on the triangular spin lattice was constructed by P. W. Anderson more than four decades ago, and employed to describe a novel spin disordered state QSL, a superposition state of all the possible configurations of valence-bond spin singlets A direct and determinative way to verify the great scenario, is to realize unconventional superconductivity by doping a QSL/Mott insulator. Actually it is really hard to find an appropriate and ideal QSL/Mott compound or material system for a clean and effective carrier doping. Nevertheless, some efforts have been made over the years. The organic compound -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu 2 (CN) 3 (-ET) with an approximate triangular lattice of spin-1/2 Cu 2+ ions (monoclinic space group P2 1 /c), was considered to be a QSL candidate since thermodynamics results suggested no magnetic ordering down to 50 mK despite its exchange coupling J ~ 200 K. A very small pressure (~0.35 GPa) can drive a metal-insulator transition at 13 K and a successive SC transition at ~3.9 K In this sense it may not represent a good example for the doping study. The famous kagome compound ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 was also employed for doping experiments. But it seems an effective doping was not archived and no metallic phase was observed with Li + doping, perhaps due to the large charge gap (with B0′ fixed to 4) are the isothermal bulk modulus at zero pressure and the pressure derivative of B0 evaluated at zero pressure, respectively; V and V0 are the high-pressure volume and zero-pressure volume of the material, respectively. The fitting was conducted below and up 12 GPa, respectively. The dotted line is a guideline for 12 GPa. NaYbSe 2 crystals were grown by flux method and self-flux method, and the details can be found elsewhere The high pressure electrical resistance and magnetoresistance measurements were performed by a four-probe method in a diamond anvil cell (DAC). The DAC made of BeCu alloy with two opposing anvils was used to generated high pressure. Diamond anvils with 300 μm culets were used for the measurements. In the experiments, a single crystal sample chip of 50 100 μm was loaded into the sample hole in a gasket pre-indented to ~25 40 μm in thickness, and a few ruby balls were loaded to serve as internal pressure standard. The corresponding gasket was rhenium. KBr was used as pressure-transmitting medium. The ruby fluorescence method was used to determine the pressure The high-pressure and temperature-dependent Raman measurements presented in this study were performed in gasketed symmetric diamond anvil cells DACs. And the KBr was used as pressure-transmitting medium in Raman experiments. The Raman spectra were collected using a HR800 spectrometer (Jobin Yvon) equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) and volume Bragg gratings, for which micro-Raman backscattering configuration was adopted. A 633 nm laser was used, with a spot size of∼5μm focused on the sample surface. The laser power was maintained at approximately 1.4 mW to avoid overheating during measurements. Fig. Raman spectra under high pressure are shown in Fig. Particularly at ~20 GPa which is the critical pressure for superconducting transition, Raman spectra, just like X-ray patterns, show no anomaly. If we fix the pressure at ~20 GPa, the temperature-dependent Raman spectra clearly tell us there is no structural change at least in the range of 5.5 K (below Tc) to 210 K (Fig. The metallization under pressure is directly illustrated in Fig. GPa (Fig. We have tried more high-pressure measurements to repeat the above observations. The reduction of resistance with pressure is clear for each measurement (Fig. Tc forms another boundary to separate the SC phase from the spin liquid/Mott insulator. First of all, we need to emphasize that no spatial symmetry breaking occurs across the boundary. This is supported by X-ray and Raman measurements under high pressures discussed above. In other words, the SC phase is developed from spin liquid/Mott insulating phase, and both phases are intrinsically connected. This is hinted by the experimental facts. As we mentioned above, a very low doping can drive a spin liquid to a superconductor. Actually in the theoretical limit, even one single mobile carrier doping into a spin liquid can give rise to a SC state. Experimentally this is reflected on the close proximity to the insulating state. And the low upper critical fields correspond to a low superfluid density which is also consistent with the above picture. More interesting features come out when we compare the present system to organic and cuprate superconductors. The organic -ET 2 Cu 2 CN 3 is also considered to possess a parent phase of spin liquid/Mott insulator, and can realize a SC transition under pressure Generally a SC transition can be described as gauge symmetry breaking in term of Anderson-Higgs mechanism. Here the parent phase is a spin liquid with additional emergent gauge field rather than a conventional metal. The question is whether or not the emergent gauge field is just simply confined in the transition from spin liquid/Mott insulator to superconductor, or we still have chance to look into the emergent gauge structure in some way. This is a fundamental issue which may find some hints on the present unique platform. We made high-pressure study on the spin liquid candidate NaYbSe 2 . Pressure induced metallization is clearly observed and the indication of possible unconventional superconductivity is also presented though the SC transition is not well repeated in the successive confirmation measurements. The SC transition is accompanied by no spatial symmetry breaking and the SC phase is intrinsically evolved from the unusual parent phase of spin liquid/Mott insulator. Many unusual features like the close proximity to an insulating phase, almost pressure independent transition temperature and low upper critical field etc, are revealed. As we mentioned before, rare-earth chalcogenides form a large and ideal family of triangular lattice spin liquid. The present study opens a window to look into the intriguing physics from spin liquid/Mott insulator to superconductor, and is just a first step towards potential extensive experimental and theoretical studies on some fundamental issues in condensed matter physics.