Downsizing well-established materials to the nanoscale is a key route to novel functionalities, in particular if different functionalities are merged in hybrid nanomaterials. Hybrid carbon-based hierarchical nanostructures are particularly promising for electrochemical energy storage since they combine benefits of nanosize effects, enhanced electrical conductivity and integrity of bulk materials. We show that endohedral multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNT) encapsulating high-capacity (here: conversion and alloying) electrode materials have a high potential for use in anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIB). There are two essential characteristics of filled CNT relevant for application in electrochemical energy storage: (1) rigid hollow cavities of the CNT provide upper limits for nanoparticles in their inner cavities which are both separated from the fillings of other CNT and protected against degradation. In particular, the CNT shells resist strong volume changes of encapsulates in response to electrochemical cycling, which in conventional conversion and alloying materials hinders application in energy storage devices. (2) Carbon mantles ensure electrical contact to the active material as they are unaffected by potential cracks of the encapsulate and form a stable conductive network in the electrode compound. Our studies confirm that encapsulates are electrochemically active and can achieve full theoretical reversible capacity. The results imply that encapsulating nanostructures inside CNT can provide a route to new high-performance nanocomposite anode materials for LIB. Lithium-ion batteries (LIB) offer high gravimetric and volumetric energy densities which renders them particularly suitable for mobile applications. In order to optimize their performance, in particular with larger energy density, there is a continuous search for novel electrode materials. Electrode materials based on conversion and alloying mechanisms promise extremely enhanced electrochemical capacities in lithium-ion batteries as compared to conventional materials Rational design of electrode materials has to tackle the abovementioned issues of low electronic conductivity limiting many promising electrode materials as well as of large volume changes during electrochemical cycling, with the latter particularly causing electrode structure and particles distortions and hence strong performance fading. Hierarchical nanocomposite carbon/active material structures offer an effective way to solve these issues as such materials exploit size effects of the nanoscaled building blocks In this work, we demonstrate that in the case of conversion materials filled inside CNT, the encapsulated material completely participates in electrochemical cycling, i.e., the theoretical capacity is fully accessible. The backbone network of CNT is indeed unaffected by cracks of encapsulate which usually inhibit long-term stability. Our data hence imply that endohedrally functionalized CNT offer a promising route to new nanohybrid anode materials for LIB. We report studies on hybrid nanomaterial of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CNT) filled with Mn3O4, CoFe2O4, FexOy, Sn, and CoSn which have been fabricated by a variety of methods. Mostly, CNT of type PR-24-XT-HHT (Pyrograf Products, Inc., Cedarville OH, USA) have been used as templates. For introducing materials into the inner cavity of the CNT, mainly extensions of solution-based approaches reported in XRD patterns show relatively broad Bragg reflections which indicate small primary particle size of the noncarbon materials of the composite as expected for nanoparticles fitting inside the interior of CNT. This is confirmed by exemplary SEM and TEM studies presented in Figure Electron microscopy confirms that the filling materials are located mainly inside the CNT. Exemplary SEM and TEM images are shown in Figure •II, The cyclic voltammograms (CVs) confirm electrochemical activity of encapsulated Mn3O4. Absence of significant changes between cycles 2 and 10 indicate good cycling stability which will be investigated in more detail below. Since the materials associated with the mechanism detailed in Equations (A) to (C) exhibit strong differences in magnetic properties, magnetic studies are suitable to follow the redox reaction. In particular, there are strong changes of magnetic properties upon electrochemical cycling from ferrimagnetic Mn3O4 to antiferromagnetic MnO (Figure In order to assess the electrochemical performance of the composite with particular emphasis on the encapsulate, evolution of capacities at 100 mA g -1 (galvanostatic cycling with potential limitation) upon cycling of Mn3O4@CNT and pristine CNT is shown in Figure Figure Our analysis shows that full conversion between MnO and metallic Mn can be achieved reversibly and the maximum of the contributed capacity by the Mn3O4 encapsulate is accessible (Figure As shown in Figure In bare CoFe2O4 nanoparticles (Figure CVs on CoFe2O4@CNT in Figure FexOy@CNT has been synthesized as described in The CVs shown in Figure Inferior stability of exohedrally functionalized CNT upon electrochemical cycling is further confirmed, e.g., for CNT decorated by mesoporous cobalt oxide (CNT@Co3O4). The material was synthesized as reported in The alloying process described by Equation ( Synthesis of Sn@CNT has been published in The CVs of Sn@CNT-and CoSn@CNT-based electrode materials shown in Figure Figure Galvanostatic cycling of Sn@CNT and CoSn@CNT as compared to pristine CNT (Pyrograf Products, Typ PR-24-XT-HHT) quantifies the contribution of encapsulates to the materials' capacities (Figure Figure Materials were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with either Stadi P (Stoe, Darmstadt, Germany) using Cu Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) or X'Pert Pro MPD PW3040/60 (PANanalytical, Almelo, Niederlande) using Co Kα radiation (λ = 1.79278 Å). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out with SDT Q600 (TA Instruments, Waters Corporation, Milford, Massachusetts, U.S.City, Abbr of State if USA, Country). The morphology was investigated by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 200 (FEI company, Hilsboro, Oregon, U.S.)) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010F (JEOL, Akishima, Japan), Tecnai (FEI company, Hilsboro, Oregon, U.S.)). A MPMS-XL5 (Quantum Design, San Diego, Californis, U.S.) superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer was used to perform magnetic measurements. Electrochemical properties were studied by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic cycling with potential limitation (GCPL) in Swagelok-type cells Endohedral functionalization of multiwalled carbon nanotubes by means of high-capacity electrode materials is studied with respect to application for electrochemical energy storage. Encapsulation indeed yields size-controlled nanoparticles inside CNT. The presented data imply that the filled materials are electrochemically active and can achieve full theoretical reversible capacity. While conversion and alloying processes yield cracks and amorphization of the encapsulate, the CNT mantles are found to be only very little affected by electrochemical cycling. The backbone network of CNT hence maintains its integrity and improved performance with respect to unshielded or exohedrally-attached nanomaterials. For appropriately tailored materials, CNT-based nanocomposites show smaller overpotentials and hence improved energy efficiency as well as improved cycling stability. The results imply that encapsulating nanostructures inside CNT provides a successful route to new high-performance nanocomposite anode materials for LIB. This subchapter in parts reviews Refs.