A broad range of scientific and industrial disciplines require precise optical measurements at very low light levels. Single-photon detectors combining high efficiency and high time resolution are pivotal in such experiments. By using relatively thick films of NbTiN (8-11 nm) and improving the pattern fidelity of the nano-structure of the superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPD), we fabricated devices demonstrating superior performance over all previously reported detectors in the combination of efficiency and time resolution. Our findings prove that small variations in the nanowire width, in the order of a few nanometers, can lead to a significant penalty on their temporal response. Addressing these issues, we consistently achieved high time resolution (best device 7.7 ps, other devices ∼10-16 ps) simultaneously with high system detection efficiencies (80 -90%) in the wavelength range of 780-1000 nm, as well as in the telecom bands (1310-1550 nm). The use of thicker films allowed us to fabricate large-area multi-pixel devices with homogeneous pixel performance. We first fabricated and characterized a 100 × 100 μm 2 16-pixel detector and showed there was little variation among individual pixels. Additionally, to showcase the power of our platform, we fabricated and characterized 4-pixel multimode fiber-coupled detectors and carried out photon correlation experiments on a nanowire quantum dot resulting in g 2 (0) values lower than 0.04. The multi-pixel detectors alleviate the need for beamsplitters and can be used for higher order correlations with promising prospects not only in the field of quantum optics, but also in bio-imaging applications, such as fluorescence microscopy and positron emission tomography. SNSPDs have already pushed the limits in several fields such as CMOS testing, 1 biomedical imaging, 2 laser ranging, We fabricate our detectors from sputtered NbTiN films on top of a SiO 2 /Au cavity or a distributed Bragg reflector. To achieve the highest possible absorption in the superconducting layer, increasing the critical current and reducing kinetic inductance (and hence the deadtime), thicker films are desirable. Magnetron sputtering was used to deposit the films and similar to ref. (always a straight section wire with no bends) and we measured their critical currents at several temperatures in the range of 4.2 K to 8.5 K (Figure1(d)). We did not observe any significant degradation of critical current with the increase of constriction length. Furthermore, many of our fabricated shorter SNSPDs (∼ 400μm long) and longer SNSPDs (∼ 4mm long) showed similar critical currents. It has been shown that local variation of nanowire width can influence the time resolution of SNSPDs. To better understand the bias-current-dependent histograms of our two-section device, we numerically simulated these histograms including electronic-noise-induced timing jitter, Nanofabrication of SNSPDs can introduce imperfections; the nanowire width may vary along the meander for a number of systemic and fabrication issues. A common factor is the proximity effect during electron beam lithography. The proximity effect can cause center areas of the detector to have a wider or narrower width (depending on the tone, thickness and chemistry of the ebeam resist as well as the properties of the substrate, see supporting information for examples of proximity effect simulations), resulting in a similar behaviour to that of Figure 45 seconds), and fabricated 70-100 nm wide nanowires made out of 10-13 nm thick films. The resulting detectors showed saturated internal efficiency in the wavelength range of 400-1064 nm. Note that the top section of the film has 0.5-1.5 nm oxidized layer, 24 preventing it from further oxidation. For high efficiency and high time resolution telecom detectors we used slightly thinner films (8.5-9.5nm). For all fiber-coupled devices, unless otherwise clearly stated, the nanowire width and filling factor were 70 nm and 0.5, respectively. For the measurement of high performance detectors, we packaged and characterized the detectors in a standard setup similar to. For jitter measurements at low photon fluxes, we used a pico-second pulsed laser (same laser as was used for characterization of two-section detectors), and we kept the detector count-rate in the range of 60-100 KCount/second. Figure3(a) and 3(b) present the efficiency and jitter measurement results for a detector optimized for the wavelength range of 880-950 nm, respectively. For other wavelengths we achieved similar performance, see supporting information. We measured a system detection efficiency of > 85(±5%) and system time resolution of 9.23±0.05 ps (deconvoluted 7.70 ps, see supporting information). Other devices for this wavelength had SDE of 82-91.5% and time resolution of 9.5-15 ps (see supporting information). The inset in Figure3(b) is a logarithmic plot of the data and fit. On the left side of the jitter measurement data, a small asymmetry and deviation from the fit is observed. Besides originating from the nanowire width variation, this asymmetry could also be due to detection in the nanowire bends as reported in. We also investigated the count-rate dependence of the jitter (see supporting information). We observed that at low count-rates (below 0.1 × laser repetition-rate), the SNSPD time jitter exhibits a typical single Gaussian distribution. However, as the count-rate increases, other peaks start to appear in the distribution. The observation of these peaks can be explained by the fact that when the bias recovery time of a SNSPD is longer than 1 laser rep. rate , subsequent detection events take place with an under-biased detector while detection events which are temporally further away would experience normal detection (similar to low countrate regime). Therefore, these different cases result in different risetime/signal levels, which consequently lead to multiple peaks in the jitter measurement. Normally, SNSPDs under high excitation powers latch into the normal mode (they become normal with no recovery to the superconducting mode). By providing a low frequency path for the SNSPD current to ground, it is possible to operate detectors at higher powers. Moreover, by using high-bandwidth low-loss coax cables, a low jitter can be achieved. We use a high pass filter, as shown in Figure Many optical experiments in chemistry, biology and material science deal with scattered light which cannot be efficiently collected and coupled into single mode optical fibers. Therefore, sensors with large active areas are required. SNSPDs with large active areas have gained attention in the recent years and several works on single pixel For multi-pixel SNSPD arrays, as the operation point and performance of individual pixels are usually not uniform, scaling these sensors also pose practical implementation challenges. Here we demonstrate, using our thick NbTiN films, multi-pixel arrays with small variations in performance of the pixels. Figure the photon count rate versus bias current for different pixels of the SNSPD array using a flood-illumination setup at 670 nm. The results are presented in Figure The multi-element detectors are of particular interest in quantum optics as they provide direct photon correlation measurements with no need of spatially splitting the beam to different detectors. We carry out antibunching measurements using a 4-pixel multimode fiber coupled SNSPD on a semiconductor nanowire quantum dot. These sources have been extensively studied in the literature and have demonstrated promising performance in terms of clean emission spectra, We demonstrated superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPD), fabricated from NbTiN thick films, combining high time resolution and high efficiencies at the same 13 (b) Illustration of the photon antibunching measurement setup used to benchmark the 4pixel detector. (c) Results of photon correlation measurements with three out of six possible pixel pair combinations (complete dataset can be found in supporting information). All pair combinations yield similar outcomes (depending on binning: a g 2 (0) between 0.03 and 0.1) while the fit at time 0 vanishes completely. The difference between the data and the fit is mainly due to timing jitter induced by a path-length difference in the monochromator (see supporting information). time. The influence of fabrication imperfections on the time resolution of SNSPDs was studied and it was revealed that a small variation in the order of a few nanometer can significantly influence the timing jitter. We showed that thicker films of NbTiN are less susceptible to small local material imperfections and therefore, a good candidate to serve as large active area high performance photonic sensors. A multi-pixel detector was showcased as a quantum correlator in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss experiment without using a beamsplitter. The resulting low g 2 (0) demonstrates the potential of such devices not only in the field of quantum optics, but also in the fields such as fluorescence microscopy. Large-area multi-pixel SNSPDs are furthermore expected to have bright prospects in ultra-fast optical and medical imaging applications. The detector that was measured at 787 nm (Fig. S 1(a)) had a nanowire linewidth of 100nm (designed), while other detectors (Fig. We fabricated small (diameter of 9 and 10 μm) and large detectors (diameter 20 μm) from a 11nm NbTiN film sputtered on a 4-inch wafer. The detectors were grouped together and their performance was evaluated. For the large detectors, apart from isolating broken devices (by a simple visual inspection), we selected the detectors at random. Shown below, Fig. S 2, is the performance summary of 8 small dimeter detectors (measurements at λ = 878nm) and 8 randomly chosen large detectors (measured at λ = 937nm since the 878nm laser was damaged). The performance of the detectors are comparable: a high efficiency (~85%) and high critical current (35-45 μA). The small difference in critical currents (higher for larger detectors) can be attributed to thickness gradient along the 4-inch wafer and possible nanowire width variation due to fabrication parameters such as different proximity effects for large and small detectors. The count rate of the detector can influence its jitter. We observed that rather than only detector count rate, the ratio of the detector count rate to the laser rep-rate influences the shape of the distribution. We attenuated pulses from a 50MHz pulsed laser to get different detection rates and carried out photon correlations at each point, the results of such measurements for a detector with the parallel high-pass filter, as shown in It can be observed that at low count-rates (below 0.1 × laser repetition-rate), SNSPD time jitter exhibit a typical single Gaussian distribution. However, as the count-rate increases, other peaks appear in the distribution. The observation of these peaks can be explained by the fact that when the recovery time of the bias current of SNSPD is longer than 1 laser rep-rate , subsequent detection events take place with an under-biased detector, while detection events which are temporally further away would experience detection with full bias current. The probability of detecting subsequent pulses (and hence the amplitude of their corresponding peak in the photon correlation distribution) depends on count-rate, being initially small and increasing as the count-rate increases. At the count rate gets close to the laser rep-rate, again the jitter starts to reduce as there is eventually only one possibility: all detection events are from subsequent pulses. By increasing the photon flux further, the latter case give us a distribution similar to the one shown in Figure We have discussed about the correlation electronics used in our experiments elsewhere [1]. The electronics has a time jitter of ~2.5ps . However, the largest contribition to the system jitter (apart from detector itself) stems from the length of the optical pulses.To measure the contribution from the laser, we use a pulse autocorrelation setup as describe below: PulseCheck Autocorrelator was used to measure the pulse width of the Fianium WhiteLase Micro supercontinuum laser. PulseCheck Autocorrelator makes use of second-harmonic generation (SHG) to retrieve the pulse width by overlapping the laser pulse in a SHG crystal and generate a new pulse with twice the frequency of the input pulse. An interferometry scheme introduces a delay between the pulses previously split by a beam splitter and the SHG pulse energy versus delay is measured by a photomultiplier tube, as shown in Fig. From the Autocorrelation trace, Gaussian fitting is then performed and a Gaussian pulse width of 5.080ps is retrieved, see Fig. We measured time jitter as a function of trigger level for a detector with a minimum jitter of ~15.5ps (detector was ~500 μm in length). The results indicate that, when the noise level is lower or the pulse has steeper slope, the time jitter is improved. The time jitter remains within 15.5-22.5ps for trigger levels in the range of 10-80%. At much lower or higher trigger levels, the jitter would suffer from low signal to noise ratio. Jitter of two sectioned SNSPD As described in the main text we fabricated two section detectors to study the influence of fabrication imperfections on the time jitter of SNSPDs. Below, in Fig. As discussed in the main text, the proximity effects can affect the linewidth of different parts of meandering nanowire. To simulate the proximity effects, we used Raith 150 e-beam lithography proximity correction software. The software provide a relative change to the ebeam dose to correct for undesired proximity effects. For ARP, the thinner resist is closer to the base dose (not much correction is required) but both cases have a good uniformity and therefore it is possible to optimize a single dose to get a relatively uniform structure. In the case of HSQ, both thicknesses require higher doses than the base dose, however, the thinner resist presents better dose uniformity than the thicker resist (it is possible to get a relatively uniform writing by increasing the dose without correction). Note that the non-symmetric shape of the dose distribution is due to the contour that e-beam follows to expose the structure. This contour creates a non-symmetric pattern of dose distribution as well as a non-symmetric heat profile during exposure. When correctly configured, the software is capable of correcting both dose and heat distributions. As discussed in the main text, we simulated a two sectioned SNSPD by considering electronicnoise-induced timing jitter [3, 4], geometric timing jitter [5], and inhomogeneity-induced timing jitter [6]. Below is a list and the definition of parameters that are used in the simulations. 16-pixel SNSPD performance at different wavelength We measured our 16-pixel device at other wavelength that is mentioned in the main text (660nm). The performance is similar, however, due to the multimode illumination (an SMF28 fiber placed far from the sample was used to illuminate the sample), some pixels get slightly higher photon flux than the other ones depending on the wavelength and the excited modes at the launch. Photon antibunching with multi-pixel detectors As discussed in the main text, we performed antibunching measurement on a nanowire quantum dot. The emission spectrum of the quantum dot and the unprocessed antibunching data (for the same pairs of detectors as discussed in the main text) are shown in It was mentioned in the main text that the overall time jitter of the experiment was limited by the time dispersion of spectrometer. We used an 1800 grooves per mm grating, kept the input slit of the spectrometer fixed at 50μm and varied the size of output slit. Below are our experimental observations for different output slit sizes: 