The possibility of a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state in a population imbalanced Fermi gas with a vortex is proposed. Employing the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes formalism we selfconsistently determine the superfluid order parameter and the particle number density in the presence of a vortex. We find that as increasing population imbalance, the superfluid order parameter spatially oscillates around the vortex core in the radial direction, indicating that the FFLO state becomes stable. We find that the radial FFLO states cover a wide region of the phase diagram in the weak-coupling regime at T = 0 in contrast to the conventional case without a vortex. We show that this inhomogeneous superfluidity can be detected as peak structures of the local polarization rate associated with the node structure of the superfluid order parameter. Since the vortex in the 3D Fermi gas with population imbalance has been already realized in experiments, our proposal is a promising candidate of the FFLO state in cold atom physics. The Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states are proposed as inhomogeneous Fermionic superfluid/superconductors with spatial oscillation of the order parameter Ultracold Fermi gas has been attracted much attentions as an ideal system to realize the FFLO states both experimentally On the other hand, in three-dimensional (3D) case, the realization of the FFLO state is still more challeng-ing. In this case, it has been predicted that the FFLO states occupy only a narrow region in the phase diagram at zero temperature In this Letter, we theoretically propose an experimentally accessible rote to reach the FFLO state in 3D system. In our idea, we consider a quantum vortex in the 3D superfluid Fermi gas with a population imbalance. In contrast to the case with no vortices, where the excess atoms gather at the trap edge, in the presence of a vortex, they can localize near the vortex core. As a result, the polarized Fermi gas is realized around the vortex core and the FFLO state appears in the wide region of the phase diagram with respect to the interaction strength and population imbalance at zero temperature. We emphasize that this situation should have been already experimentally realized To clarify our idea we investigate a singly isolated quantum vortex in the two-component Fermi gas with population imbalance within the BdG formalism Here ψ σ (r) is the field operator of a Fermi atom with pseudospin σ =↑, ↓ and the atomic mass m. μ σ is the chemical potential of the σ component. The population imbalance is included in the difference between μ ↑ and μ ↓ . The second and third terms describe the contribution from the superfluid order parameter ∆(r) = -U s ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) and the Hartree potential , respectively, where n σ (r) is the number density of the σ component. We consider a single vortex along the z axis with the winding number w = 1 at ρ = 0 in the cylindrical coordinates r = (ρ, θ, z). In this cylindrically symmetric situation, we can write the superfluid order parameter and particle number density as ∆ (r) = ∆ (ρ) e iθ and n σ (r) = n σ (ρ), respectively. In this Letter, we consider the FFLO state with a spatial oscillation of ∆ (ρ) along the radial direction. The mean fields, i.e. ∆ (ρ) and n σ (ρ), as well as the chemical potential μ σ , are determined by self-consistently solving the gap equation and the particle number equations for a given interaction strength and population imbalance P = (N ↑ -N ↓ )/(N ↑ + N ↓ ), where N σ = drn σ (r) is the total atomic number of the σ component. This procedure can be achieved by conventional diagonalization, i.e., the Bogoliubov transformation for the cylindrical symmetric system where ω n = (2n + 1)πT (n ∈ Z) is the Matsubara frequency at temperature T , and ǫ is an infinitesimally small parameter. Here Ĝ is a 2×2 single-particle Green's function with the twocomponent Nambu-Gor'kov field operator Ψ (r, τ ) = ψ ↑ (r, τ ) ψ † ↓ (r, τ ) . Finally, we summarize the setup of the numerical calculations. We take Rk F = 50 and L z k F = 20 for the system size of the ρ and z directions, respectively, where k F is the Fermi momentum. We take the cutoff energy E c = 9ε F with the Fermi energy ε F = k 2 F /(2m). We fix T = 0. In Fig. de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states with level spacing ∼ ∆ 2 0 /ε F , where ∆ 0 is the bulk value of the superfluid order parameter We also emphasize that the amplitude of the oscillation of ∆(ρ) is comparable to the bulk value of the superfluid order parameter. This is in contrast to the trapped case, where while the similar oscillation is predicted at the trap edge, the amplitude is much smaller than the value of ∆(r) at the trap center The spatial structure of the superfluid order parameter ∆(r) = ∆(ρ)e iθ is shown in Fig. The mid-gap Andreev bound states and the CdGM states, which are associated with the nodal planes of the FFLO state and the vortex, respectively, can be detected by an observation of LDOS N σ (ω, ρ). Figure Finally, we show the phase diagram with respect to (k F a s ) -1 and P at T = 0 in Fig. To summarize, we have proposed a new route to reach the FFLO superfluid in 3D Fermi gas. We have considered the population imbalanced Fermi gas with a vortex. Applying the BdG formalism to this system, we have shown that the spatial oscillation of the superfluid order parameter appears near the vortex core and the number of the node structure increases as the population imbalance increases. We have also found that the FFLO nature can be seen as peak structures in the local polarization rate, as well as vanishing gap structure in the LDOS. We have shown that the FFLO states cover a wide region of the phase diagram in the weak-coupling regime at zero temperature in contrast to the conventional case without a vortex. with an orthogonal matrix Ŵ as where E l,kz j,σ is the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian. We note that the matrix in the original BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Using the set of eigenfunction W and eigenvalues E, the self-consistent equations for the superfluid order parameter and the particle number density can be obtained as ∆ (r) = -U s e -iθ 2πL l,kz j,j ′ φ j,l+1 (ρ) φ j ′ ,l (ρ) d l,kz j,j ′ , (S12) n ↑ (r) = 1 2πL l,kz j,j ′ φ j,l (ρ) φ j ′ ,l (ρ) η ↑ j,j ′ , (S13) l,kz j,j ′ φ j,l+1 (ρ) φ j ′ ,l+1 (ρ) η ↓ j,j ′ , (S14) respectively. Here, we have defined To avoid the well-known ultra-violet divergence, we need to introduce a cutoff energy E c in the gap equation. We also note that the interaction strength is conveniently measured by the s-wave scattering length a s in cold atom physics. In our formalism, a s is related to the coupling constant U and the cutoff energy E c as i,σ W l,kz {j,↓},{i,σ} W l,kz {j ′ ,↓},{i,σ} 1n F E l,kz i,σ