A procedure to achieve the density-controlled growth of gold-catalyzed InP nanowires (NWs) on (111) silicon substrates using the vapor-liquid-solid method by molecular beam epitaxy is reported. We develop an effective and mask-free method based on controlling the number and the size of the Au-In catalyst droplets in addition to the conditions for the NW nucleation. We show that the NW density can be tuned with values in the range of 18 μm -2 to < 0.1 μm -2 by the suitable choice of the In/Au catalyst beam equivalent pressure (BEP) ratio, by the phosphorous BEP and the growth temperature. The same degree of control is transferred to InAs/InP quantum dot-nanowires, taking advantage of the ultra-low density to study by micro-photoluminescence the optical properties of a single quantum dot-nanowires emitting in the telecom band monolithically grown on silicon. Optical spectroscopy at cryogenic temperature successfully confirmed the relevance of our method to excite single InAs quantum dots on the as-grown sample, which opens the path for large-scale applications based on single quantum dot-nanowire devices integrated on silicon. Semiconductor Nanowires (NWs) have witnessed an explosion of interest in the fields of optoelectronic devices One way to tune the NW density is by substrate patterning followed by selective area growth (SAG) In the case of Au-catalyzed InP NWs grown by VLS-MBE, pure WZ NWs can be grown by controlling the growth temperature and the V/III flux ratio In this paper, we experimentally demonstrate the control over the InP NW density using Au-In droplets as catalysts insitu deposited at 500°C on a Si(111) substrate using solid source molecular beam epitaxy (ss-MBE). Firstly, we show the impact of the In/Au flux ratio used for the formation of the catalyst droplets on the NW density. Then, we studied the influences of the phosphorous (P2) pressure and the growth temperature TG on the NW density. We show that the NW density can be thus tuned from ~ 18 μm -2 to < 0.1 μm -2 . This allowed us to perform single InAs/InP QD-NW photoluminescence spectroscopy on the as-grown sample opening a novel method for the monolithic growth of III-V QD-NWs SPS devices on Si substrates. The InP NW samples were grown on Si(111) substrates using the VLS assisted solid source-MBE with Au-In droplets as catalyst. We have used the same substrate preparation and Au-In droplet formation procedures mentioned in a previous work The grown samples were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to have access to the density (dNW) of the InP NWs in addition to their morphological properties. The NW density was measured at three different positions for each sample of  1 cm 2 surface area to verify that the NW density is homogenous all over the sample. The samples were optically characterized by photoluminescence (PL) and micro-photoluminescence (μPL). The samples were mounted inside a close cycled helium cooled cryostat allowing measurements at T = 12 K. The light emitted from the NWs was collected and analyzed by a liquid nitrogen cooled Indium Gallium Arsenic (IGA) detector camera coupled to a monochromator. Continuous wave (cw) PL spectroscopy was carried out using a 532 nm diode-pumped solid-state laser source with a ≈ 200 μm laser spot size. μPL was performed using a cw single mode fibercoupled 780 nm laser source. The light was focused on the sample using a x50 microscope objective with a numerical aperture NA = 0.4. The laser spot on the sample was around 3-4 μm in diameter allowing optical spectroscopy measurements on single NWs. Our first approach to control the density of the InP NWs was based on modifying the In/Au BEP ratio for the catalyst droplet formation. The deposition of Au-In droplets was performed using an In BEP equal to 2.5x10 -7 torr, corresponding to a growth rate of 0.2 ML/s for an InP layer whereas the Au BEP was varied between 1.8x10 -8 torr and 4.2x10 -9 torr. Thus, a series of 5 InP NW samples were grown with an In/Au BEP ratio = 14, 17, 20, 25, and 58, respectively. As already shown in To know which droplet population contributes to the growth of the InP NWs, we have performed a statistical study on the density of the different droplet populations (ddroplets) and compared it to the NW density (dNWs) at two different In/Au BEP ratios = 14 and 58 (Table In summary on this part, we believe that the Au-In droplets resulting in the nucleation and growth of the InP NWs are the ones with diameter in the 20-40 nm range (B population). By modifying the In/Au BEP ratio we can therefore modify the density of these droplets, and thereafter achieve an important tuning of the NW density. After the first results showing the strong impact of the In/Au BEP ratio on the as-grown InP NW density, we have further investigated the influence of the phosphorous BEP (PP2), or of the V/III BEP ratio, and the growth temperature (TG). For this study, we have chosen the two extreme cases with In/Au BEP ratio = 14 and 58. Figure First, the growth temperature of InP NWs was fixed at 360°C and the P2 BEP was varied to 6x10 -6 torr and 1.2x10 -5 torr, corresponding to a V/III BEP ratio = 10 and 20, respectively. Whatever the In/Au BEP ratio, we can observe a slight decrease in dNW when the P2 BEP is increased: from 18 μm -2 to 13 μm -2 for In/Au BEP ratio = 14 (Figure Considering the mechanism shown in Figure InP pedestals with an Au droplet on their top could be tuned by the P2 pressure and could have a non-negligible influence on the NW density. A noticeable change can be also observed in the NW length and diameter when modifying the P2 pressure (see Table We can observe that when TG is increased from 360°C to 380°C, the NW density is strongly decreased: from 13 to 4 μm -2 and from 2 to < 0.1 μm -2 , for In/Au BEP ratio = 14 and 58, respectively. Because of the low solubility of phosphorus in the Au droplets, the decrease in dNW when TG is increased can be attributed to a limited phosphorus supplying to the droplet due to a faster phosphorus desorption at the Au droplet surface. This limited phosphorus supplying can be a factor leading to a limited number of efficient droplets to nucleate InP NWs. Obtaining such a low density (< 0.1 μm -2 ) for InP NWs monolithically grown on Si with these growth conditions (TG = 380°C and V/III BEP ratio = 20) is of prime importance since they ensure the growth of pure WZ InP NWs The previous experimental results have shown the possibility to control the density of the InP NWs where ultralow dNW < 0.1 μm -2 was achieved (Figure We have successfully implemented a new method to control the density of InP NWs monolithically grown on silicon using VLS-MBE without any pre-growth effort. The NW density was tuned between 18 μm -2 to values as small as < 0.1 μm -2 by investigating different growth parameters. By the variation of the Au BEP used for the Au-In droplet formation, their size and density were changed and such a modification has induced a remarkable change in the NW density. Beyond the Au-In droplet formation, we have extended our study and showed the P2 BEP (or the V/III BEP ratio) could be another driving parameter for the NW density control at the early stage of the growth in addition to the NW growth temperature. Our best result stands out with the use of In/Au BEP ratio = 58, V/III BEP ratio = 20 and TG = 380°C which are the optimal parameters for ultra-low NW density < 0.1 μm -2 while conserving the pure WZ structure of the NWs. This method has been proved effective through the monolithic integration of the InAs/InP QD-NWs on silicon showing a single emission line from a single InAs QD emitting in the telecom band. We believe that the control and understanding reported in this work represents a promise for future integration of III-V single QD-NW devices on silicon. Maksymov I, Hugonin J P and Lalanne P 2011 Inhibition, enhancement, and control of spontaneous emission in photonic nanowires Phys. Rev. 