The measurement and stabilization of the carrier-envelope offset frequency f CEO via self-referencing is paramount for optical frequency comb generation which has revolutionized precision frequency metrology, spectroscopy, and optical clocks. Over the past decade, the development of chip-scale platforms has enabled compact integrated waveguides for supercontinuum generation. However, there is a critical need for an on-chip self-referencing system that is adaptive to different pump wavelengths, requires low pulse energy, and does not require complicated processing. Here, we demonstrate efficient carrier-envelope offset frequency f CEO stabilization of a modelocked laser with only 107 pJ of pulse energy via self-referencing in an integrated lithium niobate waveguide. We realize an f -2f interferometer through second-harmonic generation and subsequent supercontinuum generation in a single dispersion-engineered waveguide with a stabilization performance equivalent to a conventional off-chip module. The f CEO beatnote is measured over a pump wavelength range of 70 nm. We theoretically investigate our system using a single nonlinear envelope equation with contributions from both second-and third-order nonlinearities. Our modeling reveals rich ultrabroadband nonlinear dynamics and confirms that the initial second harmonic generation followed by supercontinuum generation with the remaining pump is responsible for the generation of a strong f CEO signal as compared to a traditional f -2f interferometer. Our technology provides a highly-simplified system that is robust, low cost, and adaptable for precision metrology for use outside a research laboratory. The development of optical frequency combs has enabled high-precision frequency measurements and led to advances in a wide area of research including all-optical clocks, spectroscopy, and metrology As an alternative, here we consider a scheme where high peak power pump pulses first generate a harmonic signal before the remaining pump is used for SCG to create the fundamental frequency component [Fig. In recent years, integrated lithium niobate (LN, LiNbO 3 ) has emerged as an ideal platform for nonlinear photonics and its large nonlinear index (n 2 = 2 × 10 -19 m 2 /W) and strong χ (2) nonlinearity (χ (2) = 40 pm/V) In this paper, we demonstrate highly efficient selfreferencing in an integrated LN waveguide by leveraging the large intrinsic χ (2) and χ (3) nonlinearities. Selfreferencing is achieved by performing both SHG and SCG for f -2f interferometry in a single waveguide. We use this LN f -2f interferometer to demonstrate f CEO stabilization of a modelocked fiber laser with record low pulse energies of 107 pJ, with a large reduction in phase noise >100 dB/Hz at 10 Hz. We verify that the stabilization performance is equivalent to a conventional f -2f module. In addition, we demonstrate f CEO beatnote detection over 70 nm of pump wavelength tuning. We also numerically model the pulse propagation by employing a single nonlinear envelope equation that incorporates both second-and third order nonlinearities. Our modeling unveils the fascinating underlying dynamics of simultaneous harmonic generation and SCG which manifests in our system and correctly reproduces the experimentally observed spectrum over the vast optical bandwidth spanning multiple octaves. Our demonstration illustrates the technological readiness of LN waveguides for implementation of a low cost and adaptable precision metrology system for use outside a research laboratory. Most of the prior work done on pulse propagation dynamics with χ (2) effects has implemented coupled equations for the fundamental and second-harmonic fields where P N L = 0 χ (2) E 2 + χ (3) E 3 is the total nonlinear polarization with contributions only from nonnegative frequencies, τ sh = 1/ω 0 -∂[ln(n(ω))]/∂ω| ω=ω0 is the optical shock time, β n is the n-th order dispersion coefficient, α is the propagation loss, ω 0 is the pump frequency, and τ = t -β 1 z is the local time in the moving frame. We incorporate the effects of second-and third-order nonlinearities, high-order dispersion, and self-steepening. We solve Eq. ( In the spectral domain, we immediately see the effects of SHG and sum-frequency generation at 780 nm, along with third-harmonic generation at 520 nm. As the pulse propagates in the waveguide, we observe spectral broadening due to self-phase modulation. For z > 4 cm, we observe dispersive wave (DW) formation In our experiment, we send a pulse train from a modelocked erbium fiber laser centered at 1560 nm with a pulse duration of 90 fs and a 250-MHz repetition rate into a 0.5-cm-long air-clad LN waveguide. We pump the fundamental TE mode of the waveguide which allows us to exploit the largest nonlinear tensor component for the χ (2) process in the x-cut film. The LN waveguide is fabricated using an x-cut 800-nm LN thin film with an etch depth of 450 nm and a width of 1250 nm. The waveguide output is collected using a lensed fiber sent to two different optical spectrum analyzers for spectral characterization. We estimate an input coupling loss of 10.3 dB and an overall insertion loss of 17.5 dB. This coupling loss can be reduced to 1.7 dB, and the overall losses can be as low as 3.4 dB The f CEO of the modelocked laser is measured by directly detecting the waveguide output using a silicon avalanche photodiode (APD, 400 -1000 nm wavelength range). For f CEO stabilization, the measured offset from the APD is phase locked to a 10-MHz rubidium frequency standard using a feedback loop, which includes a phase detector and a PID controller. Figure Lastly, we investigate the operational range of the pump wavelength for generating the f CEO beatnote. For this measurement, we use 200-fs pulses from a tunable femtosecond optical parametric oscillator (OPO) with a repetition rate of 80 MHz. Figure In conclusion, we demonstrate on-chip self-referencing using a single integrated LN waveguide. We achieve efficient f CEO stabilization of a modelocked fiber laser using 107 pJ of pulse energy by exploiting the efficient second-harmonic process that occurs at the beginning of the waveguide while still allowing for strong χ (3) interactions with high peak pump power. The platform offers a wide pump wavelength range >70 nm over which the f CEO beatnote can be generated. The simple structure can replace a conventional f -2f interferometer with bulk PPLN which requires various poling periods, a temperature controller, and a delay line for extracting the f CEO . In addition, we theoretically investigate this system by modeling pulse propagation in a LN waveguide with χ (2) and χ (3) effects. The low power consumption and compact footprint of our scheme offers promise towards the miniaturization of frequency comb technology and a step towards the realization of an integrated fully-stabilized frequency comb source for applications beyond the lab. The plot shows the optical spectra (left) and corresponding RF measurement (right) for four different pump wavelengths from 1470 nm to 1530 nm. The peak at 80 MHz corresponds to the repetition rate and the two highest peaks below that corresponds to f CEO1 and f CEO2. We observe a 40 dB increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of the f CEO beatnote as the pump wavelength is increased which is attributed to the increased spectral overlap between the DW and the second harmonic component. The difference in the f CEO arises from the drift of our pump source. The RBW of the RF spectrum analyzer is 300 kHz. (b) Center wavelength of DW peak (red) and second harmonic of the pump wavelength (blue) for a range of pump wavelengths. Red circles denote the experimentally measured points and the solid red line is a fit based on the points. The shaded region shows the spectra range of f CEO detection. We expect the range extends nearly symmetrically on the other side of the crossing point between DW and SHG.