In this work, a novel one-dimensional geometry for metal-insulator-graphene (1D-MIG) diode with low capacitance is demonstrated. The junction of the 1D-MIG diode is formed at the 1D edge of Al 2 O 3 -encapsulated graphene with TiO 2 that acts as barrier material. The diodes demonstrate ultra-high current density since the transport in the graphene and through the barrier is in plane. The geometry delivers very low capacitive coupling between the cathode and anode of the diode, which shows frequency response up to 100 GHz and ensures potential high frequency performance up to 2.4 THz. The 1D-MIG diodes are demonstrated to function uniformly and stable under bending conditions down to 6.4 mm bending radius on flexible substrate. Diodes are key components in radio frequency (RF) communication systems, where they are used for several RF applications like signal rectification, power detection, and energy harvesting, just to cite few. Here we propose a radically new MIG diode geometry, which significantly reduces the junction capacitance, a so-called one-dimensional metal-insulator-graphene (1D-MIG) diode geometry. In this geometry, the graphene is encapsulated in a oxide layer and exposed only at the 1D edge, as shown in Figure For the fabrication of 1D-MIG diodes commercial available chemical vapor deposition grown graphene and photolithography technology was used on rigid silicon substrate (ρ > 5 kΩ•cm with 1 μm SiO 2 ) and on flexible foil. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is utilized to deposit the 40 nm Al 2 O 3 encapsulation layer on top of the graphene. Reactive ionic etching (RIE) is used to pattern the Al 2 O 3 /graphene stack, and the graphene is contacted ohmically with metal Ni at cathode side. A TiO 2 layer of 6 nm from ALD is deposited to form the barrier layer for the diode on the anode side, and Ti is used as the anode metal. In order to gain insights on the electrostatic playing in the 1D-MIG diode, we have numerically solved the 2D Poisson equation in the y-z plane of the structure shown in Figure assuming that the access resistance (R a ) is 6 Ω, which is calculated by using an access length of 200 nm, a contact resistance of 200 Ω•μm To evaluate the 1D-MIG diode for the application in rectifiers or power detectors, the I-V characteristics was measured under ambient conditions (Figure As shown in Figure Additionally the histogram of the bias voltage, when the f ASYM reaches maximum value, is also shown in Figure and the thickness of graphene (0.3 nm). The FOMs for diodes based on different thin-film technologies are benchmarked in Table The measured S 11 over the whole frequency range is plotted in the Smith chart shown in Figure Here for the de-embedding procedure we only utilized the big pads as an open de-embedding structure, so only the fringe capacitance between the pads as well as the parasitic capacitance via the substrate is eliminated. The device geometry capacitance introduced by the pads in the dashed box marked in Figure 1D-MIG diodes were also fabricated on the flexible polyimide (PI) substrate as shown in Figure Furthermore, we applied flex cycles for the substrate at bending radius of 6.4 mm. The diode performance (asymmetry f ASYM and ON current) shows no degradation up to flex cycles of 1000, as in Figure I (@1 V) J (A/cm 2 ) f ASYM f NL f RES (V -1 ) Nb/Nb 2 O 5 (5 nm)/Pt 