Nanomechanical systems offer a versatile platform for both fundamental science and industrial applications [1][2] It has also been shown that the mechanical vibration of a nanoscale cantilever can be used to detect electromagnetic analogue-modulated waves 9 . This concept is quite exciting; it opens the door to the possibility of fabricating an ultra-small transceiver by realising extreme scaledown of receiving antenna 20 . Indeed, aiming for digital data transfer with such small wireless terminals, some research groups have attempted to detect digitally modulated signals with nanomechanical systems of the use of nanomechanical systems for digital data transfer with a digital image. With the introduction of error-correcting code and a novel digital signal processing technique suitable for nanomechanical systems, a nanoscale digital receiver with a vibrational nano-antenna composed of a carbon nanotube cantilever was experimentally shown to be capable of digital transfer. In fact, the developed nanomechanical receiver successfully receive a digital image. Furthermore, our fabrication method achieved a tiny gap around field emitter of vibrational nano-antenna, which enables the receiver to work with quite a low power consumption, on the order of 10 nW. Such an ultra-small, robust, and ultra-low-powered nanomechanical digital receiver opens up a new paradigm of digital data transfer at the nanoscale; collecting much more meaningful data via such device is expected to contribute to the forthcoming data-oriented age with IoT and AI-based systems. The wireless transfer of digital data, such as text messages, pictures, and movies, enriches our modern life. The collection and analysis of scientific data with machine intelligence techniques have become essential techniques in natural and social science fields. Wireless communication terminals that have been scaled down to the nanoscale are expected to offer a more flexible platform for data collection Such components are often designed based on electromagnetic theory; the size of an RF antenna is designed on the order of the wavelength, which is the main issue during downsizing. Nanomechanical systems offer a versatile platform for fundamental science and applications By exploiting the resonating vibration of a nanoscale cantilever, it has been reported that electromagnetic waves with frequency modulation (FM) can be received in nanoscale However, previously proposed receivers cannot obtain the entire energy of the incoming wave, which often causes error in the data transfer Here, we provide the first experimental demonstration of an ultra-small, robust, and ultralow-powered digital receiver. We achieved it by introducing concepts from recently developed physics of nanomechanics and original digital signal processing method. Fortunately, sensed data is often expressed in a digital format, and thus, the use of error-correcting code should contribute to error reduction. Our original digital signal processing technique that is suitable for nanomechanical systems is developed, and it is shown to further enhance the error correction capability of the receiver. The developed nanomechanical digital receiver, which is presented in Fig. With the application of binary amplitude shift keying (BASK) To reduce the detection error, a robust digital detection method was also introduced. Because of the nanoscale reception of the signal, the vibration sometimes cannot follow the variation of the amplitude. One typical situation is shown in Fig. A concrete observation method is necessary to measure the amplitude of the vibration. Similar to the frontier work by Jensen et al. Unlike fabrication methods using chemical vapour deposition It was experimentally demonstrated that the developed nanoscale receiver could successfully detect a transmitted digital image (Fig. A unique procedure in the proposed detection method is the masking of the output current. Figure Even with this digital detection method, detection error still remains. The amplitude of the current after filtering and masking, A DC , is shown in Fig. These two areas comprise most of the probability density, which indicates that most of the transmitted data are correctly estimated in the developed nanomechanical digital receiver. This success arises from the setting of the threshold value. To minimise erroneous detection, the probabilities for these two regions are calculated, and the threshold is set to make these two probabilities equal (see Methods). Despite the use of this optimal threshold, some level of error is unavoidable, as shown in Fig. It was found that increasing the signal gain ∆A contributes to the reduction of erroneous detection. Figure The signal-to-noise power ratio (S/N), a key performance indicator in terms of signal processing or communication systems, was also evaluated in the nanoscale receiver. From the measurement results presented in Fig. Our receiver achieves this condition when the S/N is larger than approximately 6 dB. Employing the error correction method enhances the ability of the receiver to secure a high S/N. Based on this performance, the theoretical value of the correct detection rate can be calculated (see Methods). The blue circles in Fig. The limit on wireless transfer of digital data with the receiver was also investigated. In the field of information theory, a performance measure called channel capacity, which characterises the rate at which digital information can be reliably transmitted over a wireless channel, has been introduced The achievements in this work represent a major milestone in the development of nanoscale digital wireless terminals. This Letter reports the first practical demonstration that nanomechanical systems are capable of detecting digitally modulated signals. With the use of a vibrational nano-antenna, the proposed robust digital signal processing method enables reliable nanoscale data transfer. The developed fabrication method contributes to strongly reducing the power consumption. The present experiments demonstrate that a digital image carried by a modulated signal can be successfully detected with the developed nanomechanical system. Such an ultra-small, robust, and ultra-low-powered nanomechanical digital receiver opens up a new paradigm of digital data transfer at the nanoscale, which will contribute to the forthcoming age of true IoT world: everything are connected. involves original demodulation by bandpass filtering and masking, in addition to error correction, is used for signal discrimination. The introduced fabrication method achieves a tiny gap between field emitter (the tip of the cantilever) and counter-electrode, which enables the receiver to work with quite a low power consumption, on the order of 10 nW. The first experimental demonstration of nanoscale digital transfer was successfully performed with the proposed system (Fig. Preparing the transmitted digitally modulated signal. Digital data d s ∈ {0, 1} with N s bits were transmitted to the nanomechanical digital receiver via an electromagnetic digitally modulated signal V sig (t). The first step of preparing the signal is the encoding of the data for error correction. Here, a standard error collecting code was employed: a convolutional code with a constraint length of seven bits and a coding rate of R C = 1/2 (see Ref According to BASK modulation, the data d e = 0 are mapped to the carrier signal with a small amplitude A 0 > 0, and the data of d e = 1 are mapped to that with a large amplitude A 0 + ∆A. Each encoded bit is expressed by a signal with time-duration, T b . To reflect this point, a single pulsed signal g τ (t) = 1 for 0 ≤ t ≤ τ and in the other time-interval, g τ (t) = 0, is introduced. The digitally modulated signal in this case is theoretically described by (1) In the experiment, f c was set to 50 kHz and four periods of the sinusoidal signal were used to describe one bit, giving T b =4/f c (see Fig. Device fabrication and structural features. The developed device was fabricated with a standard semiconductor process. Extended Data Fig. Measurement set-up for observing the nanomechanical digital receiver. The transmitted digital information d s is estimated by detecting the signal V sig (t) in the nanomechanical digital receiver. Extended Data Fig. This voltage was supplied by a regulated direct current power supply (PMX110-0.6A, Kikusui Electronics Corporation). Under these conditions, the signal V sig (t) was applied to signal electrode #1. Because the opposite electrode, signal electrode #2, was grounded, the signal induced an electric field between the electrodes, including around the cantilever. In the experiment, according to Eq. (1), the signal was generated by a arbitrary waveform generators (Mi2.6021, SPECTRUM) with control software (SBench6-Pro 6.1). All of the cables were electrically isolated from the vacuum chamber to avoid any crosstalk between the signal line (signal electrodes #1 and #2) and the current measurement line (anode and cathode). The electric current in nanomechanical systems, such as the field emission current, is weak (generally on the order of 1 nA). This provides a motivation for the use of a lock-in-amplifier in the measurement Robust digital detection. From the measured data V rcv , the developed receiver estimates the transmitted data d s according to the proposed detection method. The measured current is first set to Next, the current is masked to avoid transient effects. Our observation revealed that almost the first half of the segment of the signal representing a single bit, i.e., the first two periods, are affected by the previous bit. When the amplitude of the signal changes, this effect leads to erroneous estimation (see Supporting Information). To counteract this effect, the first half of the current is deleted for every bit, and the remaining part, denoted Ĩrcv , is used in the detection. Next, bandpass filtering is applied to Ĩrcv to extract the 2f c frequency component. After Ĩrcv is multiplied by the reference signal e i(2π•2fct+θr) , a three-step filtering procedure is applied: 1) taking the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of Ĩrcv e i(2π•2fct+θr) to calculate the Fourier coefficients for each frequency; 2) replacing all coefficients with zero, except that corresponding to zero frequency, to eliminate high-frequency components; and 3) taking the inverse DFT (IDFT) with the replaced coefficients to reproduce the filtered current samples. The resulting current is given by Îrcv = A DC e i(θs-θr) , where θ s and θ r are the phases of the reference signal and the 2f c component of the current, respectively. In the estimation of the transmitted data, the absolute value of the current, | Îrcv |, is used. The current is also plotted in Fig. As shown in Fig. The function 'vitdec' with the input sequence of de is applied to obtain the final estimated data ds , which is used to reproduce the final received image shown in Fig. Drawing the probability density and estimating noise variance and signal-to-noise power We have previously reported that the probability density for the current follows a Gaussian distribution for d e = 1 and μ de=0 = 2.52×10 -10 A and σ 2 de=0 = 9.16×10 -21 A 2 for d e = 0. The result of σ 2 de=1 = σ 2 de=0 indicates that the two probability densities have a different variance. The properties of the distributions give us an important information on the communication performance of the receiver. One is the S/N, which is widely used to evaluate the signal gain in engineering fields. The distance from the threshold to the mean, which is given by ε b,de={0,1} = |μ de={0,1} -ζ| 2 , is equal to the signal power received at the nanomechanical digital receiver The ratio for each bit depends on the value of the transmitted data d e because the variances σ 2 de=0 and σ 2 de=1 are different for the two possible values. The ratio is plotted in Fig. The theoretical error rate can be calculated from the above S/N. Traditional communication theory shows that the error rate in BASK with different variances is ∞ x e -u 2 /2 du is the Q-function Calculation of channel capacity. The observations shown in Fig. In this case, the channel capacity is derived by the maximizing the mutual information I(d e ; de ) = H( de ) -H( de |d e ) with respect to the a priori probability α ≡ P [d e ]. Here, H(X) is the entropy of the random variable X, see Ref The plots in Fig. CNT cantilever 