Electrically small matched antennas with time-periodic and space-uniform modulation Alessio D'Alessandro (*) Abstract-A conceptual method to realize an impedancematched electrically small antenna is discussed, using a transmission line modulated only in time. The time-periodic spaceuniform modulation of a distributed shunt array of varcapacitors excites a mode with very small frequency but still a small (microwave) wavelength: the matching line then retains a practical size. The modulated transmission line brings the problem of impedance matching to a frequency f0 much higher than the signal, where the large antenna reactance can be easily compensated with a much higher bandwidth for the same Q factor: actually the bandwidth ∆f = f0/Q becomes large when f0 is much larger than the signal frequency. A simple way to obtain the space uniform modulation of the transmission line is illustrated, making use of a Wheatstone-bridge arrangement of the modulated varicaps. The signal and modulating lines, running in parallel on a section of the same length, see two very different equivalent shunt capacitances, so that the modulating voltage is almost uniform while the signal voltage may change significantly across the transmission line. Index Terms-Small antenna, electrically small, impedance matching, metasurface, time modulation, VLF Getting radiation from an electrically small antenna, an antenna much shorter than the radiation wavelength, has been a longstanding problem in radio engineering since early times. At low frequencies the radiation resistance of a small dipole scales as the square of the ratio of the antenna and radiation characteristic lengths, which can be extremely small. Moreover, besides the dramatic reduction of the radiation resistance, the impedance of an electrically small dipole antenna has a huge capacitive component and poses well-known matching problems with the source. Compensation of the huge capacitive component with passive linear time-invariant (LTI) elements (i.e. a large inductance) can occur just in a very narrow frequency bandwidth dictated by the Bode-Fano limit Nonlinear, modulated time variant networks (see for instance In this paper, the space-uniform modulation method is applied to get a time-variant λ/4 stub section of transmission line, as an impedance adapter for an electrically small antenna. As for any adapter, the impedance seen at the generator terminals before the λ/4 section is different from the impedance seen at the antenna terminals and can be matched much more easily. A λ/4 section of transmission line is not trivially realizable at low frequencies, and normally needs complex meander structures The modulation of the fundamental high frequency signal f G of the generator (input) with a space-uniform signal of a very close frequency (modulation) provides a low frequency (beat) excitation with the same small wavelength of the generator (since the modulation is uniform in space) and frequency equal to the difference of the fundamental and modulation: this is the low frequency f s emitted by the small antenna. Thanks to the space-uniform modulation, the λ/4 matching element propagates a signal with the very low antenna frequency and the practical-size small wavelength of the generator side at the same time. As a consequence, the significant length λ/4 = c/(4f G ) needed for the impedance matching is defined at the higher generator frequency f G , and is much smaller than c/(4f s ). The idea of applying a modulated lumped load to an electrically small antenna has already been theorized recently We point out that the present method does not affect the antenna characteristic impedance seen by its terminals, which is unchanged and always poor. Instead we just provide an upstream (modulated) line that facilitates the compensation of the antenna reactance with appropriate elements at high frequency. This operation can be done with a significant larger bandwidth compared to the standard matching technique at a single frequency. We will show that for the same value of Q factor, the bandwith defined at the high frequency f 0 is ∆f = f 0 /Q, that is larger of a factor f 0 /f s . This is the ultimate feature that makes the matching at the modulated (high) frequency much more appealing than the matching at the signal frequency. This paper is structured as follows: in Section II the main idea of time periodic and space-uniform modulation for electrically small antennas is sketched; in Section III a system which can provide the needed modulation is discussed; in Section IV the boundary conditions (filters), in Section V the bandwidth and, finally, in Section VI the limitations of the method are illustrated. A wave of angular frequency ω 0 propagating in a conductor with a propagation speed modulated in time, but uniform in space, c(t) = c/( √ (1+δ cos(ω m t))), where is the dielectric permittivity and δ the modulation index, can excite modes of different angular frequencies ω n = ω 0 + nω m with the same spatial wavenumber √ ω 0 /c. This appears intuitively from the naïve first order Taylor expansion for a small modulation index δ. The idea behind this paper is to provide a (space-uniform) modulation across a λ/4 section of matching transmission line, with a modulation (angular) frequency ω m very close to the base radiofrequency ω 0 . A low frequency wave with small frequency ω 0 -ω m << ω 0 is excited, with the same fundamental spatial wavenumber as the generator side (Figure Figure Time-periodic space-uniform modulation is not as simple as space-time modulation. While for the latter a simple travelling wave on a dedicated line can be used to modulate the gap voltage of an array of varactors, like in A practical way to obtain (an approximate) space uniform modulation across the λ/4 stub of Figure As first option of Figure The second option in order to assign a much larger characteristic wavelength to the modulating voltage than to the signal voltage is to use a compensating inductance array (Figure For both options of Figure ) stays unchanged up to second orders in the modulation index. The high symmetry also prevents any undesired coupling of the signal/feed line with the modulation line: noise in the modulation line affects in the same way each conductor of the signal line, thus producing no differential voltage across the signal. The two conductor bars of the signal line are connected to a high frequency voltage feed, providing the fundamental wave at frequency ω 0 , and to the (electrically small) antenna is defined with respect to the feed frequency ω 0 and not with the much smaller signal frequency ω 0 -ωm. The pair of conductors in bold black is reserved for the feed/signal frequency while the other couple of parallel conductors, in grey, carry the modulation signal, (almost) uniform in space across the transmision line length. Alternative options for the cross section are provided in Figure For our simplified analysis we assume the matching system to be embedded in a lossless dielectric with r = 1 with mere function of support. We also neglect the varicap parasite resistance: even though the single varicap element may have a parasite resistance (∼ 1.8Ω for Infineon BB833) of the same order as the radiation resistance of the small antenna, the equivalent resistance of the parallel arrangement is much smaller: this may be an appreciable feature of the space-uniform distributed modulation compared to the lumped modulation. A capacitance (per unit length) of the varicap array C 0 varicap much higher than the natural capacitance C line of the signal parallel line provides a high effective dielectric permittivity = C 0 varicap /C line : this in turn allows a shorter length λ 4 = πc 2 √ ω0 of the conductor rods for a given frequency ω 0 , with consequent space saving. With Infineon BB833 varicaps polarized at 2 V with a corresponding 7 pF capacitance, a 5 mm spacing of the varicap rows as in On the same side as the antenna, the couple of conductor bars carrying the signal is fed with differential voltage V (0, t) = V 0 exp(-iω 0 t), with the fundamental ω 0 in the UHF frequency range. A fraction of the generated power at ω 0 is converted into power at ω 0 -ω m by the modulated varicaps as long as the signal travels along the line, while the remaining fraction enters the modulation circuit. At the opposite end of the antenna, pure capacitive filters set a zero power boundary condition at both frequencies ω 0 and ω 0 -ω m , as we will see in Section IV, ensuring that all the feed energy at ω 0 has been converted. It will be shown that energy at ω 0 -ω m travels the opposite direction with respect to energy at ω 0 along the modulated line, that is toward the antenna. The telegraphers' equations ) and the varicap capacitance as well, the latter sized to be much larger than the line capacitance. In the above equations, d is the separation gap between conductors and z is the coordinate along the transmission line. Neglecting dielectric leakage losses and conductor resistance, equations (2) can be rearranged into the wave equation: It can be shown (Appendix A) that the equation above has solution for modes with frequency ω 0 + nω m for n integer: the low frequency mode ω 0 -ω m is combination of a wave with short wavelength λ = 2πc √ ω0 generated by the modulation, which allows the impedance matching, along with the standard wave with long wavelength λ = 2πc √ (ω0-ωm) that would be there even in absence of modulation. Boundary conditions are carefully chosen to suppress (angular) frequencies different from ω 0 and ω 0 -ω m , thanks to additional dedicated filters at the conductor ends, as discussed in Section IV. Propagation of modes ω n = ω 0 + nω m with n = 0, -1 is also discouraged by the smallness of the modulation index δ (n-mode amplitudes are proportional to δ |n| ). A full set of voltage and current solutions of the modulated wave equation ( of the feed frequency ω 0 (i.e. the wave number that the feed frequency would have in absence of modulation), and a "long" wave with the natural wave number of the radiated signal frequency. Both modes (ω 0 and ω 0 -ω m ) carry both wavelengths, in shares defined by the boundary conditions: the latter will fix the generic (voltage-dimensional) coefficients A, B, C, D of the linear combination in ( Figure At the antenna end, the block-band filter F0 in (realized with a standard LC parallel arrangement tuned to the blocking frequency ω 0 ) ensures that the feed frequency ω 0 does not enter the antenna, which should radiate the low mode ω 0 -ω m only. At the antenna terminals it is really advisable to use a blockband filter F0 in (LC parallel) rejecting the unwanted frequency ω 0 rather than a pass-band filter (LC series) selecting the low mode ω 0 -ω m . Actually, we do not want to reduce the bandwidth by creating a not needed resonance at ω 0 -ω m with the filter: the large antenna reactance is to be compensated at ω 0 , where the bandwidth is large, not at ω 0 -ω m . Moreover, a block-band LC parallel arrangement at high frequency, unlike the LC series bandpass at low frequency, does not introduce a high parasite resistance of the compensating inductor which could be of the same order as the low radiation resistance of the antenna. The remaining filter F1 in is a LC series bandpass tuned to ω 0 , which ensures that the power at signal frequency ω 0 -ω m is not dissipated in the source resistance of the feed. Finally, filters F2 are band-pass filters shorting out the high frequency mode ω 0 + ω m ∼ 2ω 0 : since the wavelength associated to this mode is roughly one half the wavelength at ω 0 , an additional F2 filter is placed mid-way the transmission line to remove the occurrence of the stationary wave at ω 0 +ω m with nodes at the end of transmission line and peak in the middle, which could not be removed by the filters F2 at the bound of transmission line. With the assessment above, the input impedance at ω 0 , at the feed points A1 and A2 in Figure as calculated in at ω 0 , cancelling the imaginary part. For the real part, either a small-size high-frequency transformer or a short matching section of unmodulated transmission line at ω 0 can be used to set equal to the generator resistance (Z G ). At this point it is useful to compare the radiated power at the low frequency ω 0 -ω m with the feed power entering the modulation system (at terminals A1 and A2 in Figure negative in sign since power flows from the line into the antenna), where the moduli |I 0 (0)| and |I -1 (0)| of the z = 0 input currents at each frequency are provided by equation ( At the feed terminals A1 and A2, power at ω 0 is positive, that is entering the modulated line, while power at ω 0 -ω m is negative, that is coming out from the modulated line (into the antenna); at the end z = λ/4 opposite the antenna there is no power flow at neither of the two modes, due to the pure reactive boundary conditions: all the feed power P 0 has been converted by the varactors. The minus sign in the Manley-Rowe relationship above enforces the power flow at frequency ω 0 -ω m in the opposite direction of ω 0 , as shown in Figure From a first impression it may look deceptive that only a fraction (ω0-ωm) ω0 of the feed power is converted into the low frequency to be radiated by the antenna, but a closer look shows that it is not so bad. Actually we obtained a performance linear in the small frequency, while for the generic case of an unmatched antenna the radiated power is only a fraction R ant /R G , where R G is the source resistance and R ant is the radiation resistance: R ant and the ratio R ant /R G are quadratic in the small frequency, hence much smaller. Moreover, while in the latter case the residual power is entirely dissipated in the source resistance, in the present case of a modulated matching line the balance of power is just converted to a different frequency ω m . In other words, the modulated line works as a frequency parametric downconverter where the idler circuit operates at a frequency ω 0 -ω m , much lower than the feed ω 0 and than the pump (modulation) frequency ω m . This result is not only a performance improvement (linear behavior in the signal frequency, instead of quadratic behavior) but also a bandwidth improvement with respect to any "standard" low frequency matching. The Q factor of the match at ω 0 can be calculated from where (Z G ) is the compensating reactance of the feed. In the derivation of the RHS of the above we assume the canonical inverse-frequency dependence for the reatance of the electrically small dipole antenna, that is 4ω0Cant and the compensating reactance is of the form (Z G (ω)) = ωδ 2 4ω 2 0 Cant (which can be obtained with a small inductor of value The Q factor is then the same as a conventional matching at ω 0 -ω m , but the bandwidth at ω 0 , defined as ∆ω = ω 0 /Q, is enhanced by the (large) factor ω 0 /(ω 0 -ω m ) with respect to the conventional match at the signal frequency ∆ω = (ω 0 -ω m )/Q. As a comparison, the most performant case of standard linear time invariant antenna model in | (Z ant )|/ (Z ant ) ∼ 1400 of the simple dipole could generate as much bandwidth as the complex spherically-folded geometry close to the Chu limit with a modulation frequency equal to Q dipole /Q min = 24 times the signal frequency. The space-uniform modulation can be applied to a more complex antenna geometry than a dipole or to other standard methods enhancing the radiation resistance (e.g. capacitor end plates) by combining the techniques. An upper limit to the high frequencies ω 0 and ω m is set by the space-uniform nature of the modulation, which requires a minimum number of components (e.g. N=20 rows) to realize the continuum limit. With a minimum row spacing of 5mm set by the manufacturability (by simple welding), a 10cm minimum length for the λ/4 modulation line seems reasonable, which sets the maximum frequency ω 0 < πc 2 √ 10cm . A further, far more important limitation is on the ratio ω 0 /(ω 0 -ω m ) due to At present, although the theoretical basis here presented are encouraging, a simulation of a complete setup of antenna + filters + matching line has not been carried out yet and should be performed as a final validation of the practicity and applicability of the method. The idea of time-periodic space-uniform modulation to provide a suitable low frequency excitation to electrically small antennas is sketched in a concept form. A high frequency voltage feed applied to a λ/4 stub section of transmission line with modulated line impedance generates a low frequency mode, with the same fundamental (microwave) wavelength, which can be used to transfer the impedance matching problem of the antenna to a much higher frequency f 0 than the signal f s . At this frequency, the antenna impedance matching can be performed easily (e.g. by a small compensating inductor with negligible parasite resistance and a section of unmodulated transmission line of small length) and the bandwidth is enhanced by a factor f 0 /f s (with the same Q-factor). The method is here presented from a theoretical point of view, still needing a simulation of the complete arrangement to prove its practicity. The same technique of space-uniform modulation with a high frequency ω m close to the fundamental frequency ω 0 of the feed can be possibly applied directly on the electrically small antenna instead of its matching circuit. A slot-loop antenna arrangement such as It is worth saying that the large power fraction 1 -ω0-ωm ω0 entering the modulation circuit due to the frequency downconversion is not necessarily dissipated in the source resistance of this circuit, but, in principle, can be recovered and eventually reconverted to ω 0 by an additional parametric amplifier before the impedance matching circuit at ω 0 . The ultimate configuration should be a power feed at the low mode ω 0 -ω m first converted to the high frequency mode ω 0 with a parametric amplifier. Then an unmodulated line section at ω 0 where the impedance match is performed before terminals A1 and A2 of Figure This paper may also provide, in principle, a mathematical framework for the (technically challenging) generation of modulated signals in the teraHertz band The above further investigations are eventually open to collaboration, in the awareness that no definite solution for a longstanding problem is provided here but just a first sketch of a method which may be gathered by others. A general voltage solution to the telegrapher's equation ( The solution can be decomposed in the superposition of a forward and backward propagating wave, which in turn can be written in the Floquet expansion form: with ω n = ω 0 + nω m . Here the + sign is for the forward and thesign for the backward wave, and the pedix n is the mode label. The mode amplitudes V n may have different values for the forward and the backward wave. With Plugging the ansatz (5) in the above equation we follow similar steps as 2c 2 e -iωn-1t = 0 Relabelling the index of terms under summation (n → n±1) we obtain The secular equation Now the calculation to obtain the dispersion relation from ( is written: higher order terms V 1 and V -2 are neglected because of the properly chosen boundary conditions (shortcut filters at z = 0 and z = λ/4, at the respective frequencies ω 0 + ω m and ω 0 -2ω m , and also because V -2 is higher order in the small modulation index, since it can be shown that b n =0 ∼ O(δ -1 ) and b 0 ∼ O(δ). Actually, from recursion relations (A-15) and (A-17) in Now equation ( The biquadratic equation above yields two distinct solutions for β 2 : with no loss of generality we can look for solutions with only positive values of β, since the redundancy due to the presence of a forward and a backward propagating wave is already considered in the ± sign of (5): for δ = 0 (no modulation) the solutions of ( for the fundamental mode and for the low frequency mode. Solving the biquadratic equation ( For the two wave numbers β 0 and β -1 , we obtain from (9) b 0 = -(ω0-ωm) 2 δ 2ωm(2ω0-ωm) and b 1 = ω 2 0 δ 2ωm(2ω0-ωm) respectively. Equation ( exp(-iω0t) cos(β-1z)+ D exp(-i(ω0 -ωm)t) -ω 2 0 δ 2ωm(2ω0 -ωm) exp(-iω0t) sin(β-1z) where we defined ω -1 := ω 0 -ω m . The antenna input impedance at ω -1 , derived by the ratio of the ω 0 -ω m components at z = 0, is: where the minus sign in -Z ant is because the current is conventionally assumed to flow out from the antenna into the transmission line. The output impedance at ω 0 , the ratio of the ω 0 components in ( The output impedance at ω -1 , the ratio of the ω -1 components evaluated at z = π/(2β 0 ), is: where for both equations ( With these settings the boundary output impedances ( while the input impedance from ( where in the last step we considered Z ant >> Z 0 since it scales as the inverse of the low frequency ω -1 . This work was fully supported by the patience of dear Stefania, which I want to thank for the English revision of this paper.