Higgs-like modes in condensed-matter physics have drawn attention because of analogies to the Higgs bosons of particle physics. Here we use a microscopic time-dependent mean-field theory to study the collective mode spectra of two-dimensional spatially indirect exciton (electron-hole pair) condensates, focusing on the Higgs-like modes, i.e., those that have a large weight in electron-hole pair amplitude response functions. We find that in the low exciton density (Bose-Einstein condensate) limit, the dominant Higgs-like modes of spatially indirect exciton condensates correspond to adding electron-hole pairs that are orthogonal to the condensed pair state. We comment on the previously studied Higgs-like collective excitations of superconductors in light of this finding. The standard model of particle physics posits a bosonic Higgs field that provides elementary particles with mass by breaking symmetries that would otherwise be present. The recent experimental detection Emergent symmetry-breaking bosonic fields are common in condensed matter, where they typically arise from interactions among underlying fermionic fields. Both electron-electron pair fields, which condense in superconductors, and electron-hole pair fields, which condense in ferromagnets and in spin or charge density wave systems, are common. An important difference between the Higgs fields of particle physics and the symmetrybreaking bosonic fields in condensed matter is the absence, in the former case, of an understanding of the field's origin in terms of underlying degrees of freedom that might be hidden at present, akin to the understanding in condensed matter that the order parameter field in a superconductor measures electron-electron pair amplitudes. Such an understanding might eventually be achieved, and analogies to the observed properties of condensed matter might once again be valuable in suggesting theoretical possibilities. Motivated partly by that hope and partly by the goal of shedding new light on the interesting literature Spatially indirect exciton condensates (SIXCs) are equilibrium or quasiequilibrium states of matter that have been extensively studied over the past couple of decades in semiconductor bilayer quantum wells has a nonzero expectation value in the broken-symmetry ground state, which is characterized by spontaneous interlayer phase coherence and a suite of related anomalous transport properties In this paper we employ a time-dependent mean-field weak-coupling theory description of the bilayer exciton condensate's elementary excitations to identify Higgs-like modes and to demonstrate that in the low-density Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) limit they have a simple interpretation as excitations in which electron-hole pairs are added to the system in electron-hole pair states that are orthogonal to the 1s pair state that is condensed in the many-body ground state. In Sec. II we first briefly describe some details of our theory of the SIXC's collective excitations. In Sec. III we summarize and discuss numerical results we have obtained by applying this theory to bilayer two-dimensional electron-hole systems. Finally, in Sec. IV we conclude by commenting on similarities and differences between bilayer exciton condensates and other systems in which Higgs-like modes have been proposed and observed. The mean-field theory of the bilayer exciton condensate is a generalized Hartree-Fock theory in which translational symmetry is retained but spontaneous interlayer phase coherence, which breaks separate conservation of the particle number in the two layers, is allowed. In Ref. For simplicity we neglect the spin and valley degrees of freedom that often play a role in realistic SIXC systems. The self-consistent Hartree-Fock mean-field Hamiltonian of the broken-symmetry bilayer exciton condensate state is then Here a n k and a † n k are fermionic annihilation and creation operators for the conduction (n = c) band electrons localized in the top layer and valence (n = v) electrons localized in the bottom layer, σ z,x are Pauli matrices that act in the band space, and ζ k = 2 k 2 [1/(4m e )-1/(4m h )] accounts for the difference between conduction and valence band effective masses, which plays no role in the temperature T = 0, charge-neutral limit that we consider. For convenience, we take m e = m h in the calculations described below. The dressed band parameters ξ k and ∆ k are obtained by solving the self-consistent-field equations: where m = m e m h /(m e + m h ) is the reduced mass and A is the area of the two-dimensional system. In Eq. 3, V q = 2πe 2 /( q) and U q = V q exp(-qd) are the intralayer and interlayer Coulomb interactions, μ is the chemical potential parameter for excitons, and n ex is equal to both the density of conduction band electrons and the density of valence band holes. Below we refer to n ex as the density of excitons; this terminology is motivated mainly by the low-density limit in which n ex a * 2 B 1. (Here a * B = 2 /me 2 is the Bohr radius, which is the bound electron-hole pair size in the limit of small layer separations.) The exciton chemical potential parameter μ = E g -V b can be adjusted electrically by applying a gate voltage to alter the spatially indirect band gap E g , provided that the barrier between conduction and valence band layers is sufficiently opaque, or by applying a bias voltage V b between layers The mean-field ground state is where and γ † k,0 is the creation operator for the dressed valence band quasiparticle states that are occupied in |XC . Note that we have chosen u k and v k to be real and that there is a family of degenerate states that differ only by a global shift in the phase difference between electrons localized in different layers. We construct our theory of quantum fluctuations and collective excitations by starting from a many-body state that incorporates arbitrary single-particle-hole excitation corrections to the mean-field state: is a creation operator for a quasiparticle state in the band that is empty in |XC : and is a normalization factor. The complex parameters z k ( Q) are the amplitudes of all possible single-particle-hole excitations. To characterize the quantum fluctuations of the meanfield state in a physically transparent way, we define the observables τα={x,y,z} ( For the interlayer phase choice we have made, the mean-field value of the order parameter ∆ M F is real and spatially constant: where A is the sample area. When fluctuations are included, the order parameter becomes where . . . = Φ| . . . |Φ and φ Qα is defined by It follows that, to leading order, fluctuations in the order parameter magnitude are proportional to τ x ( Q) , while fluctuations in the order parameter phase are related to τ y ( Q) . τ z ( Q) measures fluctuations in the exciton density. We quantize fluctuations in the XC state by constructing the Lagrangian: where δE (2) is the harmonic fluctuation energy functional δE (2) accounts for variations in band kinetic energy and Hartree and exchange interaction energy as the manyelectron state fluctuates. Explicit forms for the matrices E and Γ are given in Appendix B. We separate the fluctuation Hamiltonian into amplitude and phase fluctuation contributions by making the change in variables Note that x k ( Q) and y k ( Q) are also complex, but satisfy Note that although τ x ( Q) and exciton density τ z ( Q) fluctuations are both related to x k ( Q), they have different k-dependent weighting factors. For each wave vector transfer Q we define vectors of x and y vari-ables, X( Q) ≡ (x k1 ( Q), . . . , x ki ( Q), . . .) and Y( Q) ≡ (y k1 ( Q), . . . , y ki ( Q), . . .), whose elements are labeled by the particle-hole pair's hole momentum. In terms of these vector variables the action where is real and symmetric for both sign choices and we have used the fact that Minimizing the action yields the following equations of motion: This theory of fluctuations is equivalent to time-dependent Hartree-Fock theory for the exciton condensate state response functions. It is in the same spirit as auxiliary field functional integral theories of harmonic quantum fluctuations but unlike those approaches treats Hartree and exchange energy contributions on an equal footing Collective modes give rise to poles in particle-hole channel Greens functions. As in the case of BCS superconductors where ω i ( Q) is an excitation energy and B † i ( Q) and B i ( Q) are linear combinations of the x k and y k fields. To evaluate correlation functions involving the τ α ( Q) fields we reexpress x k ( Q) and y k ( Q) in Eqs. 17 in terms of these free boson fields. The character of collective excitations is revealed by the residues of response functions at poles that lie below particle-hole continua. To carry out this procedure explicitly, we start from the assumptions that the amplitude/density kernel K (+) is positive definite at any Q and that the phase kernel K (-) is positive definite for Q = 0 and positive semidefinite for Q = 0. These assumptions are satisfied whenever the mean-field condensate is metastable. The zero eigenvalue of K (-) at Q = 0 arises from the broken U (1) symmetry associated with spontaneous interlayer phase coherence. Because K (+) is real symmetric and positive definite, it is possible and then to diagonalize Writing Γ = SΛS T , where S is an orthogonal matrix and Λ is a diagonal matrix, we define new fields where X, Y are the density and phase fluctuation vectors labeled by wavevector k introduced above. The transformed Hamiltonian is Noting that the eigenvalues of Γ are identical to the eigenvalues of K (+) K (-) and that the equation of motion for phase fluctuations can be written in the form we have identified them as the squares ω 2 i of the elementary excitation frequencies. When expressed in terms of the normal mode fields, the action in Eq. 18 has the form The time-ordered Green's function at each Q can be calculated directly from the action of fields φ, Note that the Green's function is a 2 × 2 matrix in the basis of fields {Ψ, Π}. The τ α fields can be expressed in terms of the normal-mode fields for each Q using where the T α on the right-hand sides of these equations are the matrix forms of Eq. 17. The linear response functions are related to the time-ordered Green's functions, The response functions of operators expressed in terms of fields Π i can be evaluated by performing the average in Eq. 29 using the quadratic action weighting factor with the result that where A mn is the matrix element in a complete set of fields Π i . We identify Higgs-like modes by finding isolated eigenvalues |ω i | 2 with large values of |τ x,i | 2 in the imaginary part of the response functions for positive frequencies: Note that Imχ zz is similar to Eq. 31 by replacing |τ x,i | 2 with |τ z,i | 2 . For Imχ yy , the factor ω i /2 also needs to be replaced by 1/(2ω i ). An alternative approach to obtain the same results is to map the diagonalized action in Eq. 26 to that of a set of independent harmonic oscillators, defining the oscillator ladder operators B i by where B i satisfy [B i , B † i ] = δ i,i . The fluctuation Hamiltonian for each Q is then From the general linear response theory, the Lehmann representation of the response function is where P n = e -βEn n e -βEn (β = 1/k B T ) is the occupation probability, ω nm = (E n -E m )/ is the excitation frequency, and A mn ≡ ψ m | Â |ψ n is the matrix elements in a complete set of exact eigenstates |ψ n of Ĥ. At zero temperature, the imaginary part of the response function is We now apply the theory outlined above to bilayer exciton condensates. The length and energy units we use in our calculations are those appropriate for Coulomb interactions, the Bohr radius a * B = 2 /(me 2 ), and the effective Rydberg Ry * = e 2 /(2 a * B ). Typical values of these parameters in transition metal dichalcogenides The corresponding results for χ yy (exciton phase) and χ zz (exciton density) are presented as blue and yellow lines in Fig 2 . All three lines share similar peak positions due to the coupling between different channels except that χ zz is absent in Q = 0. The differences in coupling between exciton density fluctuations and amplitude fluctuations is due to the different k-dependent weighting factors in Eq. 17 although both responses are related to the changes in the x k ( Q) fields. The strong mixing of phase and amplitude fluctuations is also observed in superconductors with particle-hole symmetry breaking The collective modes that have large weight in the χ xx response function are entirely different in character. At Q = 0, the Goldstone mode contribution to any response functions Imχ αα vanishes because of the mode frequency factor in Eq. 31 even though the matrix elements τ x(y,z),ω GS are nonzero. However, a few peaks appear in the τ x -τ x response below the particle-hole continuum. These are identified as Higgs-like modes because they produce poles in the amplitude-amplitude response functions and correspond to the Higgs-like modes identified in studies of superconductors. The property that they appear below the particle-hole continuum is the key difference from superconductors with short-range interaction. To understand the character of the Higgs-like modes more fully, we examine the low carrier density limit in which u k has small values at all k. From Eq. 17 it follows that, to lowest order in u k , In the dilute limit the matrices K (+) = K (-) reduce to the two-particle electron-hole relative motion Hamiltonian matrices at center-of-mass wavevector Q. This very dilute exciton condensate limit becomes a standard two-dimensional hydrogen-like problem where each excitation can be characterized by atomic-like orbitals, such as 1s, 2s, 2p, etc. Note that in this limit, the χ zz response weighting factor projects out relative-motion states that are orthogonal to the pair state that is macroscopically occupied in the ground state -1s hydrogenic pair states in the Coulomb interaction case. We have computed the momentum space wavefunctions, i.e., eigenvectors of K (+) K (-) , for the six lowest-energy collective modes in the BEC regime at Q = 0 (Fig. As we see in Fig. As the BCS regime at large exciton densities is approached, the spectra of the Higgs-like modes change. In tify the first Higgs-like mode shown in Fig. In this paper we have applied time-dependent meanfield theory to spatially indirect exciton condensates with the goal of identifying collective modes associated with quantum fluctuations in the electron-hole pair amplitude. We find that in the low exciton density BEC regime the strongest response to Higgs-like perturbations is one in which an electron-hole pair is added in a state that is orthogonal to the pair state present in the ground-state condensate. This interpretation retains qualitative validity when the exciton density is increased and the BCS limit is approached. These findings shed new light on previous work that has studied Higgs-like modes in superconductors, in which the Higgs-like response appears, mysteriously perhaps, at the edge of the particle-hole continuum. In light of the present calculations it is clear that this property just reflects the absence in the BCS models used for these studies of a higher-energy electronelectron pair bound state and begs the question as to whether or not higher-energy bound states do exist in some superconductors. Since Higgs-like excitations in superconductors change the total electron number, they can be observed only indirectly Two different cases need to be distinguished when discussing the detection of Higgs-like modes. When a spatially indirect exciton condensate is formed from equilibrium populations of electrons and holes in two separate layers, the operator τ x corresponds to tunneling between layers. The presence of a spatially indirect exciton condensate or incipient condensate then appears as an anomaly in the interlayer tunneling current-voltage relationship near zero bias The case in which an exciton condensate is formed in quasiequilibrium systems of electrons and holes, either in the same layer or in adjacent layers, generated by optical pumping is perhaps simpler experimentally. In this case the coherent excitons are routinely The matrix elements for these processes are proportional to the operator τ x , which changes the number of electronhole pairs present in the system by one, and can therefore generate Higgs-like excitations. In Eq. 37, μ ex is the chemical potential of excitons which is non-zero in non-equilibrium condensed exciton systems, E i0 (N ) = E i (N ) -E 0 (N ) is the excitation relative to the ground state in the N -exciton initial state, and E j0 (N -1) = E j (N -1)-E 0 (N -1) is the excitation energy relative to the ground state in the N -1 exciton final state. A similar analysis applies in the case of polariton condensates in which the exciton system is coupled to two-dimensional cavity photons ħω/Ry * Q = 0 Short-range V FIG. 