Graphene is a 2D material with appealing electronic and optoelectronic properties. It is a zero-bandgap material with valence and conduction bands meeting in a single point (Dirac point) in the momentum space. Its conductivity can be changed by shifting the Fermi level energy via an external electric field. This important property determines broadband and tunable absorption at optical frequencies. Moreover, its conductivity is a complex quantity, i.e. Graphene exhibits both electro-absorption and electro-refraction tunability, and this is an intriguing property for photonic applications. For example, it can be combined as an active material for silicon waveguides to realize efficient detectors, switches and modulators. In this paper, we review our results in the field, focusing on graphene-based optical modulators integrated on Silicon photonic platforms. Results obtained in the fabrication of single-and double-layer capacitive modulators are reported showing intensity and phase modulation, resilience of the generated signals to chromatic dispersion because of proper signal chirp and operation up to 50 Gb/s. raphene is an allotrope of Carbon with atoms arranged on a single layer, two-dimensional (2D), and hexagonal lattice The combination of zero-bandgap and electrically tuneable electronic properties is of particular interest in photonics, because it offers ultra-broadband tuneable optical absorption In this paper, we review our recent results on Graphene-on-Si modulators, moving from the operation principle to the summary of the latest experimental demonstrations of modulators for telecom and datacom applications. Our work follows and improves the first demonstrations of Graphene on Si electro-absorption modulators (EAMs): in particular, the first EAM was based on a single layer of Graphene (SLG) transferred on top of a Si doped waveguide used to gate Graphene The paper is organized as follows: SECTION II is dedicated to describe the Graphene optoelectronic properties, in SECTION III the Graphene on Si modulators concept and simulations are reported. In Section IV, our last results on SLG on Si modulators are reviewed. Section V shows the most promising results regarding DLG on Si modulators. Conclusions and a short final discussion are reported in Section VI. Being a 2D material, Graphene optical properties are properly modeled through its surface conductivity at optical frequencies σ(ω,μc,Γ,T), where ω is the radian frequency, μc is the chemical potential, Γ is a phenomenological scattering rate taking into account electron-disorder scattering processes, and T is the temperature This work was supported by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, GrapheneCore2 under grant 785219. V. Sorianello, G. Contestabile, and M. Romagnoli where e is the electron charge, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, E the energy, and fd(E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution: where kB is the Boltzmann's constant. The first term in (1) is the contribution arising from intra-band electron-photon scattering processes, while the second is due to inter-band electron-photon scattering. The chemical potential μc is determined by the carrier density ns on the Graphene layer through where vF≈9.5•10 5 m/s is the Fermi velocity. Because of the pronounced field effect in Graphene, the carrier density can be easily controlled by application of a gate voltage and/or chemical doping, leading to a consequent significant tunability of the surface conductivity. In order to have a clear visualization of the optical property of Graphene, the Drude model can be applied to the surface conductivity in order to derive an equivalent volumetric permittivity considering a finite thickness of the material hG where εr is the permittivity of the surrounding medium and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. Figure However, it is important to highlight that the electron scattering affects the material mobility as well, which is a simple parameter to measure for the characterization of the material quality. In an ideal material the electron scattering would the lowest possible, which means in turn that the material mobility is the highest and scattering rate energy the lowest. The relation between the scattering relaxation time and mobility can be derived as in Graphene optical modulators exploiting the electric field effect can be realized with several geometries, here we are interested in dielectric waveguide modulators. Figure In both configurations, the waveguides are standard Silicon on Insulator (SOI) waveguides with a planarized oxide cladding thinned down to few nanometers from the top of the waveguide. Graphene optical properties are gated by means of the electric field generated in a capacitor, where Graphene is one or both the capacitor plates. By applying an external voltage to the capacitor, Graphene surface carrier concentration changes enabling modulation of the light guided in the waveguide. In the SLG-based modulator, the capacitor consists of the Graphene-insulator-Si capacitor shown in the zoomed section of fig. The thickness of the dielectric insulator determines the modulator capacitance influencing both the modulator speed and the modulation efficiency, i.e. the amount of amplitude/phase change in the guided light versus applied voltage. A larger capacitance will have higher efficiency, because more charges will be moved on Graphene at same voltage, but lower speed, because of the higher RC constant. We simulated the modulators reported in figure Figure As anticipated in SECTION II, in both cases we observe two almost constant regions above and below the Pauli blocking condition (0.4eV at 1550nm), and a transition region across 0.4eV where the absorption changes significantly with the carrier concentration, i.e. applied voltage. This is the operating region where amplitude modulation (AM) is possible. The main difference between SLG and DLG modulators is in the achievable modulation depth of the two modulators. In fact, the DLG modulator exhibit a factor of two enhancement in the maximum absorption: ~0.12dB/μm with respect to ~0.06dB/μm of the SLG device. At the same time, also the transparency region above the Pauli blocking condition is different. In fact, we observe that the SLG modulator minimum absorption is strongly limited by the Si background loss due to free carrier effect in the doped waveguide (reported in green in fig. In figure In the same figure, the change in the effective index of standard Si pn junction and Si capacitor modulators are reported for comparison The applied voltage is calculated from the surface carrier concentration as follow where Cox is the gate capacitance per unit area, VDIRAC is the voltage corresponding to the charge-neutral Dirac point, with K= 1 or 2 for SLG or DLG, respectively. Figure As anticipated in Section I, SLG EAMs have been reported in recent years working at 1, 10 and 20 Gb/s The compactness of the device (100μm long) and the chromatic dispersion resilience can be combined to realize optical pre-emphasis obtained by cascading two EAMs As mentioned in Section III, the phase response of Graphene modulator can be exploited to realize phase modulators. EAM and phase modulator are very similar devices, the main difference being the bias applied to the SLG capacitor, which, in the phase modulator case, must be well beyond the Pauli blocking threshold. The device operates in the 'transparency' region, where losses are only due to the waveguide propagation In the previous examples of SLG on Si modulators the bandwidth was mainly limited by the contact resistance between the metal and Graphene. In particular, in all of these examples the contact was obtained by deposition of Palladium (Pd) on top of the Graphene layer, which is one of the material allowing good contact. However, we estimated a contact resistance as high as 1kΩ μm. The topic is object of many researches, which can be found in literature. Many different strategies have been developed to reduce the contact resistance including among others the use of different materials or particular geometries. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the use of Nickel (Ni) gives very low contact resistance (minimum theoretical 30 Ω μm) with respect to other materials Adopting optimized contact strategies and engineered design, involving for example tight confinement in slotwaveguide, Graphene modulators can achieve modulation bandwidth above 100GHz V. DLG ON SI MODULATORS DLG on Si modulators have two graphene layers acting as gates, as shown in fig. Graphene integrated photonics is attracting great interest for applications in telecom and datacom as a step forward in integrated photonics, in particular in order to improve Si photonics capabilities. Indeed, Graphene optoelectronic properties allows all the active functionalities: electroabsorption and electro-refraction modulation, photo-detection and, not mentioned in this paper, efficient thermal switching. In particular, DLG configurations permit the implementation of all these functionalities on almost any kind of passive waveguide, reducing, in principle, fabrication costs. In this review paper, we discussed the optical modulation effects of Graphene integrated on silicon waveguides starting from an optoelectronic model of Graphene capable to show the operation principle of Graphene-based modulators. In particular, thanks to the enhanced electric field effect due to the 2D nature of the material, it is possible to exploit the efficient carrier accumulation on the Graphene layer for obtaining optical modulation in both the SLG and DLG configuration. In the second case, optical modulation is independent on the waveguide material, and shows a superior performance in terms of attainable ER and IL. All this considered together with the intrinsic high speed of the material, it is expected that Graphene modulators can provide the required bandwidth and efficiency to match the telecom and datacom roadmap evolution. In addition, the high efficiency of the modulation process allows for device miniaturization (<100μm for EAMs, <500μm for phase modulators) and reduced power consumption. We also reviewed our work on both SLG and DLG on Si modulators carried out in the last years showing pure phase modulation, EAMs capable of generating signals with enhanced chromatic dispersion resilience and operation up to 50 Gb/s for the DLG EAMs. Reported results demonstrate that Graphene photonics offers a combination of potential advantages in terms of both high-end performance and simplification in device manufacturing. Concluding, we underline that the main material parameter for performance optimization is the carrier mobility as it affects significantly the overall modulator performance. In particular, a mobility >2200 cm 2 V -1 s -1 0.4eV is required to realize competitive devices. These mobility values can be obtained by using single crystal graphene sheets and optimizing the transfer process, possibly exploiting a proper material encapsulation. To this extent, we expect a significant improvement of the technology in the next future, in order to satisfy the demands of performance of the next generation communication scenario. Further improvement of the modulation bandwidth towards 100GHz is required, as well as targeting other applications such as the coherent communication. Vito Sorianello received the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy, in 2010. In 2010, he received the IEEE Best Doctoral Thesis Award for his Ph.D. thesis on "Germanium-on-Silicon near-infrared photodetectors" by the IEEE Photonics Society Italian Chapter. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Nonlinear Optics and OptoElectronics Lab of Roma Tre University, being involved and responsible for the fabrication and characterization processes of Germanium-on-Silicon photodetectors for three years. He is researcher at the Photonic Networks National Lab, Interuniversity National Consortium for Telecommunications, Pisa, since 2013. His main research interests include the modeling, design, and characterization of optoelectronic components and systems for the silicon photonics platform. He is currently involved in several application-oriented research projects in collaboration with national and international research institutions and industries. Giampiero Contestabile received the Laurea degree in Physics from "La Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy, and the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications from "Tor Vergata" University of Rome, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. From 1996 to 2000, he was with the Semiconductor Devices Group of "Fondazione Ugo