We study the effects of finite temperature on normal state properties of a metal near a quantum critical point to an antiferromagnetic or Ising-nematic state. At T = 0 bosonic and fermionic self-energies are traditionally computed within Eliashberg theory and obey scaling relations with characteristic power-laws. Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations have shown strong systematic deviations from these predictions, casting doubt on the validity of the theoretical analysis. We extend Eliashberg theory to finite T and argue that for the T range accessible in the QMC simulations, the scaling forms for both fermionic and bosonic self energies are quite different from those at T = 0. We compare finite T results with QMC data and find good agreement for both systems. This, we argue, resolves the key apparent contradiction between the theory and the QMC simulations. Electron-boson models Both the SFM and the INM have been analyzed within the low-energy theory which is termed Eliashberg theory (ET) due to its similarity with the Eliashberg theory of the electron-phonon interaction. The theory assumes that near a QCP, a soft collective boson is a slow mode compared to a dressed fermion. This effectively decouples the fermionic and bosonic degrees of freedom The decoupling of the fermions and bosons leads to fermionic self-energy which depends much more strongly on the frequency ω than on deviation of the momentum from k F transverse to the FS. The magnitude of the ωdependent self-energy in turn depends on the location of k F on the FS. In the INM, the Eliashberg self-energy scales as Σ(ω, k F ) ∼ ω 1/3 INM ω 2/3 over the whole FS, except at special points (cold spots), where FL behavior survives. In the SFM, the Eliashberg self-energy scales as Σ(ω, k F ) ∼ ω 1/2 SFM ω 1/2 at special FS points (hot spots), connected by a momentum vector corresponding to antiferromagnetic order, while everywhere else on the FS the self-energy has a FL form at the lowest frequencies and crosses over to ω 1/2 behavior at a characteristic frequency proportional to the deviation from a hot spot. The ω SFM and ω INM are characteristic frequencies, which we discuss below. Both remain finite at a QCP. The validity of the ET in the case when a soft boson is a collective mode of fermions is a more tricky issue than for the original Eliashberg theory of superconductivity, where the boson is an independent degree of freedom (a phonon). For that theory, the applicability condition is the smallness of the ratio ω 0 /E F ∼ v 0 /v F , where ω 0 is the characteristic phonon frequency and v 0 is the corresponding boson velocity (the dressed Debye frequency and sound velocity for an acoustic phonon) and E F is the Fermi energy (this allows one to factorize the momentum integration), and the smallness of the ratio α 2 /(ω 0 E F ), where α is the effective fermion-boson coupling (this allows one to neglect vertex corrections). The last condition is not satisfied when ω 0 vanishes, but for large enough E F it holds in a wide range of ω 0 (Ref. The validity of the effective ET at a QCP has been recently tested in a series of sign-free quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations of both the SFM and INM. In this work we argue that the discrepancies of the QMC data with the ET can be reconciled by properly accounting for finite temperature effects within appropriately modified ET (MET), which, we argue, differs qualitatively from the ET at T = 0 (we will keep the notation ET for the T = 0 Eliashberg theory) Several previous works have studied finite temperature effects within perturbation theory where Σ T (ω m ) is the thermal contribution, coming from the static bosonic propagator, and Σ Q (ω m ) comes from the dynamic propagator. The thermal piece Σ T needs to be calculated self-consistently without factorizing the momentum integration. The dynamical Σ Q does not need to be computed self-consistently, but at ω m ∼ T one cannot factorize the momentum integration for this term as well. We show that at finite T there are two characteristic scales, a larger one and a smaller one. The larger scale, ω T , is the same for SFM and INM and up to a logarithmic factor is where ḡ is the effective fermion-boson coupling (defined below). The smaller scale is, again up to a logarithmic factor, We assume T ḡ, E F , such that in both models ω T ω T . At the smallest Matsubara frequencies, ω m ω T , the two components of the self energy have the form We call this regime strongly thermal. At high Matsubara frequencies, ω m ω T , the self energy components have the form We call this regime almost critical. In between these two regimes, i.e., at ω T < ω m < ω T , the system behavior is rather complex and there is no particular scaling behavior for both Σ T (ω m ) and Σ Q (ω m ). We argue that most of QMC data in Refs. 9, 37, and 38 fall into this intermediate frequency region. We compute Σ T (ω m ) and Σ Q (ω m ) within MET and compare the result with QMC data. For both SFM and INM we show that Σ(ω m ) = Σ T (ω m ) + Σ Q (ω m ) agrees with QMC results. The agreement holds for both the magnitude of Σ(ω m ) and its dependence on frequency. We show that in the temperature range of the QMC simulations, thermal effects are essential, and Σ SFM (ω m ) and Σ INM (ω m ) , obtained in the MET, are quite flat functions of frequency. The bosonic propagator, D(Ω m , q), obtained within MET, also agrees with QMC result. This is particularly significant for the INM, where QMC shows that the frequency dependence of D -1 (Ω m , q) is proportional to |Ω m | rather than |Ω m |/q, expected for Landau damping. The absence of |Ω m |/q scaling at the smallest q is due to the fact that the Ising-nematic order parameter is not a conserved quantity, but the near-absence of the q dependence over a wide range of q is chiefly the consequence of the flatness of Σ(ω m ) in the T range probed by QMC. For comparison, we also compute Σ T (ω m ) and Σ Q (ω m ) using the same equations as in the MET, but integrate over the internal fermionic momenta in the full Brillouin zone (i.e., compute the self-energy without linearizing the fermionic dispersion near the FS). We call this the lattice theory (LT). We show that the forms of the self-energies in MET and LT are qualitatively similar, but with differences in the details. We note in this regard that while in both MET and LT one neglects vertex corrections and extracts Σ from self-consistent analysis, Σ in LT contains an additional piece coming from high-energy fermions, with energies of the order of the bandwidth. Because vertex corrections also predominantly come from high-energy fermions, by comparing the self-energies in MET and LT to the one extracted from QMC, one can verify whether there is at least a partial cancellation between the vertex corrections and contributions from high-energy fermions to the self-energy. We show that QMC data agree somewhat better with MET than with LT, particularly for the INM. This suggests that there may be some cancellation between different contributions from high-energy fermions. Our results demonstrate that (a) current QMC data are consistent with the MET (i.e., ET, properly extended to finite T ) and that (b) the comparison between MET, LT, and QMC provides a framework to identify the strength of the correlation effects that are not captured by the low-energy MET. We hope that our results will provide useful input both to further analytical work and for analysis of upcoming numerical results. The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the SFM and INM and review the low temperature predictions of ET. In Sec. III we discuss the modified ET at a finite temperature, which takes into account thermal fluctuations. In Sec. IV we briefly review the lattice models which we use in the LT calculation of the self-energy. Finally, in Sec. V we compare our results to the QMC data. We present our conclusions in Sec. VI. A. The models Both the SFM and the INM are described within a single framework. We assume a 2D system of spinful fermions coupled to a single bosonic field. The effective field theory is It is the sum of three terms -a fermionic action S f , a bosonic action S b , and an interaction S I . The fermionic action is where σ sums over fermion spins and k is the band dispersion. Fig. where j = 1 . . . N b sums over N b boson components, D 0 is a constant with units of (area×energy) -1 , and measures the distance of the bosons from the QCP. We treat M 0 = M 0 (T ) as a parameter, and our results don't explicitly depend on the temperature dependence of M 0 , which can have e.g. Curie-Weiss form, M 2 0 ∝ T -T 0 . Q is the momentum at which a collective boson softens at a QCP: Q SFM = (π/a, π/a) and Q INM = 0 (a is the interatomic spacing). The boson is assumed to have no bare dynamics, and acquires it solely from the interaction with fermions. (More accurately, the assumption is that the bare boson dynamics exists, but is irrelevant compared to the acquired one.) The interaction is described by where g is the coupling constant, and t j σσ , f (p) express the spin and momentum form-factors of the interaction. Spin-fermion model-In the SFM the bosons represent spin fluctuations, so φ has up to three components, t j = τ j are Pauli matrices, and f (p) ≈ 1. The momentum Q = (π/a, π/a) couples N = 8 discrete points on the FS, in sets of two (see Fig. where l = 1 . . . N label the hot spots. Ising-nematic model-In the INM, the boson represents a nematic deformation along one of two symmetry axes. Accordingly, φ is a scalar. Because Q = 0, particles on the entire FS participate in the critical dynamics, and the interaction has the form where f (p) = ( kF ) -2 (p 2 x -p 2 y ) encodes the nematic formfactor and kF = (2π) -1 dθk F (θ) is the FS averaged Fermi vector, where θ traces out a direction on the FS (see Fig. We now briefly review diagrammatic perturbation theory for the two models. The dynamics of fermions and bosons is encoded in their self-energies Σ(ω, p) and Π(Ω, q) (the latter is also called a polarization bubble). We consider the self-energies on the Matsubara axis, where ω = ω m = 2π(m + 1/2) and Ω = Ω m = 2πm. As we noted in the Introduction, we compare the results on the Matsubara axis with the QMC data. We use latin letters to denote frequency-momentum 3-vectors, q = (Ω m , q), k = (ω m , k). The self-energies are related to bosonic and fermionic propagators as and Both self-energies are represented by diagrammatic series in the effective coupling ḡ = g 2 D 0 . We assume that ḡ is small compared to the Fermi energy E F . Then we can safely restrict to the lowest-order expansion in q -Q in Eq. ( The diagrammatic expressions for G(k) and Π(q) are presented in Fig. Without vertex corrections, Σ(k) and Π(q) are selfconsistently expressed as Here the factor b in Σ comes from summation over boson components and the factor 2 in Π comes from spin summation. The r.h.s.'s of Eqs. ( The static contribution to the polarization Π(q) serves to renormalize the parameters D 0 and M 0 in Eq. The dynamical contribution, which gives rise to Landau damping of a boson, can be obtained most straightforwardly by first integrating in Eq. ( We shift the incoming bosonic momentum to the vicinity of the ordering vector q → Q + q, and symmetrize Eq. ( where v F is the Fermi velocity at p F + Q, and p F (θ) = k F (θ)(cos θ, sin θ) is the Fermi vector with FS angle θ. We then replace the momentum integration by an integral over the dispersion, as is the density of states (DOS). We integrate over and obtain In Eq. ( , where θ k+Q is the FS angle of k + Q and θ is the angle of p. Evaluating the angular integral, we obtain where n(θ k+Q ) = is a unit vector pointing parallel to the FS at the angle θ k+Q . σ(x) is the sign function. Eqs. ( The main technical simplification step in ET where ω is a typical fermionic frequency and |q| is a typical bosonic momentum. As noted above, this allows one to factorize the momentum interaction between directions along and transverse to the FS. In addition, the ET assumes that relevant frequencies are much smaller than E F and integrates over momenta in infinite limits. We will first show the results within the ET and then discuss its validity for the SFM and the INM. We begin with the bosonic self-energy. In Eq. ( F . Expanding near the hotspots, replacing the Matsubara sum by an integral and integrating, we obtain In the INM, δ ≈ v F (θ)q cos(θ -θ q ) depends strongly on |q|, θ q , and is dominated by θ ≈ θ q ± π/2, yielding We emphasize that in both cases the result does not depend on fermionic Σ(ω m ). This is because in ET the polarization bubble is the convolution of two DOS's, and We now turn to the fermionic self-energy. In Eq. ( because of the assumption of ET, Eq. ( where , while for the INM we get, where F (θq) . Now we check the justification of the assumption we made, Eq. We see that at low enough temperatures, all fermionic self energies scale as power-laws in ω m , with no additional temperature dependence. Therefore, the fermionic self energies at different temperatures should collapse onto one another, and should vanish at the lowest frequencies. Similarly, the bosonic self energies in the SFM should collapse onto one another, while in the INM they should scale with 1/|q|. In the next section, we show that finite temperature effects destroy these scaling properties. We now turn to study the bosonic and fermionic self energies at finite temperatures. We do not assume that the typical fermionic momentum is smaller than bosonic momentum. In addition, we do not replace the Matsubara sum by a frequency integral, which means that we must account for the thermal piece which we discussed in the Introduction. We start with the fermionic self-energy. We explicitly split the Matsubara sum into a thermal and nonthermal part and rewrite Σ as, where Σ T (ω m ) contains only the ω m = ω n term in the sum, and Σ Q (ω m ) accounts for the nonthermal dynamical contributions. Σ T should be understood as the thermal scattering rate of the fermions, akin to scattering due to static disorder. As a guide for developing a useful approximation, we notice that the Eliashberg T = 0 results, Eqs. where and ṽF = v F (θ k+Q ), i.e. ṽF = |v F (θ hs )| for the SFM and ṽF = v F (θ k ) for the INM. Recall that we set f (θ) = 1 for the SFM. For the INM, the typical momentum transfers along the FS are small, and this explains the presence of f 2 (θ k ) in the r.h.s. of We assume that close enough to the QCP, Using the form of S(x) in this limit, we can solve Eq. ( where and we neglected log(log(• • • )) terms. We show the result in Fig. Next, we determine the dynamic contribution Σ Q -the sum over non-zero bosonic frequencies in Eq. ( in the r.h.s. of where S(x) is the same as in ω T , i.e., at a typical Matsubara number Clearly m T m T at low enough temperatures. This justifies the use m < m T in the derivation of at ω m ω T , where and for ω m ω T . This form is the same as at T = 0. We now combine our results for the thermal and quantum parts of the self-energy and show that there are two asymptotic behaviors for Σ(ω m ) separated by a wide regime. Region I: the strongly thermal regime -The strongly thermal regime occurs at ω m ω T ω T , i.e., m m T m T . In this case, adding up the appropriate limits from Eqs. ( where the leading term comes from frequencyindependent part of Σ T , and the subleading term, with prefactor A, is the combination of frequency-dependent term in Σ T and from Σ Q , Eqs. ( Region II: the almost critical regime -The almost critical regime occurs for ω m ω T ω T , i.e., m m T m T . Here, summing up the appropriate expressions in Eqs. ( The first term (the same one as at T = 0) comes from Σ Q , the second one comes from Σ T . Because ω SFM ∼ ḡ, the first term is the dominant one for m > m T , i.e., the self-energy is predominantly determined by dynamical quantum fluctuations. Note that because Σ Q (ω m ) changes its behavior at ω m ∼ ω T and Σ T (ω m ) changes its behavior at ω m ∼ ω T , there is no single crossover from the region where thermal self energy dominates to the one where the dynamical self energy dominates. In between the two limiting regimes ω m ω T and ω m ω T , there is a wide intermediate region of ω T ω ω T , (m T m m T ), where quantum and thermal contributions are comparable. This is the result we stated in the Introduction, Eq. ( Before moving on to the INM, we need to go back and check whether we were justified in neglecting the contribution of Σ Q in comparison with Σ T in the selfconsistent calculation of Σ T and subsequent calculation of Σ Q . From Eqs. ( For the INM, the behavior is somewhat more complex due to the momentum dependence of the polarization. The thermal contribution Σ T (ω m ) is identical to that for the SFM and is given by Eq. ( where ) is given by Eq. ( A similar analysis to the one we performed for the SFM shows that at The crossover frequency ω T is different from the one for the SFM but like in that case, ω T ω T . Comparing the results for Σ INM Q (ω m ) and Σ T (ω m ), Eq. ( where B is a constant. (Note that since ω T /ω T ∼ ω 2 T /ḡE F , for low enough temperatures ω T < T and region I is inaccessible.) We now discuss the bosonic self energy in more detail. From Eq. For the computation Π in the INM, it is important to realize that a nematic order parameter is not a conserved quantity, such as e.g. a spin order parameter (the total magnetization) in a ferromagnet. For a conserved order parameter, a Ward identity insures that within ET vertex corrections cancel out exactly, so that the one-loop calculation which is analogous to Eq. ( To gain a qualitative understanding of the impact of the self-energy we evaluate Eq. ( where νF = (2π) -1 ν F (θ)|f (θ)|, and the last line is valid for q → 0. The detailed behavior of Π as a function of Ω m , Σ(ω m ), q and θ is more complicated and is obtained by a numerical integration of Eq. Eqs. Before beginning our analysis of the QMC data, we first briefly describe the lattice version of the self consistent equations ( The SFM and INM are defined on a finite space-time lattice of L × L × L τ sites with periodic boundary conditions in the spatial directions, and periodic (antiperiodic) boundary conditions for the bosons (fermions) in the imaginary time direction. For both models, the bosonic part of the action is given by the lattice version of Eq.( Here ∂ x,y,τ is understood as a discretized derivative, and c is the bare velocity of the boson. We introduce this additional dynamical term to better match the QMC lattice models, where the bosonic fields have their own independent dynamics. In the Ising-nematic case, the form factor is slightly modified compared to the definition used in Sec. II A, where f (k, q) = cos (q x /2) cos (k x -q x /2)cos (q y /2) cos (k y -q y /2) = cos k x -cos k y + O(q). The self energies then take the form The fermionic part of the action is given by Eq. ( where k is a nearest-neighbor tight-binding dispersion. In the spin-fermion case, we consider the two-band model depicted in Fig. where η = ±1 is the band index. The interaction part of the action is (47) Finally, the LT self energies are given by We solve the LT equations by using the iteration method. The local nature of the boson-fermion coupling allows us to rewrite the Eliashberg equations in real space and imaginary time. We then evaluate the self-energies by performing a fast Fourier transform, with a computational cost of L 2 L τ log(L 2 L τ ) per iteration. Note that a naïve Fourier transform of the fermionic Green's function to Matsubara frequencies generates an error which scales as O(1/T L τ ). For better convergence, we use the 'Filon-Trapezoidal' rule In this section, we compare our finite-temperature results for the self-energy with QMC results for the SFM and the INM. We compare QMC results to the expressions for Σ(k) and Π(q), which we obtained within MET as well as within LT. We will see that the functional forms of Σ(k) and Π(q) obtained within MET and LT are similar but with some differences. By comparing these three forms of Σ and Π we are able to both verify the validity of the MET, and identify the strength of vertex corrections, not included into MET and LT, and lattice effects, which are not included in MET but are present in LT. Before going to a detailed comparison, we discuss the relationship between MET, LT, and QMC calculations, and how to compare them. The models used in the QMC studies differ from the ones we introduced in Sec. II in several ways. First, in the QMC models the bosonic degrees of freedom have their own dynamics. Nevertheless, at low frequencies, relevant to the physics near the QCP, the leading term in the bosonic dynamics is the Landau damping due to coupling to electronic degrees of freedom. This is since the Landau damping term scales as |Ω|, while the dynamical term of a boson scales as Ω 2 . Second, the models used in the QMC studies contain additional interactions, which are not present in the MET or LT. These include bosonboson interactions, as well as (in the INM) additional, non-critical bosonic modes which couple to the fermions. Finally, the three methods differ in the proper definition of the parameters of D 0 , M (T ) and g. The QMC starts from the theory with bare parameters and returns the numerically exact G(k), D(q), so that D 0 , M (T ) are outputs of the calculation. In the MET and LT, D 0 , M (T ) are considered as inputs to the theory. The bare parameter values are renormalized by vertex corrections and, in the case of MET, one-loop self-energy corrections from high-energy fermions. These renormalizations should be absorbed into the input to the theory. This implies that the effective g may be different in MET and LT. We obtain D 0 and M (T ) by fitting the static D(q, Ω m = 0) from QMC, and use the bare value of g, as elaborated below. We find that the bare g reproduces the QMC data well for both the SFM and INM. We first show our results for the SFM. Refs. 37, 38, and 45 presented extensive QMC data on a realization of the SFM. To compare with our work, we use the data from those papers for g = 1.5, T = 0.05 . . . 0.2, where all energies are in units of the bare hopping used in Refs. 37, 38, and 45. We note that for lowest temperature, T = 0.05, the thermal scale, given by Eq. ( We begin by comparing the self-energies Σ T (ω m ) and Σ Q (ω m ) within MET and LT. Fig. In Fig. Next we consider the INM. While in the spin-fermion case, the model used in QMC allows us to directly read off the bare value for the coupling constant g, the nematic modes in the QMC studies 9, 39, and 45 consist of pseudo-spin 1/2 degrees of freedom that are located on the bonds of the lattice, and do not directly match the form of Eqs Here, we focus on the data for α = 1 and T = 0.1, 0.167, 0.25 8.25. We note in passing that QMC simulations show a T c = 0.04, which is in good agreement with the ET prediction of T c,ET = 0.066 for the given ḡ. The Eliashberg T c in the INM scales as ḡ2 /E F ∝ g 4 , so that the difference in critical temperatures can be interpreted as a 15% renormalization of g. In the LT, we find T c,LT = 0.03. 8. Fig. We also compared MET and lattice calculations to the QMC data for Π(q). In Fig. We find it striking that most of the features of the QMC data are reproduced by our ET/MET calculations. We believe that our results imply the QMC data is a validation of, rather than a challenge to, the applicability of ET to quantum-critical models of interacting electrons. We used the differences between the theories to identify the importance of high energy vertex and lattice renormalizations to the low energy theory. The fact that the bare ḡ reproduces both T c and the self energy well in both models implies that the contribution to fermionic self-energies from vertex corrections due to high-energy fermions are likely small. In addition, we show that MET reproduces the QMC self energies quite well, but the com-parison of QMC with LT shows some systematic deviations. This suggests that there is at least a partial cancellation between vertex corrections and the contribution from high-energy fermions to one loop self-energy. In this work, we studied the effect of thermal fluctuations on metals near a QCP, either to a spin density wave state or to an Ising nematic state. We calculated the deviation from the scaling behavior predicted by ET, in the regime where the thermal contributions do not permit a separation of scales between fermionic and bosonic degrees of freedom. We found, that at low temperatures, close to the QCP the thermal contribution to fermionic self energy scales as ω T ∝ √ ḡT and dominates the contribution from quantum dynamics. We showed that once this additional physics is taken into account, by an appropiately modified Eliashberg theory, it reproduces properties that were found in recent QMC simulations, above the superconducting T c . In the absence of pair-breaking, the regime of metallic quantum critical behavior is limited by the large enhancement of the superconducting T c near the QCP, and the associated strong superconducting fluctuations. QMC studies report no clear separation between the energy scales associated with superconductivity and NFL behavior. As we discussed in the Introduction, this is in agreement with the predictions of ET, where both superconductivity and NFL appear on a scale of ω SFM , ω INM for the SFM and INM respectively. Recent work has indicated 