Among some of the current uses of the DC Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs) are qubit-readouts and sensors for probing properties of quantum materials. We present a rather unique gradiometric niobium SQUID design with state-of-the-art sensitivity in the femto-Tesla range which can be easily tuned to specific readout requirements. The sensor is a next generation of the fractional SQUIDs with tightly optimized input coil and a combination of all measures known for restraining parasitic resonances and other detrimental effects. Our design combines the practical usefulness of well-defined pickup loops for superior imaging kernel and tunable-probing applications with the fractionalization approach to reduce undesired inductances. In addition, our modeling predicts small dimensions for these planar sensors. These features make them of high relevance for material studies and for detection of magnetic fields in small volumes, e.g. as part of a cryogenic scanning quantum imaging apparatus for efficient diagnostics and quantum device readouts. This manuscript will benefit scientists and engineers working on quantum computing technologies by clarifying potential general misconceptions about DC SQUID optimization alongside the introduction of the novel flexible compact DC SQUID design. Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs) remain one of the least perturbative and most sensitive magnetic field detection technologies available today. The SQUIDs rely on the property of the singly-valued wavefunction along the SQUID circumference, which leads to its periodicity with the flux through the SQUIDs contour In this work we first review the sensitivity concerns in DC SQUIDs and then show modeling and design of practical gradiometric SQUID sensors for the femto-Tesla range (Figure The theoretical ultimate energy sensitivity of a simple Direct Current SQUID (DC SQUID) was determined to be where L is the total inductance of the squid loop and C is the capacitance of each Josephson junction, which yields the flux noise This value is the approximate theoretical limit expected with available DC SQUID technologies at finite temperatures (at very low temperatures there is another quantum-fluctuations term limiting the possible sensitivity The detected external flux couples to the SQUID either directly to the SQUID loop L or through additional superconducting coils, loops, or transformers The properties above are strongly materials and fabrication process dependent. For the 10 μA/μm " current density in the tri-layer Nb/AlOx/Nb process that we use with SeeQC Inc. (formerly Hypres Inc.), the smallest junction radius in our SQUID is ~0.56 μm, for which we obtain a critical current in the smallest junction of ~10 μA, a capacitance of ~50 fF, and a ~5 Ω shunt resistor, while keeping β . ≲ 1. The condition of β~1 leads to an optimal inductance of the SQUID of L = 100 pF. In practice, SQUID inductance can be varied by about a factor of 2 without a realistically noticeable compromise in the performance. On a more practical level, the geometry of the SQUID plays an important role in noise performance of its field-sensitivity (as opposed to flux-sensitivity). This geometry defines the inductances of the SQUID and flux pickup circuits, as well as the parasitic inductances and capacitances which may induce noisy resonances. External and trapped flux rejections are important concerns; flux coupling and flux collection efficiency are also determined by SQUID geometry One intuitive (but typically incorrect) suggestion for improving the field sensitivity of SQUIDs is to increase the number of turns of the SQUID loop, thus effectively increasing the phase drop (proportional to the flux) on the Josephson junctions. However, the main problem with this solution is that the inductance of the SQUID grows rapidly with the number of turns (usually as the square of the number of turns) and does not outpace the gain from the effective larger pickup (linearly proportional to the number of turns), especially for narrow line loops One way to improve the field performance of the SQUID with direct flux input is to connect several SQUID loops of smaller dimensions side-by-side in order to increase the overall field collection area and minimize parasitic capacitive coupling improvement can be more substantial Below we rationalize that a different (new) parallel loops approach can be very useful in SQUIDs with input coil circuits, but not in the direct detection form discussed in the preceding paragraphs. Generally, the main advantage in using the field coil input circuit is that the large inductance of the input coil can be implemented without a substantial degradation of SQUID performance. Magnetic field or flux can be collected by a fully superconducting loop of a desired shape and then magnetically (rather than electrically as in the direct schemes above) coupled to a SQUID The choice of the input coil geometry is not arbitrary. Flux coupling is most efficient when the inductance of the input coil is (ignoring inductances of connecting lines) equal to the inductance of the pickup loop(s): L 5 = L 67 (if there are two electrically connected pickup loops then coupling is most efficient when L 5 = 2L 67 ). In this case, half of the sensed flux (flux through the pickup loop(s)) is screened by the pickup loop portion of the input circuit and the other half by the coil at the input to the SQUID. Thus, the SQUID detects only a fraction of the external flux. The amount of flux detected by the SQUID, φ 8 , depends on the mutual inductance between the input coil and the SQUID, M 5 : Generally, the mutual inductance is smaller than or equal to the input coil self-inductance. Therefore, the flux noise performance (or energy sensitivity) of such a scheme is worse than that of the direct flux-coupling SQUID described in the beginning of this manuscript. However, a gain in field sensitivity may be obtained for much smaller pickup loop sizes, because the effect on β is minimized with the input coil scheme. In other words, a practical benefit arises because the pickup loop can have a large inductance and a large flux collection area without a large effect on the intrinsic noise: the input coil can be constructed to have a matching inductance, for example by using the Ketchen coupling scheme of a spiral input coil to a wide washer SQUID Combining Eq. ( Original design with series input-coils and fractional squid-loops. The main advantage in using the field coil input circuit is that the large inductance of the input coil can be implemented without a substantial degradation of SQUID performance. However, the flux sensitivity is compromised during matching of the input coil inductance and the pickup loop inductance. This is tolerable for some applications, but often higher sensitivity is needed. Often this compromise is forced by use of a commercial SQUID with a fixed inductance input coil and a customer-provided pickup loop. In other words, when n is large in Eq. ( In the following new approach based on the new 'fractional SQUID' designs, we have substantially improved this performance with parallel SQUID loops (Figure , !" "9 !" • φ 67 /N. For washers It is necessary to have on the order of N = L 67 /L SQUID loops connected in parallel, as well as the same number of input coils, leading to a total matching to the pickup loop inductance of tens nH. Figure Series input coils Gradiometric designs Our detailed optimization methods yielded novel gradiometric SQUIDs designs with projected sensitivities in the femto-Tesla range. Several variants of the designs can be implemented, mainly with varying pickup loop dimensions and numbers of washers. Other parameters that can be varied marginally are the critical currents in Josephson junctions as well as the quantity of such junctions and the values of their shunting resistors. These SQUIDs, even when gradiometric, are of a small size that are practical and relevant for use in various technological and scientific applications, where unprecedented field sensitivity is required. This potentially opens the door to beyond femto-Tesla range, atto-Tesla sensitivity SQUID sensors fabricated as compact chips in the near future, which may open new technological capabilities for discoveries of new phenomena in quantum materials as well as new phenomena in other interdisciplinary fields L $5 = n " L $ + nL $,8;<56 . The flux transfer factor is the ratio between the externally applied pickup loop flux ∆φ 67 , and the flux sensed by the SQUID, ∆φ 8 = M $ /N • NJ 5 = k 5 ]L $ L $5 J 5 (30, 87): By taking the derivative of this expression with respect to the pickup loop inductance, it can be easily shown that this factor is maximized when L 67 = (1 -k 5 " s)NL $5 yielding the maximum factor , Typically for wide washers and narrow input coils fabricated with standard lithography, k 5 ≈ 0.7 -0.9 and s is on the level of a few percent (1), therefore . Inserting known expressions for the washer and the input coil inductances , L I is the geometric inductance of the central hole in a washer (primary coil), L 87 the slit inductance, and L 8;<56 is the stripline inductance of the secondary line (which essentially represents flux leakage). In relatively large washers (tens or hundreds of microns) we can safely assume L I ≫ L 87 for finding the optimal n. Further, in our case L 8;<56 is on the order of 100 pH per one turn of the input coil, while L I ≈ L = 1.59 nH. We can thus write F >?@ ≈ $ "B! , which is obviously optimized for n = 1 and L = 1 as in our design (note, this is not necessarily accurate for small SQUIDs, for example, with a larger fraction of flux leakage in between the primary and the secondary and in the washer slit). This result echoes the textbook expressions for the classic input coil design for a single washer ) inductance, s 5! = 0.5 in our case as defined in ref. Note also, that the energy sensitivity of our design is not better than that of the previous approaches and is still fundamentally limited by the same considerations as in the classic cases Below are enlarged regions of the design presented in Figure If one would like to explore experimentally how coupling between a qubit and a readout squid influences the performance of the qubit, a SQUID, such as the one presented here, installed in a scanning apparatus will allow to scan over a large area of a wafer containing many quantum chips and thus effectively replace hundreds if not more on-chip fabricated readout or diagnostics SQUID devices. In a scanning mode, different SQUID-qubit geometrical arrangements (couplings) can be explored more easily than with on-chip readouts. When a weak coupling is desired, one can think of a (flux) qubit as being a magnetic dipole-like source, where in the weak coupling one would want to position the SQUID far enough away from the qubit. At the same time the collected signal is lost, so to compensate for that, one would want to increase the detection area of the SQUID (to collect more flux). The back action of the noise from the large SQUID on the qubit is smaller than that of a small noisy SQUID well-coupled to a small qubit SQUID, as the noise likely gets dispersed in many directions not just directly in the qubit. Thus, the hypothesis is that, a large fraction of the noise electromagnetic radiation will disperse in the open space (into a cavity and grounded cryostat parts), while a large fraction of the qubit signal can be collected by the large SQUID. More thorough calculations of backactions and experiments will be required to support this hypothesis in the future but these are beyond the scope of this work. In addition, by implementing a remote SQUID, coupling of noise through substrate to qubit is eliminated, again, providing advantages to quantum diagnostics tools. Intra-coil damping R Washer damping R The kind of SQUIDs presented here could be useful for wafer-scale testing apparatuses for quantum information technologies, like the one introduced recently by Bluefors-Intel-Afore tagged The Cryogenic Wafer Prober for millikelvin range and is said to dramatically help at speeding up the developments of cryogenic quantum devices Another possibility of use of these sensors is to test complex noisy quantum systems and to troubleshoot their performance. One such example is when targeting on the individual qubit level may not be useful due to the overall complexity of the tested chip, but the integrated sensitivity to noise and fluctuations is desired. In this case, the spatial resolution is compromised, but finer integrated field resolution could be obtained, allowing for spectroscopic studies of complex quantum systems.