Single photon emitters (SPEs) in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) have garnered significant attention over the last few years due to their superior optical properties. However, despite the vast range of experimental results and theoretical calculations, the defect structure responsible for the observed emission has remained elusive. Here, by controlling the incorporation of impurities into hBN and by comparing various synthesis methods, we provide direct evidence that the visible SPEs are carbon related. Room temperature optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) is demonstrated on ensembles of these defects. We also perform ion implantation experiments and confirm that only carbon implantation creates SPEs in the visible spectral range. Computational analysis of hundreds of potential carbon-based defect transitions suggest that the emission results from the negatively charged VBCN -defect, which experiences long-range out-of-plane deformations and is environmentally sensitive. Our results resolve a long-standing debate about the origin of single emitters at the visible range in hBN and will be key to deterministic engineering of these defects for quantum photonic devices. Single defects in solids have become some of the most promising frontrunner hardware constituents of applications in quantum information technologies and integrated quantum photonics. 1 Significant effort has been devoted to isolate and deterministically engineer such defects in wide bandgap materials such as diamond and silicon carbide. Recently, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has emerged as a promising host material for defects which display ultra-bright single photon emission (SPE) 4-8 . They exhibit remarkable properties: a strong response to applied strain and electric fields (Stark shifts), 9-11 stability under high pressure and elevated temperatures, 12, 13 potential for resonant excitation above cryogenic temperatures, Part of the challenge stems from standard hBN bulk crystal synthesis via high pressure high temperature not being amenable to the deterministic control of impurity incorporation. This is aggravated by the induced impurities often segregating and forming regions of inhomogeneous defect concentration. Here, we address this problem by carrying out a detailed study surveying various hBN samples grown in different laboratories by metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). We find compelling evidence that to observe photoluminescence from SPEs the inclusion of carbon atoms in hBN is required. By systematically growing samples with different carbon concentrations, we show that the carbon content determines whether the photoluminescence signal originates from an ensemble of emitters (high carbon concentration) or isolated defects (low carbon concentration). Defect ensembles are demonstrated to display room temperature optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR). We carry out multi-species ionimplantation experiments on MOVPE films and rule out the possibility that the emitters are associated to native vacancy complexes. Our results are supported by rigorous modelling analysis of carbon related defects. Table We first explore the photoluminescence (PL) from a series of hBN samples grown by MOVPE Previous studies on these samples have confirmed that with sufficiently slow growth kinetics (i.e. TEB 10) excess carbon atoms are largely removed in the ammonia atmosphere leaving a low percentage of carbon incorporation during growth. We next employ a lab-built confocal PL setup with a 532 nm excitation source, to study in detail the TEB 10 sample. The level of carbon doping is such that we can isolate single quantum emitters; a representative spectrum for one such emitter is shown in Figure To further confirm that carbon-based defects are responsible for SPE emission from hBN we analyze a series of hBN samples grown by a different method, MBE In contrast to the undoped MBE hBN on sapphire showing only the hBN Raman (~573.7 nm) and the Cr in sapphire line (~694 nm), we find clear emission lines, corresponding to hBN SPEs. The SPEs are incorporated at a high density, up to 5 per confocal spot (~400 nm). Due to the high density of emitters incorporated, we could not unambiguously confirm their quantum nature via second-order autocorrelation measurements. We instead probed the polarization dependence of the emission by placing a polarizer in the collection path. Figure We next explored MBE growth of hBN on silicon carbide (SiC), investigating different crystal orientations: specifically, with the top Si face-on (0 ̊) and slightly off (8 ̊). All hBN films grown on SiC utilized a Knudsen high temperature source for boron evaporation, at a growth temperature of 1390 ̊C, and identical conditions other than the substrates. Representative spectra from both sample types (Si at 0 ̊ and at 8 ̊) are displayed in Figure We attribute the incorporation of these SPEs during hBN growth on SiC to carbon diffusion from the substrate. At the growth temperature of 1390 ̊C, some sublimation of Si from the surface of the SiC substrates is expected, with the subsequent formation of an extra carbon layer on the surface of SiC. Finally, we analyze a third technique for hBN growth, the conversion of HOPG to hBN, known to yield high quality porous hBN. We now turn our attention to using ion implantation for defect creation, in an attempt to confirm the role of carbon. We performed a series of implantation experiments (dose: 10 13 ions/cm - 2 , energy 10 keV) with carbon as well as silicon and oxygen used as controls to rule out the possibility for the photoemission to be due to native vacancy defects. The implantation experiments were performed on the MOVPE hBN (TEB 10) films (film thickness ~ 40 nm, see supporting information) so to compare the relevant results to those for the samples synthesized while increasing carbon content during growth. Figure Inside the C-implanted region, most emitters (~ 80%) display narrow ZPL peaks (~5 nm FWHM) and extremely weak PSBs, compared to the typical ZPL/PSB found in these MOVPE hBN (TEB 10) films. For comparison, among 77 SPEs investigated in pristine MOVPE hBN (TEB 10) films the narrowest linewidth was ~8 nm, demonstrating the unique nature of these emission lines, see supporting information. The remaining ~20% of SPEs within the implanted region display similar line shapes (typically ~20 nm FWHM) and phonon coupling to those for the emitter in figure After characterizing the implanted hBN films, the samples were then annealed in high vacuum (1000 ̊C, <10 -6 Torr, 2 hours), and the same set of measurements was performed. As shown in figure Figure In light of the implantation results, we briefly consider a potential ancillary role of carbon. This could potentially occur through the stabilization or charge state modification of alternative defects, as well as modification of the material fermi level. Critically, our implantation results allow us to rule out these possibilities. The creation of SPEs prior to annealing with C implantation only (i.e. not with Si and O implantation), despite clear evidence of increased vacancy creation, precludes the potential of a secondary role of carbon in activating simple native vacancy complexes. Furthermore, complex native vacancies such as those involving substitution defects like VNNB, or non-carbon heteroatom impurities involving O and Si are similarly inconsistent with our results finding that only carbon implantation creates SPEs prior to annealing. Finally, the observation that high temperature annealing of the implanted samples leads to a spatially correlated and homogeneous ensemble emission only in the case of carbon implantation is further indicative of the structural inclusion of carbon in the emissive defect. The compiled evidence indicates in a compelling manner that the structural nature of hBN SPEs emitting in the visible is directly associated with carbon-based defect(s). We note the inclusion of carbon in even the highest purity hBN materials, To gain further insight into the structure of the carbon defect, we searched for defect transitions from which the observed photoemission could originate. To do so, time-dependent density-functional theory 37 (TD-DFT) calculations were performed using the CAM-B3LYP To eliminate unsuitable defect candidates, we focused on three well established experimental features of the SPEs, a ZPL energy transition of ~ 2.1 eV, In summary, we have presented rigorous experimental results to confirm the central role of carbon in hBN quantum emitters in the visible spectral range. We compared samples grown by three different methods: MOVPE, MBE, and HOPG conversion. They all exhibited a direct correlation between the introduction of carbon as a precursor/substance and the formation of SPEs. Furthermore, MOVPE growth enabled us to deterministically control carbon incorporation and vary the density of the quantum emitters from singles to ensembles and observe room temperature ODMR. We have successfully reproduced equivalent results using direct ion implantation of carbon, confirming a carbon defect structure is responsible for visible spectrum quantum emission. Employing a TD-DFT method, we proposed the negatively charged VBCN-as the most suitable transition to explain the observed results and matched the calculated spectra to the observed ones experimentally. The predicted bowl-shaped distortions for this defect, making it especially susceptible to environmental influences, in line with the diverse range of emission energies and properties observed in visible region hBN SPEs. Our results will accelerate the deployment of visible quantum emitters in hBN into quantum photonic devices and will advance potential strategies for the controlled engineering of quantum emitters in van der Waals crystals. Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy. hBN layers were grown on commercially available 2" sapphire substrates using metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE), as described in. 