The occurrence of superconducting and insulating phases is well-established in twisted graphene bilayers, and they have also been reported in other arrangements of graphene layers. We investigate three such arrangements: untwisted AB bilayer graphene on an hBN substrate, two graphene bilayers twisted with respect to each other, and a single ABC stacked graphene trilayer on an hBN substrate. Narrow bands with different topology occur in all cases, producing a high density of states which enhances the role of interactions. We investigate the effect of the long range Coulomb interaction, treated within the self consistent Hartree-Fock approximation. We find that the on-site part of the Fock potential strongly modifies the band structure at charge neutrality. The Hartree part does not significantly modify the shape and width of the bands in the three cases considered here, in contrast to the effect that such a potential has in twisted bilayer graphene. The recent discovery of superconductivity and insulating behavior in twisted graphene bilayers The bands of twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) show a number of unique properties not commonly found in other crystalline materials with narrow bands: i) the low Fermi velocity is not caused by large self-energy corrections, as in many strongly correlated materials In the following, we analyze whether the narrow bands found in other graphene stacks share some of the features of twisted bilayer graphene. We focus on the role of the long-range electrostatic interactions whose strength is of the order of e 2 / L, where is the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium and L the length of the Moiré unit cell; this is comparable to or larger than the bandwidth. We describe this interaction by means of a selfconsistent Hartree-Fock approximation. This variational technique gives a reasonable description of many interacting quantum systems. For twisted bilayer graphene it describes both the change in the width and shape of the central bands, as well as the existence of different broken symmetry phases We analyze two distinct types of systems: i) bilayers and trilayers without a twist, where the flat bands are induced by a combination of a strain due to the substrate and a perpendicular electric field, and ii) a pair of graphene bilayers which are twisted by a small angle relative to each other. In both cases we analyze the electronic bands by means of continuum models, based on the Dirac equation for a single graphene layer (see Appendix A). The first case, which involves bilayers and trilayers, requires models for the interlayer hopping in the multilayer and for the interaction between the substrate and the multilayer. We model the stacks of graphene on hBN with a lowenergy continuum model. The hBN substrate is modelled in the low-energy Hamiltonian as a modulated effective field affecting only the nearest graphene layer. As is shown in Fig. . The area of the mBZ is a factor L 2 smaller than that of graphene: we can therefore perform zone folding to study the system, decomposing the momentum g mn within the graphene Brillouin zone into a momentum k within the boundaries of the mBZ and a contribution from repeats of the superlattice mBZ. We define the momentum k inside the mBZ such that where G mn = mG 1 + nG 2 with m, n integers. Each G mn vector in the reciprocal space has six nearest neighbors, at a displacement G i = (4π/ √ 3L) cos 2j+1 6 π, sin 2j+1 6 π , i = 1, 2, ..., 6; these generate the first harmonic functions of the superlattice. We refer to these vectors as the "first star" of reciprocal lattice vectors. It has been established where the first term represents the mono or multilayer graphene low-energy Hamiltonian in the vicinity of a single valley, expanded about the K point. The second term V SL describes the effect of the hBN on the closest graphene layer, treating the resultant superlattice as a perturbation on the Dirac Hamiltonian. To take into account the long-range Coulomb interaction we also introduce self-consistent Hartree and Fock potentials, V H and V F respectively (see section VI and appendix B for further details). The effect of a hBN substrate on charge carriers in a graphene monolayer can be described by including the first harmonic functions of the superlattice. Including the interactions between charge carriers in graphene and the hBN substrate as a perturbing potential V SL , the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where H SL contains all superlattice effects, H 0 (k) is the isolated mono or multilayer graphene Hamiltonian in the mBZ and N the number of reciprocal lattice vectors in the Fourier expansion. In BG/hBN and TG/hBN we can assume that the superlattice potential V SL affects only the closest graphene layer and couples each momentum G mn with their six nearest neighbors, G j . The mismatch between the lattice constants of graphene and hBN leads, in the aligned situation, to the formation of a triangular moiré superlattice where the length of the unit vector is L ≈ nm. We describe the effect of hBN on the nearest graphene layer by an effective potential, which is written as a Fourier expansion whose components are labeled by reciprocal lattice vectors of the superlattice with amplitudes v SL (G j ) given by where The 2 × 2 Pauli matrices act on the sublattice index in a single graphene layer. The parameters w 0 and ∆ represent a spatially uniform scalar and mass term (note that hBN breaks inversion symmetry, and allows for a mass term In order to carry out the mean-field calculations, the charge density induced by the occupied states needs to be calculated. We assume approximate local charge neutrality at half filling. Deviations from charge neutrality are due to contributions from electrons or holes induced by an external gate. The charge density is expanded in Fourier components defined by the moiré reciprocal lattice vectors. The charge density includes a constant term, which defines the average charge in the system. The electrostatic potential induced by this term is cancelled by the gate potential. In twisted bilayer graphene the charge density converges rapidly: only six equivalent reciprocal lattice vectors need to be considered A. Band structure We first consider bilayer graphene aligned with hBN. Using the standard parametrization for the hoppings between next nearest layers based on the SWM mode for graphite is used in Eq. 2. Here π = k x + i k y , the parameters v i = ( √ 3/2)γ i a/ have dimensions of velocity, the lattice constant of graphene a = 0.246 nm, γ 1 is the interlayer coupling and ∆ is the energy difference between dimer and non-dimer sites As shown in Fig. The presence of hBN breaks both particle-hole and inversion symmetry. Since both middle bands are isolated for a range of parameters, the broken inversion symmetry allow us to calculate the band topology. Figure Recently Moriyama et al. We consider the effect of a self-consistent Hartree interaction, where the self consistent bands for different fillings and the distribution of the Hartree potential in real space (Eq. (A7) in appendix B) are shown in Fig. Figure. We now consider ABC trilayer graphene aligned with hBN, with a Hamiltonian H 0 in Eq. ( where we use the parameters derived from DFT calculations given in Ref. The interlayer potential δ accounts for a possible difference in the on-site energies between the first and third layer. It has recently been shown that the presence of the superlattice potential induced by hBN in TG gives rise to a tunable Mott insulating behavior and reveals signatures of superconductivity Figure It has been recently shown that TG/hBN is a gate tunable Mott Similar to the previous case, we find that the comparison of the bandwidth with the effective Coulomb potential does not ensure an strong Hartree interaction. As shown in Fig. (Eq. (A7) in appendix B), at different filling fractions. Similar to the case of BG/hBN, the small distortions in the band structure are due to the different distribution of the charge density at the different points within the mBZ. In the case of ν = -2 shown in Fig. A graphene bilayer twisted with respect to another graphene bilayer can be modelled using a continuum model, as defined in Recent experiments on TDBG Similar to TBG, we find that the dominant contribution to the Hartree interaction comes from the first star of reciprocal lattice vectors. Independently of the filling, the Fourier components of the Hartree potential (Eq. (A6)) are real numbers with a small imaginary component. In Fig. We now consider the effect of the Fock potential in the three systems considered here. We follow the procedure described in Ref. ) where V C (q) is the Fourier transform of the Coulomb potential and is an overlap term. In Eq. ( In TBG, the diagonal terms contribute to the broken C 2 symmetry In the three systems considered here, we have only taken into account matrix elements with G = G in Eq. 9. The non-diagonal terms are quite small and they can be safely neglected. In this situation, the Fock interaction behaves as a momentum dependent on-site contribution. In twisted bilayer graphene, on the other hand, this potential includes significant periodic contributions commensurate with the moiré lattice. The independence of the Fock potential on the moiré superlattice in the systems studied here implies that broken symmetry states induced by long range electrostatic interactions do not require a fine tuning of the effects of the substrate, which seems confirmed by recent experiments Although we only focused our analysis at charge neutrality where the Fock interaction is large, the strong on-site potential can be captured by an effective on-site Hubbard interaction We have analyzed the leading effect of the electronelectron interactions, the long range Coulomb interaction treated within the Hartree-Fock approximation, in three types of stacks of graphene layers where very narrow bands emerge: i) untwisted AB bilayer graphene aligned with hBN, ii) trilayer ABC graphene aligned with hBN, and iii) two graphene bilayers twisted with respect to each other. In the three cases, on the application of an out of plane displacement field the bandwidth of bands near the neutrality point becomes comparable to or below 20 meV. In the absence of interactions, the bands for each of the two valleys show a complex pattern of crossings, Berry curvature, and Chern numbers tunable by perpendicular electrostatic potentials. The Hartree potential leads to small changes in the shape and width of the bands, even when the screening is small and the band is very narrow. This behavior implies that the long range electrostatic interaction plays a significantly different role in these systems than in twisted bilayer graphene, where similar calculations lead to changes in the band- width of order of e 2 /( L) ∼ 10-20 meV, where ∼ 4-10 is the dielectric constant of the environment and L is is the length of the unit vector of the moiré lattice. We found that the Fock terms contribute effectively as a momentum dependent on-site term and strongly distort the band structure. An exhaustive analysis of the Fock term in moiré superlattices has been provided so far in the Refs. This assumption is opposite with the recent finding of Ref. In the case of TDBG, the relative twist between two Bernal stacks of bilayer graphene leads to the appearance of a moiré pattern, identical to that occurring in TBG. The size of the supercell, L m = a/2 sin (θ/2), dramatically increases with the twist angle, θ, a = 0.246 nm being the lattice constant of graphene. Thus, for θ ∼ 1.24 • , L m ∼ 11.36 nm. We describe the low-energy band structure of the TDBG within the continuum model introduced in the Refs. shown in green in Fig. ), whose entries are labels by the sub-lattice (A/B) and layer (1, . . . 4) indices. Here we defined k l = R (-) l-1 θ/2 (k -K l ), R(θ) being the 2 × 2 matrix describing the counterclock-wise rotation of the angle θ, and: )γ i a/ , γ 1 = 0.4 eV, γ 3 = 0.32 eV, γ 4 = 0.044eV, ∆ = 0.05eV, v F /a = 2.1354eV (see e.g. the Ref. where the amplitudes U (G) are given by: In the following we adopt the parametrization of the TBG given in the Ref. where I 2 is a 2 × 2 identity matrix and V b an (out of plane) external electrostatic potential. The long-range Coulomb interaction, is introduced as a self-consistent Hartree potential, V H . (A8) To solve the self-consistent Hartree Hamiltonian, the charge distribution is approximated as ρ H = ρ H + δρ H where ρ H is a constant which takes into account the total density from all bands not included in the calculations 