Illuminating a water solution with a focused continuous wave laser produces a strong local heating of the liquid that leads to the nucleation of bubbles, also known as thermocavitation. During the growth of the bubble, the surrounding liquid is expelled from the constraining microfluidic channel through a nozzle, creating a jet. The characteristics of the resulting liquid jet was imaged using ultra-fast imaging techniques. Here, we provide a phenomenological description of the jet shapes and velocities, and compare them with a Boundary Integral numerical model. We define the parameter regime, varying jet speed, taper geometry and liquid volume, for optimal printing, injection and spray applications. These results are important for the design of energy-efficient needle-free jet injectors based on microfluidic thermocavitation. When laser light is focused in a liquid with a sufficiently high absorption of the particular laser wavelength, a vapour bubble can be formed Bubbles made with continuous wave (CW) lasers, known as thermocavitation Controlling the velocity, diameter, and shape of liquid jets, is crucial to produce fast-travelling liquid microdroplets for industrial and biomedical applications, including ink-jet printing, cleaning, and jet injectors for drug delivery through the skin CW lasers have only recently been employed for the generation of jets with cavitation inside microfluidic chips Jetting phenomena can be influenced by additives, e.g. polymers, that change liquid properties such as viscosity and elasticity Small orifices used to deliver small jets have a higher probability of clogging, and typically require expensive fabrication techniques The power of the jet is calculated as: where ṁ = ρAv Jet is the jet mass flux in time and A is the nozzle cross-sectional area. The jet speeds achieved in our experiments were between ∼20 m/s and ∼100 m/s, A = 100 × 120 μm 2 , and therefore the jet power is in the range Here, by introducing CV microfluidic thermocavitation, we aim at increasing the volume delivered with the same or less power, and at the same time, establish a window of opportunities in the parameter space in which jets are created with an optimal geometry avoiding break up before reaching its target site. The experimental setup consists of a transparent glass -Borofloat R -microdevice which is partially filled with a water solution containing a red dye, see Fig. Micro-device design: Microfluidic chips were designed and fabricated in glass substrates under cleanroom conditions A. Growth and collapse of jet-producing bubbles Fig. Depending on the total liquid volume and laser energy input, two scenarios have been observed: the first occurs when all the liquid is vaporised (H 1 ), while the second exhibits a collapse phase with complex after-bounces and secondary cavitation close to the bottom of the cell, see Fig. The microdevice geometries used in this study have the same depth = 100 μm, with specific taper angles (α = 0 • , 14 • , 37 • ), and nozzle diameters (d = 120, 240μm). Considering as the characteristic length of our system, we can calculate the dimensionless Ohnesorge number of the jet as where ρ and σ are the density and surface tension of the liquid. This value is much smaller than 1, showing that the jet dynamics is dominated by inertial and surface tension forces. In terms of the jet breakup behaviour, this value is smaller than the critical Ohnesorge number proposed by Reis and Derby, Oh * =0.1, for stable drop formation and the corresponding Weber number in the surrounding gas (air) is We min gas = where ρ air is the air density. Hence, in our experiments, the minimum Weber number observed in the gas is larger than the critical We * gas = 0.2, to have droplet formation in the Rayleigh breakup regime Jets such as those observed in Figures by the non-axisymmetric shape of the nozzle (inset of Fig. As presented in Fig. Depending on the jet speed, three different jet regimes are observed related to its shape, as shown in Fig. For all device geometries, we observed a jet speed threshold value (transition between regime I and II) after which the jet tip attains a fork shape. This fork shape characteristics of regime II, we attribute it to the tapering and the growing bubble deformation as it enters the channel. Initially, as the jet is moving out of the nozzle, two separated flow threads are created due to the liquid-wall viscous effect in the taper. The flows have a prescribed angle α corresponding to the taper angle and cross each other outside of the device, as shown by the yellow dashed line in Fig. Finally, for sufficiently high jet velocities (regime III) as the liquid flows through the nozzle, wall-bounded air is entrapped in the liquid, and lead to a high Reynolds number turbulent jet, Re>5000, as shown by the dashedellipses Fig. The fork shaped jet tip is not desired for specific applications, such as needle-free injections where a high pressure to penetrate the skin is necessary and thus, a circular cross-section with the smallest possible diameter gives the best results. However, due to its high speed, jet penetrates agarose slabs up to a depth of ∼2 mm, see Fig. The experimentally measured jet speed for the three microdevices taper angles is plotted with respect to the initials meniscus position H in 7 solid symbols. The figure also includes the mentioned regimes (I, II and III); regime I is the green area corresponding to higher H and lower jet speed, regime III has the lowest H and highest jet speed, and regime II is the intermediate regime. A large scatter in the data is observed, which we attribute to the initial condition in the nozzle and the walls, e.g. the presence of water droplets from a previous jet ejection The second condition that affects the jet speed is related to the initial meniscus position that is represented by the filling factor. For lower H values higher velocities are reached, because the growing bubble has to displace less mass with the same amount of input energy from the laser. The relationship between v Jet and H can also be determined by quantifying the pressure changes in the system, based on the assumptions in literature where v is the local velocity of the fluid, ρ the density of the liquid and the pressure gradient is the ratio between the given initial pressure and the meniscus position ∂p/∂x = ∆p/H. Thus, integrating equation 5 over time ∆t, we can write the velocity of the free surface, i.e. v Jet , after the bubble nucleates as: The power law v Jet ∼ H -1 is represented by the dashed line in Fig. The jet formation was simulated using an axisymmetric boundary integral (BI) code, in which the liquid flow is FIG. Since the BI code is axisymmetric, and the experimental setup was not, the radial dimensions of the numerical configuration were calculated based on the cross-sectional areas of the experimental setup. First, the radius of the chamber and the straight section of the nozzle were chosen such that the cross-sectional area of each section equalled that of the corresponding section in the experimental setup. Secondly, the radius was calculated at the start and end of the tapered section of the nozzle based on the cross-sectional area at these positions in the experimental setup. In between the start and end position the radius was calculated based on linear interpolation between these two radii. The contact angle θ was measured with respect to the axis of symmetry, i.e. independent of the inclination of the nozzle wall, to avoid instabilities on the meniscus shape during transition of the contact line from the straight to the tapered section of the nozzle, and vice versa. The contact line dynamics of the meniscus were modelled using the contact angle hysteresis concept, with a receding contact angle θ r and an advancing contact angle θ a . The contact line was pinned in the case where θ r < θ < θ a , it was moving to have θ = θ r for θ < θ r , and it was moved to have θ = θ a for θ > θ a . θ r and θ a were set to the maximum angle away from 90 • at which the meniscus motion near the wall remained stable during the simulations, i.e. θ r = 72 • and θ a = 108 • . The bubble's initial radius was set to 10% of the nozzle radius, placed in the centre of the chamber, and not at the wall as occurs in the experiments. This was meant to prevent a premature ending of the simulation due to instabilities of the bubble surface. A rectangular wave pressure pulse was applied to the bubble at the start of the simulation to mimic the pressure evolution in the bubble during the experiment, which is driven by the sudden phasechange after liquid heating and by the rapid cooling of the vapour during bubble expansion An example of a simulation qualitatively reproducing the observed jet formation for a device with angle α = 14 • and jet speed v Jet = 34 m/s (corresponding to Fig. Fig. We have elucidated jetting phenomena induced by thermocavitation in microfluidic devices keeping constant CW-laser parameters such as laser wavelength, beam spot size shape and power. We also kept constant the liquid properties viscosity and density -Newtonian liquids-, and selected specific geometrical designs of the microfluidic device that determine surface properties of the material containing the liquid such as surface wettability and roughness. The influence on the velocity and shape of the jets produced by changes in the taper angle of the nozzle in the experiments were compared with a numerical model. Three regimes were observed related to the jet tip shape: I) semi-spherical tip, II) fork shaped tip, and III) turbulent jet. The jet speed was observed to increase with a decreased liquid volume in the microdevice and with an increased taper angle. Moreover, we laid out that for tapered geometries, we observed the higher jet speeds. As a follow up we plan a comparison of experiments with more complex numerical models taking into account the viscous dissipation, and the asymmetrical crosssectional area in the microdevice. The first choices are using Gerris and Basilisk See Supplementary material for the experimental and modelling videos related to specific figures in the manuscript.