Extending the qubit coherence times is a crucial task in building quantum information processing devices. In the three-dimensional cavity implementations of circuit QED, the coherence of superconducting qubits was improved dramatically due to cutting the losses associated with the photon emission. Next frontier in improving the coherence includes the mitigation of the adverse effects of superconducting quasiparticles. In these lectures, we review the basics of the quasiparticles dynamics, their interaction with the qubit degree of freedom, their contribution to the qubit relaxation rates, and approaches to control their effect. 1 Superconductivity in an isolated metallic island Exposition of the theory of superconductivity conventionally starts with considering electrons freely propagating as plane waves in an ideal, translationally-invariant medium Here operators c † nσ and c nσ create and annihilate electrons with energies ξ n (measured from the Fermi level), and are the matrix elements of interaction, written in terms of the single-particle eigenfunctions. These are strongly oscillating in space, and there is little correlation between the oscillations of the wavefunctions of different states. As a result, there is a strong hierarchy in the matrix elements H klmn : those with pairwise-equal indices are by far the largest ones. We will illustrate it using an example of a contact interaction, V (r) = (λ/ν 0 )δ(r), characterised by dimensionless interaction constant λ. In this example, the double-integral in the right-hand side of Eq. ( For generic k, l, m, n the product of wave functions is rapidly oscillating as a function or r thus suppressing the value of the integral (the characteristic length scale for the oscillations is set by the Fermi wavelength) and making it zero on average. Having k = n, l = m or k = m, l = n reduces the product of wavefunctions to |ψ k (r)| 2 |ψ l (r)| 2 which is non-negative, no matter if the one-particle wave functions real-or complex-valued. A non-negative integrand leads to matrix elements H kllk and H klkl which only weakly depend on k and l, having non-zero average ∼ λδ . In the presence of a magnetic flux piercing the island wavefunctions the timereversal symmetry is broken, and ψ k (r) are complex-valued. To the contrary, time-reversal symmetry allows one to choose real-valued eigenfunctions ψ n (r) = ψ n (r). That brings yet another paring, k = l, m = n, yielding a non-negative product [ψ k (r)] 2 [ψ m (r)] 2 . The said three types of parings correspond, respectively, to the Hartree term, Fock term, and the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) term. These three interaction types are the leading ones, regardless the details of V (r), including its range and sign. Accounting for the Coulomb long-range component of V (r) generates the charging energy out of the Hartree term, while the Fock term induces exchange interaction (which is safe to ignore in the case of a nonmagnetic material); these two interactions are insensitive to breaking the time-reversal symmetry. The BCS term is responsible for the formation of a superconducting state, once V (r) contains a short-range attraction component. Therefore, neglecting the exchange interaction and levelto-level fluctuations, the interaction term in the island Hamiltonian Eq. ( independent on the details of the electron wavefunctions in the island. Here is the operator of the number of electrons, and accounting for Ô = |ξn|< ω D c n↓ c n↑ The electron number N e is conserved in an isolated island, so the included in Eq. (3) polarization charge N g for now reflects only the level from which all energies are measured. Now we consider fixed even N e and therefore fixed charging energy represented by the first term in Eq. ( The term Ô † Ô in Eqs. ( Either side of Eq. ( to replace the quartic term in Eq. ( is diagonalized, one evaluates the average . . . in the right-hand side of Eq. ( Here γ † nσ , γ nσ are creation and annihilation operators for quasiparticle excitations with spin σ =↑, ↓. The Bogoliubov amplitudes are complex numbers; for convenience, we may define gauge by taking u n = u * n , v n = |v n |e iφ with φ being the phase of the order parameter, ∆ = |∆|e iφ . To preserve canonical commutation relations, their magnitudes satisfy the constraint where n = ξ 2 n + |∆| 2 is the quasiparticle excitation energy. The ground state |GS of the mean-field Hamiltonian is defined by the condition γ nσ |GS = 0. The order parameter ∆ is found self-consistently as Please note that the right-hand side here remains finite in the macroscopic limit δ → 0. Finally, the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Thermal averages present in Eq. ( where |0 is the vacuum for electronic excitations, c nσ |0 = 0. The subscript φ indicates that the phase of ∆ enters this definition via the Bogoliubov amplitudes. One can verify that this expression satisfies the condition γ nσ |ψ φ = 0 defining the ground state for quasiparticle excitations (cf. Sec. 2.3). Clearly, the defined by Eq. ( While being an eigenstate of the BCS Hamiltonian, |ψ φ is not an eigenfunction of the electron number. It is rather a coherent superposition of states with different numbers of electron pairs, so the number of pairs is not defined. The ground-state energy and the excitations spectrum are independent of φ, which provides a relief: out of |ψ φ functions, we may form a linear combination corresponding to a definite number of electron pairs N P . The relation ( The condensate wavefunctions |ψ φ and |ψ N P form two bases in the Hilbert space of many-body paired electron states. We may view the N P and φ representations as dual ones, similar to x and p representations in the single-particle quantum mechanics. (The most important difference is that φ varies between 0 and 2π, making it a compact variable.) In the N P representation, the operator of number of electron pairs N (measured from some large integer corresponding to the filled Fermi sea in the island) acts as a multiplication operator, N = N •. Now we establish its form in the φ representation: That is, N = -id/dφ. It is important to remember that the functions |ψ φ are 2π-periodic, so the spectrum of -id/dφ is the set of integers (N = 0 means no extra electron pairs on the island). Conversely, the operator increasing the number of pairs by 1 is a multiplication operator in the φ-representation: so that T = e -iφ . Therefore in the space of states we considered here, variable N is a conjugate to the compact variable φ. The two satisfy the appropriate canonical commutation relation invariant with respect to the basis. The electron condensate in an isolated island accommodates an even number of particles. If the number of electrons on the island is even, they all reside in the condensate in a T = 0 equilibrium state. Under the same conditions, an odd electron in the island does not have a pair and occupies the lowest-energy quasiparticle state, thus raising the energy of the island by |∆|. At higher temperatures, ionization of the Cooper pairs results in a higher number of equilibrium quasiparticles, diminishing this even-odd effect. To see this we evaluate and compare the partition functions Z 0 and Z 1 for the even and odd numbers of electrons, respectively (hereinafter we disregard the negligible probability of double-occupancy of any state). The series here is easy to sum up: Similarly in the "odd" case the island contains 1, 3, 5, . . . quasiparticles, and the partition function equals One can easily recognize n qp = 2z(T, δ , ∆)/V as the quasiparticle density in the bulk at T ∆ (the factor of 2 accounting for spin). It is convenient to normalize n qp by the "density of Cooper pairs" n CP , In equilibrium, x qp = 2πT /|∆| exp(-|∆|/T ). The difference between the thermodynamic potentials of the even and odd states, namely T ln(Z 0 /Z 1 ), becomes substantial (order-of-∆) once on average there is less than one thermally excited quasiparticle on an island, i.e., z 1. This happens at T below the scale set by the V-dependent Cooper pair ionization temperature The logarithm in the denominator here is pretty big, it is about 14 for an Al island of a typical volume V = 10 -2 μm 3 . As a result, one expects -on the grounds of thermodynamics -no broken Cooper pairs in such island at T T = 0.14K. In our example, we find x qp ≈ 1.9•10 -7 at T = T and may expect a minuscule x qp ≈ 2.1 • 10 -23 at a typical for qubit experiments temperature T = 40mK. However, numerous measurements find x qp = 10 -7 -10 -5 at these temperatures. The origin of the excess quasiparticles is not known and remains under scrutiny. Meanwhile, it is worth assessing how harmful they are for the qubits operation and look for ways to mitigate their unwanted effects. 2 Linking the islands Upon linking the islands, electrons may flow from one island to another. However, at energies low compared to the gap |∆| in the excitations spectrum, only Cooper pairs facilitate the electron transfer. The corresponding Hamiltonian H J of a link between two islands (L and R) therefore is a function of the products T † R TL and T † L TR [cf. Eq. ( This Hamiltonian captures the coherent, non-dissipative tunneling of pairs of electrons; each term of the sum corresponds to transfer of n Cooper pairs in a single tunneling event. For a conventional tunnel junction, electron transmission coefficient is small, so one may safely keep only the lowest-order term (n = 1) in the sum. Furthermore, time-reversal symmetry for tunneling through a non-magnetic insulator dictates C * 1 = C 1 . Using the phase representation (φ L , φ R ) for the operators T L and T R and omitting the phase-independent const term, we obtain The connected islands at φ = 0 constrain the motion of a Cooper pair less than each island separately, so the ground-state energy of the entire system is reduced by the link; it means that in Eq. ( Transfer of N Cooper pairs across the junction creates a charge dipole between the islands. The corresponding electrostatic energy [cf. Eq. ( Here charging energy E C = e 2 /2C takes into account the junction capacitance as well as any capacitance shunting the junction; n g is the static charge (in units of 2e) induced by a biasing gate, background charges, and unpaired electrons. Out of the three contributions only the first one is controllable; the two others fluctuate on some large time scale. The contribution stemming from unpaired electrons is discrete, and changes by ±1/2 upon a quasiparticle tunneling across the junction; the background charge may vary continuously. A single-junction qubit is described by the Hamiltonian H J + H C acting in the space of periodic functions, ψ(φ) = ψ(φ + 2π). Clearly, its spectrum is discrete, non-equidistant, and depends on n g periodically with period 1. The n g -dependence is detrimental for the qubit coherence, due to the uncontrolled variations of n g . In transmons 1, one may separate the quantum dynamics of the phase difference φ into small fluctuations around the minima (φ = 2πn with integer n) and discrete phase slips by ±2π. The former correspond to the dynamics of an anharmonic oscillator having non-equidistant levels needed for a qubit operation. The latter brings the unwanted sensitivity of the levels (∝ δε n cos 2πn g ) to the uncontrolled variations of n g . The probability amplitude of a phase slip is exponentially small at E J /E C 1, δε n ∝ exp(-8E J /E C ). This allows one to effectively suppress the influence of n g without affecting the qubit energy levels (the relative anharmonicity α r scales as a power law of E C /E J , α r E C /8E J , see Ref. In a fluxonium qubit Figure An "eye"-shaped pattern indicates charge-e jumps associated with the tunneling of nonequilibrium quasiparticles. Panel (b) copied from Ref. The inductive energy E L = E s J /n s = (Φ 0 /2π) 2 /L, with Φ 0 = π c/e being the quantum of flux, accounts for the loop inductance L; we also allowed for an external flux Φ e threading the loop formed by the superinductor and the qubit junction. The form of the Hamiltonian To summarize, Hamiltonian describes a wide variety of superconducting qubits. In the absence of the superinductor (E L = 0) Hamiltonian Hamiltonian Consider two normal-state leads separated by an insulating barrier. Electrons can tunnel through the barrier, and we model this system using the Hamiltonian: where H α , α = L, R are the Hamiltonians of the left/right lead, and is the tunneling Hamiltonian, describing transfer of an electron from a state n R in the right lead to a state n L in the left one, and a transfer in the opposite direction; t n L n R is the corresponding tunneling matrix element. If voltages V α are applied to the leads, their Hamiltonians take the form where H α and the number operators N e α are given by the proper generalizations of Eqs. ( It is convenient to change the representation, so that the excitation energies are measured from the respective electrochemical potential of each lead. For a generic, time-dependent unitary transformation U (t), the transformed Hamiltonian H is given by Here we take U in the form (the specific value of constants φ L,R here is inconsequential). Clearly, U commutes with the lead Hamiltonians, [H α (V α ), U ] = 0, while [H T , U ] = 0. In the new representation, we have Hα = H α (V α = 0), Ñ e α = N e α , and , and the tunnel Hamiltonian takes form In the used representation, this is a periodic-in-time perturbation of the Hamiltonian HL + HR , which results in the absorption of energy quanta Ω = eV by the system. To find the absorption power P in the weak-tunneling limit, we may use the Born approximation for the tunneling amplitudes and then apply Fermi's Golden Rule to evaluate the transition rate; lastly, we multiply it by the energy quantum eV to obtain: We replaced the averages of c † n c m over the Gibbs distributions with the Hamiltonians H L,R by the respective Fermi functions f F (ξ n L ,n R ). This required neglecting the electron-electron interaction in the leads, which is fine for the conventional tunnel junctions between normalstate metallic electrodes; the extra factor of 2 in Eq. ( , and then returns to a fixed Ω = eV . To proceed with the derivation of DC conductance G N , we use the relation (we prefer the latter form of this relation for its compactness). In derivation of Eq.( The microscopic properties of the junction are encoded in the matrix elements t n L ,n R of the tunneling Hamiltonian and abbreviated to a single parameter, conductance, by Eq. The second factor here represents the cross-sectional area of the junction in units of the Fermi-wavelength-squared and can be viewed as the (large) number of independent electron modes fitting into the junction's area. Equation We define current operator Î as a time derivative of eN e R , = ie At zero bias, the phase difference entering in Eq. ( Eq. ( We removed the tilde sign in Eq. ( We are interested in the Josephson current I J (φ) and energy at temperatures T ∆, so we may replace the free energy F (φ) with the φ-dependent part δE G (φ) of the groundstate energy. We will evaluate δE G perturbatively to the lowest non-vanishing order (t 2 n L ,n R ) in tunneling and within the BCS mean field approximation. In the "tilde" basis the phase dependence is delegated to HT , so the defined in Eq. ( We now write the tunneling Hamiltonian H T , Eq. ( where for simplicity we assumed no bias (V = 0), and the presence of time-reversal symmetry resulting in real-valued tunneling amplitudes, we also adjusted the gauge, multiplying u n and v n by e -iφ/2 compared to the definitions in Section 1.1. Here we have separated the terms accounting for single quasiparticle tunneling, H qp T , from that describing pair breaking and recombination, H p T . It is convenient to show explicitly the phase dependence of the Bogoliubov amplitudes: where Obviously, the zeroth-order average H T 0 = 0; in the next order one finds where the sum is over all possible excited states |λ of energy E λ determined from the proper generalization of quasiparticle Hamiltonian Eq. ( and E λ = n L + n R . Evaluation of Eq. ( Trading the summations here for the integration over the energies over the corresponding states and dispensing with the dependence of the tunneling matrix elements on n L , n R we find The latter simplification made the integral in Eq. ( which makes the integral convergent at L,R ∼ ∆ L,R and provides a way to express const in Eq. ( The applicability of the perturbation theory used in the derivation of Eq. ( The expression of E J in terms of ∆ and G N may be viewed as a version of the Ambegaokar-Baratoff formula. We may convert it to the familiar Josephson energy E J is one of the main parameters defining the energy spectrum of an ideal qubit, see Eq. This program works equally well for the tunnel junctions with normal or superconducting leads. In the former case, the result is independent of φ. We find Re Y (ω) = G N for a SciPost Physics Lecture Notes Submission junction between two normal leads with energy-independent electron density of states, cf. Eq. ( Considering superconducting leads, we use Eqs. ( Power P then is found by multiplying the energy quantum by the transition rate: Double angular brackets denote averaging over the initial (not necessarily equilibrium) quasiparticles states |η with energy E η ; sum is over possible final quasiparticle (qp) states |λ with energy E λ . The two terms in square brackets account for energy absorbed and emitted by quasiparticles, respectively. Performing the averaging and using Eqs. The quasiparticle distribution functions here do not have to be equilibrium ones; they merely represent occupation factors of various energy states. An assumption of L/R symmetry allows us to simplify Eq. ( The φ-dependence here comes from the interference between two processes of charge-e transfer across the barrier: the first one consists of forwarding an electron as a quasiparticle across the barrier; the second process involves forwarding a Cooper pair accompanied by returning an electron. The involvement of the condensate makes the result of interference phase-dependent; the closer the quasiparticle energy to the gap, the stronger the relative effect of interference, cf. the numerator of the integrand in Eq. (57). Now assume that the microwave energy quantum ω and the characteristic value T eff of quasiparticle energy measured from the gap edge, -∆, are small, ω, T eff ∆. Then, by changing the variable of integration in Eq. (57 Under an additional assumption T eff ω, the quasiparticle admittance here is The dimensionless quasiparticle density is introduced here consistently with Eq. ( The factor x qp in Eq. ( Assuming the quasiparticle distribution is described by a Fermi function with some μ and effective temperature T eff , the imaginary part of the quasiparticle admittance Y qp can be recovered using Kramers-Krönig transform. This would account for the effect of itinerant quasiparticles, but miss the main contribution to the imaginary part of the junction admittance Y J , which originates from the response of the condensate (or, equivalently, from the contribution of Andreev bound states). We refer to Ref. 3 Qubit transitions driven by quasiparticles For a Josephson junction shunted by an inductive loop, Fig. The first term determines the dynamics of the phase degree of freedom in the absence of quasiparticles, see Eq. The second term in Eq. ( with H α qp of Eq. ( This way, H qp T becomes a Hamiltonian of the quasiparticles-qubit interaction. This way of accounting for the interaction is fine, as long as the dynamics of the condensate involves frequencies ω/2π much smaller that ∆/π . Fortunately, this is the case for the typical devices controlled by microwaves (with frequency 10 GHz, while ∆/π ∼ 100 GHz in Al). Within the described model, we can calculate the transition rate Γ if between qubit states |i and |f (i.e., eigenstates of the Hamiltonian H φ ) associated with tunneling of a quasiparticle across the junction similarly to the calculation of admittance in Sec. 2.4. That is, we treat H qp T as a perturbation and evaluate the transition rates using Fermi's Golden Rule: where It is important to note that the transitions between the qubit states are accompanied by the charge-e transfer across the junction. In some cases, see Section 3.5, that helps one to single out the qubit transitions driven by quasiparticles. For generic states and flux bias, the matrix elements of sin(φ/2) and cos(φ/2) have similar orders of magnitude; then, at low effective temperature of quasiparticles (T eff ∆) the cos φ/2 contribution to Eq. ( Here we focus on the relaxation rate from the first excited, |i = |1 , to the ground, |f = |0 , state in a generic setting, therefore neglecting the cos φ/2 contribution, see the last line in Eq. ( With the assumptions discussed above, the qubit relaxation rate due to quasiparticle tunneling can be expressed as where is the quasiparticle current spectral density, see the first two lines in Eq. ( By comparing this formula to Eq. ( For a quasi-equilibrium distribution of quasiparticles with some x qp and T eff , it may be viewed as a particular case of more general fluctuation-dissipation relations indicating that Γ 10 > Γ 01 , as T eff > 0 (there are no reasons to expect an inversion in the energy distribution of quasiparticles). Relations (66) and (68) may allow one to link the magnitude of the junction dissipation (the real part of Y qp ) to the qubit relaxation rate. In the next sections we explore similarities and differences between the phase dependence of the admittance, see Eq. (58), and the variation of the relaxation rate with the external flux which controls the qubit and implicitly enters in Eq. (66). The last two terms (the "potential energy") in Eq. ( So long as the external flux is tuned away from half-integer multiples of the flux quantum and phase fluctuations are small, we can treat the potential energy in the harmonic approximation, The assumption of small phase fluctuations corresponds to the condition where is the qubit frequency in the harmonic approximation. For the transmon Within the harmonic approximation, it is straightforward to calculate the matrix element in Eq. (66) by expanding sin φ/2 to linear order around φ 0 . This way we find Substituting this expression into Eq. (66), and using Eq. ( Therefore, the qubit relaxation rate is given by the inverse of the classical RC time of the junction, where 1/R is identified with the real part of its flux-dependent admittance [φ 0 is identified with the phase difference φ in Eq. ( The dependence on phase/flux in this expression clearly differs from that in Eq. (58). Moreover, we remind that Eq. ( The result for the real part of the junction admittance, Eq. ( where ε → 1 as T → 0, see A fluxonium qubit consists of a small junction shunted by an inductor (the latter can be either an array of junctions or a superconducting nanowire). The qubit transition frequency ω 10 (f ) depends on the external flux; moreover for this qubit, assuming ε = 1, one can show that the relaxation rate near f = 1/2 takes the form [15] where the dimensionless prefactor F can be calculated given the qubit parameters E C , E J , and E L . With regard to the flux dependence, this expression extends the validity of Eq. ( A qubit without an inductor is described by Hamiltonian As we already discussed in Sec. 2.1, n g exhibits uncontrollable jumps by ±1/2 associated with the quasiparticle tunneling (e-jumps). Therefore, at a given n g a transmon is not a two-level system, but in fact is a four-level system: two states differing by the charge parity represent the logical ground state, and another pair forms the logical excited state. Quasiparticle tunneling results in the parity-changing transitions within the four levels. The relaxation rates between the logical states considered in the previous section are one example of the e-jumps, but transitions which do not change the qubit logical state while changing its parity are also possible, see Fig. Aiming at the most realistic case, we take T eff ω 10 , which allows us to use Eq. (68) in Eq. (66). Furthermore, disregarding small anharmonicity we utilize Eqs. ( entering Eq. (66). As a result, the latter equation leads to Generalization to arbitrary T eff / ω 10 amounts to multiplication of the right-hand side of Eq. (82) by 4 ω 10 /πT eff exp( ω 10 /2T eff )K 0 ( ω 10 /2T eff ), where K 0 (z) is a modified Bessel function, see In the derivation of these rates we accounted for the near-degeneracy between the states connected by the transitions. Indeed, the corresponding energy difference (divided by ) is at most a few MHz, so it satisfies the condition ω T eff , even is we assume that quasiparticles equilibrate at the fridge temperature (10 mK ≈ 200 MHz). Comparing Eqs. ( 4 Photon-assisted e-jumps So far we have considered transitions in a qubit due to quasiparticles, but neglected any effect of the external environment. In general, a qubit is coupled to the environment via a cavity or a waveguide resonator which support a number of modes; in other words, the qubit is coupled to photons whose frequencies ω ν depend on the geometry of the device. We can distinguish two kinds of photons: those with frequency lower than the pair-breaking energy, ω ν < 2∆/ , can be absorbed or emitted during a tunneling event of a quasiparticle already present, similarly to the absorption/emission of the qubit energy by the quasiparticles. Assuming that only a small number of such low-frequency photons are present in the cavity, this type of photon-assisted tunneling can only contribute a small correction (which we neglect) to the rates calculated in the previous section. In contrast, higher frequency photons, ω ν > 2∆/ , can always be absorbed, even in the absence of quasiparticles, as they have enough energy to break a Cooper pair and thus create two quasiparticles. The photon wave length, even at the photon energy somewhat exceeding 2∆, is still comparable to the size of the qubit. Therefore it is fair to assume that the alternating voltage generated by a photon is applied across the junction. Thus breaking of a Cooper pair generates two quasiparticles, one on each side of the junction. Here we consider the e-jump rates associated with such pair-breaking events. The inclusion of the qubit-photon interaction in our model can be accomplished where b † ν and b ν are the creation and annihilation operators for the photon, and by replacing in Eqs. with d ν being the effective dipole length that relates the electric field to the voltage drop U ν across the junction, U ν = d ν E ν (0). With these definitions, one can recognize that the replacement in Eq. ( For our purposes, it is sufficient to perform the replacement (85) in Eq. ( Using as before Fermi's golden rule, we can find the transition rate Γ ph if between the initial state with qubit in state |i , no quasiparticles, and one photon in the cavity, and the final state with qubit in |f , two quasiparticles, and no photon: where can be related to the coupling strength between qubit and cavity with E and K the complete elliptic integrals of the second and first kind, respectively. These structure factors have the following properties: S ± (x) = 0 for x < 2, S ± (x) ≈ x for x 2, and for x -2 2. Note the similarities between Eqs. ( Let us consider again the case of a single junction transmon; then using Eq. ( The relaxation and excitation rates are generally close: for ω 10 < min{ω ν -2∆/ , 2∆/ } we find with the lower bound saturated as ω ν → 2∆/ and the upper one for ω ν → ∞. This is in contrast to "cold" quasiparticles, in which case Γ qp 01 /Γ qp 10 1. Finally, the ratio between parity switching and relaxation rates can be large, since for ω ν 2∆/ . On the other hand, for photons near the pair-breaking threshold, ω ν -2∆ ∆, we find and the large prefactor on the right hand side can be compensated by the small, final factor originating from S -(x). Various experiments have reported measurement of qubit rates for transitions that can be caused by quasiparticles. In the work introducing the 3D transmon architecture Alternatively, 1/T 0 1 could be dominated by a different, non-quasiparticle mechanism. One may attempt to distinguish between the mechanisms by measuring T 1 as a function of flux A more recent experiment ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ Figure photon-assisted e-jumps calculated in the previous two sections: Some parameters (E C 355 MHz, E J /E C 22.8, ω 10 /2π = 4.400 GHz) are obtained from independent measurements; then we are left with three fit parameters: ∆/2π 49.1 GHz, ω ν /∆ 2.8, and Γ ν 7.7 kHz. The result of the fit is shown by the solid lines. The disagreement between theory 5 Quasiparticle dynamics While multiple experiments indicate a low-temperature saturation of the quasiparticle density at a level x qp ∼ 10 -7 -10 -6 , the source of such non-equilibrium population is not uniquely identified. Monitoring of the occupation of the fluxonium states Here 1/τ N (∆) is the rate of relaxation of an electron with energy ∆ (measured from the Fermi level) in the normal state. It depends, among other parameters on the electron mean free path. We extract the estimate 1/τ N (∆) = 4 • 10 8 s -1 for Al with electron diffusion constant D = 20 cm 2 /s from the data of Ref. The considered above processes may occur regardless the presence of macroscopic inhomogeneities in a superconductor. Inclusion of inhomogeneities, however, brings about two more elements of the quasiparticle dynamics, i.e., their diffusion and trapping. Experiments with qubits have opened new ways to investigate these processes, based on monitoring the relaxation rate of a qubit. Indeed, an excess density of quasiparticles created by a AC bias jolt applied to the junction affects the qubit relaxation rate, see Eqs. (66) and (68). The total, time-dependent relaxation rate Γ(t) of a transmon qubit can be written in the form where x qp (0, t) is the time-dependent excess quasiparticle density at the position of the junction, while Γ 0 accounts for all other relaxation mechanisms (including relaxation due to a possibly finite steady-state quasiparticle density). Using Eq. ( When a thin superconducting film is cooled below its critical temperature in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field, vortices are trapped in the film if the field is higher than a certain threshold. For a strip of width W , this threshold is of the order Φ 0 /W 2 , see Ref. In the presence of a vortex, the superconducting order parameter is suppressed over a core region of radius ∼ ξ, with ξ the coherence length. In this region, a quasiparticle can loose energy (e.g., by emitting a phonon), since there are states available with energy below the bulk gap, and thus get trapped in the vortex core. Experiment At a phenomenological level, we expect the dynamics of the quasiparticle density to be governed by the following generalized diffusion equation: where D qp is the (temperature-dependent) quasiparticle diffusion constant, P is the "trapping power" of a single vortex, and the sum is over all the N vortices at positions R i . The trapping by vortices leads to an exponential decay of the density; we calculate this decay rate in a simplified model of a (quasi-)1D wire of length L and width W L attached to a square pad of area S (see bottom panel of Fig. with the boundary condition ∇ ⊥ x qp = 0 at the boundaries (here ∇ ⊥ denotes the gradient in the direction perpendicular to the boundary). While Eq. ( The solution to Eq. ( x qp (y, t) = e -st α cos (ky) where s = D qp k 2 is the density decay rate (i.e., the total trapping rate), and the boundary condition at the origin is satisfied. In the limit of small number of vortices of weak trapping power, N P τ D /A W 1, we have z 2 ≈ N P τ D /A, where A = S + A W is the total device area. In this regime, the density decay rate s is then s ≈ which is proportional to the number of vortices. It is the vortices which provide the bottleneck for the quasiparticle evacuation from the vicinity of the Josephson junction. The measured in experiment rate s exhibited step-wise increase with the external field, see Fig. As the number of vortices increases, the bottleneck shifts to the diffusion along the wires connecting the junction to the antenna pads. In terms of Eq. ( with diffusion coefficient D q ≈ 20 cm The core of a vortex can be thought of as a small (size ξ 2 ) normal-state region inside a superconductor. Since quasiparticles can be trapped there, one can expect that an actual normal-metal island can also act as a quasiparticle trap. Here we consider the case of such an island in tunnel contact with a superconductor -that is, the normal and superconducting layers are separated by a thin insulating barrier, so that the contact has low transparency. In this situation, we have again a generalized diffusion equation for the quasiparticle density: In the last term, the function a(r) is unity in the normal-metal/superconductor contact region and zero elsewhere. The effective trapping rate Γ eff accounts for the competition of three effects (see Fig. For both the slow and fast relaxation regimes, according to Eq. ( with the boundary condition ∂x qp /∂y = 0 at y = -d, L. So long as the trap is small, d λ tr , compared with the trapping length defined as λ tr = D qp /Γ eff , we can treat the trap in the same way as we treated the pad in the previous section, and from integrating over the trap area obtain an effective boundary condition at y = 0: Taking the solution in the region y > 0 to be of the form x qp = e -st α cos[k(y -L)] with s = D qp k with z = kL and l 0 = πD qp /2Γ eff L = πλ 2 tr /2L. Up to different parameters, this equation for z has the same form as Eq. (108); 2 therefore, we find again two regimes, one for small, weak traps with the density decay rate given by valid for d l 0 , and one for large/strong traps (d l 0 ) in which the decay rate is limited by diffusion, see eq. ( The cross-over between the weak and strong trapping regime can be studied by increasing the trap length d while keeping everything else equal. Such experiments were carried out with transmon qubits of design similar to that used in the vortex experiments, see Fig. A more accurate modelling of the qubit geometry was considered in Ref. At the end of Section 2.2 we mentioned that the normal-state conductance scales proportionally to the product of the junction's cross-sectional area Σ and the electron transmission 1. In terms of tunneling Hamiltonian Now we perform a canonical rotation into a new quasiparticle basis defined by the operators In new variables, the Hamiltonian for low energy ( n ≈ ∆ + ξ 2 n /2∆) quasiparticles in two identical leads linked by the junction takes the form In the continuum limit, we may replace the summation over n here with integration over ξ, thus relaxing the requirement for the leads to be microscopically identical, n {. . . } → (Vν 0 ) dξ{. . . }. It is instructive to compare the resulting Hamiltonian of one of the fermion species (+ or -) with a Hamiltonian of free particles in one dimension subject to a potential -U δ(x) with U > 0, written in momentum representation: The comparison allows us to identify 1/m with Vν 0 /∆ and U with the "potential", either + √ Vν 0 t B sin(φ/2) or -√ Vν 0 t B sin(φ/2), for one of the species which has a negative potential at a given value of φ. A δ-function well creates a localized state at any U > 0. Likewise, a localized Andreev state with energy is formed at any φ = 0. In writing Eq. ( A remarkable property of the phase dispersion E A (φ) is that it is exactly opposite to the phase dispersion of the ground-state energy δE GS (φ), cf. Eq. ( This relation, and the respective modification of δE GS (φ), can be obtained in multiple ways, including a non-perturbative treatment of the tunneling Hamiltonian The Andreev levels lie below the edge of the quasiparticle continuum, and therefore are prone to trap quasiparticles. In terms of occupation factors n i A of the Andreev levels, the corresponding correction to the energy of the junction is δE(φ) = i n i A E i A (φ). At each given time, the set of factors {n i A } is drawn from integers 0 and 1 (we assign different superscripts to the components of a degenerate level). The set {n i A } changes from time to time, due to the inelastic relaxation of quasiparticles interacting with phonons. Based on Eqs. (101) and the discussion in the beginning of Section 5, we expect their rate to be slower than 1/τ N (∆). The rate is reduced further by low total average number of trapped quasiparticles, in which case we also may expect the energy relaxation to occur faster than the recombination. At fixed {n i A }, the trapped quasiparticles affect the inductance of the junction. If the latter is a part of an LC-circuit, trapping shifts down its resonance frequency. This shift provides one with a measurable "fingerprint" of {n i A }. This kind of experiment was performed Microwave technique was recently also applied to studying Andreev levels in atomic point contacts Constructing a quantum information device calls for finding elementary building blocks capable of maintaining quantum coherence over extended time periods. Superconductors provide one with a head-start in the race for a perfect device: the superconducting ground state locks together a macroscopic number of degrees of freedom, leaving a small number of collective variables to build a qubit from. The coherence distributed over many particles is inherently more robust than that of a single spin or atom. This robustness allows one to shorten the preparation and readout times for a superconducting qubit. However, some hazards come along with the macroscopic dimensions of a qubit. Many of them are defeated by now ubiquitous circuit QED architecture Figure The vanishing of the density derivative at the junction position is equivalent to considering a symmetric device with the same number of vortices in both pads; generalizations to more complex geometry and unequal vortex number can be found in Ref. -∆ 2 , > ∆ . (112)Identifying the quasiparticle effective temperature with T , we can distinguish two limiting regimes (see Ref. in the regime d λtr L, for the slow modes one can neglect the second term in Eq. (116), which then reduces to the expression found in Ref.