The scaling invariance for chaotic orbits near a transition from unlimited to limited diffusion in a dissipative standard mapping is explained via the analytical solution of the diffusion equation. It gives the probability of observing a particle with a specific action at a given time. We show the diffusion coefficient varies slowly with the time and is responsible to suppress the unlimited diffusion. The momenta of the probability are determined and the behavior of the average squared action is obtained. The limits of small and large time recover the results known in the literature from the phenomenological approach and, as a bonus, a scaling for intermediate time is obtained as dependent on the initial action. The formalism presented is robust enough and can be applied in a variety of other systems including time dependent billiards near a transition from limited to unlimited Fermi acceleration as we show at the end of the letter and in many other systems under the presence of dissipation as well as near a transition from integrability to non integrability. Since the observation and a phenomenological characterization In this letter our aim is to characterize analytically a transition from limited to unlimited diffusion by using the diffusion equation where γ ∈ [0, 1] is the dissipative parameter and ǫ corresponds to the intensity of the nonlinearity. This system has two well known transitions The range of parameters we are interested in to validate the transition is γ positive and small, typically γ ∈ [10 -5 , 10 -2 ] and ǫ > 10, which drives the system to high nonlinearities and absence of sinks in the phase space. At such a window of parameters a transition from limited, γ = 0 to unlimited, γ = 0, diffusion is observed. A typical plot of the phase space is shown in Figure Given an initial condition near I ∼ = 0 the particle diffuses along the chaotic attractor. The natural observable to characterize the diffusion is the average squared ac- i where M corresponds to an ensemble of different initial conditions along the chaotic attractor. To obtain such observable we need to solve the diffusion equation that gives the probability to observe a specific action I at a given time n, i.e. P (I, n). The diffusion equation is written as where the diffusion coefficient D is obtained from the first equation of the mapping by using D = . A straightforward calculation assuming statistical independence between I n and θ n at the chaotic domain leads to The expression of I 2 n is obtained also from the first equation of the mapping assuming that , whose solution is To compare with the experimental observable Eq. ( To obtain an unique solution for Eq. ( Differentiating R(k, n) with respect to n and from the property that Considering the initial condition we have that R(k, 0) = F {δ(I - Inverting the expression of R(k, n) we obtain Equation ( Using D(n) obtained from Eq. ( Let us discuss specific limits of n and its consequences to Eq. (8). The first limit is n = 0, which leads to I rms (0) = I 0 , in well agreement to the initial condition. The second limit is n → ∞. At such a limit we have and that when expanding in Taylor series up to first order the term 1 -e -γ(2-γ) ∼ = γ(2 -γ) we obtain Let us discuss this result prior move on. It is known in the literature The limit of small n is the third limit we consider. Assuming that the initial action I 0 ∼ = 0, hence negligible as compared to ǫ and doing a Taylor expansion on the exponential of the numerator from Eq. ( 2 n. This result proves that for short n, an ensemble of particles diffuses along the chaotic attractor analogously as a random walk motion, hence with diffusion exponent β = 1/2, i.e., normal diffusion. From Ref. A fourth interesting limit we want to take into account is again intermediate n but non negligible I 0 such that 0 < I 0 < I sat . At such windows of I 0 and n, an additional crossover is observed when n ′ x ∼ = 2 I 2 0 ǫ 2 . This crossover had already been observed in A fifth limit is in the case of I 0 ∼ = 0, leading to a growth in I rms for short n followed by a crossover and a bend towards the regime of saturation. Such a characteristic crossover is given by n x ∼ = 1 2-γ γ -1 . From the scaling approach as discussed in Ref. The last regime of interest is considered when I 0 ≫ ǫ 2 2γ(2-γ) . At this limit, Equation ( (11) The leading term for small n is while the stationary state is obtained at the limit of γ -1/2 , in well agreement with the previous results. Figure Let us now show applicability of the formalism developed to a far more complicate system, indeed a time dependent billiard ing to a restitution coefficient. The case of γ = 1 leads to a non dissipative case while 0 < γ < 1 corresponds to the dissipative case. T and N are the tangent and normal unit vectors at the instant of the impact and ′ is to consider the momentum conservation law at the moving referential frame. The case γ = 1 leads to unlimited diffusion for the velocity of the particles, hence producing Fermi acceleration while γ < 1 suppress such a diffusion generating a set of points in the phase far from the infinity. The diffusion coefficient obtained for this model is where the expression for V 2 n is As discussed in Ref. As a summary, the diffusion equation is used with a great success to describe a transition from limited to unlimited diffusion leading to an analytical explanation of the scaling invariance present in such a transition. A set of critical exponents, so far obtained from numerical and phenomenological way were obtained analytically corroborating for a robust and general interest of the procedure. EDL thanks support from CNPq (301318/2019-0) and FAPESP (2019/14038-6), Brazilian agencies. CMK thanks to CAPES for support.