We develop a phenomenological theory for the family of uranium-based heavy fermion superconductors (U RhGe, U CoGe, and U T e2 ). The theory unifies the understanding of both superconductivity(SC) with a weak magnetic field and reentrant superconductivity(RSC) that appears near the first-order transition line with a high magnetic field. It is shown that the magnetizations along the easy and hard axis have opposite effects on SC. The RSC is induced by the fluctuation parallel to the direction of the magnetic field. The theory makes specific predictions about the variation of triplet SC order parameters d with applied external magnetic fields and the existence of a metastable state for the appearance of the RSC. Heavy-fermion superconductors U CoGe, and U RhGe are promising spin triplet superconductors. The spin triplet pairing is supported by their highly anisotropic upper critical fields which greatly exceed the Pauli limit along all three crystallographic directions Very recently, another uranium-based superconductor(UBS) U T e 2 has been found. Considerable researches have been conducted, such as a large residual Sommerfeld coefficient The difference between these superconductors brings new challenges and calls for a unified understanding. On the basis of Landau phenomenological theory and weakcoupling theory for U RhGe given by Mineev Herein, we generalize the phenomenological theory of the spin fluctuation feedback effect (SFFE) proposed by Amin et.al Ferromagnetic SC -we first focus on the SC and RSC in FM UBS, and take U RhGe as an example. The phase diagram is sketched in Fig. here i, j = x, y, z and the repeated subscripts indicate summation throughout the paper. Except A 1z < 0, other A 1i , B ij , K 1ij 's are positive or positive-definite to ensure the FM ground state. Positive K 2i are the amplitudes of the couplings between the FM and SC order parameters In the weak magnetic field region, the relevant magnetic part of the free energy can be simplified as f m,1 ≈ A 1z m where , with α i being the bare quadratic coefficient of SC without SFFE. The positive or positivedefinite quartic coefficients β's are renormalized from the SFFE as listed in section.II of the SM To track the evolution of T c under varying magnetic field, we rescale the d vector with where α is the α i corresponding to the highest T c . By minimizing the free energy, we obtain the non-unitary SC with rescaled order parameter d This SC state has intrinsic z-polarized magnetic moment proportional to p I = -d 2 0 ( r)ẑ here K 2z (here the weak temperature dependence of the K 2z can be ignored as discussed in SM In this case, it can be seen from Eq.3 that either the decrease of m z0 or the increase of m y0 results in the decrease of T c . Namely, T c decreases with increasing magnetic field h y , corresponding to SC phase of U RhGe as shown in Fig. On the low field side of the first-order transition, the y-component of the magnetic moment enters the free energy as: and m y0 = hy 2(A1y+Byzm 2 z0 ) . Following the same procedure, integrating out magnetic fluctuations and rescaling the d vector, we obtain the effective free energy: here again α = α i and the high order (HO) terms are not specified. The coupling K 2y makes the SC with (1, 0, ±i) and p I = ∓d 0 ( r) 2 ŷ at the highest T c . Close to the first-order transition critical magnetic field h m , before the sudden jump of m z0 , the variation of m z0 is small, so ∆T c tuned by the magnetic field can be approximated as: where .In this case, from Eq.6, the T c increases with increasing magnetic field (h y > 0) at first and then decrease when the magnetic filed h y > h q . However, it is noteworthy that Eq.6 is valid only for the region which is on the left side of the first-order transition line and close to it. From Eq.6, we know that the key coupling terms which leads to the appearance of the reentrant superconductivity under strong magnetic field are K 2y and λ terms. When the magnetic field continues to increase and exceeds the critical value h m , as will be analyzed next, the RSC disappears with increasing magnetic field. The first order transition and the disappearing of RSC close to it can be further understood within our theory. With a strong magnetic field and a small m z0 in the FM phase, the free energy to describe the first order transition can be derived where , and . So one can learn from Eq.7 that the magnetic field h y modifies the coefficients of the free energy f m . Thus the magnetic moment dependence of the free energy changes with increasing magnetic field as shown in Fig. as well as the condition that the local minima are broken: . Here as m z1 > m ze , there is a metastable state as displayed in Fig. The existence of the metastable state is important to the RSC. By substituting ∂fm ∂mz | mz0 = 0 and m z = m z0 + δm z into the free energy Eq.7, one can get the magnetic part of the free energy f m . Using this f m and the new p is parallel to the direction of the magnetic field which can be derived from d I = d0( r) from f sc-m with the same method as before: The second term in Eq.8 shows that if the metastable state is broken, namely, , as shown in Fig. Paramagnetic SC -there are several known experimental facts for the paramagnetic UBS, U T e 2 Due to the absence of FM order, the absence of the K 2i coupling terms in our free energy hardly supports the non-unitary triplet SC states in the weak magnetic field region, consistent with the measurements of heat capacity and thermal conductivity in U T e 2 which indicates the point-node gap structure where T c0 is the superconducting critical temperature without the SFFE. Since m y0 increases with increasing h y , the Eq.9 implies T c decrease as shown in Fig. and ∆T c can be derived as: This parabolic function on m y0 explains the RSC close to the first order transition line in U T e 2 and shows the key coupling terms which lead to the appearance of the RSC are K 2y and λ coupling terms. Similar to the FM case, we can also describe the firstorder transition and metastable state in U T e 2 , which have been detected in experiment We can derive [37] the condition for the first-order transition, h yc1 = , where ∆ y = 3c y + 9c 2 y -12a y b y . Here h yc2 < h yc1 , so the metastable state is located in the paramagnetic region as shown in Fig. (14) When the first-order transition happens, the magnetic moment m y0 increases abruptly. The second term in Eq.14 increases suddenly. As for the last two terms of Eq.14, the jump of the magnetic moment m y0 can lead to m y0 >> |K 2y -2λ A1y| 2K1yi which belongs to the right side of the first-order transition line. In this case, the T c decrease abruptly as shown in Fig. Moreover, due to the non-degenerate nature of the triplet SC d vector under the magnetic group, another interesting phenomenon of the multi-jump of the specific heat at different temperatures corresponding to the transition of each component might be observed. The nonunitary coupling K 2z term can further cause the splitting of the transition temperature of d x and d y from that of d z , as derived with simplification in sec.VI of SM Our theory makes a few explicit predictions. First, we predict that the rotation of the spin-triplet pairing d vector in different magnetic field regions. In ferromagnetic superconductors U CoGe and U RhGe, with increasing magnetic field, the rescaled d vector rotates from In U T e 2 , the SC is unitary at first. However with a high enough magnetic field, it becomes a non-unitary SC with a rescaled d vector, d0( r) √ 2 (1, 0, ±i). The rotation of the d vector by magnetic field was studied in Sr 2 RuO 4 Second, we predict that it is the metastable state that ensures the extension of the RSC over the right side of the first-order transition line in U RhGe and U CoGe. This prediction can be checked by performing a magnetic-hysteresis-loop type measurement around the first order transition line. We can apply a strong magnetic field to destroy the metastable state at first and then reduce it to induce the RSC. The maximum of the upper critical magnetic field is predicted to have a magnetic-hysteresisloop type of behavior. Namely, it is much smaller than the one with a normal procedure that the field crosses the first-order transition line from its left side. The RSC dome upon down-sweep magnetic field would shift to the left of the first order transition line as depicted by the broken cyan line in Fig. Finally, we predict that the metastable state also exists in U T e 2 and affects the behavior of the RSC in U T e 2 because of the magnetic hysteresis When spin-orbital coupling is strong and the magnetic field along y-direction is weak, the symmetry of the U RhGe and U CoGe with ferromagnetic moment along zdirection is described by D 2h (E, C 2z , I, σ xy ) In this table, the representation basis are: Then we turn to the the terms coupling magnetic moment and superconductivity in free energy f sc-m (the Eq.( For the d belonging to the co-representation A u , the quadratic terms from Eq.A.15 are: (A.21) They are invariant under all operations belonging to the magnetic group D 2h (E, C 2z , I, σ xy ), so do m 2 i . Therefore the term K 1ij m 2 i |d j | 2 can be included in the free energy. The term K 2i m i (i d× d * ) i , (i = x, y, z) can also be derived from Eq.A.15: x : -K 2x m x zxη 5 (η 1 -η 3 ) Terms in Eq.A.22 are all invariant under all operations belonging to the magnetic group D 2h (E, C 2z , I, σ xy ). However, because the symmetry of these two materials U RhGe and U CoGe is described by the magnetic group D 2h (E, C 2z , I, σ xy ) when the magnetic field is weak, the x and y components of the spin average of the pairing state can't be finite. So only the term K 2z m z (i d × d * ) z can be included in free energy f sc-m (Einstein summation convention is used here and below without special mention): where i, j = x, y, z. For the d belonging to the co-representation B u , the quadratic terms from Eq.A.16 are: We can learn from the Eq.A.24 that K 1ij m 2 i |d j | 2 can be included in the free energy, since it is invariant under all operations belonging to the magnetic group D 2h (E, C 2z , I, σ xy ). Moreover, we can derived the exact form of i K 2i m i (i d × d * ) i from Eq.A.24: (A.25) In Eq.A.25, all terms are invariant under all operations belonging to the magnetic group. As in co-representation A u , only K 2z m z (i d × d * ) z can be included in the free energy, the free energy f sc-m of the co-representation B u is the same as the co-representation A u . When the magnetic filed along y-axis is strong enough, the magnetic group of U RhGe and U CoGe is D 2h (E, C 2y , I, σ zx ), there are also two co-representations in this magnetic group, as shown in Table .AT.3: In this table: (A.27) The same method as in weak magnetic region can be used here, then we can get the free energy f sc-m of corepresentation A2 u and B2 u respectively. Here, we also consider the term coupling magnetic filed to superconductivity -λh y (i d × d * ) y . For both co-representation A2 u and B2 u : For U T e 2 , in weak magnetic field region, the absence of the magnetic order leads to the absence of the K 2i coupling terms. However, when the magnetic field is strong enough, the symmetry of the U T e 2 is described by the magnetic group D 2h (E, C 2y , I, σ xz ), there are two antisymmetric co-representations A3 u , B3 u and two symmetric co-representations A3 g , B3 g . Since we only care about the spin triplet superconductivity, we only care about the anti-symmetric co-representations. (Basises are the same as U RhGe and U CoGe under a strong magnetic field along y-axis.). Thus the Eq.A.28 is also the free energy of both co-representations A3 u and B3 u . x, where τ is inverse temperature) to get the effective superconducting free energy, here the f I sc is the modified part of the superconducting free energy. The effective free energy can be expressed as: where (A.30) Here, fluctuations are relatively small compared to β 1ij0 , β 2z0 and β 3iz0 . Thus the quartic terms in effective free energy are positive. As we can see in Eq.A.29, the dependencies of these three α i on magnetic moments have a similar form and the same trend. Moreover, although the quadratic terms in free energy can be described as: α i |d i | 2 , for each co-representation, there is only one highest T c . To derive this T c conveniently, we will rescale the d. Where the S n is the entropy of the normal state, α i0 (i = x, y, z) are positive constants. Thus the slope of the entropy will change when T = T 1 and T 2 . The specific heat can be derived from Eq.A.51: (A.52) Thus the jumps of the specific heat can be expressed as: Clearly, the spefici heat jump over the transition temperature do not dependent on the magnetic field and can be used to extract the phenomenological coefficients from the experiments. 2. √2Bz .