Imaging the bio-impedance distribution of a biological sample can provide understandings about the sample's electrical properties which is an important indicator of physiological status. This paper presents a multi-frequency electromagnetic tomography (mfEMT) technique for biomedical imaging. The system consists of 8 channels of gradiometer coils with adjustable sensitivity and excitation frequency. To exploit the frequency correlation among each measurement, we reconstruct multiple frequency data simultaneously based on the Multiple Measurement Vector (MMV) model. The MMV problem is solved by using a sparse Bayesian learning method that is especially effective for sparse distribution. Both simulations and experiments have been conducted to verify the performance of the method. Results show that by taking advantage of multiple measurements, the proposed method is more robust to noisy data for ill-posed problems compared to the commonly used single measurement vector model. Biological tissues show complex impedance over a range of frequencies excited by time-varying electromagnetic fields The most straightforward way of bio-impedance measurement is to contact or penetrate the sample by electrodes and then measure the transimpedance between the electrodes. For example, Yang and Jia reported a multi-frequency electrical impedance tomography (mfEIT) for biomedical imaging in Multi-frequency Electromagnetic Tomography (mfEMT) is a contactless and non-invasive imaging technique. It measures bio-impedance by using multi-frequency excitations with components spreading across the bandwidth of interest There are two imaging modes of EMT, i.e. Time-Difference (TD) imaging and Frequency-Difference (FD) imaging In the field of compressive sensing, it has been shown that compared to the SMV model, the successful recovery rate of signal can be greatly improved by using Multipl Measurement Vectors (MMV) In mfEMT, a sample is placed within an alternating excitation magnetic field (primary field) that is produced by a current flowing in a coil. In return, an electrical field in the sample is generated which will cause eddy current and thus, a secondary magnetic filed can be measured externally. Due to the small conductivity of biological samples, the secondary field is weak. Therefore, it is suggested that the primary field should be eliminated before measuring the secondary field. Previously, we reported that the gradiometer coil (see Fig. Based on the quasi-static approximation of eddy current, the sensitivity of gradiometer coil is governed by where ∆φ g denotes the phase response of secondary field caused by conductivity change ∆σ. V 0 is the voltage produced by the primary magnetic field. P 1 and P 2 are the geometrical factors that relate to the size and shape of the target and its position relative to the coil. ω represents the angular frequency of excitation signal and μ 0 is the permeability in free space. V res , the key tunning parameter of sensitivity, is the residual voltage caused by the imbalance of two receiver coils. The mfEMT system (see Fig. (2) excitation modules to drive gradiometer coils; The linear model describing phase change ∆φ and the conductivity change ∆σ is generally expressed as: Sensitivity matrix J is maps the conductivity distribution to phase values. It reveals by previous work where B 1 is the magnetic field produced by a current I 1 injected into the excitation coil; B 2 is the magnetic field produced by a current I 2 injected into the differential sensing coil; k is a coefficient. The discretized mesh of J is 64 × 64. The normalized sensitivity map (summation of rows) is shown in Fig. where {y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y L }, y i ∈ R N ×1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) denotes a sequence of measurements at different frequencies; J ∈ R N ×M (N M ) represents the sensitivity matrix; {σ 1 , σ 2 , . . . , σ L }, σ i ∈ R M ×1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) are the conductivity vectors to be solved and {v 1 , v 2 , . . . , v L }, v i ∈ R N ×1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) are unknown noise vectors. To utilize the correlation of mfEMT images, we consider the MMV model for mfEMT image reconstruction, which is given by where is the corresponding conductivity distribution at L frequencies. As illustrated in Fig. denotes the unknown noise vectors at multiple measurements. We first make a block sparsity assumption about the spatial conductivity. Without requiring any prior knowledge about the block distribution pattern, we consider the general case that the blocks have equal size of h and overlap with each other where g = M -h + 1 is the total number of blocks, and ∀i = 1, 2, . . . g, denotes the i-th block structure and x i = [x i , . . . , x i+h-1 ] T ∈ R h×1 denotes the weights of this block. The spatial block-sparse underlying model in Eq. ( To solve this MMV problem, we transfer the temporally correlated MMV (T-MSBL) method in . ⊗ represents the Kronecker product of the two matrices. vec(.) denotes the vectorization of the matrix by stacking its columns into a single column vector. We assume that the elements in the noise vector v F are independent and each has a Gaussian distribution i.e. p (v F ) ∼ N (0, γ 0 I). To exploit the spatial block sparsity and frequency information simultaneously, we design a prior of the weights x F using a zeromean Gaussian distribution where Σ 0 is and B i ∈ R hL×hL incorporates the spatial and frequency information into one covariance matrix. To avoid overfitting, it is a good practice to use one positive definite matrix B to model all the pixel covariance matrices B i , ∀i. The spatial sparsity is controlled by γ i , ∀i. With this prior, Eq. ( The final solution is x = μ x . The hyperparameter estimation of μ x , Σ x adopts the T-MSBL method introduced in A. System Evaluation Fig. To evaluate the phase measurement accuracy of Red Pitaya, we used the Agilent 33500 signal generator to produce dualchannel signals with predefined phase differences. The signals with an amplitude of 500 mVpp at 6.25 MHz are sampled by Red Pitaya at 125 MSPS. The FFT data length is 16384 (maximum capacity of red pitaya buffer) and the averaging factor is 20. Fig. Three test phantoms were designed with carrot cylinders (see Table Table It should be noticed that the reconstructed conductivity of objects with the MMV model has the same trend as true conductivity spectra. For example, the average reconstructed conductivity of phantom 1 in the object region is [σ f2 , σf3 , σf4 ] = [0.98, 1.46, 1.89], increasing with frequency. Although these values have not been calibrated with absolute conductivity, it verifies that the improvement of image quality is not just 'averaging the measurements'. The underlying information has been extracted in a noisy environment with the MMV model. Fig. Table This paper presents a novel image reconstruction algorithm for mfEMT by introducing MMV model and sparse Bayesian learning. The proposed method exploits the frequency-related information between each measurement. We introduce the sparse Bayesian learning method to solve the corresponding MMV problem, which is especially effective for challenging small scale conductivity distributions. Simulation and experiment have been conducted to verify the performance of the proposed method. Results show that by taking advantage of multiple measurements, it is more robust to noisy data. This feature is crucial for electromagnetic tomography image reconstruction because the problem is severely ill-posed. 