We present the theory of out-of-plane (or vertical) electron thermal-field emission from 2D semimetals. We show that the current-voltage-temperature characteristic is well-captured by a universal scaling relation applicable for broad classes of 2D semimetals, including graphene and its few-layer, nodal point semimetal, Dirac semimetal at the verge of topological phase transition and nodal line semimetal. Here an important consequence of the universal emission behavior is revealed: in contrast to the common expectation that band topology shall manifest differently in the physical observables, band topologies in two spatial dimension are indistinguishable from each others and bear no special signature in the electron emission characteristics. Our findings represent the quantum extension of the universal semiclassical thermionic emission scaling law in 2D materials, and provide the theoretical foundations for the understanding of electron emission from cathode and charge interface transport for the design of 2D-material-based vacuum nanoelectronics. Since the first field emission model or the well known Fowler-Nordheim (FN) law was formulated about a century ago Compared to field emission, thermionic emission due to 2D materials have been studied more intensively For field emission For quantum 2D materials, the validity of FN based models need to be scrutinized since the foundational bases of such theories, particularly the assumption of 3D quasi-free electron gas with parabolic dispersion, are fundamentally incompatible with the physical properties of 2D material In this work, we will address the above questions by developing the theory of out-of-plane electron thermalfield emission from 2D semimetals. We present the full numerical and analytical approximate expressions of the thermal-field emission current where A and B are material-dependent parameters, F is the electric field strength, T is the emitter temperature, d F ∝ F is a field-dependent parameter (defined below), and c ≡ d F /k B T . A particularly intriguing feature of Eq. ( The universal field emission scaling law identified here reveals an important fundamental feature of band topology in two spatial dimensions: in contrast to the common expectation that different band topologies shall manifest differently in the electronic, optical, electrical, mechanical and thermodynamical properties, as already demonstrated in the density of states In a 2D system, the confinement of electrons within the 2D plane lead to the formation of discrete subbands. The energy dispersion and the wavevector of the ith-subband are, , respectively, where ε ⊥,i and k ⊥,i denotes the discrete subband energy and the quantized wavevector along the outof-plane direction, respectively; ε ,i and k ,i denotes the continuously-dispersing in-plane energy dispersion and wavevector, respectively. The out-of-plane electron emission current density can be generally expressed as where g is the degeneracy factor, k F is the Fermi wavevector, D(k) is the out-of-plane tunneling probability, f (k i ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, the k -integral spans the whole Brillouin zone, i runs over all subbands, and τ -1 ⊥ is the vertical electron injection rate, which is affected by the intrinsic material properties and the device configuration, and can be experimentally extracted from the transport measurements For field-induced electron emission, the tunneling potential barrier is modeled, with inclusion of the image charge effect across a dielectric interface, as U (z) = Φ B0 -eF ze 2 ν/16π 0 z, where Φ B0 is the intrinsic interface potential barrier height measured from zeroenergy, ν ≡ ( s -1) /( s + 1), and s is the dielectric constant of the substrate material (see Fig. eF , v 0 and t 0 are correction factors for the image charge effect, and m is the free electron mass (see where k and ε denote the in-plane wavevector and energy components of the subband undergoing emission. We now employ a generalized 2D anisotropic density of states (DOS) to solve Eq. ( where m ∈ Z ≥0 and βml is an expansion coefficient that compactly contains the φ-integral where the (m, l)-component is which cannot be analytically solved except for the case of m = 0. An approximate analytical expression can be obtained by making the following ansatz. The term ε m is replaced by ξ m |ε F | m where ξ m is a the correction factor for the m-th order term since field emission is dominantly contributed by electrons residing around ε F . By making the substitution u = exp εε F /d F , Eq. ( where c ≡ d F /k B T . The above integral can be analytically solved We evaluate the full numerical solution in Eq. ( Equation ( Nodal point semimetal.-We first consider a generalized model of topological 2D nodal point semimetal with the effective Hamiltonian, where k = (k x , k y ) is the in-plane wavevector, σ x,y is the Pauli matrices, α n is a material-dependent parameter, and n ∈ Z + denotes the pseudospin vorticity. Equation (9) also describes the low-energy quasiparticles in n-layer graphene of Bernal stacking configuration with α n = ( v F ) n /t n-1 ⊥ , v F = 10 6 m/s and t ⊥ = 0.39 eV The analytical approximate solution in Eq. ( where v x and b are band structure parameters. The system undergoes a topological quantum phase transition from a Dirac semimetal into a band insulator when ∆ is switched from ∆ ≤ 0 to ∆ ≥ 0. In the semimetallic 2D system Density of states Thermal-field emission current density Numerical vs. approximation Generalized 2D anisotropic band Nodal point semimetal Dirac semimetal QCP Nodal line semimetal Graphene monolayer F (V/nm) J Gr / JGr FIG. phase (∆ ≤ 0), the thermal-field emission current density (c > 1) is where ε 0 ≡ 2 v 2 F /b is a characteristic energy, and where Λ φ,μ ≡ (cos 2 φ + 2μ sin 2 φ) 2 , arises from the broken rotational symmetry of Eq. ( again exhibits good agreement with the full numerical results (Fig. where ∆ is a band inversion parameter. Solving Eq. ( The above approximated form produces good agreement with the full numerical evaluation of Eq. (3) (Fig. Graphene.-The thermal-field emission from graphene is described by the Dirac Hamiltonian, H(k ) = v F (k x σ x + k y σ y ). The field emission current density is obtained as, Here, the ε F (also implicit in d F , c and D F ) is a function of the applied electric field strength, i.e. ε F = ε F (F ) Before conclusions, we make six remarks. Firstly, in the 'cold' field emission regime of T → 0, the scaling law in Eq. ( Secondly, the universal scaling law breaks down in the case of a non-dispersing 2D flat bands in 2D systems such as the Kagome which clearly deviates from Eq. ( Fourthly, the injection time parameter (τ ⊥ ) of a 2D material solid/solid interface ranges from 10 ps (lowquality contact) to 0.1 ps (high-quality contact) depending on the contact quality Fifthly, we remark that the substrate can significantly affect the field emission characteristics of 2D field emitter, particularly the electronic properties of atomicallythin materials can be sensitively modified when they are in close proximity to an external materials Finally, we briefly comment on the edge emission from 2D materials, which is expected to differ significantly from the 'face emission' reported in this manuscript. The emission current density from edge is a 1D linear current density whose underlying transport physics and formalism is completely different from Eq. ( In summary, we have developed the theory of out-ofplane thermal-field electron emission from 2D semimetals. We demonstrated the existence of a universal current-field scaling law broadly applicable for a large variety of 2D semimetals with different band topologies. As thermal-field emission represents one of the key charge transport process across solid/vacuum and solid/solid interfaces, the universal scaling law developed here shall provide a simple useful theoretical tool for the study and the design of vacuum electronics, nanoelectronics, optoelectronics and the emerging concepts of spintronic 