The spin-triplet state is most likely realized in uranium ferromagnetic superconductors, UGe 2 , URhGe, UCoGe. The microscopic coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity means that the Cooper pair should be realized under the strong internal field due the ferromagnetism. leading to the spin-triplet state with equal spin pairing. The field-reinforced superconductivity, which is observed in all three materials when the ferromagnetic fluctuations are enhanced, is one of the strong evidences for the spin-triplet superconductivity. We present here the results of a newly discovered spin-triplet superconductor, UTe 2 , and compare those with the results of ferromagnetic superconductors. Although no magnetic order is found in UTe 2 , there are similarities between UTe 2 and ferromagnetic superconductors. For example, the huge upper critical field exceeding the Pauli limit and the field-reentrant superconductivity for H b-axis are observed in UTe 2 , URhGe and UCoGe. We also show the specific heat results on UTe 2 in different quality samples, focusing on the residual density of states in the superconducting phase. The coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity attracts much attention because unconventional superconductivity with spin-triplet state is realized. The similar field-reinforced superconductivity is also observed in UCoGe. In order to study more details on superconducting properties in UTe 2 , we have grown single crystals of UTe 2 with different quality, and measured the specific heat at low temperatures. We compare the (H, T ) phase diagrams for H b-axis in UTe 2 , URhGe and UCoGe. Single crystals of UTe 2 were grown using chemical vapor transport method. The starting materials of U and Te were put into a quartz ampoule with the atomic ratio, U : Te = 2 : 3, together with iodine as the transport agent to be the density, 3 mg/cm 3 in the inner volume of the quartz ampoule. The ampoule was slowly heated and was kept at the temperature gradient of 1060 • C/1000 • C for 10 days. Many single crystals were obtained at lower temperature side, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. Figure Figure An important question is whether the residual density of states exists in the ideal single crystal without impurities. In that case, the partial density of states would be gapped, and the so-called A1 state should be realized, where the time reversal symmetry must be broken at zero field. There is, however, no experimental evidence for the breaking of time reversal symmetry in UTe 2 . Next we show in Fig. In URhGe, the suppression of T Curie leads to the spin-reorientation at H R in field sweep at low temperatures. The slope of magnetization curve for H b-axis is larger than that for c-axis. The moment gradually tilts from c to b-axis, and finally it re-orients to b-axis at H R ∼ 12 T. The γ-value is enhanced with increasing field, taking a maximum at H R . In NMR experiments, the spin-spin relaxation rate, 1/T 2 shows the diverging behavior around H R , indicating the strong enhancement of the longitudinal ferromagnetic fluctuations In UCoGe, the suppression of T Curie with field is similar to the case for URhGe. However, the spin reorientation is not observed in magnetization curve, indicating the strong Ising property compared to URhGe. The superconductivity shows an "S"-shaped curve, which is also connected to the suppression of T Curie . The enhancement of γ-value and the development of longitudinal fluctuation are observed in the field scan for H b-axis. In UTe 2 , the field reentrant superconductivity is also observed, while the temperature range and field range are much wider, compared to those in ferromagnetic superconductors, URhGe and UCoGe. The reentrant superconductivity is again linked to the metamagnetic transition at H m . The clear difference from ferromagnetic superconductors is that H m at high fields originates from the broad maximum of magnetic susceptibility, T χ,max , instead of T Curie . In the heavy fermion system, it is well known that H m is scaled with T χ,max 