Designing functional molecules and advanced materials requires complex design choices: tuning continuous process parameters such as temperatures or flow rates, while simultaneously selecting catalysts or solvents. To date, the development of data-driven experiment planning strategies for autonomous experimentation has largely focused on continuous process parameters despite the urge to devise efficient strategies for the selection of categorical variables. Here, we introduce Gryffin, a general purpose optimization framework for the autonomous selection of categorical variables driven by expert knowledge. Gryffin augments Bayesian optimization based on kernel density estimation with smooth approximations to categorical distributions. Leveraging domain knowledge in the form of physicochemical descriptors, Gryffin can significantly accelerate the search for promising molecules and materials. Gryffin can further highlight relevant correlations between the provided descriptors to inspire physical insights and foster scientific intuition. In addition to comprehensive benchmarks, we demonstrate the capabilities and performance of Gryffin on three examples in materials science and chemistry: (i) the discovery of non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, (ii) the design of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites for light harvesting, and (iii) the identification of ligands and process parameters for Suzuki-Miyaura reactions. Our results suggest that Gryffin, in its simplest form, is competitive with state-of-the-art categorical optimization algorithms. However, when leveraging domain knowledge provided via descriptors, Gryffin outperforms other approaches while simultaneously refining this domain knowledge to promote scientific understanding. The discovery of functional molecules and advanced materials is recognized as one of the fundamental obstacles to the development of emerging and future technologies, which are needed to face immediate challenges in clean energy, sustainability and global health. The machine learning community has been exploring algorithmic approaches to the data-driven selection of categorical variables in the context of hyperparameter optimization In this work we introduce Gryffin, a global optimization strategy for the selection of categorical variables in chemistry and materials science, which can be readily integrated into autonomous workflows. Gryffin implements a Bayesian optimization framework leveraging kernel density estimation directly on the categorical space, which can be accelerated with domain knowledge in the form of physicochemical descriptors by locally redefining the metric on the categorical space. In addition to accelerating the identification of optimal categorical options via the use of descriptors, Gryffin can construct more informative ones on-the-fly. This feature can highlight the relevance of the provided descriptors, enabling the interpretation of their role in determining the target properties of interest. Gryffin's approach to categorical optimization differs from how Bayesian optimization has been adopted in automatic chemical design. In the latter, categorical input spaces are mapped onto continuous ones with variational autoencoders and using large datasets. We highlight the applicability and performance of Gryffin on a set of synthetic benchmark functions and three real-world tasks: the discovery of small molecule non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, the discovery of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites for light harvesting, and the combined selection of ligands and process parameters for the optimization of Suzuki-Miyaura coupling reactions. We identify four key advantages of Gryffin: (i) it provides a framework for categorical optimization that is competitive with state-of-the-art algorithms in its naïve formulation, (ii) it outperforms the state-of-the-art when taking advantage of expert knowledge in the form of descriptors, (iii) can inspire scientific insights, and (iv) can be readily integrated with continuous optimization strategies to enable the robust and efficient optimization of mixed continuous-categorical domains in both sequential and batched workflows. Experiment planning can be formulated as an optimization task, where we consider a set of controllable parameters within a defined domain, z ∈ Z n , and an experimental response, f (z), for each of the parameter choices. In the context of reaction optimization, the controllable parameter could for example include the reaction temperature, the amount of solvent, or the choice of catalyst, while the experimental response could be the reaction yield, or the rate at which the product is formed. The optimization domain is also referred to as the design space or the candidate space. The optimization task in experiment planning consists in the identification of specific parameter values, z * ∈ Z n , which yield the desired experimental outcome, f (z * ). For simplicity, we will consider minimization tasks from here on, i.e. we formulate f such that z * = argmin z∈Z f (z) corresponds to the desired experimental result. The optimization task can be approached with a closed-loop strategy, which iteratively evaluates a set of options z j and records associated responses, f j = f (z j ), to gradually collect a set of observations, D n = {z j , f j } n j=1 , as feedback to the experiment planning strategy. The optimization of categorical parameters poses additional challenges compared to the optimization of continuous or discrete variables due to the lack of a natural ordering between individual parameter values, which is illustrated in the supplementary information (see Sec. S.2). Regardless of the optimization strategy, the confidence of having identified the best performing candidate in the search space increases with the number of evaluated candidates. In the best case, only one evaluation is required, while in the worst case all candidates in the search space need to be evaluated. Yet, the choice of the optimization strategy modulates the chance of having identified the best performing candidate after a certain number of evaluations and consequently the average fraction of the candidate space that needs to be evaluated to identify the most desired one. Straightforward search strategies rely on exhaustive random Extensions of Bayesian optimization frameworks to categorical parameter domains are under active development. One approach consists in the representation of categorical parameters as one-hot encoded vectors. Building upon previous work (see Sec. II), we base the formulation of Gryffin on a one-hot encoding of categorical variables. Yet, rather than constructing the surrogate on the continuous space spanned by the onehot encoded categorical choices, where each dimension is bounded by [0, 1], Gryffin aims to support the surrogate on the simplex to avoid projection redundancies. To this end, we extend the recently reported Phoenics approach 77 from continuous to categorical domains. Phoenics uses kernel regression, based on the Nadaraya-Watson estimator Naïve Gryffin constructs kernel densities by extending the one-hot encoding of categorical options to the entire simplex, i.e. we consider z ∈ ∆ n-1 . The largest entry of any given point z can be used to associate this point to a realizable option ζ (see Fig. The recently introduced concrete distribution Naïve Gryffin estimates kernel densities from concrete distributions and conditions the parameters of the concrete distribution on the sampled candidates, as introduced by the Phoenics framework. Approximating the computation of kernel densities can further reduce the overall computational cost of Gryffin by a significant amount. The approximation is based on the idea that the low density regions of the kernel densities indicate a lack of information. A precise estimate of the kernel densities in these regions might therefore not be required. We find that an approximate estimate of the kernel densities in low density regions can significantly reduce Gryffin's computational cost without degrading optimization performance. Details on this approximation are provided in the supplementary information (see Sec. S.3.A) The naïve Gryffin approach imposes an equal measure of covariance between individual options of categorical variables, which is undesired in cases where a notion of similarity can be established between any two options. Especially in the context of scientific discovery, similarities between the options of categorical variables can be defined, for example, via physicochemical descriptors for small molecules or material candidates. We extend the naïve approach by assuming that the metric to measure similarity between any two options is based on the Euclidean distance between real-valued d-dimensional descriptor vectors, x ∈ R d , which are uniquely associated with individual categorical options (see Fig. While the descriptors are embedded in a continuous space, their arrangement in this space is unknown for a generic optimization task and only selected points in the descriptor space can be associated with realizable categorical options. These limitations present major obstacles to optimization strategies that operate directly on the descriptor space. Instead, we propose to leverage the naïve Gryffin framework but redefine the metric on the simplex based on the provided descriptors. Following this strategy, the length of an infinitesimal line element on the simplex is conditioned not only on the corresponding in-finitesimal change of location on the simplex, but also on the infinitesimal change of the associated descriptors. Imposing a linear mapping between points on the simplex z and the descriptor space x, we can compute the length of a finite line element, ∆s, following the redefined metric to be which is derived in detail in the supplementary information (see Sec. S.1.B). Kernel densities generated by the naïve approach can be transformed following this descriptor-based definition of distances on the simplex to reflect the similarity between individual options as illustrated in Fig. We refer to the descriptor-guided categorical optimization as static Gryffin, as provided descriptors are used without further transformations. The benefits of static Gryffin over naïve Gryffin with respect to an accelerated search will depend on the provided descriptors. More informative descriptors are expected to guide the algorithm toward well-performing options more efficiently than less informative descriptors. This effect is investigated empirically in Sec. IV. The dynamic formulation of Gryffin aims to alleviate the expected sensitivity of the performance of static Gryffin on the choice of provided descriptors by transforming them during the optimization. Specifically, dynamic Gryffin infers a transformation, T , which constructs a new set of descriptors, x , from the provided descriptors, x, based on the feedback collected from evaluated options. The transformation T can be constructed to target two major goals: (i) the generation of more informative descriptors, x , which help to navigate the candidate space more efficiently, and (ii) the interpretable identification of relevant domain knowledge to inspire design choices and scientific insights, as we will demonstrate in Sec. V. In addition to these two goals, the transformation T is required to be robust with respect to overfitting due to the low data scenarios which are commonly encountered in autonomous workflows. In an attempt to balance flexibility, robustness and interpretability, we suggest constructing this transformation T from a learnable combination of the provided descriptors where W and b are the learnable parameters inferred from the feedback collected in previous evaluations. The class of transformations described by Eq. 2 includes slightly non-linear translations and rotations of the provided descriptors. While more complex transformations accounting for higher-order interactions between individual descriptors could potentially yield even more informative descriptors, a slightly non-linear transformation is inherently robust to overfitting, We empirically assess the performance of all proposed variants of Gryffin on a set of synthetic benchmark surfaces, which are detailed in the supplementary information (see Sec. S.2). Four of the surfaces constitute categorized adaptations of established functions commonly used to benchmark global and local optimization strategies on continuous parameter domains. In addition, we include three partially and fully randomized surfaces with responses sampled from stationary probability distributions. While the ordering of the categorical options is arbitrary, we introduce a reference ordering to illustrate the surfaces (see supplementary information, Sec. S.2, for details). Unless noted otherwise, descriptors for the categorical options are generated such that they encode the reference ordering. Implementations of all benchmark surfaces are made available on GitHub. In a first test, we compare the optimization strategies on two-dimensional formulations of the synthetic benchmark surfaces with 21 options per dimension, as illustrated in Fig. We observe that random exploration requires the evaluation of approximately half the space for the surfaces with well-defined global optima, and about a third of the space for the Camel function with degenerate optima. We find that the performances of PyEvolve, SMAC and Hyperopt are roughly comparable across the different surfaces, although PyEvolve tends to outperform SMAC and Hyperopt on the noiseless surfaces. GPyOpt generally locates global optima faster than the other strategies, but is slightly slower than naïve Gryffin on the non-convex surfaces. The faster optimization of convex surfaces by Gaussian process-based Bayesian optimization, compared to kernel density-based approaches, has already been observed and discussed for continuous domains. We further study the performance of Gryffin on larger candidate spaces with (i) more categorical variables, and (ii) more options per categorical variable. Increasing the number of variables or the number of options per variable generally increases the number of candidates in the space and is thus expected to require more candidate evaluations overall before the best candidate is identified. Results obtained for these benchmarks are detailed in the supplementary information (see Secs. S.3.C and S.3.D). The benchmarks suggest that Gryffin indeed uses more candidate evaluations to locate the global optimum with an increasing volume of the search space, consistently across all benchmark surfaces. However, although the number of evaluations increases, the fraction of the explored space generally decreases. More specifically, across the different surfaces, we identify a polynomial decay of the explored space with an increasing number of options per variable, with decay exponents ranging from -1.0 to -1.25, and an exponential decay for an increase in the number of parameters with decay coefficients ranging from -1.6 to -2.0 (more details in the supplementary information, Secs. S.3.C and S.3.D) Based on this observation, we conclude that Gryffin may show an onset of the curse of dimensionality 104 only for a relatively large number of dimensions and thus constitutes an optimization strategy that can efficiently navigate large categorical spaces. The effectiveness of transforming provided descriptors to accelerate the search for the best candidate is studied in detail on the Slope surface with 51 options per dimension, resulting in 2, 601 different candidates (see Fig. Fig. We further find that static Gryffin can benefit from descriptors and significantly outperform the naïve approach if the Pearson correlation coefficient between descriptors and responses is at least 0.8. Below this value, the average performance of static and naïve Gryffin is comparable, although the variance on the performance is higher for the static formulation. Similar to static Gryffin, learning a more informative set of descriptors with dynamic Gryffin accelerates the search more if the FIG. correlation between the descriptors and the responses is high. However, the dynamic formulation is generally at least as fast as the static formulation and can successfully leverage descriptors to outperform descriptor-less searches even at correlations as low as 0.1. We thus confirm that the descriptor transformation introduced in Eq. 2 is sufficiently robust to be applied to low-data tasks and conclude that deploying dynamic Gryffin can be beneficial for some descriptor guided optimization tasks without delaying the optimization compared to static Gryffin. Following the empirical benchmarks of Gryffin, we now demonstrate its applicability and practical relevance to a set of optimization tasks across materials science and chemistry. Specifically, we target the discovery of non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, the design of organic-inorganic perovskites for light harvesting, and the selection of phosphine ligands and optimization of process conditions for Suzuki-Miyaura coupling reactions. Obtaining statistically significant performance comparisons at a sufficient level of confidence requires the repeated execution of optimization runs to average out the influences of initial conditions and probabilistic elements of the optimization strategies. As repetitive executions of optimization runs on these applications are highly resource demanding, we construct these optimization tasks from recently reported datasets: the applications on the discovery of non-fullerene acceptors and perovskites are based on lookup tables, and the optimization of Suzuki reactions are facilitated via a probabilistic model trained on experimental data (virtual robot) to emulate experi-mental uncertainties in addition to the average response. Virtual robots have recently been introduced to benchmark algorithms for autonomous experimentation. Small organic molecules currently constitute the highest performing acceptor materials for organic solar cells. We demonstrate the applicability of Gryffin for the discovery of non-fullerene acceptors on a candidate space of 4,216 different small organic molecules, which form a subset of a recently reported comprehensive study. We guide static and dynamic Gryffin with a set of electronic and geometric descriptors for each of the fragments: the HOMO and LUMO energy levels, the dipole moment, the radius of gyration, and the molecular weight. Electronic properties were computed at the B3LYP/Def2SVP level of theory on a SuperFineGrid using Gaussian, Fig. Perovskite solar cells constitute another class of lightharvesting materials. They are typically composed of inorganic lead halide matrices and contain inorganic or organic anions (see Fig. The fractions of the candidate space explored by each optimization strategy before locating the HOIP composition with the lowest bandgap are illustrated in Fig. Despite naïve Gryffin already outperforming all other search strategies tested, its static and dynamic formulations still manage to improve upon Gryffin's performance and identify the best-performing HOIP after exploring less than 8 % of the design space, i.e. less than 16 HOIP candidates. This means that, on average, Gryffin could find the optimal design without the need to evaluate all organic anions. This observation further confirms that Gryffin's optimizations are indeed accelerated by the availability of suitable descriptors. However, in this example, we did not observe a significant performance difference between the static and the dynamic formulation of Gryffin. This behavior is expected given the high correlation (up to 0.9) between provided descriptors and the bandgaps (see Sec. IV.C). For this application, we find that electronegativity is most relevant for the inorganic constituents, while the radius of gyration and the molecular weight are most informative for the organic compound. Although the targeted property (bandgap of the HOIP) is an electronic property, dynamic Gryffin seems to benefit the most from the geometric (and not the electronic) descriptors of the organic compound. In contrast, the mass of the in- organic compounds seems to be the least relevant, while their electronegativity is most informative. These observations suggest that the organic molecule does not directly affect the electronic properties of the HOIP material, but rather induces a change in the arrangement of the inorganic compounds which in turn modulates the bandgap. Indeed, this hypothesis has emerged in various studies on perovskite materials. As a final application, we demonstrate how Gryffin can aid in the optimization of Suzuki-Miyaura crosscoupling reactions with heterocyclic substrates. Here, we consider a flow-based Suzuki-Miyaura crosscoupling reaction, in which we tune three continuous reaction conditions (temperature, residence time, catalyst loading) and one categorical variable (ligand for Palladium catalyst) as illustrated in Fig. The contributions of individual descriptors are illustrated in Fig. Overall, across all three applications, we find that naïve Gryffin generally constitutes a competitive strategy for the optimization of categorical variables in chemistry and materials science, which tends to outperform state-of-the-art optimization strategies. Static Gryffin can accelerate the search with provided descriptors and navigate the search space more efficiently by exploiting descriptor-based similarities between individual options, thus efficiently leveraging domain knowledge. Dynamic Gryffin can accelerate the search even further by transforming provided descriptors to improve their relevance and inspire scientific insights. Finally, Gryffin integrates well with optimization strategies for continuous variables and thus enables the simultaneous optimization of mixed continuous-categorical parameter spaces. In this work we introduced Gryffin, an experiment planning strategy for the selection of categorical variables, such as functional molecules, catalysts, and materials. Similar to a recently introduced algorithm for optimization over continuous domains We compared the performance of Gryffin to stateof-the-art categorical optimization algorithms on a set of synthetic benchmark functions. Our benchmarks indicate that the naïve formulation of Gryffin, which does not use any descriptor information, is competitive with state-of-the-art strategies on pseudo convex surfaces and outperforms them on all other surfaces. Descriptorguided searches with static Gryffin identify global optima at significantly faster rates across all surfaces. Dynamic Gryffin, which attempts to construct a more informative set of descriptors, can accelerate the search even further, especially when correlations between the descriptors and the properties to be optimized are moderate, and for noisy response surfaces. Importantly, across all our tests, the dynamic formulation of Gryffin was never found to be considerably inferior to its static formulation. The capabilities of Gryffin were further demonstrated on three real-world applications across materials science and chemistry: (i) the discovery of non-fullerene acceptors for organic solar cells, (ii) the discovery of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites for light harvesting, and (iii) the mixed categorical-continuous selection of ligands and reaction conditions for Suzuki-Miyaura crosscoupling reactions. Gryffin outperformed the other experiment planning strategies in all three applications. Static and dynamic Gryffin accelerated the searches even with moderately informative physicochemical descriptors. We further found that dynamic Gryffin was able to identify trends among descriptors that elucidate some of the prevalent phenomena giving rise to the properties of interest. This observations indicates that dynamic Gryffin has the potential to foster scientific understanding and encourage physical and chemical intuition for the studied systems. A question that naturally arises when using Gryffin is how to select the descriptors associated with specific chemical species. In fact, cheminformatics tools like RDKit Several extensions and improvements to Gryffin are possible and will be considered in future work. While dy-namic Gryffin learns the importance of each descriptor from data, the static formulation assumes equal importance among all descriptors provided by the user. A possible extension could allow the user to provide weights associated with each descriptor to reflect user knowledge of their relative importance. Another possible improvement is the use of unsupervised learning techniques, such as variational autoencoders One of the most computationally demanding aspects of Gryffin is the optimization of the non-convex acquisition function. Within acquisition optimization, the evaluation of the objective function is responsible for most of the cost, given that numerous evaluations are required. The use of zeroth-order optimization approaches, like evolutionary algorithms, might reduce this cost by avoiding the function evaluations required by first-and second-order methods to estimate gradients. In addition, the use of compositional solvers The use of power transforms to handle heteroscedastic noise has recently been found to improve the performance of Bayesian optimization based on Gaussian processes. 134 Among other recently proposed approaches to handle this scenario, common in many experimental and computational experiments, is the use of surrogate models that are robust against this type of uncertainty. In summary, Gryffin constitutes a readily available strategy for the efficient selection of categorical variables across optimization tasks in science and engineering, and alleviates some of the immediate challenges to the ver-satile deployment of autonomous experimentation platforms. The demonstrated improvement upon state-ofthe-art approaches thanks to the use of physicochemical descriptors constitutes a step towards effective, datadriven experiment planning guided by domain knowledge. We believe that Gryffin will enable the acceleration of scientific discovery, such as the search for promising molecules and materials. We invite the community to test and deploy it in expensive optimization tasks where similarities between categorical options can be defined. Gryffin is available for download on GitHub. Phoenics models kernel densities on continuous domains with normal priors, where the parameters of the normal priors are sampled from a Bayesian neural network conditioned on the observed parameter points. The use of normal priors provide two main advantages. First, the locations and the precisions of the priors can be controlled independently, which means that priors can be fine-tuned based on the collected observations. Second, the priors can be reparameterized into deterministic functions of their parameters and stationary noise nodes, which accelerates the computations for inference and prediction in automatic differentiation frameworks. where Γ(n) = (n -1)! is the gamma function, τ is a temperature parameter that controls the precision of the distribution, and π indicate the class probabilities. Samples z of the concrete distribution can be generated by sampling from a standard Gumbel distribution, i.e. we draw i.i.d. samples g k ∼ Gumbel(0, 1), and setting Note, that the parameters π are deterministic. Based on the kernel densities p k (z) and the associated observed responses f k , where k indicates the k-th measurement, we can construct the acquisition function where λ is a sampling parameter that controls the degree of exploitation or exploration expressed by the acquisition function. The static Gryffin approach extends the categorical optimization strategy detailed in Sec. S.1.A to cases where individual options of a categorical variable z can be associated to a set of descriptors x, for which we can define a metric to measure their pairwise distances. For simplicity, we consider descriptors that are m-dimensional real-valued vectors, x ∈ R m , for which we compute distances as the Euclidean norm after normalization to the unit hypercube [0, 1] m . We further assume that the descriptors are uniquely associated with individual options, such that no two options are described by the same descriptor. While options for future evaluations could be selected directly from the real valued space R m in which the descriptors are embedded, the efficient selection of candidates solely based on their descriptors is non-trivial for various reasons. For example, the geometry of the descriptors embedded in the real space is unknown and can be highly complex for a generic optimization task, which poses a challenge to defining domain boundaries. Furthermore, only specific points in the descriptor space correspond to realizable options of the categorical variable, such that the selection of the next candidate to evaluate can be ambiguous. To avoid these challenges, static Gryffin instead suggests new options based on kernel densities constructed on the categorical space, where the geometry of the space is known. Static Gryffin accounts for descriptor information by locally transforming the metric on the categorical space based on varying distances between individual descriptors. To this end, static Gryffin constructs a metric tensor for the categorical space from the descriptors associated with individual options. Illustration of the path in the categorical space along which changes of a given descriptor are computed for a change in a given categorical option. The path is parameterized by t and goes from z to z2 in this example. In the following, we derive an expression for the distance between any point z on a simplex with dimensionality #opt and a particular target corner e, z t = δ it e i for i = 0, . . . , #opt, computed based on the metric spanned by the descriptors associated with individual options, following the example illustrated in Fig. S.7. The infinitesimal line element on the descriptor space with #desc-many descriptors can be calculated following the Euclidean norm where we sum over all descriptors. With the assumption that descriptors are a function of the points on the simplex, x = x(z), we can compute the infinitesimal changes in the descriptors via infinitesimal changes in the categorical variable The infinitesimal line element ds can then be expressed as Further, if we assume that x(z) is a linear function of the points on the simplex, we can replace dx → ∆x, dz → ∆z and ds → ∆s. The length of the path from a point z on the simplex to the corner z i then simplifies to where we introduced ∆x i m to describe the change of the m-th descriptor with a change in the i-th option of the categorical variable. To compute this change in the descriptor, we consider a straight line in the categorical space as illustrated in Fig. and compute the value of the descriptor x m along this path. For t = 1, the value of x m is identical to the value of the m-th descriptor of the i-th categorical option. For t = 0, however, the value of x m is given by the weighted average of the descriptors x m across all categories but the i-th category. Hence, for a given point z along this path, where denotes the value of the m-th descriptor of the i-th categorical option. Following the path from z to z i (yellow line in Fig. We then compute the length of the path outlined in x opt i m - Eq. 14 presents the final equation to recompute distances. Based on these distances, similarity between sampled points on the simplex and its corners can be established. The reshaping process is further illustrated on a three dimensional categorical space in Fig. S.8 for two different sets of descriptors. Fig. S.8a is generated for a set of three dimensional descriptors with equal pairwise distances between them, with x 0 = (1, 0, 0), x 1 = (0, 1, 0) and x 2 = (0, 0, 1). Fig. S.8b,c are generated for descriptors with different pairwise distances arising from x 0 = (1, 1, 1), x 1 = (1/4, 1, 1/2), and x 2 = (0, 0, 1). Panels (i) are created with the Euclidean metric on the simplex, such that the color contours in panels A.i and B.i illustrate the closest corner point to any point in the simplex, and C.i shows an arbitrary kernel density sampled from a concrete distribution. The meshes illustrate line elements of equal length along individual coordinates. Panels (ii) show the meshes computed for the descriptor-guided metric, while contour plots follow the Euclidean metric. Panels (iii) show the contours for the descriptor-guided metric and the meshes for the Euclidean metric. Static Gryffin leverages real-valued descriptors to navigate categorical spaces in search for the best performing options. Such descriptor-guided searches, however, can only achieve faster optimization rates if the provided descriptors are representative of the expected performance of individual options. In fact, for an optimal performance of static Gryffin, the provided descriptors should perfectly correlate with the collected measurements, which will rarely be the case in real-world applications. However, descriptors that only poorly resemble the associated measurements cannot efficiently guide the search. The dynamic Gryffin approach aims to alleviate this limitation by constructing more informative descriptors, denoted with x , on-the-fly from the responses {f k } collected during the optimization and the provided descriptors x. The transformed descriptors x are considered to be more informative if they achieve higher correlations with the collected measurements {f k }, which are quantified via the Pearson correlation coefficient. Note, that we focus on large Pearson correlations without loss of generality, as highly negative coefficients close to -1 can be converted to large coefficients by a sign flip in the descriptors. The construction of a transformation T , which generates more informative descriptors x from the provided descriptors x, i.e. T : x → x , can potentially elucidate the relevance of the provided descriptors, measured by their significance and influence to the construction of x . As such, analyzing the transformation T and identifying the descriptors x to which the measurements are most sensitive has the potential to inspire scientific insights. (i) Maximizing the correlation between collected measurements {f k } and at least one of the transformed descriptors x i . Transformed descriptors that highly correlate with the collected measurements can efficiently guide an optimization strategy such as Gryffin, as demonstrated in Sec. IV of the main text. (ii) Reducing the cardinality of the set of transformed descriptors, such that only informative descriptors are retained. Larger sets of descriptors are more likely to span highly non-linear manifolds with stronger local curvatures, which can pose challenges to efficient optimizations. (iii) Reducing the pairwise correlation between any two transformed descriptors. Two highly correlated descriptors contain redundant information which is irrelevant for the optimization. The set of transformed descriptors is most informative if there is little correlation between any two transformed descriptors. We model the transformation T by a slightly non-linear operation, which could be interpreted as a simple, one-layer neural network. Specifically, we construct T following Eq. 15, where W and b are trainable parameters inferred from the collected measurements. where softsign( This model architecture encodes slightly non-linear translations and rotations on the descriptor space. Although the simplicity of this model restricts the possible set of transformations, it substantially reduces the risk of overfitting in the low-data regimes commonly encountered in autonomous experimentation workflows. In addition, linear regression models are typically easier to interpret than more elaborate models with more complicated architectures, such that this choice of T can potentially facilitate scientific insight. The architecture and the effect of realizable transformations on the descriptors are illustrated in Fig. S.9. The parameters W and b of the transformation T described by Eq. 15 are inferred from collected measurements to satisfy the three aforementioned goals. To 3his end, we define a set of penalties, λ, which are collectively minimized during inference via stochastic gradient descent. The first penalty, λ 0 , targets the maximization of the correlation between at least one of n transformed descriptors and the collected measurements where ρ(x i,k , f k ) denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient defined as and μ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation of the descriptors and measurements over the set of all executed evaluations. Note, that this penalty favors correlation over anti-correlation without loss of generality. Given at least one highly correlated descriptor, we would like the correlation between the measurements and all remaining descriptors to either be high (for the descriptors to be informative) or close to zero (for the descriptors to be insignificant). Additional, highly correlated descriptors x would still provide valuable information. Transformed descriptors with low correlations, however, can be neglected altogether as they provide little guidance to the optimizer. To construct a penalty that reflects these two desired outcomes, we first estimate the expected values for insignificant correlations. Given two independent random sequences with n elements, the expected Pearson correlation coefficient ρ is zero with a standard error ∆ρ of approximately as derived by Fisher. The second penalty is constructed from this adjusted correlation to equally favor correlations close to 1 or below the significance threshold where π here refers to the mathematical constant. Our third penalty aims to decorrelate the transformed descriptors x, to diversify the information carried by each of them. Indeed, transformed descriptors that all perfectly correlate with the collected measurements also necessarily correlate with one another, and are thus redundant. In the definition of this third penalty, we again consider correlations to be insignificant if they are below the threshold defined in Eq. 18 Finally, the parameters W of the transformation are L1-regularized to favor sparse operations which are easier to interpret. The regularization factor is denoted with ν and set to 10 -3 in all experiments The overall penalty function is then minimized via stochastic gradient descent until no significant improvement is observed over a period of 20 epochs, or a total training duration of 1, 000 epochs has been reached. We demonstrate the performance of the introduced formulations of Gryffin with empirical benchmarks conducted on a set of synthetic surfaces. The benchmark surfaces are constructed with inspiration drawn from well-established analytic functions on continuous spaces that are typically used to benchmark local and global optimization strategies. Specifically, we extend the widely used Ackley, Camel, Dejong and Michalewicz functions to categorical spaces with arbitrarily many categorical variables and options per variable. In addition, we introduce three partially and fully randomized surfaces, referred to as Slope (no noise), Noise (moderate noise) and Random (purely random), where responses are perturbed by noise sampled from stationary uniform distributions. All benchmark surfaces are illustrated in the top panels of Fig. S.10 for two categorical variables with 21 options per variable. It is important to note that there is no spatial relation between individual options since the order of any two options can be mutually switched without changing the surface. We illustrate this order ambiguity in the lower panels of Fig. S.10, where random permutations α have been performed on the reference order illustrated in the top panels to create the shuffled orders depicted in the lower panels. However, descriptors can be assigned to each of the categories such that a particular metric is imposed on the domain space. Unless noted otherwise, we use the reference ordering for all options when supplying descriptors to construct a metric space for these categorical benchmark functions. In the following, we describe and characterize the introduced benchmark surfaces in more detail. Python implementations of the benchmark functions are made available on GitHub. b. Camel surface: The Camel surface is generalized from the Camel function on continuous domains and features a degenerate and pseudo-disconnected global minimum. c. Dejong surface: The Dejong surface is inspired by the Dejong function and, as such, represents the generalization of a parabola to categorical spaces. We therefore refer to the Dejong functions as pseudo-convex. Similar to the Ackley surface, the Dejong surface features a well-defined global minimum if the number of options for all dimensions is odd, and a degenerate global minimum if at least one of the dimensions features an even number of options. d. Michalewicz surface: The Michalewicz surface is generalized to categorical spaces from the Michalewicz function. This surface features well-defined options for each dimension which yield significantly better performances than others. In addition, the number of pseudo-local minima scales factorially with the number of dimensions. e. Slope surface: The Slope surface is constructed such that the response linearly increases with the index of the option along each dimension in the reference ordering. As such, the Slope surface presents a generalization of a plane to categorical domains. f. Noise surface: The Noise surface is a variant of the Slope surface, where perturbations sampled from a stationary uniform distribution are added to the responses of the surface, such that the overall correlation between the responses and the descriptors in the reference ordering target a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.5. The noise added to the surface is fixed with a random seed conditioned on the dimensionality and the number of options per dimension, such that the surfaces are generated reproducibly. g. Random surface: The Random surface is constructed from samples drawn from a stationary uniform distribution. To reproduce the surface, the random seed which generates the surface is conditioned on the dimensionality of the surface and the number of options per dimension. In the following sections we empirically illustrate the performance of the three introduced variants of Gryffin on the synthetic benchmark surfaces introduced in Sec. S.2. The computationally most expensive step in the evaluation of the acquisition function is the computation of the kernel densities as an average over the number of samples drawn from the Bayesian neural network. However, the shape of the acquisition function is dominated by the (a priori known) uniform distribution in regions of the parameter space where the kernel densities assume relatively low values. Based on this observation, we suggest that the construction of the acquisition function can be accelerated with an approximate scheme, which estimates kernel density values from fewer samples in low density regions. Following this strategy, we compute a first estimate to the value of the true kernel density p true (z) at a given parameter point z based on a randomly selected 10 % of the samples drawn from the Bayesian neural network. This preliminary estimate, p approx,10 (z) is compared to the uniform distribution on the parameter domain, p uniform (z). If the estimated kernel density is greater than or equal to 1 % of the uniform distribution, i.e. the kernel density is considered to be sufficiently large to require a more accurate estimate, p approx,100 , using 100 % of the samples. Otherwise, the evaluation is stopped and the more uncertain estimate is used to approximate the true kernel density, thus saving 90 % of the sample evaluations at this parameter point. Further accelerations of the implementation of the Gryffin framework are achieved by caching previously evaluated kernel densities to avoid redundant evaluations. This approach, however, balances reduced time requirements with slightly increased memory requirements and might thus not be applicable to all types of computational resources. We refer to this approximation as pseudo-boosting. We empirically estimate the runtime accelerations and the degree of potential performance degradations due to approximations to the acquisition functions on six of the benchmark surfaces introduced in Sec. S.2. The performances of the pseudo-boosting strategy and the full sampling strategy are quantified based on the average best function values sampled for each benchmark surface after a certain number of iterations, while each optimization targets the location of the global minimum. Each benchmark surface is constructed with two categorical variables with 21 options per categorical variable. Results for 200 independent repetitions of the optimization runs for all surfaces are illustrated in The benchmarks indicate no significant performance difference between the pseudo-boosting and the full sampling strategies of Gryffin, indicating that approximations to the acquisition function in low density regions does not severely affect the optimization runs. In addition to the performance, we also analyzed the computational time required for one iteration at a given number of options with fixed dimensionality (see Fig. We find a linear dependence of the runtime with the number of observations in both cases. While the full sampling version of Gryffin experiences an increase in runtime of about 0.071 s with each additional observation, the increase in runtime of the pseudo-boosted version of Gryffin is about 0.028 s per observation. Thus, the pseudo-boosted implementation makes Gryffin's linear scaling 2.5 times less steep. However, we do not observe any significant accelerations for a varying number of dimensions. We conclude that pseudo-boosting provides a runtime advantage when increasing the number of observations (as expected, by construction) without any noticeable degradations in the optimization performance. Based on these findings we recommend the pseudo-boosted version of Gryffin and use the pseudo-boosted version for all reported studies unless noted otherwise. We empirically estimate the fraction of the candidate space that static Gryffin explores to locate the optimum with respect to the number of categorical variables in the optimization task. For this benchmark, we set up each categorical variable with a total of 11 options and gradually increase the dimensionality of the search space. Fig. S.14 illustrates the performance of static Gryffin on different benchmark surfaces with varying dimensionality, for a total of 100 independent executions. Descriptors were provided in the reference ordering introduced in Sec. S.2. As expected, Gryffin required more candidate evaluations to locate the global optimum for search spaces with larger volumes. However, the fraction of the space explored by static Gryffin decreased with the dimensionality across all benchmark surfaces. More specifically, we find that the dependence of the explored space to the number of parameters can be approximated with an exponential decay of the form y = α exp(-γx) where y denotes the fraction of the explored space, x denotes the number of parameters and α and γ are two parameters which we infer from a least-square fit. Parameter values are reported in Tab. S.1. This observation indicates that Gryffin does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality, as the number of evaluated candidates does not increase as fast as the volume of the space. We empirically estimate the fraction of the candidate space that static Gryffin explores to locate the optimum with respect to the number of options per categorical variable. We set up each benchmark surface with two categorical variables and gradually increase the number of options. We observe that the fraction of the space that static Gryffin explores to locate the optimum consistently decreases with an increasing number of options across all benchmark surfaces. More specifically, we find that the dependence of the explored space to the number of parameters can be approximated with an exponential decay of the form y = αx -γ where y denotes the fraction of the explored space, x denotes the number of options and α and γ are two parameters which we infer from a least-square fit. Parameter values are reported in Tab. S.2. This discovery task involves the selection of molecular fragments that are assembled into non-fullerene acceptor candidates for solar cell applications, following a recent study by Lopez et al. We construct hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIP) from a set of different options for the inorganic cation, the inorganic anion, and the organic anion. HOIP designs are evaluated based on their bandgap, and ranked from lowest to highest. Inorganic constituents are characterized by their electron affinity, ionization energy, total mass and electronegativity. Organic anions are described by a set of electronic properties (HOMO, LUMO, dipole moment, atomization energy) and geometric properties (radius of gyration, molecular weight). Correlations between individual descriptors and the computed HOIP bandgaps are reported in Tab. S.4 In agreement with the results reported in Sec. V.A, we observe that the dynamic formulation of Gryffin locates promising candidates the fastest. The tendency of static Gryffin to show a reduced optimization rate beyond the initial phase as observed for the non-fullerene application (see Sec. S.4.A) is not as prevalent in this application. In this application we demonstrate that Gryffin can be used to determine reaction conditions for Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reactions (see Sec. V.C). Following the experimental procedure detailed by Reizman et al.: From the total dataset comprising 88 reactions, eight reactions were separated for the test set. The reactions for the test set were chosen randomly, but with the constraint that each of the seven ligands was used in at least one of the test set reactions. The remaining 80 reactions were used for 10-fold cross-validation. The different ligands were represented as one-hot encoded vectors, and all other experimental conditions were standardized. Both reaction yields and TON were chosen as prediction targets. To account for the fact that both reaction yields and TON cannot be negative, we applied the ReLU activation function to the last layer. Accordingly, the targets were rescaled by dividing by the average reaction yield and TON, respectively, to simplify the initialization of the BNN. We use leaky ReLUs for all other activations and apply dropout at a rate of 0.1 for further regularization. Distributions for weights and biases are initialized as standard normal distributions. The BNN is constructed with three hidden layers and 24 neurons per layer. Network parameters are inferred via variational inference using the Adam optimization algorithm with an initial learning rate of 10 -3 . We compute the yield and TONs for each ligand on a grid of 100 equidistant levels for each of the three remaining process conditions (temperature, residence time, catalyst loading). The maximum and average values of both optimization objectives, associated to each ligand, are reported in Tab. S.5. We observe that ligand L3 is associated with the highest maximum TON and ligand L1 with the highest maximum yield, while the highest average turnover numbers and yields are achieved with ligand L2. We also analyze the correlation of the provided descriptors with the maximum and average TONs and yields and report the results in Tab. S.6. The logP values of the ligands correlate the best with the maximum TON, the average TON, and the average yield, while the number of valence electrons is most indicative of the maximum achievable yield. Given that the first optimization target is the maximization of the reaction yield, the number of valence electrons is expected to be most informative in the initial phase of the optimization. In addition, because Gryffin will investigate the most promising ligands in more depth, and given that the yield is the primary objective, the number of valence electrons might be considered more informative than logP across the rest of the optimization too. Finally, we compute the pairwise correlations between the provided descriptors (Tab. S.7). We find that the number of valence electrons, the melting point and the molecular weight generally correlate well with one another. 1. Fitting parameters for the dependency of the fraction of the explored space on the number of categorical parameters. The r 2 score indicates the coefficient of determination D. Influence of the number of options