Gallium selenide (GaSe) is a layered compound, which has been exploited in nonlinear optical applications and photodetectors due to its anisotropic structure and pseudo-direct optical gap. Theoretical studies predicted that its two-dimensional (2D) form is a potential photocatalyst for water splitting reactions. Herein, we first report the photoelectrochemical (PEC) characterization of GaSe nanoflakes (single-/few-layer flakes), produced via liquid phase exfoliation, for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in both acidic and alkaline media. In 0.5 M H2SO4, the GaSe photoelectrodes display the best PEC performance, i.e. a ratiometric power-saved metric for HER (Φsaved,HER) of 0.09% and a ratiometric power-saved metric for OER (Φsaved,OER) of 0.25%. When used as PEC-type photodetectors, GaSe photoelectrodes show a responsivity of ~0.16 A W -1 upon 455 nm illumination at light intensity of 63.5 μW cm -2 and applied potential of -0.3 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). The stability analysis of the GaSe photodetectors evidences a durable operation over tens of cathodic linear sweep voltammetry scans in 0.5 M H2SO4 for HER. Viceversa, degradation effects have been observed in both alkaline and anodic operation due to highly oxidizing environment and O2-induced (photo-)oxidation effects. Our results provide new insight into PEC properties of GaSe nanoflakes for their exploitation in photoelectrocatalysis, PEC-type photodetectors and (bio)sensors. Gallium selenide (GaSe) is a layered pseudo-direct optical bandgap (direct transition positioned just above the indirect one) binary chalcogenide (namely, a group-III monochalcogenide) (2) GaSe + 3/4O2 = 1/2Ga2O3 + Se. The thermodynamic requirements for a water splitting photo(electro)catalyst are ECBM > E(H + /H2) and EVBM < E(O2/H2O) for HER and OER, respectively. The GaSe crystal was synthesized by direct reaction from Ga and Se elements. Based on the theoretical and experimental characterizations of their optoelectronic properties, the GaSe flakes were tested as candidate photoelectrocalysts for PEC water splitting and PEC-type photodetectors (Figure As shown by the SEM image (Figure On the basis of the preliminary results achieved for PEC water splitting, the GaSe photoelectrodes were investigated as PEC-type photodetectors in 0.5 M H2SO4 upon three different illuminations with wavelengths in the visible spectral range, i.e., 455, 505 and 625 nm, whose energy is above the Eg of the GaSe flakes (~1.9 eV (~653 nm), see Tauc analysis, Figure The photocurrent density of the GaSe photodetectors at fixed potential of -0.3 V vs. RHE was evaluated as function of the light intensity (Figure In summary, the electronic structure of solution processed GaSe flakes was theoretically studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The predicted bandgap (Eg) values (3.14 eV for singlelayer flake, between 2.7 and 2.0 eV for few-layer flakes) indicate that GaSe flakes can absorb a significant fraction of solar irradiation. By referring the calculated conduction band minimum energy (ECBM) and the valence band maximum energy (EVBM) of GaSe flakes versus the redox potentials of H + /H2 and O2/H2O, respectively, GaSe flakes with less than 4 layers are predicted to be pH-universal photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Meanwhile, GaSe flakes with at least 4 layers are expected as pH-universal photocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction (OER). These results indicate that mixed nanoflakes with different number of layers could operate as "local" tandem water splitting systems. Moreover, the representative cases of bulk GaSe and trilayer-GaSe should attain the overall water splitting at pH < 1.5 and pH > 7, respectively. Driven by these expectations, GaSe single-/few-layer flakes were produced by liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) in 2-Propanol (IPA) to be used as photoelectrocatalyst in aqueous media. The GaSe photoelectrodes were fabricated via spray coating of the as-produced GaSe flakes dispersion onto graphite paper current collectors. They exhibit catalytic activity toward water splitting reactions, i.e., HER and OER in both acidic (0.5 M H2SO4) and alkaline (1 M KOH) media. The GaSe photoelectrodes show the best photoelectrochemical performance in 0.5 M H2SO4, in which they reach a cathodic photocurrent density at 0 V vs. RHE (J0V vs RHE) of -9.3 μA cm -2 , a ratiometric power-saved metric for HER (Φsaved,HER) of 0.09%, an anodic photocurrent density at +1.23 V vs. RHE (J1.23V vs RHE) of 83.4 μA cm -2 and a ratiometric power-saved metric for OER (Φsaved,OER) of 0.25%. When used as PEC-type photodetectors, GaSe photoelectrodes show a responsivity up to ~0.16 A W -1 upon 455 nm illumination at light intensity up to 63.5 μW cm -2 (at applied potential of -0.3 V vs. RHE). The stability analysis of the GaSe photodetectors evidences a durable operation in 0.5 M H2SO4 for PEC HER. Viceversa, degradation effects have been observed in both alkaline and anodic operation (i.e., during OER) due to highly oxidizing environment and O2 evolved-induced (photo-)oxidation effects. Our results represent the first PEC characterization of GaSe single-/few-layer flakes, and further optimization of the PEC performance can be achieved by engineering the photocathodes architecture and optimizing the electrolyte solution. Prospectively, advanced photoelectrodes could be achieved by optimizing the GaSe nanoflakes films in terms of thickness (and possible incorporation of conductive additives) and electrochemically accessible surface area/porosity, while other electrolyte solutions (both aqueous and inorganic media) could be used for carrying out other kind of PEC reactions. Overall, our research provides new insight into the exploitation of the PEC properties of GaSe nanoflakes, paving the way towards their use in photoelectrocatalysis, PEC-type photodetectors/(bio)sensors and other innovative optoelectronics devices. Gallium (Ga) (99.9999 %) and selenium (Se) (99.999 %) were purchased from Strem Chemicals Inc. USA. Sulfuric acid (99.999%), KOH (≥ 85% purity, ACS reagent, pellets), were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Electronic structure calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) with generalized gradient approximation (GGA, PBE96 parametrization scheme) GaSe crystals were synthetized by direct synthesis from Ga and Se elements. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of the as-synthetized crystal was performed using a Helios Nanolab ® 600 DualBeam microscope (FEI Company) and 10 kV and 0.2 nA as measurement conditions. The EDS spectra were acquired with a microscope combined with an X-Max detector and INCA ® system (Oxford Instruments), operating at 15kV and 0.8 nA. The samples were imaged without any metal coating or pre-treatment. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were acquired with a PANalytical Empyrean using Cu Kα radiation. The samples for XRD were prepared by depositing powder of GaSe crystal onto Si/SiO2 substrates. Transmission electron spectroscopy (TEM) images were acquired with a JEM 1011 (JEOL) TEM (thermionic W filament), operating at 100 kV. The morphological and statistical analysis was performed by using ImageJ software (NIH) and OriginPro 9.1 software (OriginLab), respectively. The samples for the TEM measurements were prepared by drop casting the as-prepared exfoliated material dispersions onto ultrathin C-on-holey C-coated Cu grids and rinsed with deionized water and subsequently dried overnight under vacuum. The AFM images were acquired with a XE-100 AFM (Park System, Korea) by means of PPP-NCHR cantilevers (Nanosensors, Switzerland) having a tip diameter <10 nm. The images were collected in intermittent contact (tapping) mode on an area of 5×5 μm 2 (1024×1024 data points) using drive frequency of ~330 kHz and keeping the working set point above 70% of the free oscillation amplitude. The scan rate for the acquisition of the images was 0.2 Hz. Gwyddion 2.53 software (http://gwyddion.net/) was used for processing the images and the height profiles, while the data were analysed by using OriginPro 2018 software. The latter was also used to carry out the statistical analysis on multiple AFM images for all the tested samples. The samples were prepared by dropcasting the as-prepared GaSe nanoflakes dispersion onto mica sheets (G250-1, Agar Scientific Ltd.) in N2 and heating to 100°C for 15 min to dry the sample and remove adsorbates. Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed by using a Renishaw microRaman Invia 1000 mounting a 50× objective, with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm and an incident power of 1 mW on the samples. For each sample, 50 spectra were collected. The samples were prepared by drop casting the as-prepared GaSe nanoflakes dispersion onto Au-coated Si/SiO2 substrates and subsequently dried under vacuum. Optical absorption spectroscopy (OAS) measurements were carried out on GaSe nanoflakes dispersion (diluted or concentrated at various concentrations of GaSe nanoflakes) by using a Cary Varian 5000 UV-vis spectrometer with integrating sphere. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis is accomplished on a Kratos Axis UltraDLD spectrometer at a vacuum < 10 -8 mbar, using a monochromatic Al Kα source operating at 20 mA and 15 kV and collecting photoelectrons from a 300 × 700 μm 2 sample area. The charge compensation device was not used. Wide spectra were acquired at pass energy of 160 eV and energy step of 1 eV, while high-resolution spectra of Ga 2p, Ga 3d, Se 3d, O 1s, C 1s and Au 4f peaks were acquired at pass energy of 10 eV and energy step of 0.1 eV. The samples were prepared by drop-casting the dispersion of GaSe nanoflakes on an Au-coated Si chip in N2 atmosphere while heating the substrate to 120°C. As-synthetized GaSe crystals were stacked onto conductive carbon tape and cleaved prior analysis. The samples were then transferred from air to the XPS chamber. Data analysis is carried out with CasaXPS software (version 2.3.19PR1.0). The energy scale was calibrated by setting the Au 4f 7/2 peak at 84.0 eV. For a better comparison of the as-synthetized crystal and the GaSe nanoflakes, the spectra of the GaSe crystal were calibrated by setting the binding energy of the sharp Se 3d doublet equal to the one obtained in the nanoflakes. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) with He I (hν = 21.2 eV) radiation was performed to estimate the Fermi energy level (EF) and the valence band maximum of the materials under investigation. The experiments were conducted on the samples after the XPS analysis using the same equipment. A -9.0 V bias was applied to the sample in order to precisely determine the low kinetic energy cut-off. The energy scale was corrected according to the binding energy calibration performed for the XPS measurement. The photoelectrodes were produced by spray-coating the GaSe nanoflakes dispersion (GaSe nanoflakes concentration = 0.13 g L -1 ) onto graphite paper (PGS, Panasonic) mounted on a hot plate heated at 60 °C. The material mass loading was 0.1 mg cm -2 . The electrode area was 1.5×1 cm 2 . The photoelectrodes were dried overnight at room temperature before the characterization. Scanning electron microscopy analysis of the of the as-produced electrodes was performed using a Helios Nanolab 600 DualBeam microscope (FEI Company) operating at 5 kV and 0.2 nA. The electrodes were imaged without any metal coating or pre-treatment. The electrochemical measurements were performed at room temperature in a flat-bottom fused silica cell using the three-electrode configuration of the potentiostat/galvanostat station (VMP3, Biologic), controlled via own software. A glassy carbon rod and a saturated KCl Ag/AgCl were used as the counter-electrode and the reference electrode, respectively. The measurements were carried out in 200 mL of 0.5 M H2SO4 (99.999% purity, Sigma Aldrich) or 1 M KOH (99.999% purity, Sigma Aldrich). Before starting the measurements, the oxygen was purged from electrolyte by flowing N2 gas throughout the liquid volume using a porous frit. A constant, slight nitrogen flow is maintained afterwards for the whole duration of the experiments, to avoid re-dissolution of molecular oxygen in the electrolyte. The Nernst equation: ERHE = EAg/AgCl + 0.059×pH + E 0 Ag/AgCl, where ERHE is the converted potential vs. RHE, EAg/AgCl is the experimental potential measured against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and E 0 Ag/AgCl is the standard potential of Ag/AgCl at 25 °C (0.1976 V vs. RHE), was used to convert the potential difference between the working electrode and the Ag/AgCl reference electrode to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale. A 300 W Xenon light source LS0306 (Lot Quantum Design), equipped with AM1.5G filters, was used to simulate solar illumination (1 sun). The light emitting diodes (LEDs) M455L3 (Thorlabs), M505L3 (Thorlabs) and M625L3 (Thorlabs) were used as monochromatic source. The light intensity of the LEDs was adjusted through source meter (2612B Dual-Channel System SourceMeter, Keithley)-controlled LED driver (LEDD1B, Thorlabs). The illumination intensity of the LED was calibrated by using an optical power and energy meter (PM100D, Thorlabs). The LSV curves were acquired at 5 mV s -1 scan rate, in both anodic and cathodic directions. In agreement with ref. The stability of the GaSe photodetectors was evaluated by recording subsequent 20 LSV scans and measuring the corresponding responsivity. Figure Figure Figure 