Spectral imagers, the classic example being the color camera, are ubiquitous in everyday life. However, most such imagers rely on filter arrays that absorb light outside each spectral channel, yielding ∼1/N efficiency for an N -channel imager. This is especially undesirable in thermal infrared (IR) wavelengths, where sensor detectivities are low, as well as in highly compact systems with small entrance pupils. Diffractive optics or interferometers can enable efficient spectral imagers, but such systems are too bulky for certain applications. We propose an efficient and compact thermal infrared spectral imager comprising a metasurface composed of subwavelength-spaced, differently-tuned slot antennas coupled to photosensitive elements. Here, we demonstrate this idea using graphene, which features a photoresponse up to thermal IR wavelengths. The combined antenna resonances yield broadband absorption in the graphene exceeding the 1/N efficiency limit. We establish a circuit model for the antennas' optical properties and demonstrate consistency with fullwave simulations. We also theoretically demonstrate broadband ∼ 36% free space-to-graphene coupling efficiency for a six-spectral-channel metasurface. This research paves the way towards compact CMOS-integrable thermal IR spectral imagers. We take spectral imaging for granted in daily life. Our eyes are spectral imagers, providing information about the composition of what we see. The infrared electromagnetic band covers many chemical absorption resonances and thus also reveals compositional information. In particular, infrared spectral imaging is applied in areas such as gas emission monitoring, where Z0 and n eff are the characteristic impedance and effective index of the TE10 mode of the slot and k0 is the vacuum wavenumber. r is the Fresnel reflection coefficient between vacuum and metal for an s-polarized plane wave at an incident angle of arccos(n eff ), which describes the TE10 mode. The graphene presents a mostly resistive impedance of using power/current impedance normalization. where represents reciprocal addition. Define Agr = Pgr I inc as the partial absorption cross section of light of intensity Iinc coupled into the graphene and Pgr as the power absorbed in the graphene. For a lossless, conjugate matched antenna, antenna theory predicts Agr,max = D(θ,φ) 4π λ 2 where D (θ, φ) is the antenna's directivity at the given incident angle and polarization, We obtain Agr from FDTD simulations of plane waves incident on the graphene-loaded antennas, which we then use to calculate ηgr via Equation To further validate our model, we artificially scale the sheet conductance of the graphene load by factors ranging from 0.33 to 5 and compare the resulting ηgr between the model and FDTD for a single such antenna. The results, shown in Figure Having modeled the individual components, we now discuss broadband absorbing metasurfaces incorporating differently tuned antennas tiled in a periodic array. We use a three-step process to design such metasurfaces. We first constrain d and w to be the same for all antennas in the metasurface, and choose their values to yield high peak ηgr for antennas resonant in the targeted wavelength range. Secondly, we choose the values of h for the antennas, following the heuristic that at the wavelength where one antenna's ηgr falls to half its peak amplitude, the next antenna's ηgr should have risen to half its peak amplitude. Finally, we choose the arrangement and pitch of the antennas to be as closely packed as possible while satisfying qualitative fabricability constraints. We also avoid juxtaposing antennas of adjacent wavelength channels to minimize antenna-antenna crosstalk. The antenna pitch, more accurately described by the Bravais lattice vectors of the array, is a critical parameter in determining the potential absorption efficiency of the array. Light incident from a given direction can only be scattered by the two-dimensional diffraction orders of the lattice. The array can only perfectly absorb an incoming light beam if no nonzero diffraction orders fall within the light cone, barring the event that all higher diffraction orders overlap with nodes in the individual unit cell radiation pattern. By "light cone", we refer here to the region in the Fourier transform space of the xy-plane for which radiation can occur, namely k 2 x + k 2 y < k 2 0 . For a square lattice, if the lattice pitch a < λmin/2, no higher diffraction orders are within the light cone for any incident angle. In practice, the limited numerical aperture of imaging systems relaxes this constraint. Targeting the 6 -10 μm wavelength range, we follow the above methodology and arrive at an array of six antennas with d = 2.25 μm, w = 400 nm, and h = 3.41, 3.81, 4.41, 5.04, 5.80, 7.36 μm, uniformly spaced and tiled as shown in Figure To further understand the physics of these metasurfaces, we vary the pitch of the unit cell while keeping all other parameters constant. The resulting total absorption efficiency spectra for six different cases are shown in Figure , where a1 and a2 are the unit cell dimensions. The corresponding wavenumbers for the various unit cells used here are listed in Figure For a spectrally sensitive metasurface to be practical, not only must it maintain a high absorption efficiency for a reasonable range of incoming light directions, but also the absorption spectra of the individual antennas must not shift or distort too strongly as the incoming light angle varies. The directional dependence of our metasurface arises from two factors: The directivity profile D (θ, φ) of the individual antennas, and array effects resulting from interference and antenna-antenna coupling. Although full angle-dependent simulation results for our gold metasurfaces are outside the scope of this paper due to the extreme computational overhead of off-angle periodic structure simulations, We also investigate metasurfaces comprising numbers of spectral channels besides N = 6. Supplementary Figure With realistic metal, the efficiency of these devices is ultimately limited by ohmic losses. However, more advanced antenna designs can be used to improve ηgr. As it turns out, not only can the copper layers in the back end of a CMOS process be designed to incorporate slot antennas, but they also provide a convenient medium to realize those antenna designs that would be exceedingly difficult to fabricate in an academic setting. sign, in which the walls of the cavity are perforated to comply with via design rules. If the perforations are sub-cutoff for the resonant wavelength and sufficiently deep, they do not leak light. Additionally, it would be necessary to etch away the inter-layer dielectric to prevent light absorption. Besides different antenna designs, material quality also affects efficiency considerably. We explore both of these variations in Figure In conclusion, we introduced a six-spectral-channel graphene-coupled slot antenna metasurface with 36% efficiency functioning as a spectral imager in the thermal IR, as well as a model for estimating the optical properties of the individual antennas therein. This device is appropriate for integration in the wiring layers of a CMOS process with suitable post-processing to remove inter-layer dielectric within the cavity and transfer graphene. We have shown that more sophisticated antenna designs can improve the efficiency of optical energy transfer to the load to above ηgr = 0.6. Further research on this concept may focus on experimental demonstration of the absorption enhancement functionality, or on optimizing the device design to meet certain engineering goals. Unless otherwise specified, we use the evaporated gold optical model described in Palik et al. throughout the paper. We use the Lumerical FDTD package for our FDTD simulations. For simulations of individual antennas, we use x-, y-and z-meshes of 8 nm in the vicinities of the slot aperture and slot bottom, as well as a z-mesh of 40 nm within the slot. As such, the finest meshes coincide with metallic surfaces and corners, allowing us to capture the nonzero skin depth of the metal, whereas the more gradual z-dependence of the fields inside the slot permits a coarser mesh. We find that a minimum mesh size of 8 nm yields converged results for these simulations. We use PML boundary conditions on all sides except for the -z side, where we use a metallic boundary condition as the light does not penetrate beyond the slots anyway. We also apply symmetry conditions across the xz and yz planes. For the metasurface simulations, we use the same meshing scheme, but with a fine mesh of 15 nm and a z mesh of 100 nm within the slot due to computational resource availability limits. To illustrate the error associated with this choice of mesh, we plot mesh-dependent absorption efficiency curves for a 9 μm by 13.333 μm unit cell, N = 6 metasurface in Supplementary Figure We calculate Z0 and n eff for our impedance model using the Lumerical MODE waveguide mode solver with an 8 nm mesh. We use the graphene model from Falkovsky, We base our estimation of the detectivity D * on the formulation put forth in Song et al. Here κ represents the electronic planar thermal conductivity of the graphene; ∆T el is the difference between the thermally excited electronic temperature T el and the lattice temperature T0 = 300 K, γ represents the electron-phonon thermal decay rate, and C el represents the electronic heat capacity of graphene. α is the efficiency with which optical energy absorbed by the graphene is deposited into the electronic system on a sub-picosecond timescale, taken to be unity since the incident photon energy is below graphene's optical phonon energy. 0 Ṅ represents the intensity profile of absorbed light. j is the electrical current density, and Π refers to the Peltier coefficient. We choose an antenna with w = 400 nm and h = 5.5 μm in these calculations, extracting the spatial dependence of 0 Ṅ from Ansys HFSS finite element simulations. For the graphene's conductivity σ as a function of Fermi level, we use the data measured by de Fazio et al. for unannealed, polycrystalline graphene; Having obtained the short-circuit responsivity R under zero bias as such, we calculate the noise-equivalent power of the device assuming Johnson noise at 300 K as the dominant noise source, a reasonable assumption for an unbiased device. The authors would like to thank Chris Panuski and Dr. Laura Kim of MIT as well as Sebastian Castilla of Institut de Ciències Fotòniques (ICFO) for helpful feedback and insight in the course of preparing this article. This research was funded in part by a grant from the Institute of Soldier Nanotechnologies of MIT. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. 1122374. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Founda-tion.