Sub-nanometer displacement detection lays the solid foundation for critical applications in modern metrology. In-plane displacement sensing, however, is mainly dominated by the detection of differential photocurrent signals from photodiodes, with resolution in the nanometer range. Here, we present an integrated in-plane displacement sensor based on a nanoelectromechanical trampoline resonator. With a position resolution of 4 pm/ √ Hz for a low laser power of 85 μW and a repeatability of 2 nm after 5 cycles of operation as well as good long-term stability, this new detection principle provides a reliable alternative for overcoming the current position detection limit in a wide variety of research and application fields. High-performance position sensing is a substantial corner stone for challenging applications such as stateof-the-art atomic force microscopy for molecular-and mechano-biology Besides the common photodiode-based PSDs, it has been shown that a spatial resolution of 25 pm/ √ Hz can be achieved by direct transmission of a Gaussian beam through a slit Here, we present a nanoelectromechanical positionsensitive detector (NEMS-PSD) with a position resolution in the picometer range. Recently, similar nanoelectromechanical resonators have demonstrated unprecedented sensitivity for radiation The laser spot displacement ∆x is measured in terms of the measured relative frequency shift δf = ∆f /f 0 of the trampoline resonator with the relative responsivity δR of the nanoelectromechanical resonator. The displacement responsivity δR of the nanomechanical resonator is defined as its relative frequency change per laser spot displacement. Since the laser displacement and the resonant frequency change are connected by the change in absorbed laser power P , δR can be written as with the well-investigated relative power responsivity δR p where α is the thermal expansion coefficient, E is the Young's modulus, κ is the thermal conductivity, σ is the tensile stress, L is the tether length of the cross, and A is the cross-section of the cross resonator tethers. Since the dimension of the nanoparticle is around 10% of the laser beam diameter, the nanoparticle antenna can be approximated as a point absorber with an absorption cross-section σ abs . Then, the power absorbed by the nanoparticle (P ) at a position x, with respect to a Gaussian beam center, under different beam position, which is the convolution of a point source and a Gaussian beam profile, can be expressed as with the beam radius w 0 and the laser power P 0 , and I(x) as the laser irradiance. According to Equation (2), R x can then be obtained by taking the first derivative of P (x) with respect to x. And since the gradient of a Gaussian beam profile is maximum at half of the beam radius x = ± w0 2 , the maximum R x value becomes Combining Equations ( As indicated by Equation ( As has been shown in the derivation of Equation Figure Figure Figure As discussed previously in Equation However, the small center area makes it challenging to distribute nanoparticles on the surface by means of spincoating. Type C trampolines have a large enough center area and show a high responsivity, only 10% less compared to the most responsive type A trampoline. Therefore, type C trampolines were the devices of choice used for the present study. Furthermore, since the nanopar- ticles are distributed randomly on the trampoline resonator, the position-dependency of the power responsivity is worth discussing. As shown in the finite element simulation in the inset of Figure After the characterization of the displacement responsivity and the optimization of the trampoline geometry, a repetitive displacement measurement within a small range of 15 nm and small step size of 3 nm is performed. Therefore, the laser spot was placed randomly on the center of the trampoline in order to demonstrate the possibility to operate the NEMS-PSD without any fine alignment and calibration process demonstrating the practicability. Furthermore, the repeatability and long-term stability of displacement sensing is studied, as illustrated in Figure The repeatability after 5 cycles of operation is within a maximum deviation of 2 nm. This deviation could also partly result from the accuracy of the nanopositioning stage that controls the position of the beam. With a drift below 500 nm within 4 hours, as discussed in the supplementary information, the long-term stability of NEMS-PSD is of the same order as of photodiode-based PSDs with 0.1 μm to 1 μm We presented a NEMS-PSD based on silicon nitride trampoline resonators with integrated electrodynamic readout and actuation. We demonstrated a sensitivity of 4 pm/ √ Hz with the potential of further optimization by using e.g. silicon nitride with lower stress. The NEMS-PSD demonstrated a repeatability of approximately 2 nm after 5 cycles of operation and showed a long-term stability better than 500 nm in 4 hours. This position-sensitive detector design overcomes the issue of non-uniformity of multiple segments by measuring the direct absorption instead of differential current from photodiodes, which improves the sensitivity greatly, and also requires minimum signal processing effort. Due to the localized nanoparticle absorber, the parasitic effect from the ambient is also minimized, which enables better long-term stability. It is also compatible with small beam diameter and even irregular beams, since the artifact could be easily calibrated with a scan before operation to identify the beam profile. The presented NEMS-PSD is promising to provide a sensitive alternative to existing PSDs and could bring advances to a great variety of research and application fields. The samples are fabricated with a bulk micromaching process. A silicon wafer with a thickness of 370 μm is deposited with 50 nm silicon-rich silicon nitride (SiN) with low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). The prestress is approximately 150 MPa. 190 nm thick gold electrodes together with a 10 nm chrome adhesion layer for magnetomotive transduction is first defined with photolithography on the front side of the SiN wafer, and the SiN trampoline structure is then defined with another step of photolithography after lift-off. The excess SiN is then removed with reactive ion etching (RIE) and protected with a layer of photoresist. A window is defined from the back side and etched with KOH to release the trampoline resonator. Reactant-free gold nanoparticles with a diameter of 200 nm in 0.1 mM PBS stabilized suspension solution (SigmaAldrich) are first diluted in Micropur deionized water (18 MΩ, Milli-Q) at a ratio of 1:100 at room temperature, and then spin-coated on the trampoline resonator at 2000 rpm. The finite element simulations are done with the thermal stress module of COMSOL multiphysics, including first the simulation of the temperature field of a point heat source and subsequently the stress distribution and the eigenfrequency. The responsivity could be extracted by simulating the eigenfrequency at different powers of the point heat source. The thermal expansion coefficient (α) used in the simulation is 2.2 × 10 -6 K -1 , the Young's modulus (E) 250 GPa, thermal conductivity (κ) 3 W m -1 K -1 , and prestress (σ) of 150 MPa. All the constants are also consistent with the ones used for theoretical calculations. The optical setup is shown in detail in Figure The detailed measurement setup is shown in Figure The rise time (τ r ) of a step transition of frequency (∆f ) can be calculated by the time difference between 10% and 90% transition. The rise time can also be related to the time constant (τ RC ) of the first-order low-pass filter model of The extracted rise time from the first-order low-pass model of three different frequency steps in Figure The standard deviation of each step in Figure In this measurement, the standard deviation of frequency of 4 Hz with around 250 samples each step results in a standard error of 253 mHz, which is close to the Allan deviation measurement of 250 mHz with same integration time of the step. If considering also the step with slight oscillation with an overall average standard deviation of 6 Hz, the standard error increases to 380 mHz. The calculation of theoretical responsivity is based on Equation K includes Young's modulus (E), thermal expansion coefficient (α) and thermal conductivity (κ). The constants used for each material and the calculated effective constants are listed in the following table. The resulting displacement responsivity theoretical limit is calculated to be 2080 Hz μm The simulated temperature profile for different types of trampolines without electrodes are plotted in Figure 