Discrete degrees of freedom, such as spin and orbital, can provide intriguing strategies to manipulate electrons, photons, and phonons. With a spin degree of freedom, topological insulators have stimulated intense interests in condensed-matter physics 1 , optics 2,3 , acoustics 4 , and mechanics 5-7 . However, orbital as another fundamental attribute in crystals has seldom been investigated in topological insulators. Here, we invent a new type of topological insulators with an auxiliary orbital degree of freedom on a nanomechanical platform. We experimentally realized nanomechanical topological insulators where the orbital can arbitrarily be manipulated by the crystal. Harnessing this unique feature, we demonstrated adiabatic transition between distinct topological edge states, which is a crucial functionality for complicated systems that involve distinct topological edge channels. Beyond the onedimensional edge states, we further constructed zero-dimensional Dirac-vortex states. Our results have unveiled unprecedented strategies to manipulate topological phase transitions and to study topological phases of matter on an integrated platform. Topological insulators are a new phase of matter that behaves as an insulator in its interior but supports backscattering-immune conduction of electrons on its surface Here, we invented and experimentally demonstrated a new type of topological insulators with an auxiliary orbital degree of freedom based on a 2D nanomechanical crystal (Fig. Nonzero values of δi and δt break the C2 inversion symmetry and T p translational symmetry along the vector P (white arrow in Fig. The orbitals of the upper-band states |u 2 θ = θ 0 (lower-band states |u 1 θ = θ 0 ) are the same as those of the lower-band states |u 1 θ = θ 0 + π (upper-band states |u 2 θ = θ 0 + π ), indicating that the energy bands are always inverted for θ = θ0 and θ = θ0 + π. We further defined and calculated the spin Chern number for crystals with parameters (δ0 ≠ 0, θ = θ0) and (δ0 ≠ 0, θ = θ0 + π), and confirmed that they belong to distinct topological phases (see Supplementary Information). Interestingly, the eigenfrequencies ω n, (θ) (n = 1, 2) at the Γ point exhibit a doubly degenerate cone-like dispersion relation near the origin of the 2D parameter space (Fig. indicating that variation of θ has negligible influence on the degeneracy of ψ n, θ (n = 1, 2). In other words, the proposed nanomechanical crystals support phononic QSH phases with an auxiliary orbital degree of freedom |u n θ (n = 1, 2) determined by the parameter θ. The QSH topological insulators demonstrated previously are the special cases with θ = ±π/2. It is also interesting to note that the well-known QVH topological insulators Without loss of generality, we investigated the topological edge states at the domain wall between two nanomechanical crystals with parameters (δ0 = 300 nm, θ = θ0 = π/4) and (δ0 = 300 nm, θ = θ0 + π = 5π/4). Figure Next, we characterized the propagation properties of the topological edge state along a Zshaped domain wall (Fig. Then, we experimentally demonstrated adiabatic transition between distinct topological edge states by continuously varying the orbital states |u n θ (n = 1, 2) along the propagating direction. Figure We also experimentally demonstrated that such an adiabatic topological phase transition cannot be realized with fixed orbitals. Taking the topological edge states with fixed orbitals |u n θ = 0, π (n = 1, 2) as an example, abrupt change of θ from -π to 0 in region I and from 0 to π in region II yields unavoidable crossing of a point with δ0 = 0 (blue point in Fig. Finally, by using the auxiliary orbital degree of freedom we constructed zero-dimensional Dirac vortex states, which are the nanomechanical analog of the well-known Majorana bound states in superconductor electronic systems In conclusion, we have theoretically proposed and experimentally demonstrated a novel type of topological insulators with an auxiliary orbital degree of freedom. Exploiting this additional degree of freedom, we realized adiabatic topological transition between distinct edge states without closing the energy bandgap. This functionality can be used for mode conversion between distinct topological states, which enables the development of large-scale topological circuits dealing with various topological phases such as QSH and QVH states. We further realized the nanomechanical Dirac vortex states by azimuthally varying the orbital polarization of the crystals. Operating in the very high frequency regime (~50 MHz) with an ultrahigh quality factor (~2.2 × 10 4 ), the demonstrated Dirac vortex states are topologically robust and can be used for various sensing and signal-processing applications in nanomechanical systems. Considering the large mechanical nonlinearity of the nanomechanical crystals are mainly based on breaking the T P translational symmetry, which limits the orbitals of phonons to conventional p-and d-types. Here we explored a more generic type of topological insulators