The unique electronic structure found at interfaces between materials can allow unconventional quantum states to emerge. Here we observe superconductivity in electron gases formed at interfaces between (111) oriented KTaO3 and insulating overlayers of either EuO or LaAlO3. The superconducting transition temperature, approaching 2.2 K, is about one order of magnitude higher than that of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 system. Strikingly, similar electron gases at (001) KTaO3 interfaces remain normal down to 25 mK. The critical field and current-voltage measurements indicate that the superconductivity is two dimensional. Higher mobility EuO/KTaO3 (111) samples show a large in-plane anisotropy in transport properties at low temperatures prior to onset of superconductivity, suggesting the emergence of a 'stripe' like phase where the superconductivity is nearly homogeneous in one direction, but strongly modulated in the other. One Sentence Summary: Electron gases formed at KTaO3 (111) interfaces show 2D anisotropic superconductivity with Tc much higher than that in LaAlO3/SrTiO3. Superconductivity in two dimensions (2D) has been a central theme in condensed matter physics and material science The 2DEGs on KTO studied in this work were prepared by growing an overlayer of EuO with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), or LAO using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) (details in Supplementary Materials). We characterized the chemical oxidation state of the EuO/KTO (111) interface using X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) at the Ta-L3 edge (9.88 keV). XANES measurements were carried out adopting two different angles of incidence, one close to grazing incidence (0.16°) that probed only the first few nanometers of the KTO near the EuO/KTO interface, and another at a higher angle (5.16°) that probed the bulk of the KTO. As shown in Fig. Figure We have also performed measurements on 2DEGs formed at (001) oriented KTO interfaces. Figure The superconductivity at the KTO (111) interface is two-dimensional. This is borne out by upper critical fields B &' and B &∥ measured perpendicular and parallel to the KTO (111) interface, defined as the field at which the resistance rises to half of R " . Figure 2, where Φ . is the magnetic flux quantum and ξ /0 is the G-L coherence length. The linear fit to B &' (T) in Fig. > 10 at T = 0.6 K (Fig. , where d is the effective thickness of the superconducting state. From the fit to B &∥ (T), we obtain d ≈ 5.1 nm, smaller than ξ /0 , consistent with 2D superconductivity. We note that B &∥ (0) ≈ 17.0 T extrapolated from the fit is substantially larger than the paramagnetic pair-breaking field B 4 = ∆ 5 /√2μ 6 ≈ 3.2 T based on BCS theory in the weakcoupling limit The superconducting state in the EuO/KTO sample shows a robust critical current. The measured I-V characteristics at different temperatures are shown in Fig. In higher mobility EuO/KTO (111) samples, we observe the emergence of a new phase near the superconducting state, as revealed by a giant in-plane anisotropy in sheet resistance. Shown in Fig. The increase in resistance along the [11 # 0] direction upon lowering temperature from the normal state is similar to observations in 2D granular superconductors The magnetic field dependence of sheet resistance provides further evidence for an anisotropic 'stripe' like superconductivity. Figure Figures The 2D superconductivity observed in the KTO (111) interfaces shows substantially higher Tc than that observed in the widely studied LAO/STO system, and increases monotonically with n2D. These higher Tc values making fundamental studies and device applications of superconducting 2DEGs using crystalline interfaces more readily accessible. The origin of the superconductivity is still an open question. Possible links between superconductivity and the large spin-orbit interaction in KTO (111) 2DEGs, as has been suggested in LAO/STO (111) When global superconductivity in the KTO (111) surface is suppressed by either temperature or a magnetic field, transport measurements reveal a 'stripe' phase which produces large anisotropic transport in the (111) plane. Notably, the directions for the high/low resistance states in the vicinity of superconductivity are oriented along the same crystal axes in the KTO and STO (111) interfaces 