We study two-dimensional fermionic quadratic band touching (QBT) systems in the presence of vortex and skyrmion of insulating and superconducting masses. A prototypical example of such systems is the Bernal bilayer graphene that supports eight zero-energy modes in the presence of a mass vortex with the requisite U(1) symmetry. Inside the vortex core, additional ten masses that close an SO(5) algebra can develop local expectation values by splitting the zero modes in five and ten different ways by lifting its SO(4) and SU(2) chiral symmetries, respectively. In particular, each SU(2) chiral symmetry can be broken by three distinct copies of chiral-triplet mass orders, giving rise to the notion of the color or flavor degeneracy among the competing orders. By contrast, a skyrmion of three anticommuting masses supports additional six masses in its core, and possesses an SU(2) isospin quantum number, besides the usual generalized U(1) charge. Consequently, charge 4e Kekule pair-density-waves can develop in the skyrmion core of Néel layer antiferromagnet, while a skyrmion of quantum spin Hall insulator in addition supports a mundane s-wave pairing. We also analyze the internal algebra of competing orders in the core of these defects on checkerboard or Kagome lattice that supports only a single copy of QBT. The transition between two distinct broken symmetry phases, even though commonly believed to be first-order, can be continuous when two orderparameters are related via a chiral rotation (see below). Such unconventional continuous phase transition possibly takes place through proliferation of real space singularities, known as topological defects, when one order resides inside the defect core of the other, giving rise to the notion of dual orders and deconfined criticality The notion of competing orders becomes more transparent, when they can be described as composite objects of underlying fermionic degrees of freedom. In this respect, massless Dirac fermions, realized in monolayer grpahene (MLG), d-wave superconductor, honeycomb Kondo-Heisenberg model, constitute an ideal platform to capture the competing orders However, representation of ordered phases in terms of Dirac matrices is not limited to the Dirac materials, rather quite natural for any multiband systems. And here we address competing orders that can be found in the core of topological defects, such as vortex and skyrmion, in planar fermionic systems, where the valence and conduction bands in the normal state display biquadratic touching, also known as Luttinger materials. The Bernal stacked bilayer graphene (BLG) is an ideal place to realize such unusual gapless fermionic excitations Various theoretical works in the recent past have discussed the possibilities of topological defects and dual orders in BLG in the absence The most tantalizing outcomes are possibly the following. We find that skyrmions of both Néel antiferromagnet and QSHI in BLG accommodate charge 4e spinsinglet pair-density-waves, assuming two distinct Kekule patterns on honeycomb lattice, whereas the later one in addition sustains a mundane s-wave pairing. On the other hand, all three singlet pairings support topological QSHI in the mixed phase, while the Néel order can only be realized in the vortex phase of spin-singlet Kekule superconductors. Thus, in BLG the competing orders are not unique, giving rise to the notion of a flavor or color degeneracy (defined precisely below) among them. Now we present an extended summary of our main findings. The differences in the internal algebra of competing orders in MLG and BLG root into the dispersion of noninteracting fermions, which respectively scales linearly and quadratically with the momentum in these two systems. Consequently, the number of mass matrices that can develop a uniform spectral gap at the band touching points via spontaneous lifting of discrete and/or continuous symmetries are 36 (1) In a single-flavored QBT system, a vortex of any two mutually anticommuting masses [see Table (2) A real space vortex of two anticommuting masses with the requisite U(1) symmetry accommodates doublydegenerate four, thus total eight states at zero energy in a valley-degenerate QBT system. The sub-space of zeroenergy states altogether supports ten masses. For example, a vortex of translational symmetry breaking Kekule current orders sustains the layer polarized state (1), Néel layer antiferromagnet (3), the real (3) and imaginary (3) components of the spin-triplet f -wave pairing. Quantities in the parentheses indicate the number of matrices required to describe a particular order, see Table Iuv S IT TABLE I: All masses in a single-flavored QBT system in checkerboard lattice SO(3) or SU(2) subgroups. Thus, zero-energy subspace can also be split by breaking its SU(2) chiral symmetry in ten different ways. But, each set of SU(2) generators rotate between three distinct set of three mutually anticommuting masses, see Fig. (4) In the presence of an underlying skyrmion of three mutually anticommuting masses, there is no bound state at zero energy. But, the bound states at finite energies possess an SU(2)⊗U(1) chiral symmetry. While the generator of U(1) rotation captures the generalized charge of the skyrmion, the SU(2) generators correspond to its isospin, see Fig. Matrix , see Eq. ( The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. In the next section, we discuss the microscopic models leading to both single-flavored and valley-degenerate QBTs, and all possible mass orders therein, see Tables I and II. Topological defects, such as vortex and skyrmions, and the bound states in their cores are discussed in Sec. III. Sec. IV is devoted to the derivation of the internal algebra among competing orders in the defect cores using the real representation of the Clifford algebra. We support these findings through some concrete examples in Sec. V, and summarize the results in Sec. VI. Additional discussions are relegated to the appendices. We begin the discussion by considering microscopic models for QBTs. Unlike the situation in two-dimensional Dirac materials, displaying linear touching of the valence and conduction bands, for which the minimal representation must be four component The simplest microscopic model, supporting a single copy of QBT can be realized on a checkerboard lattice. To accommodate all possible masses in such a system, we introduce an eight-component Nambu spinor Ψ = (Ψ p , Ψ h ) , where Ψ p and Ψ h are two four-component spinors, with Ψ p = (Ψ p,↑ , Ψ p,↓ ) and Ψ h = (Ψ h,↓ , -Ψ h,↑ ). The two-component spinors are Here u σ (k) and v σ (k) correspond to fermion annihilation operators on two sublattices of the checkerboard lattice with momentum k, measured from the band touching Γ = (0, 0) point, and spin projection σ =↑, ↓. In this basis, the low-energy Hamiltonian near the Γ point is where and m * has the dimension of mass. Three sets of Pauli matrices {α μ }, {σ μ } and {τ μ } operate on the sublattice, spin and Nambu indices, respectively, where μ = 0, 1, 2, 3, and '⊗' represents a direct or tensor product. Throughout we neglect the particle-hole anisotropy. The above Hamiltonian ( ĤSF 0 ) is invariant under the (1) exchange to two sublattices (u ↔ v), generated by Various mass orders in this system that uniformly gap the QBT point and their transformation under various discrete (I uv , I T ) and continuous ( S) symmetries of ĤSF 0 are shown in Table where u ±,σ (k) and v ±,σ (k) are the fermionic annihilation operators on two complimentary layers, with Fourier component localized around the nonequivalent valleys at ±K, spin projection σ =↑, ↓, and momentum k, measured from the corresponding valley. The non-interacting Hamiltonian ( ĤBLG 0 ) remains invariant under the following symmetries. It should be notated that the exchange of two layers and valleys are accompanied by the inversions of momentum axes k y → -k y and k x → -k x , respectively. Therefore, all mass orders can be classified according to their transformation under these symmetries, see Table In this section, we introduce topological defects inside various mass ordered phases. Specifically, we consider vortex and skyrmion, and highlight the structure of the bound states in their cores. This will allow us to construct the internal algebra of competing orders in the core of these defects, discussed in Secs. IV and V. The effective single-particle Hamiltonian for a vortexlike point defect involving two anticommuting masses in QBT systems assume the following universal form where C nφ = cos(nφ), S nφ = sin(nφ), with φ as the polar angle and r as the radial coordinate in the xy plane. The radial profile of m(r) is m(r → 0) = 0 and m(r → ∞) = m 0 , otherwise arbitrary, where m 0 is a constant. For concreteness, we consider vortex of unit vorticity (n = 1), as it is the most stable and energetically favored topological defect. Here, γ j s are Hermitian matrices satisfying the anticommuting Clifford algebra {γ j , γ k } = 2δ jk . Therefore, γ 3 and γ 5 are the mass matrices. Since H vor involves four mutually anticommuting γ matrices, their minimal dimensionality is four. It was shown by Herbut and Lu plays the role of a pseudo time-reversal operator. Existence of such antiunitary operator does not depend on the choice of representation of the γ matrices. Without any loss of generality, we choose γ 1 and γ 3 to be purely imaginary, and γ 1 and γ 2 to be purely real. Then, U = γ 1 γ 3 . While J K endows each energy eigenvalue a two-fold degeneracy, existence of the midgap states is guaranteed by the spectral symmetry, generated by an unitary operator γ 0 , such that {H vor , γ 0 } = 0. In particular, γ 0 = γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 γ 5 is the fifth anticommuting fourdimensional Hermitian γ matrix From the above discussion, we can also infer the competing order in core of the mass vortex. Since {H vor , γ 0 } = 0, the two zero-energy modes are the eigenstates of γ 0 with eigenvalue +1 or -1. Therefore, filled or empty zero modes yields a finite expectation value of the mass operator γ 0 , i.e. γ 0 = 0. Then in the core of the vortex, constituted by the γ 3 and γ 5 masses, the system supports their competing mass γ 0 , since {γ 0 , γ j } = 0 for j = 1 and 2 (thus qualifying as a mass), as well as j = 3 and 5 (hence, a competing order). For the minimal model in Eq. ( A single-flavored QBT system is described by eightdimensional Hermitian matrices. Since the effective single-particle Hamiltonian describing a vortex configuration involves only four mutually anticommuting matrices, and their irreducible representation is four-dimensional, the vortex Hamiltonian can always be cast as a orthogonal sum of two copies of H vor . As a result, the core of a mass vortex hosts four zero energy modes. Following the same line of arguments, one can convince herself that there exists eight zero energy modes in the core of a mass vortex in valley-degenerate QBT systems. In the following sections, we will discuss the possible competing orders and their internal algebra in such higher-dimensional zero-energy manifolds. Next we consider a skyrmion of mass orders. It involves three mutually anticommuting mass matrices. The corresponding effective single-particle Hamiltonian is For an underlying skyrmion of unit skyrmion number where the parameter λ determines its core size. Note that H skyr exhausts all five mutually anticommuting fourdimensional γ matrices. Therefore, we cannot find any unitary (or antiunitary) matrix that fully anticommutes with H skyr and all states (including the bound ones) reside at finite energies. Nonetheless, they continue to enjoy the two-fold degeneracy, as [H skyr , J K ] = 0. One can render the loss of the spectral symmetry in the following way. Say, we begin with two zero-energy modes (the eigenstates of γ 0 with eigenvalues +1 or -1) bound to the core of a vortex, and subsequently introduce the third component of the mass γ 0 such that it changes sign as we approach the boundary of the system (r → ∞) from its origin (r = 0). Therefore, addition of the γ 0 mass besides constituting a skyrmion texture, pushes the zero-modes bound to a vortex to finite energies. As a direct consequence of the spectral asymmetry, the core of the skyrmion becomes electrically charged of charge +e or -e (depending on the sign of m 0 ). The corresponding operator is Q elec = I 4 , where I n is an ndimensional identity matrix, which is the product of five mutually anticommuting matrices appearing in H skyr where Q skyr is the generalized charge of a skyrmion For single-flavored and valley-degenerate QBT systems, the Hamiltonian operator in the presence of a background skyrmion of three mutually anticommuting mass orders can be cast as direct or orthogonal sum of two and four copies of H skyr , respectively. Such decomposition allows skyrmion to acquire chiral charges, while being electrically neutral. Note that any Hermitian operator that commutes with the noninteracting Hamiltonian (H SF 0 and H BLG 0 ), such as S, generates the chiral symmetry of the system, and qualifies as a chiral charge of the skyrmion. On the other hand, any mass operator that anticommutes with H skyr can develop a finite expectation value in the core of a skyrmion. In this section, we derive the internal algebra of competing orders in the core of topological defects using the real representation of Clifford algebra. In order to describe various insulating and superconducting mass gaps within a unified representation, it is useful to double the number of fermionic components (Nambu doubling), and include both particle and hole in the spinor representation. The resulting massive Nambu Hamiltonian is The kinetic energy part of H Nam m (k) is given by where Γ j s, M are eight and sixteen dimensional Hermitian matrices for single-flavored and valley-degenerate QBT systems, respectively. Here is purely imaginary For single-flavored QBT the Nambu Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Since iM is also real, we first seek to answer the following questions. What is the maximal number of q, so that for p ≥ 0 the dimensionality of the real representation is eight, and mutually anticommuting p + q matrices satisfy the Clifford algebra C(p, q)? If we construct a vortex out of two mutually anticommuting masses, say M 1 and M 2 , according to Then the vortex Hamiltonian, defined as supports four zero-energy modes. Note that four mutually anticommuting matrices in H Nam vor close a C(4, 0) algebra. Thus the eight-dimensional matrix H Nam vor can be decomposed as orthogonal sum of two identical copies of the four-dimensional Hamiltonian H vor , shown in Eq. Any mass matrix that anticommutes with H Nam vor can acquire finite expectation value inside the vortex core by splitting the zero-energy manifold. The number of such matrices is only three, and they are M 3 , M 4 , M 5 , which together close an SU(2) algebra. They can be placed at three vertices of a triangle, see Fig. Next we proceed to construct a skyrmion out of three mutually anticommuting masses, say M 1 , M 2 and M 3 , (a) described by the single-particle Hamiltonian where m(x) is given in Eq. ( the product of five mutually anticommuting matrices appearing in H Nam skyr . We initiate the discussion on competing phases in valley-degenerate QBT systems by asking the following question. What is the maximal number of q, so that for p ≥ 0 the dimensionality of the real representation is sixteen, and mutually anticommuting p+q matrices satisfy a C(p, q) Clifford algebra? The answer is eight. They constitute C(0, 8) Clifford algebra First we focus on vortex constituted by two mutually anticommuting mass matrices M 1 and M 2 , following the protocol in Eqs. ( Even though {H Nam vor , E} = 0, E by construction is a real. So, E is not a mass. Nevertheless, we can define the following six imaginary Hermitian matrices where 3 ≤ j, k ≤ 6, but with j = k and j > k, which anticommute with H Nam vor . Hence, altogether there are ten masses, anicommuting with H Nam vor . Any one of them can acquire finite expectation value by splitting the eightdimensional subspace of zero energy states. In order to demonstrate the two-fold degeneracy of the zero-energy manifold, we search for all possible candidates for the sixteen-dimensional unitary operator U , such that we can define the pseudo time-reversal operator are imaginary and J 2 K = -1, the imaginary unitary operator U must satisfy {H V , U } = 0. Due to the enlarged dimensionality of H Nam vor , in fact there are ten possible choices of U , given by Therefore, any one of the ten masses that anticommutes with H Nam vor can be a candidate for U . Since all mass matrices are Hermitian and imaginary J 2 K = -1. If one of them, say M 3 , acquires local expectation value (m 3 ) near the vortex core, there are still six candidates for U , namely M j and M 3j with j = 4, 5, 6, such that J K , H Nam vor + m 3 M 3 = 0. Therefore, split zero energy modes continue to enjoy the two-fold degeneracy. A question arises quite naturally. What is the internal algebra among these 10 competing masses? Notice each member of the set of 10 masses matrices, say M 3 , anticommutes with 6 other masses (namely, M 4 , M 5 , M 6 , M 34 , M 35 , M 36 ), and commutes with 3 other masses (namely, M 45 , M 46 , M 56 ). Such an algebra is the defining property of an SO(5) group, constituted by product matrices. Therefore, 10 masses that can develop finite expectation value within the zero-energy subspace close an SO(5) algebra. By contrast, in a Dirac system (such as MLG) six mass orders in the vortex core satisfy SU(2)⊗SU( where E jk = iM j M k . Each generator anticommutes (commutes) with 6 (3) other generators, and they close an SO(5) algebra. See also Appendix B. An SO(5) group has five SO(4) subgroups. Between any two of them there exists three common generators, precisely the number of common planes between two four-dimensional subspaces of a five-dimensional sphere. The generators of each SO(4) subgroups are shown in blue in Fig. In Fig. Four masses belonging to any SO(4) subgroup are mutually anticommuting reconciles with the fact that the maximal number of mutually anticommuting mass matrices is six in BLG. Therefore, if the system chooses to split the zero-energy manifold by breaking SO(4) chiral symmetry of H Nam vor , it can be accomplished in five different patterns. On the other hand, an SO(5) group has ten SO(3) or SU(2) subgroups. 6 Their generators are the following For any j = I, • • • , X, three SU(2) generators (A α s) satisfy the group algebra [A α , A β ] = i αβδ A δ , where αβδ is the fully antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol. As shown in Fig. Now we focus on skyrmion [see Eq. ( 6 Ten SU(2) subgroups can be found in the following way. Each SO Notice that the U(1) charge of the skyrmion rotates between three pairs of distinct induced masses, residing at any two equivalent vertices of two triangles, while each generator of isospin SU(2) symmetry rotates between two copies distinct induced masses, residing at the end of identical arms of two triangles, see Fig. In terms of the masses related by the U(1) rotation, generated by Q skyr = Y , we can define three copies of five-tuplet of mutually anticommuting masses The existence of five mutually anticommuting masses gives the right number to support WZW term in d = 2 where the U(1) rotation between the induced masses, namely (M 4 , M 5 ) and (M 34 , M 35 ), is generated by one of the generators of isospin SU(2) symmetry, namely E 45 . Therefore, same isospin-WZW term can arise for two copies of five tuplets of masses. Isospin-WZW terms can also be derived for the induced masses, related via U(1) rotation generated by E 46 and E 56 . The WZW term in believed to be responsible for continuous (and possibly deconfined) quantum phase transition. Therefore, in valley-flavored QBT systems such an unconventional quantum phase transition can take the system to a variety of competing broken symmetry phases, due to their flavor degeneracy in the skyrmion core, a detailed analysis of which is left for a future investigation. Upon establishing the internal algebra of competing orders in the core of topological defects of mass orders, we now discuss some physically pertinent examples for both single-flavored and valley-degenerate QBT systems. To this end we refer to Table I for all masses in this systems and Sec. II A for the corresponding definition of eight-component spinor. First, we consider a vortex of easy-plane components of QSHI. Therefore, in Eq. ( and three mutually anticommuting masses are the easyaxis QSHI, and real and imaginary components of the singlet s-wave pairing. Any one of these three masses can split the zero-energy manifold of H Nam vor [see Eq. ( Next we consider a skyrmion of QSHI. The generalized charge of such a skyrmion is the standard electric charge Q elec in the Nambu basis. Note that Q skyr generates a U(1) rotation between the real and imaginary components of s-wave pairing. Therefore, core of the skyrmion of QSHI supports s-wave pairing, and a vortex of s-wave superconductor allows the local formation of QSHI. Next we discuss the competing phases in the core of vortex and skyrmion in Bernal BLG. Readers should consult Table Due to a large number of masses, one can construct a myriad of vortices out of any two mutually anticommuting masses shown in Table (1) Vortex of spin-singlet Kekule currents (M 1 = K E , M 2 = K O ): Ten masses that anticommute with K E and K O are the layer polarized (LP) and layer antiferromagnet ( N) states, and spin-triplet f -wave superconductor ( F 1 , F 2 ). Four-tuplets of masses forming the SO(4) subgroups of mutually anticommuting masses are If the zero-energy manifold gets split by spontaneously breaking the SU(2) spin rotational symmetry ( S), it can be accomplished by nucleating either the Néel layer antiferromagnet ( N), real ( F 1 ) or imaginary ( F 2 ) components of the spin-triplet f -wave pairing, representing the color degeneracy of competing orders in the vortex core. (2) Vortex of easy-plane layer anti-ferromagnet (M 1 = N 1 , M 2 = N 2 ) supports singlet Kekule currents (K E and K O ), Kekule pair-density-waves (sK 1 , sK 2 , pK 1 and pK 2 ), and the easy-axis component of QSHI (SH 3 ), layer anti-ferromagnet (N 3 ) and f -wave pairing (F 3 1 and F 3 2 ). Five SO(4) subgroups of competing masses are In contrast to a Dirac system (such as MLG), the vortex core of easy-plane Néel layer antiferromagnet supports spin-singlet pair-density-waves in BLG. (3) A vortex in the easy-plane of QSHI (M 1 = SH 1 , M 2 = SH 2 ) supports easy-axis layer anti-ferromagnet (N 3 ), QSHI (SH 3 ) and Kekule spin-currents (K 3 E and K 3 O ), s-wave pairing (S 1 and S 2 ), and Kekule pairdensity-waves (sK 1 , sK 2 , pK 1 and pK 2 ). The associated four-tuplets of mutually anticommuting masses are In contrast to a similar situation in MLG, where the vortex zero modes only support the s-wave pairing, in Bernal BLG they can also accommodate translational symmetry breaking Kekule pairings. So far, we discussed vortex in various insulating phases of BLG, discerning sufficient differences with their counterparts in MLG. Next we discuss vortex of superconducting masses in this system. (4) First we consider a vortex of s-wave pairing, with M 1 = S 1 and M 2 = S 2 . It supports layer polarized state (LP), QSHI ( SH), and Kekule spin-currents ( K E and K O ). The four-tuplet of masses are If the zero-energy manifold gets split by lifting the SU(2) spin rotational symmetry, it can be accompanied by QSHI ( SH) or two spin-triplet Kekule currents ( K E and K O ), manifesting the flavor degeneracy. (5) In the vortex core of spin-singlet s-Kekule pairing (M 1 = sK 1 , M 2 = sK 2 ), one can find layer antiferromagnet ( N), QSHI ( SH), and specific components of spinsinglet (K E ) and spin-triplet ( K O ) Kekule currents. The corresponding four-tuplet of masses are On the other hand, the SU(2) spin rotational symmetry of the zero modes can be lifted by layer antiferromagnet ( N), QSHI ( SH) or spin Kekule current ( K O ), manifesting the color degeneracy among the competing orders. A similar algebra among ten masses in the vortex of p-Kekule superconductor can be constructed after taking K O → K E and K O → K E . Therefore, vortex core of all spin-singlet superconductors (the s-wave and two Kekule ones) supports topological QSHI. ( O ), easy-axis QSHI (SH 3 ), and singlet Kekule currents (K E and K O ). The five sets of four mutually anticommuting masses are Therefore, all four gapped supercondcutors support QSHI and some translational symmetry breaking masses in the vortex core. It is also interesting to notice that the vortex phase of pair-density waves additionally supports the Néel layer antiferromagnet. Now we consider skyrmion of triplet masses in BLG. (1) Néel layer anti-ferromagnet, with M j = N j for j = 1, 2, 3. The six mass matrices that anticommute with H Nam skyr [see Eq. ( is the chiral or valley charge (Q ch ), which changes sign between two valley. The valley charge rotates between the following three pairs of masses, (1) K E and K O , (2) sK 1 and pK 2 , and (3) sK 2 and pK 1 , manifesting the flavor degeneracy of competing order. One generator of the SU(2) isospin is the electric charge Q elec = τ 3 ⊗ σ 0 ⊗ η 0 ⊗ α 0 , which rotates between the real and imaginary components of the s-Kekule (sK 1 and sK 2 ) and p-Kekule (pK 1 and pK 2 ) pair-density-waves. Therefore, skyrmion core of Néel order can become charged by nucleating a specific Kekule superconductor. is the regular electric charge (Q elec ), which rotates between the real and imaginary components of three singlet pairings. One generator of SU(2) isospin is the chiral charge Q ch . Hence, the core of a skyrmion of QSHI can host three different types of spin-singlet superconductors, leading to the notion of the color degeneracy among competing orders. In contrast, only the s-wave pairing can be realized in the skyrmion core of QSHI in MLG To summarize, here we unveil the internal algebra of competing orders inside the core of the topological defects, such as vortex and skyrmion, of various the ordered phases in two-dimensional fermionic systems that in the normal phase are described by biquadratic touching of the valence and conduction bands. We consider two realizations of such systems, describing singledflavored and valley-degenerate QBTs, respectively realized on the checkerboard or Kagome lattice The internal algebra of competing orders in valleydegenerate QBT systems is much richer. For example, eight zero-energy vortex modes can supports ten masses that close an SO(5) algebra. While there are five possible patterns for splitting the zero modes by lifting its SO(4) chiral symmetry, they can also be split by spontaneously breaking the SU(2) chiral symmetry in ten different ways. Most interestingly, each SU(2) symmetry can be broken by three distinct set of chiral triplet masses, giving rise to the notion of color or flavor degeneracy of competing orders inside the vortex core. As a concrete example of such flavor degeneracy, we note that zero modes bound to the vortex of Kekule current orders can be split by spontaneously breaking the SU(2) spin rotational symmetry by either Néel layer antiferromagnet or the real and imaginary components of the spin-triplet f -wave pairing. On the other hand, a skyrmion composed of three mutually anticommuting masses possesses an SU(2)⊗U(1) chiral symmetry, and therefore supports a generalized U(1) charge and SU(2) isospin. While the U(1) charge rotates between three distinct pairs of masses, each generator of SU(2) isospin symmetry rotates between two distinct pairs of masses, once again yielding the color or flavor degeneracy among competing orders within the skyrmion core. As a concrete outcome of such a rich algebraic structure, we note that skyrmions of QSHI and Néel antiferromagnet supports singlet Kekule pairings, while the vortex phase of spin-singlet pair-density-waves (s-Kekule and p-Kekule) supports both insulating masses. A question of practical importance arise quite naturally. How to stabilize a real space vortex in an ordered phase? Notice that an easy-plane configuration of Néel layer antiferromagnet or topological QSHI can be realized in the presence of an in-plane external magnetic field Deep inside a triplet ordered phase, such as layer antiferromagent and QSHI, skyrmions are expected to appear naturally. Recently it has been shown that singlet s-wave pairing can be nucleated through the condensation of skyrmions of QSHI in MLG 2. The time-reversal operator is, therefore, I t = K, and I 2 t = +1, which is basis independent. Therefore, when valence and conduction band display quadratic touching, the minimal representation of such a system can be two-component, and therefore the system does not necessarily encounter the fermion doubling. On the other hand, when d 1 (k) = vk x , and d 2 (k) = vk y , where v is the Fermi velocity, the minimal representation of α 1 and α 2 is four-dimensional for spinless fermions in two dimensions The Clifford algebra C(p, q) defines a set of p + q mutually anticommuting matrices, where p(q) of them squares to +1(-1). This is so because seven mutually anticommuting matrices satisfy the constraintiΓ 1 Γ 2 M 1 M 2 M 3 M 4 M 5 ∝ I 8 . In Dirac system, such as MLG, a skyrmion of the Néel order does not permit any superconducting mass in its core