Wearable electronic devices and gadgets raise the need for flexible, thin and lightweight batteries. In this article we present for the first time, a unique, single-step method for the preparation of a membrane-electrode assembly for flexible-batteries application. Concurrent electrophoretic deposition (EPD) of positive and negative battery electrodes (LFP and LTO) on opposite sides of a commercial nanoporous membrane (Celgard 2325) results in the formation of a three-layer-battery structure. The cell comprising this electrophoretically deposited structure ran for more than 150 cycles with 125-140mAh/g capacity, which approaches the theoretical value of lithium iron phosphate. The electrodes can be deposited either cathodically or anodically by replacing the interchangeable charging agents, like polyethyleneimine and polyacrylic acid. These polyelectrolytes, when adsorbed on the particles of the active material, serve also as the binders. The simultaneous EPD, which we developed, can be used for the simple and low-cost manufacturing of a variety of cathode and anode materials on nanoporous polymer-and ceramic ion-conducting membranes for energy storage devices. The forthcoming era of smart and omnipresent energy requires flexible power sources, which feature visual adaptability and simplistic integration with electronic devices of various sizes and shapes Research on flexible lithium-ion batteries has mainly been focused on the development of nano-size electroactive materials, shape-conformable electrolytes, and soft current collectors. Free-standing carbon-based mats based on carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, and their composite matrices have attracted increasing attention as promising functional electrode materials for flexible batteries For quite a while, solution-based processing of electrode materials, which include ink-jet printing, serigraphy, sol-gel, chemical-bath, electro-and electrophoretic deposition techniques, has been shown to be accessible and cost-effective for the fabrication of thin-film high-performance electrodes To the best of our knowledge, very few articles address the electrophoretic deposition of ceramic materials on polymer membranes. The first report is that of Sarkar and Nicholson in 1996 The feasibility of preparation by EPD of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) for a polymer-electrolyte fuel cell was demonstrated in The possibility of simultaneous electrophoretic deposition of oppositely charged MgO and silicon particles was tested in As declared in the Introduction, the goal of this research was the development of a membrane-electrode battery assembly (MEBA) by the simultaneous electrophoretic deposition of negative and positive battery electrodes on the opposite sides of a flexible nanoporous membrane. Since most of the of the publications report the EPD of different materials on metal electrodes, like nickel and aluminum, or graphite, it was of particular importance to initially test the feasibility of electrophoretic deposition of the LFP and the LTO on a polymer membrane. Celgard 2325 membrane is a tri-layer polypropylene-polyethylene-polypropylene 25m-thick film with a porosity of 39% and pore size not exceeding 28nm. This membrane, in addition, is known to have good wettability by acetone and by typical nonaqueous electrolytes used in lithiumion batteries. In most of our experiments, the LFP was deposited cathodically and the LTO anodically on the membrane, which was placed in front of the electrode, both at 100V and from 30 to 300 seconds. It is well established that the surface charge of particles dispersed in suspension is brought about by the adsorption of ionic species and/or polyelectrolytes Zhitomirsky et al showed The adhesion of electrophoretically deposited electrodes to Celgard 2325 was evaluated by an adhesive tape test. The tape was stuck on the film and peeled by pulling one of its ends. It was found that after the tape test the remaining area of the membrane coated by cathodic LFP deposit, in which PEI was used as a single charging agent/binder, was only half that of the EPD film prepared from the suspension containing two polyelectrolytes -PEI and PAA. It is important to emphasize that simply by replacing the charging agents in the appropriate suspensions, the LFP can be electrophoretically deposited on the anode and the LTO on the cathode. Moreover, it appears that LFP particles dispersed in acetone solvent with acetylacetone alone undergoes anodic deposition, while the -potential induced by this additive to the LTO particles is insufficient to enable their EPD. Increased concentration of PAA (3% w/w) facilitates the migration of both types of particles towards the anode, while the combination of PEI (1% w/w) and PAA (2% w/w) -towards the cathode. The mass of the deposited materials was found to increase with deposition time, leading to the formation of films of different thicknesses. Figure We ascribe this to the coagulation of the micelles, composed of LFP/LTO and polymers in the very close vicinity of the membrane and their precipitation on Celgard, the pores of which are smaller than the particle sizes of LFP and LTO. As expected, when two and three Celgard membranes are placed in front of the negative aluminum electrode, the mass of the LFP deposit on the membrane facing the suspension, significantly decreases. The decrease is more pronounced than that estimated from the simple increase of the thickness of the dielectric barrier. We attribute this not only to the diminution of the applied electric field strength, but mainly to the imperfect contact between the membranes, which results in the nonlinearity of the external field. While the mechanism of EPD has been the subject of much study, a full understanding of the process is still lacking On the basis of our data collected so far, it can be deduced that the deposition on the membrane fits the Hamaker and Verwey [43] mechanism better. This is in agreement with Sarkar and Nicholson The questions of the causes, and the processes of charge redistribution of adsorbed polyelectrolyte macromolecules to form the neutral deposited particulate composite, still remain unresolved and require further investigation. Modulated high-resolution TGA tests were carried out with the purpose of determining the relative content of polymers in the deposited films. Figures The modified design of the homemade setup for simultaneous electrophoretic deposition on membrane, is shown in Figures The results of electrochemical testing of half-and full-coin-cells (LFP/Li, LTO/Li and LFP/LTO) with the electrodes deposited electrophoretically on Celgard, are collected in Figure The charge/discharge behavior of LFP/Li battery was thoroughly studied and described by Srinivasan and Newman The novelty of the research presented in this manuscript is in the development of a prototype of flexible battery on nanoporous Celgard 2325 membrane. The LFP-and LTO-based electrodes were prepared by a single-step simultaneous electrophoretic deposition of oppositely charged particles. Both electrodes can be deposited anodically, or cathodically simply by the replacement of the charging agents. In the low-ionicstrength suspension the migration of both, positively charged particles and free ions (protons), followed by reduction of the latter is most likely to govern the cathodic EPD process. Passivation of the counter electrode (Ni or Al) by dissolved-inacetone oxygen and migration of negatively charged particles control the anodic EPD. In the electrolytic bath with separate electrodes partitions, the nanoporous membrane sandwiched between the electrodes serves as the physical barrier to the two-way penetration of particles, the surface charge of which is induced by the adsorption of polyelectrolytes. Applied strong electric field facilitates coagulation of micelles in the close proximity to the membrane and precipitation of positively and negatively charged particles on its opposite sides. This is followed by the formation of tri-layer membrane electrode battery assembly. For cathodic EPD, the PEI (0.1%) was used as a charging agent, and 2% PAA as a binder. For anodic EPD, the PAA (3% w/w) functions both as a charging agent and as a binder. For both anodic and cathodic EPD the active-material content (LFP or LTO) was 85%, carbon-additive content, 10%(w/w) and solid loading was 3-4mg/ml solvent. The suspension also included 0.25%(v/v) acetylacetone (Sigma-Aldrich). At 30sec deposition time the standard deviation of the weight of the deposits was about 30%, at 60sec and at longer EPD process it decreased to 13.8% and 7.1%, respectively. A Keithley SourceMeter model 2400 interfaced with LabTracer software and a PC was used to control the DC-EPD process and to monitor the current and voltage profiles. The constant voltage of 50 or 100V was applied to nickel or aluminum electrodes, in front of which the Celgard membrane was placed. The details of the setup are described in the "Results and Discussion" part of the manuscript. The deposited three-layer thin-film LFP/Celgard/LTO samples were dried under vacuum at 50C for 24 hours. The argon-filled MBraun glove box containing less than 0.1ppm water was used for handling of these materials. The three-layer membrane-electrode battery assembly (MEBA) was soaked in commercial electrolyte (1M LiPF6 in 1:1 EC:DEC:2%VC, Solvionics) and sealed in electrochemical coin cells (type 2032). The cells were cycled at room temperature in a Biologic VMP3 and BCS 805battery-test system. A JSM-6300 scanning microscope (Jeol Co.) equipped with a Link elemental analyzer and a silicon detector, was used for the study of the surface morphology of the electrodes. TOF SIMS tests were performed with the use of a TRIFT II (Physical Electronics Inc. USA) under the following operating conditions: primary ions (indium) , DC sputtering rate 0.035nm.min -1 based on SiO2 reference. Modulated high-resolution tests of the composite films were conducted with the use of high-sensitivity thermogravimetric analyzer Q5000 TGA-IR (TA Instruments), which operates from ambient temperature to 1000 • C. The weight of the samples was 3-5mg. Overlay d) Cross-sectional tilted image This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2020, xx, xx | 7 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx J. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2020, xx, xx | 9