Electron and x-ray microscopes allow one to image the entire, unlabeled structure of hydrated materials at a resolution well beyond what visible light microscopes can achieve. However, both approaches involve ionizing radiation, so that radiation damage must be considered as one of the limits to imaging. Drawing upon earlier work, we describe here a unified approach to estimating the image contrast (and thus the required exposure and corresponding radiation dose) in both x-ray and electron microscopy. This approach accounts for factors such as plural and inelastic scattering, and (in electron microscopy) the use of energy filters to obtain so-called "zero loss" images. As expected, it shows that electron microscopy offers lower dose for specimens thinner than about 1 μm (such as for studies of macromolecules, viruses, bacteria and archaebacteria, and thin sectioned material), while x-ray microscopy offers superior characteristics for imaging thicker specimen such as whole eukaryotic cells, thick-sectioned tissues, and organs. The required radiation dose scales strongly as a function of the desired spatial resolution, allowing one to understand the limits of live and frozen hydrated specimen imaging. Finally, we consider the factors limiting x-ray microscopy of thicker materials, suggesting that specimens as thick as a whole mouse brain can be imaged with x-ray microscopes without significant image degradation should appropriate image reconstruction methods be identified. The as-published article [Ultramicroscopy 184, Soft materials are often wet materials. This applies to polymer gel absorbants, biofilms in soils, and in particular to biological specimens. While tremendous advances have been made in superresolution light microscopy for the study of added fluorophores or genetically-encoded fluorescent regions in proteins, it is still desirable to image the entirety of a specimen using its intrinsic contrast to provide overall structural context and for this the classical resolution limit of δ = 0.61λ/NA applies. Given the numerical aperture of wet or oil immersion lenses, this means that it is difficult to see sub-100 nm intrinsic detail in soft materials using visible light microscopes, even when using methods such as structured illumination microscopy For higher resolution, one must use radiation with a shorter wavelength λ, which is provided in both electron and x-ray microscopes. However, these shorter wavelength probes come at a cost in loss of convenience and, more fundamentally, a cost in terms of radiation damage caused by the use of ionizing radiation. For simple linear effects in molecules, Burton proposed The relative merits of electron and x-ray microscopy for transmission imaging have been considered by several researchers who have reached seemingly contradictory conclusions: • Molecular imaging can be done at significantly lower radiation dose in electron microscopy than in x-ray microscopy • X-rays offer great advantages in penetration, so for studies of thicker biological materials it has been argued that soft x-ray microscopy can be carried out at a much lower radiation dose than is the case with electron microscopy In fact, these conclusions are neither contradictory, nor individually incorrect as will be seen in Sec. 7.2. It is our purpose here to use the same calculation methodology for modern approaches to electron and x-ray microscopy to re-evaluate the relative advantages of these methods for different biological specimen types, and also consider the ultimate thickness limits for x-ray microscopy over a wide range of photon energies. In the case of electron microscopy, several authors have considered the improvements that phase contrast and zero-loss filtering can provide for imaging thicker specimens. In one case, Monte Carlo numerical Table Our x-ray microscopy calculations are based on estimating image intensities with features present and absent, following the method of certain previous approaches for transmission imaging Our calculations here are for two dimensional images of features with a thickness equal to the intended lateral resolution (that is, we assume that small features have the same size in depth as they do laterally in a 2D image). However, they should apply equally well to 3D imaging on the basis of using dose fractionation, which is the idea that "a three-dimensional reconstruction requires the same integral dose as a conventional two-dimensional micrograph provided that the level of significance and the resolution are identical" In what follows, we will start with more basic models and consider their limits for the case of thin specimens, after which more complete models will be discussed. A guide to these various expressions is provided in Table If all other noise sources are eliminated, the signal-to-noise ratio of an image is dominated by photon statistics where n is the average over many measurements and n is the result of a particular measurement. For values of n above about 10, the Poisson distribution is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution of which has a variance σ 2 characterized by σ = √ n. ( We then follow previous work The noise is the fluctuation due to photon statistics in both the feature-present and feature-absent cases, since we are looking at the difference between these two cases in Eq. 4. The statistical fluctuations of Eq. 3 in these two measurements are uncorrelated, so the noise N is the root-mean-squared sum of these two results or Consequently, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is given by where we define as an image contrast parameter. Therefore we obtain the result that the mean number of quanta n with which we must illuminate each pixel in a 2D image (or each voxel in a 3D tomographic reconstruction Human vision studies suggest a signal-to-noise ratio of SNR = 5 leads to acceptable image quality (the so-called "Rose criterion" for the minimum photon exposure per pixel. Our specimen model follows the assumption of several previous studies while the total for the underlying and overlying material is as shown in Figure Overlying material Figure For biological materials we will follow the assumption that the feature f is comprised of the stochiometric composition of a representative protein formed from the average of all 20 amino acids, leading to a composition of H 48.6 C 32.9 N 8.9 O 8.9 S 0.6 with a density when dry of 1.35 g/cm 2 We first consider the case of image contrast and dose x-ray microscopy. We begin with a simplified model in Sec. 3.1 which follows earlier calculation methods Materials illuminated by x-ray beams have an index of refraction n that is slightly less than unity An alternative expression is where r e is the classical radius of the electron, n a is the number density of atoms, and (f 1 +if 2 ) describes the frequency-dependent complex number of oscillator modes per atom in a form for which excellent tabulations exist For the specimen model shown in Fig. while the feature absent (background) case is given by = I 0 exp(-μ b t). In the limits of μ t t f 1 and μ b t f 1, the above equations can be simplified as and Letting I 0 = 1 for unit-normalized intensities in accordance with the expression of Eq. 7, we arrive at a contrast parameter Θ abs for x-ray absorption contrast imaging of which for thin specimens becomes as expressed using either the linear absorption coefficients μ for Eq. 22 or the amplitude reduction part β of the complex x-ray refractive index (Eq. 12) for Eq. 23. While it has long been known that the phase-shifting part δ of the x-ray refractive index is much larger than the amplitude-reducing part β, it was not until 1987 that Schmahl and Rudolph suggested the use of phase contrast in x-ray imaging for phase advance per thickness in the materials of the feature (i → f ), the background (i → b), and the phase ring (i → p). The original derivation began from formulating the complex amplitudes A of waves exiting from the feature-present (A f ) and -absent (A b ) regions. We slightly modify the equations to adapt them to the specimen model used in this work, which contains an overlaying background layer on the dispersed feature materials, leading to The amplitude attenuation and phase shift imposed upon the reference beam A b by transmission T through the phase ring is As a result, the amplitude of the reference beam on the image plane is given by while the wave A d diffracted due to the presence of feature rather than background material in the pixel t f is Because of its scattering throughout the lens aperure, the diffracted wave A d is nearly unaffected by the modulation T p of the small phase ring. As a result, the amplitude of the wave that transmits through feature-present regions of the specimen takes the following form at the image plane: Therefore the detected image intensities for the feature-present and -absent cases are given by If the specimen is a weak phase object, and the phase ring produces a phase shift of exactly π/2 with no absorption, these expressions reduce to We then have a contrast parameter for Zernike phase contrast imaging of involving the expressions of Eqs. 31 and 32. In the weak phase contrast limits of t f η f 1 and t f η b 1, this can be simplified by using Eqs. 33 and 34 to arrive at where Eq. 37 emphasizes the symmetry with Eq. 23. We have seen that the contrast parameters of the two imaging schemes mentioned depend on the x-ray refractive indices 1 -δ f -iβ f for the feature material, and n = 1 -δ b -iβ b for the background material. With these expressions in the thin specimen limit (Eqs. 23 and 37), one can use Eq. 8 to formulate simplified expressions for the number of photons n required for imaging at the Rose criterion of SNR = 5 of These expressions for the required number of photons per pixel scale with feature thickness as t 2 f , while the area also decreases with t 2 f if we assume an isotropic (cubic) specimen; thus we are consistent with other analyses The above expressions are essentially what have been used in dose estimates in x-ray microscopy that update the early work of Sayre et al. The probability P for individual photon interactions within a sample thickness dt is given by where σ i is the cross section for interaction event i, and ρ is the sample density. The interaction events i we now want to consider are photoelectric absorption as before (i → abs), elastic or Rayleigh scattering (i → el), and inelastic (Compton) scattering (i → inel). These cross sections are well tabulated where η el and η inel are the probabilities that a photon is scattered more than 90 • (that is, backscattered and thus lost to the imaging system) in an elastic and inelastic scattering event, respectively. The two fractions can be found where Eq. 47 integrates the differential Thomson cross section for unpolarized radiation and the atomic form factor F (θ/λ, Z), while Eq. 48 integrates the Klein-Nishina cross section for the relative incident energy k = E/m e c 2 and uses the incoherent scattering form factor S(θ/λ, Z). One can obtain numerical values for both σ el and σ inel by numerical integration of the respective formulae as tabulated in the subroutine library xraylib With the above, we can now follow the example of calculations in electron • Unscattered: all photons are in this category at the outset, but they leave according to The initial condition is I noscat (0) = I 0 . • Single elastic scattered: unscattered photons can enter this category, while photons leave this category due to various scattering events giving with I 1el (0) = 0. • Detected plural scattered: photons undergoing multiple elastic scattering events while remaining within the detectable aperture are described by with I el,plural (0) = 0. • Backscattered: photons that are scattered out of the detectable angular range (whether due to elastic, or inelastic, scattering) are given by with I out (0) = 0. • Absorbed: photons from any of the forward-directed category categories can always be absorbed according to with I abs (0) = 0. • Not inelastic scattered: the fraction of detectable photons that have not undergone inelastic scattering (the sum I noscat + I 1el + I el,plural ) is denoted as I in,noinel and given by with I in,noinel (0) = 0. • Ineastically scattered within aperture: the fraction of photons that undergo at least one inelastic scattering yet are still within the detectable aperture is given by with I inel (0) = 0. Unscattered: Single elastic scatttered: Plural scattered: I el,plural = I 0 e -(K out +K inel,in +K abs )t - Scattered out: Absorbed: Scattered in, no inelastic: Inelastic scattered: and it can be confirmed that the above expressions satisfy as expected. For a generic protein feature lying in amorphous ice and EPON resin matrices, the expressions of Eqs. 56-62 are plotted in Figs. 2 and 3 as a function of overall background material thickness for three example x-ray energies: 5, 15, and 45 keV. The above analyses can be used to evaluate the quality and statistical quantities of the acquired images only if the continuous specimen assumption remains valid. This requires that neither the background or feature material has optically significant structure at length scales smaller than t f , the spatial resolution of the imaging experiment. If that is the case, then there is a coherent superposition of scattering amplitudes within the numerical aperture of the imaging experiment from structures within the resolution scale t f . This is in fact a condition assumed by the previous imaging-based analyses cited earlier. If instead there is significant structure within a pixel, one might have to consider the fraction of signal scattered to angles beyond the numerical aperture (NA) of the imaging system; that is, one would have a reduction in intensities I 1el , I el,plural , and I inel . Obviously this approximation becomes increasingly invalid as the resolution t f is decreased down towards values where there are a small number of molecules within a distance t f so that the feature begins to look "lumpy" and scatters into larger angles. As an example, one simulation study of gold atoms in amorphous and crystalline particles indicated that this approximation becomes invalid at length scales of about 1 nm To understand the limits where atomic structure begins to produce significant scattering beyond the acceptance of an experiment with a limiting numerical aperture corresponding to the resolution t f in biologically-significant materials, we turned to small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) data of 80 different protein samples retrieved from Small Angle Scattering Biological Data Bank (SASBDB) is the momentum transfer of scattering (in nm -1 for the parameterization of Eq. 64), with 2θ as the scattering angle. While it is usual to denote momentum transfer with q in the x-ray scattering literature, we use s for consistency with electron microscopy calculations If we assume the value of the numerical aperture exactly matches s , then the fraction f NA of photons scattered into the aperture can be found through That is, approximately 66% of the photons are accepted within a square (rather than circular) numerical aperture if the imaging system were to collect signal from a square of width ∆ = 0.5λ/NA with NA replaced by s = 0.42 nm -1 (that is, a square pixel resolution of ∆ = 7.40 nm using 5 keV x-rays). In other words, when the square pixel feature size t f decreases towards a value of 7.40 nm, one would want account for f NA in the expressions for I 1el , I el,plural , and I inel ; however, we will not apply the corrective factor f NA in the calculations that follow. The approximation of structure being continuous at length scales finer than the spatial resolution t f begins to break down when molecular scattering exceeds the corresponding numerical aperture. Shown here as a series of thin lines are the small angle scattering patterns I(s) from 80 different macromolecules in small angle scattering patterns in SASBDB, the Small Angle Scattering Biological Data Bank Having determined the normalized intensities of x-rays in various interaction categories, we can carry out a more complete calculation of image signals with, and without, features present. Starting from Eqs. 56-62, we arrive at expressions for the background or feature-absent case of whereas the feature-present case is described by equations including The signal from the feature slice is gradually reduced in downstream layers due to scattering. This is described by I out/f,f and I abs/f,f , which are formulated in a fashion similar to Eqs. 72 and 73. The differences within the feature slice are that the interaction coefficients (the K coefficients) of the background material are replaced by those of the feature, and t is changed to t f . In addition, the incident intensity I 0 in Eqs. 72 and 73 is replaced by , which is the intensity that remains after absorption and out-of-aperture scattering in the overlying slab (the "incident intensity" at the upper boundary of the feature slice): Based on these, the total signal scattered outside the aperture of the detector is given by The equation consists of three terms, describing the amount of photons scattered out in the overlaying background material, out of the feature slice in the middle, and out of the underlying background material. Following the definition in Eq. 72, I out,b (t b /2) gives the amount of photons scattered out in the background material of thickness t b /2, given an incident intensity of I 0 , which is the thickness of the overlying slab. Within the feature slice at the middle, the amount of photons scattered out is I out/f,f . The third term is the amount of out-of-aperture photons contributed by the underlying slab, but the incident intensity I 0 in I out,b (t b /2) has to be replaced by the beam intensity after being attenuated by the overlying and middle slab, which is accounted for by the prefactor of I out,b (t b /2). For t f t b , the first and third terms in the equation can be collectively replaced by I out,b (t b ), resulting in This approximation is based on the assumption that the attenuation caused in the middle slice does not significantly alter the beam intensity at the upper boundary of the underlying material. Along with similar considerations for photoelectric absorption, we arrive at where the approximation at t f t b similarly applies to Eq. 82c. Finally, this set of equations are completed by the expression These intensities are dominated by interactions in the background material as shown in Figs. where t again represents the total specimen thickness. The modified wave amplitudes corresponding to Eqs. 25 and 26 then become where A 0 is the amplitude of the incident beam. If we neglect absorption in the phase ring used in Zernike phase contrast so that it only applies a phase shift exp[iφ], the image intensity equivalents to Eqs. 31 and 32 become For an ideal phase ring with φ = π/2, and the limiting case that the amplitude correction terms C i (t) become 1, Eqs. 86 and 87 reduce to Eqs. 31 and 32. If instead we "turn off" the phase ring by setting φ = 0 while also working in the thin specimen limit with C i (t) → 1, it can be shown that Eqs. 86 and 87 reproduce the thin specimen limit expresions for absorption contrast of Eqs. 18 and 19. Thus the intensities of Eqs. 86 and 87 can be used to describe both absorption (φ = 0) and Zernike phase contrast (φ = π/2) for thick specimens with the effects of I el,plural , I inel , and I out included. In this case the contrast parameter Θ is modified from the expressions of Eqs. 21 or 35 to become using Eqs. 86 and 87, as well as an expression for the background signals of At left is shown the case for Zernike phase contrast using the pure-phase thin sample approximation of Eq. 36, the conventional model of Eq. 35, and the complete model of Eq. 88 with phase contrast (φ = π/2) . The discrepancy between the pure-phase thin sample approximation and the conventional model is due to the fact that there is significant absorption at the soft x-ray energy of 0.5 keV, even though this is within the "water window" spectral region between the carbon (0.290 keV) and oxygen (0.540 keV) x-ray absorption edges. Because the plural elastic and inelastic terms do not carry structural information, they only contribute to the noise term in the denominator of Eq. 88. As summarized in Table In order to see this more clearly, we show in Figs. 5-7 the contrast parameter Θ calculated for different x-ray energies, imaging conditions, and specimen and background thicknesses. The case of Zernike phase and absorption contrast for soft x-ray microscopy is shown in Fig. Once the appropriate expression for the contrast parameter Θ has been evaluated, one can arrive at the required number of photons per pixel n using Eq. 8. This provide us with the basis of estimating the radiation dose, which is the energy deposited per mass. Accounting for attenuation by the overlying background material shown in Fig. where E = hc/λ is the photon energy based on Planck's constant h and the speed of light c. Since this is incident on a feature with area ∆ 2 and density ρ f , this leads to a dose D f absorbed in the feature of When the pixel width is equal to the feature thickness (or ∆ = t f ), this becomes for the case of x-ray imaging of cubic features. Since the required number of incident photons n is found from the contrast parameter Θ according Eq. 8, we arrive at a dose to the feature of where setting SNR=5 corresponds to the Rose criterion which again shows that the required radiation dose D increases with the fourth power of improvements in spatial resolution t f . If one instead uses δ = αλ 2 f 1 and β = αλ 2 f 2 from Eq. 13, the phase contrast expression becomes At x-ray energies in the keV range, f 1 tends to approach a constant value of the atomic number Z for the element in question while f 2 scales like λ 2 Transmission electron microscopy has a long and enormously successful history in biological imaging, so it is useful to perform a similar analysis of its characteristics. In fact, several analytical analyses exist (as noted Sec. 1), but some of them ignore defocus phase contrast While electrons undergo both atomic scattering and a refractive-index-like phase advance due to the inner potential The cross section for elastic scattering σ el is well approximated by where Z is the atomic number and β is the velocity relative to the speed of light c given by for an electron of mass m e accelerated over a voltage V 0 . The cross section for inelastic scattering σ inel is approxmated by where with ∆E representing the mean energy loss of electron in the media. As noted by Langmore and Smith, Eq. 100 gives erroneous results for hydrogen so instead one uses which scales empirical observations made at V 0 = 80 kV. The value of η inel (the fraction of inelastically scattered electrons blocked by the objective aperture) is assumed to be η inel = 0 as inelastic electron scattering typically involves very small angles The expression for the inelastic cross section σ inel requires knowledge of the mean energy loss ∆E of electrons in a material, and this quantity is also needed for calculating the dose in electron microscopy (Eq. 131). This energy can be measured using electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) from a thin specimen. We have obtained EELS spectra for our two background materials: amorphous ice (based on 100 kV data provided by Richard Leapman, National Institutes of Health), and EPON (based on 80 kV data acquired with Kai He, using a sample prepared by Qiaoling Jin; both are with Northwestern University). From the as-recorded spectrum, one can calculate the single-inelastic-scatter spectrum I inel (∆E) using a Fourier-log deconvolution method The values we obtained for ∆E are very similar between amorphous ice (39.3 eV) and EPON Amorphous ice Figure Having established functional forms for electron interaction cross sections in Sec. 6.1, we can proceed in a manner similar to that used for x-ray interactions in Sec. 4. We first write the interaction probability K for electrons to undergo elastic scattering as for those singly scattered inside and outside the acceptance of the objective respectively as and for the probability for electrons to be singly inelastically scattered yet remain within the aperture as We can then assign electrons to categories Single elastic scattered: Plural scattered: Scattered out : Scattered in, no inelastic : Inelastic scattered: These normalized intensities for electrons in amorphous ice and in EPON are shown in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively, for the frequently-used electron beam energies of 100 and 300 keV. These plots can be compared with the equivalents for x-rays shown in Figs. The expressions of Eqs. 108-113 were for a uniform material. We now consider our model specimen as shown in Fig. while when it contains the feature material we obtain As noted in Sec. 1.1, phase contrast dominates in transmission electron microscopy of biological specimens. Phase contrast is usually obtained by using various defocus settings to maximize contrast at different momenta transfer values s In electron microscopy, scattered electrons recieve a phase shift of π/2 relative to the incident beam If instead there is no feature present, then the background-material-containing pixel has no contrast variation within itself or relative to the surrounding material (Fig. We can therefore write the contrast parameter Θ of Eq. 7 as when a zero-loss energy filter is used. Note that the intensity I in,noinel contributes to the background when zero-loss filtering is not used, because these electrons will not be brought into a sharp focus on the pixel in the imaging plane due to their different de Broglie wavelength as noted above. Instead, they will be distributed in a more diffuse way on the detector plane, so that they effectively make equal contributions to the intensities of both feature and background pixels. Once we have the required per-pixel illumination of n = SNR 2 /Θ 2 of Eq. 8 as calculated using either Eq. 129 or Eq. 130, we can calculate the radiation dose imparted to the specimen based on the fraction of inelastic scattering events and the mean energy ∆E deposited per inelastic scatter (Eq. 103). The absorbed dose D e , or energy deposited per mass in the pixel of area ∆ 2 = t 2 f , involves the fraction of interactions per length K inel,f in the feature of thickness t f (Eq. 42), leading to Note that because the rejection of any large-angle-scattered electrons by the objective aperture happens well downstream of the specimen plane, we do not include a term [1 -I out (t b,o )] which would otherwise indicate a reduction in the beam intensity due to any overlying background material. Finally, we can use Eqs. 42 and 131 to estimate a dose correponding to a given electron fluence; for protein in amorphous ice, we find that a fluence of 1 e -/nm 2 corresponds to a dose of 3.2 × 10 4 Gray at 100 kV, and 1.8 × 10 4 Gray at 300 kV. We have used a unified approach to estimate the required exposure and radiation dose in x-ray and electron microscopy. In this section, we make use of this approach to consider both the comparison of x-ray and electron microscopy, and to make several observations on the characteristics of x-ray microscopy and imaging. For these numerical calculations, we will use the complete expression for x-ray microscopy of Eq. 88, and the expressions for electron microscopy given in Eqs. 130 and 129 for the case of with and without zero-loss filtering, respectively. Before making these comparisons, we first wish to check our calculations against some published experimental observations. While many electron microscopy and tomography papers quote the electron fluence in e -/nm 2 , relatively few provide precise quantitation of both the achieved spatial resolution and the overall specimen thickness. In addition, while in electron tomography one should have nearly the same dose as a 2D image due to the dose fractionation theorem noted above In x-ray microscopy, there are again only a limited number of examples of 2D imaging of frozen hydrated specimens where the detection efficiency is well known. One such example involves 5.2 keV x-ray ptychography as a method for phase contrast imaging of a frozen hydrated cell with an overall ice thickness of t b = 3 μm, where a fluence of 9.2 × 10 3 photons/nm 2 was used to achieve sub-20 nm resolution In Section 1.1, we noted that previous comparisons of x-ray and electron microscopy arrived at seemingly contradictory statements about their relative merits. By using a consistent methodology, we are able to address this question, building upon previous work Because radiation dose scales strongly with spatial resolution, we consider the case of a fixed spatial resolution of 10 nm which is routine in electron microscopy and is within a factor of 2 of what is now being demonstrated x-ray microscopy of frozen hydrated biological specimens • Electron microscopy offers dramatically lower radiation dose for high resolution imaging when the specimen thickness is much less than about 0.3 μm, with extendability to slightly more than 1 μm for zero-loss imaging at 300 kV. • X-ray microscopy offers lower dose at thicknesses greater than about 1 μm. At the soft x-ray energy of 0.5 keV corresponding to the "water window" In other words, Fig. In order to better understand the optimal photon energy to be used for transmission imaging in x-ray microscopy, in Fig. As discussed in Sec. 3.1 and shown in the approximate results of Eqs. 94 and 95, for isotropic features the required radiation dose in x-ray microscopy increase as the fourth power of improvements in spatial resolution. Therefore in Fig. • The human LD 50 dose of about 4.5 Gray, which is the radiation dose that leads to to 50% fatalities in human populations • The incapacitation dose for rats and pigs, which is the dose at which these animals show an immediate cessation of normal function when the dose is administered over a time of minutes or less. Miniature pigs used in animal agriculture show immediate incapacitation upon exposure to gamma and neutron radiation doses of 130 Gray • The LD 10 dose for the radiation-resistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans. This dose of 1.0-2.5×10 3 Gray kills all but 10% of these bacteria in sewage sludge or animal feed • The dose associated with immediate inactivation of muscle function. At an absorbed soft x-ray dose of about 2 × 10 4 Gray, myofibrils will no longer contract in response to the addition of adeosine triphosphate or ATP • The dose associated with immediate structural changes in living cells. Chinese hamster ovarian cells show no immediate effect at soft x-ray doses of about 6 × 10 2 Gray, but they show immediate and dramatic structural changes at a dose of 1.2 × 10 5 Gray • The dose associated with changes in the carbon x-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) of polymers. One can observe an exp[-1] decrease in the strength of the C=C absorption resonance in room temperature polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) at a dose of about 1.2 × 10 7 Gray • The so-called Henderson dose limit for fading of x-ray diffraction spots in cryo-cooled crystals of about 2 × 10 7 Gray • The dose associated with mass loss in PMMA at a cryogenic temperature of 113 K. Soft x-ray measurements have shown • The dose associated with "bubbling" of amorphous ice in electron microscopy Of these effects, all but the last two are measures either of biological function, or specific atomic bonding or atom-to-atom correlation distances. For microscopy at a resolution of a few nanometers, these effects do not affect the image (unless one is utilizing XANES resonances for image contrast Figure In Sec. 7.2, we compared electron and x-ray microscopy for 10 nm resolution imaging in amorphous ice thicknesses up to 200 μm and with x-ray energies as high as 20 keV, as shown in Figs. X-ray energy (keV) Gray and so on. Of course it would be very challenging to obtain amorphous ice over these organ-scale thicknesses, but on the other hand ice crystal artifacts that obscure features in few-nanometer-resolution cryo electron microscopy studies might be unnoticeable in 100 nm resolution imaging. We have described a consistent approach to estimating the required per-pixel quantum exposure n and associated radiation dose D for both x-ray and electron microscopy of thick specimens, and have applied these calculations to the example of imaging frozen hydrated as well as plastic embedded biological specimens. We have done so by building upon previous work in x-ray 