The structural and electronic properties of twisted bilayer graphene are investigated from first principles and tight binding approach as a function of the twist angle (ranging from the first "magic" angle θ = 1.08 • to θ = 3.89 • , with the former corresponding to the largest unit cell, comprising 11164 carbon atoms). By properly taking into account the long-range van der Waals interaction, we provide the patterns for the atomic displacements (with respect to the ideal twisted bilayer). The out-of-plane relaxation shows an oscillating ("buckling") behavior, very evident for the smallest angles, with the atoms around the AA stacking regions interested by the largest displacements. The out-of-plane displacements are accompanied by a significant in-plane relaxation, showing a vortexlike pattern, where the vorticity (intended as curl of the displacement field) is reverted when moving from the top to the bottom plane and viceversa. Overall, the atomic relaxation results in the shrinking of the AA stacking regions in favor of the more energetically favorable AB/BA stacking domains. The measured flat bands emerging at the first magic angle can be accurately described only if the atomic relaxations are taken into account. Quite importantly, the experimental gaps separating the flat band manifold from the higher and lower energy bands cannot be reproduced if only in-plane or only out-of-plane relaxations are considered. The stability of the relaxed bilayer at the first magic angle is estimated to be of the order of 0.5-0.9 meV per atom (or 7-10 K). Our calculations shed light on the importance of an accurate description of the vdW interaction and of the resulting atomic relaxation to envisage the electronic structure of this really peculiar kind of vdW bilayers. After the first experimental findings 1,2 , Twisted Bilayer Graphene (TBG) has been subject of intense investigation from both the experimental and theoretical point of view. When the rotation angle between the two graphene layers is close to the first "magic angle" θ ∼ 1.08 • , transport experiments show different superconducting domes as well as correlated insulating phases Most of the unconventional transport properties of TBG originate from the almost flat bands (FBs) at the Fermi energy, originally predicted in Ref. Similar physics is being addressed also in twisted bilayers made out of transition metal dichalcogenides That reveals how the twist angle can be used as a further degree of freedom In this paper we apply large-scale density functional calculations to better elucidate the origin of the FBs in the single-particle band structure and show the fundamental role played by the atomic relaxation. Relaxation mechanisms have been recently addressed using semiclassical techniques Tight binding calculations both at the relaxed and unrelaxed positions are also carried out, to provide a further and less expensive tool to reproduce, especially at the first magic angle, the electronic structure. We also give the effective parameters that best approximate the ab-initio band structure within the low energy continuum theory 9 generalized in the presence of atomic relaxation The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we outline the technical details of the calculations. In Sec. III we extensively discuss the results on the geometrical relaxation and displacement patterns. In Sec. IV the tight binding approach and the continuum model outcomes are compared with the ab initio band structure. Finally, in Sec. V we summarize our findings and draw our final conclusions. DFT calculations have been carried out using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) TBG systems corresponding to four twist angles have been considered: θ = 1.08 • , θ = 1.61 • , θ = 2.65 • , and θ = 3.698 • . The rotation is carried out starting from two perfectly AA stacked graphene layers and rotating around an axis orthogonal to the layers and passing through two C atoms, one on top of the other, belonging to the two planes (that therefore preserve their initial AA stacking). The respective structures can also be classified, according to the notation commonly used in the literature For the smallest angle, because of the size of the simulation cell, we could only compute one k-point at a time, and the reported single-particle energies were therefore referred to the Fermi energy computed in the SCF calculation. The size of the supercell in the direction orthogonal to the layers (z-axis) was initially fixed at 10 Å, corresponding to about 6.5 Å vacuum space, introduced to prevent periodic replicas of the TBG supercell from interacting with each other. Full relaxation of the atomic positions was carried out until the residual forces were smaller than 0.002 eV/ Å. Additional calculations were repeated using supercells with z-axis of 12 Å and 14 Å. A small residual (maximum) relaxation of less than 0.002 Å was observed as the z-axis was increased to 12 Å, but no further relaxation was detectable with the largest 14 Å vacuum space. All symmetries were turned off. Further detail on the calculations can be found in our previous paper Tight-binding calculations of the TBG electronic structure at different twist angles and geometries were also carried out using the Slater-Koster tight binding parametrization for p z carbon atoms: Here r 0 = 0.184a is the decay length of the transfer integral, a 0 = a/ √ 3 is the first-neighbor distance in graphene, d 0 = 0.335 nm is the intralayer distance, chosen in agreement with that of graphite. V 0 ppπ = -2.7eV and V 0 ppσ = 0.48eV are the in-plane and-out-of plane nearest-neighbours hopping energy as from Ref. We also adopt a continuum model generalizing the model proposed in Ref.s Through a proper inclusion, within the ab initio approach, of the long-range inter-layer vdW interaction, we provide a detailed and accurate description of the atomic relaxations arising from the inter-layer interaction. We start discussing the out-of-plane atomic displacements. We give two complementary representations, in Fig. is kept also after relaxation. However, due to the steric repulsion of their p z orbitals, they move far apart from each other. This corresponds to the hills (valleys) in the top (bottom) plane, clearly visible in the left (right) panels of Fig. The patterns in Fig. The out-of-plane displacements are accompanied with significant in-plane relaxations. The (x,y) displacement field is shown in Fig. 3. The color map and vector field of the in-plane displacements in TGB for the top (left) and bottom (right) plane. Each vector points in the displacement direction and its magnitude is proportional to the displacement norm. The latter is also highlighted by the color. Since the patterns look quite similar at different twist angles only the result for 1.08 • is shown. The color bars report the measure of the displacement in the x -y plane with respect to the unrelaxed structure (in Å units). (intended as the curl of the displacement field) changing sign when moving from the top to the bottom plane and viceversa. Such result can be explained by considering that AB stacking regions minimize the total energy of the system. Hence, close to an AA stacking configuration, the atoms of the two layers tend to move in their plane in opposite directions, in order to minimize the overlap of their orbitals that is maximum at AA stacking. Indeed, it is observed that: i) the in-plane displacement is exactly null for the AA stacked pair of atoms (no arrow and blue region at the unit cell corners in the figure); ii) the maximum displacements are observed around the unit cell corners, thus for the atoms that mostly feel the "repulsion" due to a stacking that is quite close to AA; iii) no ( displacement is observed in the AB stacking regions, as it can be evinced by the blue, hexagonal regions. While the displacement pattern looks quite similar for all the twist angles (at variance with the out-of-plane displacements), the magnitude of the displacements decreases by an order of magnitude when moving from the smallest to the largest twist angle (the maximum displacement being of the order of ∼ 0.1 Å and ∼ 0.01 Å in the two cases, respectively). The relaxation energy, is the energy gained by the structure when it is allowed to relax with respect to the unrelaxed configuration, in which the atoms are arranged in ideal honeycomb lattices in two parallel planes. It is reported in Table The per-atom relaxation energy increases from 3.7 K to 10.2 K when passing from the largest twist angle (corresponding to the smallest unit cell) to the smallest twist angle (corresponding to the largest unit cell). Such relaxation energy is an estimate of the upper bound of the thermal energy that in a real experiment would induce thermal fluctuations of the atomic positions that in turn would destroy the ground-state geometry pattern shown in Figs. A. Focus on the first magic angle at θ = 1.08 • We now focus on TBG at the first magic angle, θ = 1.08 • , which shows the most intriguing and marked relaxation pattern. In the following, we investigate the interplay between the out-of-plane and in-plane relaxations. This is done performing two optimizations, the first by allowing all atoms to relax only along the z direction, the second by allowing them to relax only their graphene planes (hence the z coordinates are fixed while xy coor-dinate are free to move). These partial relaxations have nontrivial effects on the electronic properties of the TBG. First of all, we notice that these partial relaxations lead to a smaller gain in the total energy with respect to a full relaxation. This is shown by the red star and diamond in Fig. In this section we discuss the electronic structure for the four angles analyzed, with and without including relaxation mechanisms. The results are summarized in Fig. In all panels, it is clearly visible that relaxation mech-anisms tend to maximize the energy gaps at Γ and, in particular, in the case of the magic angle θ = 1.08 • the gap separating the FBs from the higher (lower) energy bands is about 26 meV (16 meV), consistent with the experiments 1,2,8,10-13 . On the other hand, those gap cannot be reproduced at all if no relaxation is allowed. Aimed at identifying if there is a predominant role of the in-plane or of the out-of-plane displacements, these energy gaps have been estimated also when the system is allowed to relax only either in the x -y plane or along the z axis: in the former case, we obtained gaps of ∼ 2 and ∼ 14 meV, that underestimate these values in the fully relaxed system, especially in the hole side; in the latter case, the two gaps turn out to be both zero, showing that a quite important role is played by the x -y displacements. As far as the FB dispersion is concerned, we obtain a full bandwidth of ∼ 20 meV in the relaxed system, which is of the order of the one measured in the experiment of Ref. 2. The FBs in TBG at the first magic angle can be intimately related with the atomic displacements arising as effect of the interlayer vdW interaction. Large scale first principles calculations allow us to conclude that experimental gaps cannot be reproduced if we consider a flat bilayer system. Relaxation effects are thus crucial as already noticed in our previous manuscript The energy gain induced by the relaxation is the larger, the smaller is the twist angle, decreases by increasing the twist angle and eventually seems to reach a plateau of ∼6.8 K at large twist angles. The smaller angles correspond to larger unit cells, that can easier accommodate the atomic rearrangement, and correspond to large energy gain, of the order of ∼10 K, much larger than the temperature at which the most exotic phenomena, such as correlated insulating phase and superconductivity are detected. Since the latter are intimately related to the presence of the FBs, that in turn we demonstrate being related with the atomic relaxation, such temperature (10 K) should be considered as an upper limit. Higher tem- The left (right) panels corresponds to the relaxed (initial) structure. Blue dashed lines and filled dots correspond to the DFT calculation, red solid lines to the TB approach. Zero energy corresponds to the Fermi energy. The effective continuum model mentioned in Sec. II can be also used to approximate the DFT calculations. The parameters u, u are independent of the angle and, within a reasonable error, can be approximated as u = u = 0.107 ± 0.004 in the unrelaxed case and u = 0.078 ± 0.002, u = 0.098 ± 0.004 for relaxed structures. peratures would destroy relaxation effects due to thermal atomic oscillations, and as a consequence FBs effects would be hindered. Including relaxation effects not only we reproduce band gaps consistent with the ones measured in experiments, but we also give the effective parameters of a low energy continuum model to be adopted for further investigation including correlation effects. Interestingly enough, despite the fact that relaxation patterns have different shapes at various angles, the interplane hopping coefficients u, u are found to be almost independent of the twist angle. That could be a useful hint to apply the continuum model also to smaller angles, where the unit cell would become umpractically large to be attacked with atomistic approaches. * giovanni.cantele@spin.cnr.it † procolo.lucignano@unina.it 1 Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe,