We consider the dynamics of the photon states in distant resonators coupled to a common bus resonator at different positions. The frequencies of distant resonators from a common bus resonator are equally detuned. These frequency detunings are kept larger than the coupling strengths of each resonator to the common bus resonator to satisfy the dispersive interaction regime. In the dispersive regime, we show that the time dynamics of the system evolve to an arbitrary W-type state in a single step at various interaction times. Our results show that a one-step generation of arbitrary W-type states can be achieved with high fidelity in a system of superconducting resonators. The coherent interaction of matter with quantized fields within high reflective resonators or Cavity known as cavity Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) provides a powerful platform for quantum information processing In an alternative scenario of circuit-QED In the present paper, we theoretically examine the time dynamics and realization of W-type states in distant quantum resonators coupled to a common bus resonator at different positions with dispersive interaction. In the dispersive regime, we consider equal frequency detuning of each distant resonator from a common bus resonator, which is larger than their coupling strengths to common bus resonator. We show that the time dynamics of the photon states |0 and |1 (which serves as a qubit) in distant resonators lead to an arbitrary n-qubit a † and a are the creation and annihilation operators of the common resonator R 0 holding the commutator property [a, a † ] = 1. Next, we consider one dimensional distant resonators R j (j = 1, 2, 3, ...) coupled to a common resonator R 0 at different positions having Hamiltonian Here, ω j is the frequency of j th distant resonator and b † j (b j ) is the creation (annihilation) operators, which follows the property of [b j ′ , b † j ] = δ jj ′ . It is assumed that the spacing between each distant resonator R j is large enough to avoid interaction among them. Our proposed physical system using superconducting resonators is shown in Fig 1 . The coupling strength g j between the j th resonator R j to common resonator R 0 can be tuned by external flux through the Superconducting Ring Couplers We first consider four-resonator subsystem composed of R j (j = 1, 2, 3) and R 0 in dispersive regime. In the interaction picture, the Hamiltonian of four-resonator subsystem under rotating wave approximation can be written as (here, we assume = 1) where, g j is the coupling strength of resonator R j to common resonator R 0 at different positions. The detuning of the each resonator R j from common resonator R 0 is given by ∆ j = Ω 0 -ω j . We consider the dispersive regime such that g j /∆ j ≪ 1. This regime can be studied using a second-order perturbation expansion in g j /∆ j . Under this condition, it is convenient to rewrite the Hamiltonian H of the fourresonator subsystem in Schrödinger's picture such that with and The interaction part of the Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( Expanding the above transformation to the second order in the small parameter g j /∆ j , we can get the dispersive Hamiltonian given by where, The frequencies of the resonators R j are Lamb-shifted to ω ′ j = ω j + g 2 j /∆ j , where j = 1, 2, 3. Similarly, the frequency of resonator bus R 0 is Lambed-shifted to Ω ′ 0 = Ω 0 -3 j=1 g 2 j /∆ j . For completeness, we give detailed derivation of Eq. ( The Hamiltonian H ′ in the interaction picture, can be obtained using H eff = e iH0t H I e -iH0t , and is given by where, 3 . Equation In order to study the time dynamics of photon state population, we consider the subspace composed of photon states |1 1 0 2 0 3 , |0 1 1 2 0 3 and |0 1 0 2 1 3 . In this subspace, the state of the four-resonator subsystem is a lin-ear combination of three states Here, The fourth qubit with subscript 0 represents the vacuum photonic state of common resonator R 0 . The time evolution of the state |ψ(t) of the fourresonator subsystem under effective Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( Using |ψ(t) in Eq. ( The initial state of four-resonator subsystem is assumed to be |1 1 0 2 0 3 |0 0 , which shows that there is a single photon in resonator R 1 . When resonators R 1 , R 2 and R 3 are resonant to each other with ω r = ω 1 = ω 2 = ω 3 , than each resonator will be equally detuned from common resonator with detuning ∆ = ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 = ∆ 3 = Ω 0 -ω r . Assuming identical couplings i.e., g = g 1 = g 2 = g 3 to a common resonator, we have zero detuning values δ 12 = δ 13 = δ 23 = 0 and identical dispersive couplings between the resonators pairs R j as χ 12 = χ 13 = χ 23 = χ (see Eq. ( here, χ = g 2 /∆. We first plot the population of photon states in resonator R 1 , R 2 and R 3 as a function of operation time in dimensionless units χt/π as shown in Fig. where m = 1, 2, 3 and ρ(t) = |ψ(t) ψ(t)|. In Fig. In order to get a comparison of the resulting dynamics obtained from the effective Hamiltonian Eq. ( , just in a single step. During the entire time dynamics, the photon state population in resonator R 2 and R 3 oscillates with an equal magnitude due to the identical coupling strengths and frequencies. It is in-phase with each other while out of phase with the population in resonator R 1 . It may be mentioned here that for the case of coupledcavity array system still holds. Therefore, it is clear that three-qubit entangled states with unequal probability amplitudes can still be generated except for time at which P 1 → 1 and P 2,3 → 0 as shown in Fig. (16) The subscript π/3 indicates the operation time χt at which time dynamics evolves to an entangled state. Similarly, for χt = π, the final state is given by Both |ψ 3 π/3 and |ψ 3 π are three-qubit entangled state of photons in three distant resonators R 1 , R 2 and R 3 . Note that for both states The behavior of the system symmetrically changes if a single photon is initially present in resonator R 2 i.e., P 2 → P 1 and P 1 = P 3 , as a result, W-state entanglement still preserved. This situation is in contrast to coupledcavity array system Next, we extend the scheme for time dynamics and generation of entanglement to an arbitrary n-distant res- FIG. onators. We consider n resonators R j (j = 1, 2, 3, ..., n) coupled to a common resonator R 0 in the dispersive regime having identical coupling constant. In this case, following the similar unitary transformation (See Eq. ( Here, we assume that the initial state of n + 1-resonator subsystem is |1 1 0 2 0 3 ...0 n |0 0 and all the distant resonators are resonant to each other i.e., equally detuned from the common resonator R 0 . Under this condition, the state of n + 1-resonator subsystem evolves at time t with coefficients which reduce to Eq. ( The parameters taken here are similar to the case considered in Fig. which is similar to the prototype four-qubit W-sate. Next, we consider the case of six-resonator subsystem composed of resonators R 1 , R 2 , R 3 , R 4 , and R 5 coupled to R 0 with initial state |1 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 |0 0 . In Fig. In general, our scheme for generating W-state is possible using different kind of quantum system that follows the ladder algebra of quantum harmonic oscillator i.e., [a, a † ] = 1, and dispersive interaction regime. Such as photon states inside the optical cavities or superconducting resonators Recently, quantum information processing using microwave photons in a one-dimensional superconducting resonator has been focused due to high-quality factor and large zero-point electric fields. Some interesting outcomes have been presented such as catching and releasing of microwave photon states Imperfections in the implementation can affect the time dynamics and hence the realization of the W-state entanglements. The possible sources of imperfections could be the finite lifetime of the photons in the superconducting resonators, inhomogeneous coupling strength g j , direct resonator-resonator interactions due to mutual inductance or capacitance, and noisy initial state preparation. We first consider the effects of photon lifetime κ in the four-resonator subsystem. The time evolution of the four-resonator subsystem under the influence of photon decay rates can be described by the master equation where, j = 1, 2, 3, κ 0 is decay rate of superconducting resonator bus and κ j is the decay rate of the j th superconducting resonator. The Liouvillian of an operator ξ ∈ (a, b j ) is L [ξ] = ξρξ † -ξ † ξρ/2 + ρξ † ξ/2, which describes the photon decay through the resonator. In Eq. ( Here, |ψ 3 is the output state of an ideal system and ρ(t) is the final density operator under photon leakage from the superconducting resonator. Figure Here, |ψ 4 is the W-state given by Eq. ( In our scheme, R j resonators are coupled through resonator-bus-mediated mechanism instead of direct resonator-resonator coupling. This mediated mechanism may allows neglecting any parasitic mutual inductance or capacitance. Further more, the spacing between each superconducting resonators R j can be kept large enough to avoid interaction among them due to mutual capacitance and mutual inductance. However, in a realistic situation, a direct resonator-resonator coupling my still appear. In order to study the effects of this direct interaction in the generation of W-state, we added the additional interaction term in Eq. ( Furthermore, initial state |ψ 1 can be realized with high fidelity by catching the photons from the transmission lines by turning on the coupling capacitance Here, 0 ≤ p ≤ 1 is a noise parameter which includes imperfection due to time controlled capture and release of microwave photons and unwanted hoping of microwave photons among resonators. An arbitrary pure state is given by |Φ i = (cos θ |1 1 0 + i sin θ |0 1 1 2 ) |0 3 0 0 and I 8 is an identity operator. The parameters p and θ measure the overlap of the mixed state Eq. ( The influence of superconducting ring couplers may also arise in time dynamics and entanglement. However, it can be neglected because their frequencies are designed at large detuning with those of superconducting resonators In conclusion, we have studied the time dynamics of the photon state population in distant resonators. Each resonators R j is coupled to a common quantum bus resonator R 0 . In our scheme, all resonator R j have identical frequency detuning from a common bus resonator R 0 . In order to satisfy the dispersive regime, the frequency detuning is kept larger than the coupling strengths to a common bus resonator. In the dispersive regime, the time dynamics of three and four resonators coupled to a common bus evolve to three and four-qubit W-state, respectively. A population gap appears when five or higher number of resonators are coupled to a common bus resonator. We show that the dynamics of the system can still produce multiqubit W-state by increasing the coupling strength of the first resonator to a larger optimum value as compared to the rest of the coupling strengths. Our numerical simulations in a system of superconducting microwave resonators show the high fidelity generation of single-step W-state against the possible sources of imperfections in a realistic situation. Since it is possible to achieve high Q-value resonators, catching and releasing a photon in resonator from a transmission line in the experiment, therefore, our results may stimulate experimental activities in the near future.