Ultrathin films of topological Dirac semimetal, Na3Bi, has recently been revealed as an unusual electronic materials with field-tunable topological phases. Here we investigate the electronic and transport properties of ultrathin Na3Bi as an electrical contact to two-dimensional (2D) metal, i.e. graphene, and 2D semiconductor, i.e. MoS2 and WS2 monolayers. Using combined firstprinciple density functional theory and nonequilibrium Green's function simulation, we show that the electrical coupling between Na3Bi bilayer thin film and graphene results in a notable interlayer charge transfer, thus inducing sizable n-type doping in the Na3Bi/graphene heterostructures. In the case of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers, the lateral Schottky transport barrier is significantly lower than many commonly studied bulk metals, thus unraveling Na3Bi bilayer as a high-efficiency electrical contact material for 2D semiconductors. These findings opens up an avenue of utilizing topological semimetal thin film as electrical contact to 2D materials, and further expands the family of 2D heterostructure devices into the realm of topological materials. Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials and topological semimetals represent two of the most active research fields of current condensed matter physics, material science and applied device engineering. The ever-expanding family of 2D materials, such as graphene On the other hand, three-dimensional (3D) topological semimetals Although both 2D materials and 3D topological semimetals have been extensively studied, the union of topological Dirac semimetals and 2D material in terms of contact engineering remains largely unknown thus far. In this work, we explore the integration of topological semimetal ultrathin film into the design of 2D-materialbased electronic devices. We propose a previously unexplored concept of utilizing ultrathin films of topological semimetals as aelectrical contact to 2D materials. Using a field-effect transistor setup, we show that the Schottky barrier height (SBH) formed at the bilayer-Na 3 Bi/2Dsemiconductor is markedly lower than that formed by many bulk metals (see Fig. We perform a first-principle density functional theory (DFT) simulation as implemented in the VASP code Figures ) periodicity for Na 3 Bi bilayer and graphene, respectively. The lattice mismatch is 0.79 %, and we stretch the graphene system while keeping the Na 3 Bi lattice fixed so to preserve the electronic properties of Na 3 Bi. The energetically most stable configuration, depicted in Fig. We next study the contact between bilayer Na 3 Bi and the monolayers of MoS 2 and WS 2 (see Fig. To further understand the detailed nature of the charge transfer at the Na 3 Bi and MoS 2 /WS 2 interfaces, we calculate the charge difference between the combined heterostructure system and the sum of the isolated Na 3 Bi and MoS 2 /WS 2 in Figs. To illustrate the key strengths of ultrathin Na 3 Bi as an electrical contact to 2D TMDCs over other bulk metals, we simulate a field-effect transistor device with a 5-nm channel length [see Fig. Here Φ e L,T of bilayer-Na 3 Bi is substantially lower when compared to other bulk metals. Particularly for WS 2 contacted by Na 3 Bi bilayer, the Φ e L,T is the lowest com- pared to other common bulk metal electrodes (i.e. Sc, Ti, Ag, Cu, Pd, and Pt) Finally, we remark that Na 3 Bi is prone to degradation under ambient air conditions. Nonetheless, recent experiment In summary, we investigated the electronic and transport properties of the ultrathin topological Dirac semimetal Na 3 Bi as an electrical contact to graphene, MoS 2 and WS 2 via first-principle calculations. We show that the Na 3 Bi/graphene contact leads to a n-type dop-ing in graphene, which can be useful for electronics and optoelectronics applications, such as p-n junction and photodetector For Na 3 Bi/MoS 2 and Na 3 Bi/WS 2 , the prevalence of ohmic vertical interface and low lateral Schottky barrier heights indicates the potential of Na 3 Bi as an energy-efficient electrical contact. The findings reported here could form the harbinger for the exploration of an emerging class of heterostructure electronic devices 