In this study, we investigate noble metal free photocatalytic water splitting on natural anatase single crystal facets and on wafer slices of the [001] plane before and after these surfaces have been modified by high pressure hydrogenation (HPH) and hydrogen ion-implantation. We find that on the natural, intact low index planes photocatalytic H2 evolution (in absence of noble metal co-catalyst) can only be achieved when the hydrogenation treatment is accompanied by the introduction of crystal damage, such as simple scratching, miscut in the wafer or by implantation damage. X-ray reflectivity (XRR), Raman, and optical reflection measurements show that plain hydrogenation leads to a ~ 1 nm thick black titania surface layer without activity, while a colorless, density modified and ~ 7 nm thick layer with broken crystal symmetry is present in the ion implanted surface. These results demonstrate that i) the H-treatment of an intact anatase surface needs to be combined with defect formation for catalytic activation, and ii) activation does not necessarily coincide with the presence of black color. In photocatalytic H2 generation, electron-hole pairs are created by illumination of a suitable semiconductor that is exposed to an aqueous solution; subsequent transfer of the excited electrons from the semiconductor conduction band to H2O then leads to the evolution of H2. Due to its suitable energetic positions of band edges, high stability, and economic aspects, TiO2 has been the most studied material over the last 40 years. Recently, so called 'black' TiO2 has attracted wide attention for the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen The majority of work (meanwhile several hundred reports on black TiO2 have been published) uses polycrystalline anatase (powder, mesoporous structures, nanotubes) In our experiments, we used natural anatase crystals and polished [001] wafers obtained from SurfaceNet GmbH, Germany (as shown in Fig. In order to further elucidate the effect of defects, we miscut one of the anatase crystals approx. 10° with respect to the [101] plane (in the [001] direction) using a diamond saw. Also this miscut surface (or its corresponding defects) shows activity for photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. In order to clarify these findings and exclude effects (artifacts) of the naturally formed anatase facets, we additionally investigated wafer slides with an exposed [001] surface and used a HPH treatment. It is noteworthy that the high pressure hydrogenated wafer shows an optical color change to black (Fig. The most defined means of defect introduction, H-ion implantation, mainly leads to the formation of vacancy interstitial pairs with a depth-distribution that can be estimated using SRIM 2008 (Fig. R F (q z ) is the Fresnel reflectivity of an ideally smooth and abrupt interface. Detailed structural information can be obtained by constructing a model electron density profile, in the present case made up of slabs of constant electron density, which is then used to reproduce the experimental data by varying the parameters defining the model in the Master-formula. Fig. Additionally, Raman spectra were acquired for the single crystal samples before and after HPH treatments and H-implantation (Fig. In conclusion, we show that on a defined intact (low index) single crystal surface of anatase, a H2 treatment is not sufficient to create a stable activation for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Clearly, additional lattice distortion (defects, exposed high index planes) are required to create an intrinsic co-catalytic effect. 