The development of ultrahigh quality factor (Q) microresonators has been driving such technologies as cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED), high-precision sensing, optomechanics, and optical frequency comb generation. Here we report ultrahigh-Q crystalline microresonator fabrication with a Q exceeding 10 8 , for the first time, achieved solely by computer-controlled ultraprecision machining. Our fabrication method readily achieved the dispersion engineering and size control of fabricated devices via programmed machine motion. Moreover, in contrast to the conventional polishing method, our machining fabrication approach avoids the need for subsequent careful polishing, which is generally required to ensure that surface integrity is maintained, and this enabled us to realize an ultrahigh-Q. We carefully addressed the cutting condition and crystal anisotropy to overcome the large surface roughness that has thus far been the primary cause of the low-Q in the machining process. Our result paves the way for future mass-production with a view to various photonic applications utilizing ultrahigh-Q crystalline microresonators. Ultrahigh-Q crystalline microresonators have been used as attractive platforms for studying nonlinear and quantum optics in the last few decades Magnesium fluoride (MgF 2 ) and calcium fluoride (CaF 2 ) are crystalline materials that are commonly used for fabricating WGM microresonators thanks to their quality, commercial availability, and optical properties. We usually manufacture crystalline resonators by using diamond turning and a polishing process. They are accomplished either with a motion-controlled machine or manually In this article, we describe an ultrahigh-Q crystalline microresonator fabrication technique that employs computer-controlled ultraprecision machining. The measured Q of the MgF 2 crystalline resonator reaches 1.4×10 8 , which is the highest value yet obtained without a subsequent polishing process. In addition, we achieved a comparably high-Q in CaF 2 crystalline material. To obtain the ultrahigh-Q, we addressed the single-crystal cutting condition by undertaking an orthogonal cutting experiment, which revealed the critical depths of cuts for different cutting directions. Also, a precise cylindrical turning experiment revealed the relationship between crystal anisotropy and surface quality after machining and demonstrated the realization of nanometer-scale surface roughness with diamond turning alone. The results we obtained provide clear evidence that cutting parameters that have been optimized for fluoride crystals lead to a significant reduction in surface roughness. An automated ultra-precision machining technique is compatible with dispersion engineering and a high-Q factor, which is often restricted by the trade-off relation en-countered with conventional fabrication techniques. We confirmed that the dispersion of fabricated resonators agrees extremely well with the design, and this extends the potential of dispersion controllability in crystalline WGM microresonators. Furthermore, our approach, namely the reliable production of high-Q crystalline microresonators, supports recent advances on the integration of crystalline microresonators with photonic waveguides towards a wide range of future applications One important parameter that we need to know when fabricating a single crystal is the critical depth of cut. It is defined by the depth of cut at which the transition from ductile-mode to brittle-mode cutting is observed when machining single-crystal material The cutting direction and plane of the crystal is expressed with the Miller index, as shown in Fig. To investigate the critical depth of cut, we performed an orthogonal cutting experiment on single-crystal MgF 2 . The experiment was carried out with an ultra-precision machining center (UVC-450C, TOSHIBA MACHINE), and a workpiece holder equipped with a dynamometer to detect the cutting force during the processing. As a workpiece, we used a pre-polished single-crystal MgF 2 substrate with a size of 38×13 mm and a thickness of 1 mm, which was fixed on the workpiece holder with a vacuum chuck as shown in Fig. Here, we tested two different crystal planes, (001) and (010), where we performed the cutting in every 30 • rotational direction to investigate the critical depth of cut for different crystal orientations. The direction of 0 • was set at [100] and [001], respectively. It should be noted that MgF 2 has a complex rutile structure with a different crystal plane configuration from CaF 2 [see Fig. Figure We can understand the experimental results as follows. The difference in critical depth of cut could be considered to originate from the slip system and the cleavage plane since they are strongly related to the ductile-brittle mode transition. Cutting along the slip plane promotes ductile-mode cutting (i.e., plastic deformation), which contributes to the large critical depth of cut. On the other hand, the cutting force against cleavage induces crystal parting where brittle fractures are easily manifested. They are explained intuitively in Fig. The slip system and cleavage plane of single-crystal MgF 2 are (110)[001] and (110), respectively; therefore the influence of cutting on the (001) plane on the critical depth of cut is less susceptible to the cutting direction because the cutting on the (001) plane is always normal to both the slip system and the cleavage plane. With the (010) plane, however, we observed a large variation in the cutting direction, because the cutting periodically followed the same direction as the slip system (i.e., 0 • and 180 • ) as shown in Fig. A. Procedure of cylindrical turning Although the orthogonal cutting experiment provides information on the critical depth of cut for specific directions, the cutting direction continuously changes when cylindrical turning is performed to manufacture a crystalline cylinder workpiece. Therefore, the optimum turning parameters have to be investigated to achieve the smooth surface needed for a high-Q microresonator. A MgF 2 cylinder workpiece was prepared with an end-face orientation of (001) because a z-cut (c-cut) resonator is used to avoid optical birefringence. Cylindrical turning was performed using an ultraprecision aspheric surface machine (ULG-100E, TOSHIBA MACHINE), as shown in Fig. The depth of cut at the finish turning step was set at 50 nm based on the result of the orthogonal cutting experiment. To achieve a smooth surface, other factors, such as the rotation speed, feed rate, and diamond tool, should be taken into account because these choices deter-mine the effective cutting speed and cutting amount. In particular, previous studies have reported that the feed rate critically affects the quality of the machined surface as does the combination of the tool radius and depth of cut For the pre-finish and finish cutting, we used a single crystal diamond cutting tool with a 0.01 mm nose radius, a 0 • rake angle, and a 10 • clearance angle. In terms of the choice of the cutting tool, a smaller nose radius makes it possible to have a smaller contact area between tool and material during cylindrical turning, which helps to reduce any excess cutting force and leads to an improved surface quality. However, tools with a small nose radius are more fragile, which gives them a short lifespan; hence in this work we use different tools for the rough turning and finish turning stages. The machined surfaces were observed using an optical microscope (VHX-5000, Keyence), as shown in Figs The surface roughness after cylindrical turning was measured using a scanning white-light interferometer (New View TM6200, Zygo) at 15 • intervals from the orientation flat [100] defined as 0 • [Fig. This periodicity can also be understood from the slip system and cleavage configurations shown in Fig. The cylindrical turning described here is a pre-process in microresonator fabrication. It should be noted that the measured roughness is the result of the implosion of a machined cylinder, not the dimensional resonator surface. However, the results we obtained allow us to predict the surface of the resonator under the employed cutting conditions. Crystalline microresonators are fabricated using the same ultra-precision machine as that used in the cylindrical turning experiment (ULG-100E, TOSHIBA MA-CHINE). The resonator diameter is determined after the finish cutting. It should be noted that the diameter can be precisely controlled by measuring the diameter and undertaking additional turning prior to microresonator fabrication. The resonator shape is carefully fabricated by feeding a diamond tool under the critical cutting depth. Here, the turning motion is fully and automatically controlled by the NC program. The manufacturing procedure is shown in Fig. Once we had completed the fabrication, we cleaned the microresonator to remove lubricant and small chips attached to the surface. We emphasize that proper cleaning is essential for obtaining a high-Q as well as optimized cutting conditions. Since we used water-soluble oil as a machining lubricant during the ultra-precision turning, we first used acetone solution to clean the microresonator surface and remove the remaining lubricant. A lens cleaning tissue is usually used to wipe the resonator, but there is the possibility that it might scratch or damage the resonator surface, which could be a critical problem in terms of degrading the Q-factor. Alternatively, to avoid unwanted damage on the resonator, we can employ ultrasonic cleaning. (The cleaning method is detailed in Supplement 1.) The use of an ultrasonic cleaner enables us to clean the surface without touching or rubbing it. It is also a great advantage for fully automated fabrication combined with ultra-precision turning. The Q-factor and dispersion were measured in crystalline microresonators fabricated with the procedure described above. We fabricated an MgF 2 WGM resonator and a CaF 2 WGM resonator with the same curvature radii of 36 μm. The diameters were 508 μm for the MgF 2 resonator and 512 μm for CaF 2 resonator. microresonator. Although the two resonators were fabricated with the same motion program and cutting conditions, their diameters differ slightly as a result of differences in the positioning accuracy in the cylindrical turning process and the original diameter of the cylindrical workpiece. As described in the previous section, the additional measurement of the workpiece dimension enables us to achieve the practical precise control of the diameter at the sub-micrometer level. Figures Figures is the resonance frequency of the μ-th mode (μ = 0 designates the center mode), D 1 /2π is the equidistant free-spectral range (FSR), D 2 /2π is the second-order dispersion linked to group velocity dispersion, and the above D 3 /2π terms correspond to higher-order dispersion. The microresonator dispersion measurement was performed assisted by a fiber laser comb and a wavelength meter In fact, we realized a Kerr frequency comb in the fabricated MgF 2 crystalline microresonator by machining alone where the dispersion was designed to generate octave-wide parametric oscillation where Q -1 mat is determined by material absorption, Q -1 surf and Q -1 scatt are determined by surface absorption and scattering loss, respectively. The radiation (tunneling) loss is given by Q -1 rad , and Q -1 ext is related to the coupling rate between the resonator and the external waveguide (e.g., tapered fiber, prism). Since the total Q-factor can readily reach 10 9 by polishing in fluoride crystalline resonators, the effect of Q -1 mat , Q -1 rad , and Q -1 ext should be negligible. surf is one possible reason for this, whereas single crystals such as MgF 2 and CaF 2 inhibit the diffusion of water into the crystal lattice, which makes Q -1 surf negligible in our case Then, we highlight Q -1 scatt as a fundamental limitation of ultra-precision machining. Since the surface roughness of the polished resonator reaches a sub-nanometer scale where R is the resonator radius, n is the refractive index, B is the correlation length, and σ is the surface roughness (RMS). The maximum Q-factor versus surface roughness and correlation length of MgF 2 resonator is plotted in Fig. In addition, we should take the effect of subsurface damage into account since it causes the degeneration of the inner structure of the material. Subsurface damage occurs when machining a single crystal, and so it has been intensively studied in the field of micromachining and material science In conclusion, we demonstrated the fabrication of an ultrahigh-Q crystalline microresonator by using ultraprecision turning alone. For the first time, we achieved a Q value exceeding 100 million without polishing and thereby managed both an ultrahigh-Q and dispersion engineering simultaneously. We revealed the critical depth of cut needed to sustain ductile mode cutting, and this information contributes significantly to reducing surface roughness. Moreover, we proposed an optimal cutting condition for cylindrical turning for realizing an ultrasmooth surface throughout an entire cylindrical surface. This result provides the path towards the fabrication of a high-Q microresonator without the need for skilled manual work. Furthermore, we discussed the possibility of further improving the Q-factor from the standpoint of the theoretical limitation imposed by surface roughness. The described fabrication and cleaning procedure can be applied to various single-crystal materials and will raise the potential for realizing crystalline microresonators. (2) (λ=1550 nm and R = 250 μm). The dashed contours show the estimated value from our measurement and previous studies um 20 um 