We propose a new non-Hermitian chiral random matrix model that describes single-flavor spin-one Cooper pairing of quarks. For three colors the model shows spontaneous breaking of color SU(3)C and spin SO(3)J symmetries down to the diagonal SO(3)C+J subgroup, in striking analogy to the color-spin locked phase of one-flavor QCD at high density. For two colors, color-singlet spin-one diquarks condense and trigger symmetry breaking U(1) × SO(3)J → SO(2)J . In both cases the microscopic large-N limit is rigorously taken and the effective theory of Nambu-Goldstone modes is derived. In relativistic cold ultradense matter, the Fermi surface is destabilized by attractive interactions between quarks and the ground state is likely to exhibit color superconductivity In this paper, we propose a new non-Hermitian RMT that describes single-flavor Cooper pairing for two and three colors. By taking the microscopic large-N limit with N the matrix size we show, for three colors, that diquark condensation occurs in the color-triplet spinone channel and spontaneously breaks U(1) B × U(1) A × SU(3) C × SO(3) J symmetry down to SO(3) C+J , which is the diagonal subgroup of SU(3) C × SO(3) J . This is the first-ever realization of color-spin locking in RMT. For two colors, we show that color-singlet spin-one diquarks condense and break U(1) B × U(1) A × SO(3) J spontaneously. There seems to be no previous work on oneflavor two-color QCD at high density and this work provides the first systematic study based on symmetries. This paper is organized as follows. In section II our new matrix model is defined and basic properties are summarized. In section III the large-N limit is taken for three colors and color-spin locking is demonstrated. Similarities and differences between RMT and QCD are clarified. In section IV the analysis for two colors is presented. The breaking of rotational symmetry by diquark condensates is demonstrated and the effective theory of soft modes is rigorously derived. We conclude in section V. The partition function of our random matrix model for N c colors is defined by where X, Y, V A , W A (A = 0, 1, • • • , N 2 c -1) are N × N real matrices and dX, dY, dV A , dW A are flat Cartesian measures over R N ×N . The "Dirac operator" D is a 4N c N × 4N c N matrix defined as where are the generators of U(N c ) in the fundamental representation, normalized as Tr(t A t B ) = 2δ AB . The last factor 1 2 in (3) and (4) indicates that D L,R are diagonal in the spin space. In the chiral limit, there is a symmetry which is reduced to the vectorial subgroup [SU(N c ) × SU(2) J ] V by nonzero quark mass. There is also an orthogonal symmetry Let us introduce quarks ψ α ai and antiquarks ψ α ai , where It is now straightforward to integrate out the Gaussian random matrices. Using the completeness relation For the Pauli matrices σ M ≡ (1 2 , σ i ) there is the identity It allows us to write where we have omitted the spinor indices for brevity. Noting that the M = 0 term vanishes identically due to the Pauli principle, we are left with with m ∈ {1, 2, 3}, which should not be confused with the quark mass. The treatment henceforth depends on the number of colors and is discussed in the following sections. For N c = 3 the identity ε abe ε cde = δ ac δ bd -δ ad δ bc holds. Hence we have from ( To bilinearize the quartic interaction we insert the constant factor where ∆ L,R are complex 3 × 3 matrices that transform as triplet under color SU(3) and spin SO This is an exact rewriting of the original partition function and so far no approximation has been made. Now we shall let N large with m ∼ 1/ √ N . To nail down the saddle point of the integral, let us take the chiral limit using the Pfaffian formulas Here, (σ 2 σ m ) ij ε abc ∆ mc and (σ m σ 2 ) ij ε abc ∆ * mc are treated as 6 × 6 matrices with left index (a, i) and right index (b, j). The partition function in the chiral limit therefore reads With a quick calculation involving the singular value decomposition of ∆ L,R one can verify that maximizes the integrand. It is not invariant under separate rotations by color SU(3) and spin SO(3) but is invariant under their simultaneous rotation. Namely color and spin are locked: The soft fluctuations around with U, V ∈ U(3). (This V should not be confused with the Gaussian random matrix V A inside D.) Let us define The large-N partition function can be evaluated as fol-lows: where we have defined Using a software Upon substituting ( Notice that (34) respects invariance under SO(3): Û transforms as Û → g Û g T for g ∈ SO(3). The U(1) part of Û is the Nambu-Goldstone boson associated with the U(1) A symmetry Due to its unique features and theoretical simplicity, two-color QCD has long been studied as a prototype of strongly coupled non-Abelian gauge theories. A particularly pleasant feature of two-color QCD is that for an even number of flavors with degenerate masses, the path-integral measure is positive definite even at nonzero quark chemical potential and can be simulated on a lattice It seems that almost all previous work focused on twocolor QCD with an even number of flavors [69], but there is a qualitative difference between even and odd flavors. (Note that we refer to the number of Dirac fermions here. The famous Witten's SU(2) anomaly In order to understand implications of our RMT for dense two-color QCD, let us return to The ensuing analysis is routine. To bilinearize the quartic interaction we insert the constant factor where Ω L,R are three-component complex vectors that transform as triplet under SO(3) and are also charged under U(1) B × U(1) A . Then We are now ready to take the microscopic large-N limit with m ∝ 1/ √ N . In the chiral limit we find Thus the problem of finding the saddle point at large N boils down to extremizing the function f To simplify the problem we shall draw upon the fact that by a suitable U(1) × SO(3) rotation, an arbitrary complex 3-vector Ω can be brought to the form (a + ib, c, 0) with a, b, c ∈ R. Then This function is maximized when b = 0 and a 2 +c 2 = 1/4, or when c = 0 and a 2 + b 2 = 1/4. To show this, first note that f = e -8(a 2 +b 2 +c 2 ) (a 2 + b 2 + c 2 ) 2 -4b 2 c 2 . This means that f can be increased by rotating (b, c) into either . Thus one can safely assume bc = 0. If b = 0, the vector (a, c, 0) can be rotated to ( √ a 2 + c 2 , 0, 0) by the action of SO(3). If c = 0, the vector (a + ib, 0, 0) can be rotated to ( √ a 2 + b 2 , 0, 0) by the action of U(1). In either case, a quick calculation shows that (1/2, 0, 0) maximizes f . The above analysis reveals that the manifold of maxima of f is given by U(1) × SO(3) rotations of (1/2, 0, 0). Picking out any single point on this manifold as a ground state breaks global symmetries according to Note that this breaking occurs for each chirality independently. The low-energy fluctuations in the ground state can be parametrized as where the unit vectors n L,R ∈ R 3 (n 2 L,R = 1) stand for the directions of diquarks in the spin space. For N 1 with m ≡ √ N m ∼ O(1), we have from ( The φ field is nothing but the Nambu-Goldstone mode for the U(1) A symmetry. Integrating out φ yields where I 0 is the modified Bessel function of the first kind. This is the simplest form we found for the microscopic partition function. An important observation is that a nonzero quark mass tends to make the diquarks of opposite chiralities parallel to each other. In fact, for a large mass | m| 1, the leading asymptotic behavior I 0 (z) ∼ e |z| / 2π|z| for |z| 1 In this paper we reported an attempt to extend chiral random matrix theory (RMT) 