The superconducting s-wave state in Weyl semimetals in a strong strain-induced pseudomagnetic field is investigated in a model with local four-fermion interaction. It is found that only the internode pairing is possible in the lowest pseudo-Landau level approximation. Unlike the case of the lowest Landau level in a conventional magnetic field, the corresponding gap equation has only a trivial solution. Nevertheless, superconductivity can be induced via the proximity effect with a usual s-wave spin-singlet superconductor. Since a pseudomagnetic field is present necessarily at the surface of a Weyl semimetal, the proximity effect is strongly affected by the pseudomagnetic field. The analysis of such an effect showed that while no gap is opened in the spectrum, the degeneracy of energy levels is lifted. The unique character of the proximity effect in Weyl semimetals can be probed via the density of states, the spectral function, and the tunneling current. The density of states does not vanish at small energies and scales linearly with the pseudomagnetic field strength. This scaling is manifested also in the tunneling current. total momenta and, consequently, produces a LOFF-type state. On the other hand, the inter-node pairing might allow for spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings with zero total momentum. The competition of intra-and inter-node pairing states in Weyl semimetals is subtle and depends on the model details. For example, it was argued that the inter-node pairing could be more favorable energetically than the intra-node one Another important manifestation of the nontrivial topology of Weyl semimetals is the topologically protected surface Fermi arc states, which connect the projections of the bulk Weyl nodes of opposite chiralities onto the surface In this study, we investigate a different possibility to realize an unconventional superconducting state in Weyl semimetals. It relies on strong pseudomagnetic fields generated by mechanical strains It was found, however, that a weak pseudomagnetic field does not favor inter-node superconducting pairing in Weyl semimetals This paper is organized as follows. Section II is devoted to the study of intrinsic superconductivity in Weyl semimetals in a strong pseudomagnetic field. In particular, the Hamiltonian, wave functions, superconducting pairings, and the gap equation are defined. The proximity effect with a usual superconductor is considered in Sec. III. As an experimentally accessible signatures, the spectral function, the DOS, and the tunneling current are discussed in Sec. IV C. Results are summarized in Sec. V. The superconducting pairing in a strong magnetic field is considered in Appendix A. A few technical details are presented in Appendix B. Throughout this study, we set = 1. The interplay of superconductivity and magnetic fields is a nontrivial problem with a rich history as well as high fundamental and applied impact. The relevant phenomena are the Meissner effect connected with the expulsion of a magnetic field from a superconductor The basic idea considered in Refs. The systems with relativisticlike dispersion relations are particularly advantageous for observing the unconventional superconductivity in strong magnetic fields Nontrivial topology of Weyl semimetals, whose Weyl nodes are sources and sinks of the Berry flux, plays an important role in their superconducting properties is the Bogolyubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, k is the momentum, and Θ is the time-reversal operator. In addition, the trace and the logarithm in Eq. ( We consider the minimal model of Weyl semimetal with two Weyl nodes of opposite chiralities separated by 2b in momentum space. The linearized Hamiltonian reads where Here λ = ± is the chirality of Weyl nodes, μ is the electric chemical potential, v F is the Fermi velocity, σ is the vector of the Pauli matrices, c is the speed of light, and A 5 is the axial gauge field. This field can be induced by strains A schematic illustration of the chiral shift profile and the corresponding pseudomagnetic field is shown in Fig. Finally, for Hamiltonian (3), the TR operator has the following form: To calculate the functional trace in the first term of the effective action (1), let us to determine eigenstates and eigenenergies of the BdG Hamiltonian, which satisfy the following equation: The wave function Ψ BdG consists of two parts corresponding to the wave function of the Weyl Hamiltonian and its TR copy. The first part reads and the TR conjugate part is given by where the notation ψ i with (i = 1, 8) is introduced for convenience. It is difficult to find eigenstates of the BdG Hamiltonian (2) in an explicit analytic form when ∆ = 0. The situation changes in the case of a strong pseudomagnetic field B 5 → ∞ when the approximation of the lowest pseudo-Landau level can be used. To see this, we begin with solutions ψ + ↓ for quasiparticles of chirality λ = + [without loss of generality, we assume that sgn (eB 5 ) = 1]. They are defined by the equation which gives where N + is the normalization factor and l B5 = c/|eB 5 | is the pseudomagnetic length. For quasiparticles of negative chirality λ = -, the equation and its solution read and respectively. The states ψ + ↓ and ψ - ↑ form the basis that will be used in the analysis of the superconducting pairing below. Let us begin our analysis with the intra-node pairing of quasiparticles of chirality λ = +. Since only ψ + ↓ is not zero, the inter-node s-wave pairing is not possible. Indeed, the corresponding anomalous average ψ + ↓ ψ + ↓ vanishes identically due to the Pauli principle. Thus, the intra-node pairing is not permitted in the lowest pseudo-Landau level approximation. Obviously, the situation is different for the inter-node pairing, where the nonzero anomalous average ψ + ↓ ψ - ↑ is possible. The general gap matrix for the inter-node pairing is Among the three possible types of superconducting gaps, it is ∆ z which describes the only possible s-wave anomalous average ψ + ↓ ψ - ↑ . The eigenstate equation and similar equations for ψ 3 and ψ 5 with b z → -b z . Equations ( As one can see, the superconducting gap ∆ z does not open the gap in the energy spectrum. In fact, it splits the degenerate energy branches. As shown in Appendix A, due to a different structure of Landau levels, the case of strong conventional magnetic field is qualitatively different. In particular, the s-wave inter-node pairing leads to a gapped energy spectrum (see Fig. The wave functions ψ 2 and ψ 8 are normalized as which gives Similar expressions with b z → -b z hold for ψ 3 and ψ 5 . By varying the effective action (1) with respect to ∆ † z , we find the following gap equation in the lowest pseudo-Landau level approximation: where τ -= (τ x -iτ y )/2 and the first τ -matrix acts in the Nambu space. Explicitly, the gap equation reads Let us consider the first term in the square brackets. By using Eqs. ( The integrals over ω and k z can be taken straightforwardly where Λ is a momentum cutoff, which is usually determined by the range of applicability of the low-energy linearized model. One can check that the second term in the square brackets in Eq. ( It admits only a trivial solution ∆ z = 0. (Strictly speaking, a nontrivial solution is possible for a certain value of the coupling constant g or the pseudomagnetic field B 5 . Since it is unlikely that such a solution survives beyond the lowest pseudo-Landau level approximation, we omit it as the spurious one). Therefore, we conclude that a strong pseudomagnetic field does not allow for the intrinsic s-wave superconductivity in Weyl semimetals. On the other hand, there is another well-known way to realize the superconducting state through the proximity effect, which we consider in the next section. It is worth noting also that the gap generation in a strong magnetic field is qualitatively different. In particular, there is a nontrivial solution for the corresponding gap equation (see Appendix A for details). Superconducting gaps are routinely induced in materials, which do not support an intrinsic superconductivity, by coupling them to superconductors. In essence, this phenomenon is connected with the permeation of Cooper pairs into a nonsuperconducting medium and is known as the proximity or Holm-Meissner effect The simplest approach to the proximity effect is to add a bare superconducting gap term ∆0 to the initial BdG Hamiltonian, which corresponds to the internode pairing channel By replacing ∆ z → ∆ z + ∆ 0 on the right-hand side of Eq. ( where we introduced the shorthand notation for the effective interaction constant which is linear in the pseudomagnetic field strength. Unlike the study of the intrinsic superconductivity in the previous section, a nontrivial solution for ∆ z is possible now. It reads and the full gap equals As one can see from this expression and Fig. is not applicable near the pole because the gap diverges there [see the green region in Fig. In this subsection, we provide a more rigorous description of the proximity-induced superconductivity. By using McMillan's model The BdG Hamiltonian of a usual s-wave spin-singlet superconductor reads where ξ k = k 2 /(2m) -μ, m is the effective mass of electron quasiparticles, ∆ is the superconducting gap, and the unit matrix denotes the spin degree of freedom. By using the BdG Hamiltonian The self-energy due to tunneling between the superconductor and a Weyl semimetal reads where Tk,k ′ is a tunneling matrix. The approximation of the lowest pseudo-Landau level significantly simplifies the structure of the effective BdG Hamiltonian and Green's function in a Weyl semimetal. Therefore, we find it useful to introduce the reduced BdG Hamiltonian in the basis {ψ 2 , ψ 3 , ψ 8 , ψ 5 } as follows: We consider the tunneling matrix Tk,k ′ in the simplest diagonal form Further, we assume that the tunneling coupling randomly fluctuates, i.e., This approximation is known as the "rough surface" approximation, which is valid for sufficiently large contact areas [Notice that such a treatment of tunneling is similar to the treatment of disorder.] The dependence on momentum in the tunneling matrix is not important also in the case of an isotropic superconductor and at small energies where ν 0,S = m √ 2mμ/(2π 2 ) is the DOS of the normal state per spin and Γ 0 = πt 2 0 ν 0,S is the tunneling energy scale. Having obtained the self-energy, the full Green's function is determined by the Schwinger-Dyson equation This means that the proximity effect modifies the BdG Hamiltonian as follows: It is straightforward to see that self-energy (35) leads to the following standard renormalization of parameters in the BdG eigenequation (6): Note that if one assumes that |ǫ| ≪ |∆|, a simple replacement ∆ z → ∆ z + Γ 0 immediately follows from Eq. ( The modification of parameters in the BdG Hamiltonian defined in Eqs. ( with replacements Unfortunately, solutions to the characteristic equation ( To provide an analytical insight into the nonreciprocity, let us consider the characteristic equation ( where α = Γ 0 / |∆| 2 -ǫ 2 . The first term in the above equation gives constant -Γ 2 0 . The second term diverges at ǫ → -∆ and kz → ±∞. To satisfy the equation, this term should be compensated by the third term which diverges also at kz → ±∞. However, since these terms have the same sign, no cancellation is possible at kz → -∞ leading to a nonreciprocal dependence on momentum. Now let us study how the proximity-induced corrections affect the dynamical generation of ∆ z in a Weyl semimetal. The gap equation The integral over kz is divergent for the energy spectrum shown in Fig. where k0 ≃ ∆ z -∆ denotes the termination point in the spectrum and δ → +0. Then, by setting μ = 0, I(∆ z ) reads Since the last term is linearly divergent, it is determined by the cutoff and can attain a large value. Therefore, we can neglect the first term. Then Numerical results are in good agreement with the simple estimate given in Eq. ( It is clear that the dependence of the right-hand side of the gap equation on ∆ z is weak. Nevertheless, it agrees qualitatively with the results obtained in the simple approximation in Sec. III A at least when ∆ z is much smaller than the cutoff. It is important to emphasize that since I(0) = 0, there is no trivial solution ∆ z = 0. The dependence of ∆ z on g is well fitted by the following expression [cf. with Eq. ( As one can see, |∆ z | grows with the absolute value of the effective interaction constant g. This resembles the growth of |∆ z | shown in Fig. Let us discuss now how the unique character of proximity-induced superconductivity in a Weyl semimetal caused by the presence of strong pseudomagnetic fields could be observed experimentally. For this, we consider such quantities as the electron DOS, the spectral function, and the tunneling current. Let us begin with the electron DOS for Weyl semimetal, which is defined as where |N + | is defined in Eq. where we replaced kz → -kz in the second line and used ǫ 28,+ ( kz ) = -ǫ 28,-(-kz ). Thus, by taking into account the contributions from both Weyl nodes, the DOS reads In general, one should use an energy spectrum defined in Eq. ( If the proximity effect is absent, i.e., Γ 0 = 0, then the integral over kz can be trivially taken resulting in Similar to the scaling of the DOS in the lowest Landau level, the DOS in the lowest pseudo-Landau level (54) scales linearly with B 5 . For comparison, the DOS for a usual superconductor described by Hamiltonian ( We show the dependence of the DOS in a Weyl semimetal defined by Eq. ( Next, we present the results for the spectral function, which is relevant for spectroscopic studies. The spectral function could be, in principle, probed via the high-energy ARPES if the conventional superconductor is of a sufficiently small thickness. We use the standard definition of the spectral function (see also Appendix B) Its trace integrated over k y reads where δ → +0. In our numerical calculations, however, we keep δ finite, which leads to a finite width of the spectral lines. We present the trace of the spectral function integrated over k y in Fig. A direct way to probe the proximity effect in various heterostructures is the electron tunneling. The corresponding tunneling current is sensitive to the details of the DOS in a superconducting metal and a Weyl semimetal. The current is defined by where V is an electric potential applied to the junction and the spectral function is given in Eq. as well as Eqs. ( Here A S/W , ĀS/W , and C S/W are the spectral function components defined in Appendix B. As one can see, there are one-particle and Josephson terms given by the first two and last two terms in the curly brackets in Eq. In what follows, we focus on the one-particle contribution to the current. By using Eqs. ( In the limit of T → 0, it is straightforward to derive As expected, the tunneling current is proportional to the density of states in both superconductor and Weyl semimetal. The DOS in a Weyl semimetal scales linearly with the strength of the pseudomagnetic field B 5 , therefore, providing a definite signature of a strain-induced pseudomagnetic field in proximity setups. Superconducting pairing in Weyl semimetals with broken time-reversal symmetry in a strong pseudomagnetic field is investigated. Although naive arguments based on analogy with superconducting pairing in a strong magnetic field suggest that a strain-induced pseudomagnetic field, for which the Meissner effect is absent, should favor the superconducting state in Weyl semimetals, both the study in a weak field On the other hand, the pseudomagnetic field in a Weyl semimetal affects nontrivially the proximity effect with a conventional s-wave spin-singlet superconductor. In a simplified low-energy approach, the proximity effect induces the bare superconducting gap ∆ 0 in a Weyl semimetal. Therefore, the gap equation no longer admits a trivial solution. We found that the full superconducting gap ∆ z + ∆ 0 inversely depends on the pseudomagnetic field strength B 5 and vanishes in the limit B 5 → ∞. It is interesting that the dependence of the gap on the field strength is nonmonotonic for an attractive interaction. In particular, the magnitude of the superconducting gap grows at small fields, changes sign, and then vanishes at large fields. In the case of a repulsive interaction, ∆ z + ∆ 0 decreases monotonically. In a more refined approach where the proximity effect is taken into account via the self-energy contribution, a few important differences compared to the simple approach are found. They are well manifested at energies that are larger than a gap in a normal superconductor, where a nonreciprocal dependence on momentum and plateau-like behavior are observed. In the vicinity of the Weyl nodes, on the other hand, the energy spectrum is qualitatively the same as in the simplified approach. It is interesting that the solution to the gap equation also resembles its counterpart in the simplified approach when the coupling constant is small. As observable signatures of the interplay of the pseudomagnetic field and superconductivity in Weyl semimetals, we propose the electron DOS, the spectral function, and the tunneling current. It is found that the electron DOS is insensitive to the superconducting gap ∆ z but has large peaks for energies close to the gap in the s-wave superconductor. Moreover, the DOS scales linearly with the pseudomagnetic field strength. Therefore, we believe that the tunneling current through the superconductor-Weyl semimetal interface could be an efficient means to determine the magnitude of a strain-induced pseudomagnetic field, which could be particularly large at the interface. In addition, it can be controlled by applying an external strain to a Weyl semimetal. Finally, the spectral function shows a characteristic hysteresis-like pattern composed of overlapping nonreciprocal branches. It could be probed via the ARPES when the conventional superconductor is sufficiently thin. While in the present study we consider only the one-particle tunneling current, it would be very interesting to investigate the manifestation of the pseudomagnetic field in the Josephson current. The corresponding study will be reported elsewhere. It is worth noting also that while a pseudomagnetic field is, in general, nonuniform near the surface of a semimetal, we treated it as constant. Phenomenologically, a nontrivial spatial dependence of the pseudomagnetic field could be described by replacing B 5 → B 5 (x). This approximation is valid as long as the proximity-induced gap decreases in the bulk of a Weyl semimetal much faster than the field changes. A more rigorous analysis of the proximity effects is, however, beyond the scope of this study. Further, we discuss the solutions to the gap equation. For the sake of definiteness, we set ∆ y = 0. By varying the effective action (1) with respect to ∆ † x , we obtain dω dk z (2π) 3 1 Let us concentrate on the first term in the curly brackets. The contribution from the second term is the same albeit with b z → -b z . We have where Λ is the momentum cutoff. The gap equation (A8) reads Its nontrivial solution is This result is similar to the dynamical gap generation in the framework of the magnetic catalysis 