We theoretically study the profile of a supercurrent in two-dimensional Josephson junctions with Rashba-Dresselhaus spin-orbit interaction (RDSOI) in the presence of a Zeeman field. Two types of RDSOIs are considered that might be accessible in GaAs quantum wells and zinc-blende materials. Through investigating self-biased supercurrent (so called φ0-Josephson state), we obtain explicit expressions for the functionality of the φ0 state with respect to RDSOI parameters (α, β) and inplane Zeeman field components (hx, hy). Our findings reveal that, when the chemical potential (μ) is high enough compared to the energy gap (∆) in superconducting electrodes, i.e., μ ∆, RSOI and DSOI with equal strengths (|α| = |β|) cause vanishing φ0 state independent of magnetization and the type of RDSOI. A Zeeman field with unequal components, i.e., |hx| = |hy|, however, can counteract and nullify the destructive impact of equal-strength RDSOIs (for one type only), where μ ∼ ∆, although |hx| = |hy| can still eliminate the φ0 state. Remarkably, in the μ ∼ ∆ limit, the φ0 state is proportional to the multiplication of both components of an in-plane Zeeman field, i.e., hxhy, which is absent in the μ ∆ limit. Furthermore, our results of critical supercurrents demonstrate that the persistent spin helices can be revealed in a high enough chemical potential regime μ ∆, while an opposite regime, i.e., μ ∼ ∆, introduces an adverse effect. In the ballistic regime, the "maximum" of the critical supercurrent occurs at |α| = |β| and the Zeeman field can boost this feature. The presence of disorder and nonmagnetic impurities change this picture drastically so the "minimum" of the critical supercurrent occurs at and around the symmetry lines |α| = |β|. We show that the signature of persistent spin helices explored in disordered systems originate from the competition of short-range spin-singlet and long-range spin-triplet supercurrent components. Our study uncovers delicate details of how the interplay of RDSOI and a Zeeman field manifests in the φ0 state and critical supercurrent. Relying on the fact that the φ0 state is accessible regardless of the amount of nonmagnetic impurities and disorder, our results can provide guidelines for future experiments to confirm the presence of persistent spin helices, determine the type of SOI, and reliably extract SOI parameters in a system, which might be helpful in devising spin-orbit-coupled spintronics devices and ultra sensitive spin-transistor technologies. The quantum response of a system to motives can be highly influenced by the electron spin and orbital degrees of freedom as well as their interaction. This fact has triggered immense interest to, first, shed light on various aspects of spin-orbital interactions (SOIs) and, second, explore and propose practically feasible routes in utilizing SOI for spintronics devices The simultaneous existence of Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling (RSOC and DSOC) can result in fundamentally important phenomena such as persistent spin helix detrimental impurities and unwanted defects, that influence adversely experimental results. Therefore, any experimentally observable SOI-related quantity, which is accessible regardless of the amount of nonmagnetic impurities and disorder (i.e., emerges in both ballistic and diffusive systems) is highly desired for conclusively determining the parameters of SOI. When a ferromagnet is placed next to a s-wave superconductor, long-range spin superconducting correlations may arise due to the interplay of superconductivity and spatially textured spin at a close vicinity to the ferromagnet-superconductor interface The energy ground state of a conventional ferromagnetic Josephson junction with a uniform magnetization can always be found at two specific superconducting phase differences, i.e., φ=0 and π Here, we study the φ 0 state driven by the interplay of a Zeeman field with generic in-plane orientation (h x , h y , h z ) and two types of Rashba-Dresselhaus SOCs (RDSOCs) with differing strengths [RSOC(α) = DSOC(β)]. To this end, a two-dimensional Josephson junction is considered and the profile of supercurrent flow across the junction in both the ballistic and diffusive regimes is determined when the junction is oriented along the x axis (depicted in Fig. Considering the accessibility of the φ 0 state in both the ballistic and diffusive systems, the expressions obtained for the φ 0 phase shift can provide a unique opportunity for experimentally extracting reliable parameter values for Rashba and Dresselhaus SOI parameters. Our theoretical findings can serve as guidance for examining the persistent spin helices discussed earlier. The distinctive influence of the spin-singlet and spin-triplet correlation on critical supercurrents found in this paper can serve as evidence for affirming the spin-triplet supercurrent. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we summarize theoretical frame works employed for studying a two-dimensional Josephson junction. The low-energy Hamiltonian, the Bogoliubov de Gennes approach, and charge current are described. Section III presents the main findings of the paper, divided into two subsections for the distinction between the self-biased supercurrent and critical supercurrent for various sets of parameters, considering the ballistic and diffusive systems. We finally give concluding remarks in Sec. IV. The low-energy electronic properties of a noncentrosymmetric solid-state crystal, hosting spin-orbitalmediated interaction, can be described by an effective single-particle Hamiltonian where in which p = (p x , p y , 0) is momentum, m is the effective mass of a charged particle, η so is the SOI, h = (h x , h y , h z ) is the Zeeman energy corresponding to the magnetic field such that |h| = gμ B B, g is the g-factor of a charged carrier, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and B is the magnitude of the magnetic field. The field operator in spin-space can be expressed by ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ ) T and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is a vector comprised of Pauli matrices. We use = k B = 1 units throughout the paper. To simplify calculations, derive analytical expressions, and facilitate analysis, we consider two types of linearized SOI. in which α and β are the Bychkov-Rashba and Dresselhaus velocities, respectively. As mentioned in the Introduction, the coefficients α and β can be controlled by the application of electric field and mechanical strain. The two different types of RSOC and DSOC considered in this paper might be found in GaAs quantum wells and zinc-blende materials. The difference between η a so and η b so can originate from different crystallographic growth orientations. Consider a situation where a system is able to develop superconductivity through the traditional opposite-spin electron-phonon BCS mechanism. To describe electronic characteristics, one can use spin-Nambu field operators and introduce phonon mediated electron-electron amplitudes: The low-energy Hamiltonian, governing electron-hole behavior in the BCS superconductivity, reads in which μ is the chemical potential multiplied by 2×2 unity matrix 1 and ∆ is a 2×2 superconducting gap matrix in spin space. Here H(p) can be obtained by setting η so = h = 0 in Eq. ( One of the most important experimentally observable quantities is the current due to moving charged particles. To calculate the charge current, flowing through a two-dimensional system in the presence of SOI, magnetization, and superconductivity, we switch to real space: r ≡ (x, y, 0). Also, a situation with no charge sink or source is considered. In this case, the time variation of charge density vanishes, ∂ t ρ c ≡ 0, in its quantum mechanical definition: Here H στ σ τ is the component form of Eq. ( where H(r) is given by Eq. ( . Supercurrent as a function of superconducting phase difference, I(φ), when the Josephson junction is oriented along the x direction and spin-orbit interaction is η a so . The supercurrent is plotted for various values of magnetization direction/intensity and the strength of spin-orbit interaction. In (a1)-(a2 In the first and third columns, magnetization is oriented along the x direction, i.e., hy = hz = 0, hx = 0 and in the second and fourth columns the orientation is aligned with the y direction, i.e., hx = hz = 0, hy = 0. W and thickness d. The interface of superconductornonsuperconductor junctions extends along the y direction at x = 0, d. The magnetization possesses an arbitrary orientation and can be described by three components h = (h x , h y , h z ). The superconductor leads, regions 1, 3, support an externally controllable macroscopic phase difference φ = φ 1 -φ 3 . The phase difference can be tuned by for instance passing a magnetic field through an exterior SQUID-like geometry interconnected via junction Fig. This section is divided into two subsections. In Sec. III A, we present our study of current-phase relation (CPR), φ 0 -state, and in Sec. III B the critical supercurrent . In Secs. III A 1 and III A 2, the results of numerical analysis for the profile of CPR and self-biased current shall be given, considering two differing SOIs (3) and two perpendicular directions to the orientation of Josephson junctions in the xy plane. We now proceed to study the supercurrent in the ballistic regime of a two-dimensional magnetized Josephson junction with Rashba-Dresselhaus SOI depicted in Fig. 1 tions. The index r indicates that we switch to real space after taking the derivatives in momentum space. It is worth mentioning that we shall apply no simplifying assumptions and approximations to the wavefunctions in actual numerical calculations. This, however, results in highly complicated and lengthy expressions for the wavefunctions and supercurrent. Thus, we are able to evaluate them numerically only and omit giving explicit expressions. In the numerics, we consider a rather thin and wide junction W/d 1 to avoid any finite size effect induced by the edges at y = ±W/2. To explore different aspects of how the interplay of RDSOI and magnetization orientation influences supercurrent, we conduct a systematic numerical study. Our extensive investigation demonstrated that supercurrent responds relatively weak to the interplay of h z magnetization and RDSOIs Eqs. (3) (h z induces supercurrent reversal only). In addition, the interaction of h z with η a,b so is unable to induce φ 0 self-biased supercurrent. Therefore, in the following, we concentrate on supercurrent response to the interplay of in-plane magnetization h = (h x , h y , 0) with RDSOC. In the numerics that follow, we consider representative values 0, ±1 for the coefficients of RDSOIs α and β, a low value to the chemical potential μ = ∆, and h x , h y = 0, ±0.75∆ for the magnetization components unless otherwise stated. The junction thickness and width are normalized to ξ S = 2 /2m∆ and fixed values d = 0.3ξ S and W = 10ξ S are considered in the numerics. Nevertheless, we emphasize that our conclusions made are independent of these representative parameter values. In what follows, we visualize a few samples of the comprehensive investigation of current-phase relation performed, to make the flow of discussions smoother, illus-trate how CPRs are systematically obtained, and how φ 0 -state is analyzed. Figures I(±α, 0, 0, ∓h y ) = I(0, ±β, ±h x , 0); φ a,x 0 > 0, (8a) I(±α, 0, 0, ±h y ) = I(0, ±β, ∓h x , 0); φ a,x 0 < 0, (8b) I(±α, 0, ±h x , 0) = I(±α, 0, ∓h x , 0) = I(0, ±β, 0, ±h y ) = I(0, ±β, 0, ∓h y ); φ a,x 0 = 0, I(±α, ±β, ±h x , 0) = I(±α, ∓β, ∓h x , 0) = I(±α, ∓β, 0, ∓h y ) = I(±α, ±β, 0, ∓h y ); φ a,x 0 > 0, (10a) I(±α, ±β, ∓h x , 0) = I(±α, ∓β, ±h x , 0) = I(±α, ±β, 0, ±h y ) = I(±α, ∓β, 0, ±h y ); φ a,x 0 < 0, (10b) I(±α, ±β, ±h x , ±h y ) = I(±α, ±β, ∓h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ∓β, ±h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ∓β, ∓h x , ±h y ); φ a,x 0 = 0, (11a) I(±α, ∓β, ±h x , ±h y ) = I(±α, ∓β, ∓h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ±β, ±h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ±β, ∓h x , ±h y ); φ a,x 0 = 0, (11b) I(±α, 0, +h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, 0, -h x , ∓h y ) = I(0, ±β, ∓h x , +h y ) = I(0, ±β, ∓h x , -h y ); φ a,x 0 > 0, (12a) I(±α, 0, +h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, 0, -h x , ∓h y ) = I(0, ±β, ±h x , +h y ) = I(0, ±β, ±h x , -h y ); φ a,x 0 < 0, (12b) To analyze the CPRs obtained, Eqs. ( . Supercurrent vs superconducting phase difference in a η b so spin-orbit-coupled Josephson junction oriented along the x direction. The magnetization has nonzero in-plane components: hx = 0, hy = 0, hz = 0. The coefficients of spin-orbit interaction vary in different panels: (a1 in which θ(X) is the conventional step function. The relations Eqs. (8) imply that the phase shift should have a form of φ a,x 0 (0, β, h x , 0) ∝ O(h x )O(β) and φ a,x 0 (α, 0, 0, h y ) ∝ -O(h y )O(α). Considering Eqs. ( Here, we have defined Γ x,y = γΘ(h x,y ) -1 with γ > 1. Note that Eq. ( For completeness, we have performed the same numerical study as described above for a Josephson junction oriented along the y axis. According to Fig. Comparing phase shift φ a,x 0 , Eq. ( Another limit of interest emerges when the chemical potential is larger enough than all energies available in the system (i.e., μ h, ∆). To evaluate this limit in the ballistic regime, we have set μ = 10∆ and repeated the above numerical study. The resultant CPRs are similar to Eqs. ( and As seen, the phase-shift functionalities now reduce to relatively simpler expressions in this limit. Next, we consider a Josephson junction oriented along the x axis, hosting RDSOI of type η b so , Eq. (3b). Some representative cases are shown in Figs. I(±α, ±β, ±h x , ±h y ) = I(±α, ±β, ∓h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ±β, ±h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, ∓β, ∓h x , ±h y ); φ b,x 0 = 0, ( I(±α, 0, ±h x , ±h y ) = I(±α, 0, ∓h x , ±h y ) = I(0, ±β, ±h x , ∓h y ) = I(0, ±β, ∓h x , ∓h y ); φ b,x 0 > 0, ( I(±α, 0, ±h x , ∓h y ) = I(±α, 0, ∓h x , ∓h y ) = Considering Eqs. (18), we deduce that φ b,x 0 (α, β, h x , h y ) can be expressed by φ b,x 0 (α, 0, 0, h y ) ∝ -O(h y )O(α) and φ b,x 0 (0, β, 0, h y ) ∝ O(h y )O(β). However, in the presence of both α and β with arbitrary signs, the relations Eqs. (19) illustrate that φ b,x 0 = 0. Thus, we can conclude φ b,x 0 (α, β, 0, We have also conducted this systematic study when the Josephson junction is oriented along the y axis, supporting the η b so type of SOC. We have summarized the resultant CPRs and the status of the corresponding phase shift in Appendix A; Eqs. (A6)-(A10). The same analysis as the above yields the following relation for the phase shift in this case: Comparing φ b,x 0 , Eq. ( By setting a large value to the chemical potential, i.e., μ = 10∆ and numerically reproducing CPRs, we find that φ b,x 0 reverses sign in Eqs. (18) and vanishes in Eqs. (20). The rest of the CPRs given by Eqs. (19), Eqs. (21), and Eqs. (22) remain unchanged. The analysis of these new CPRs yields the following expressions for the anomalous phase shifts, when the Josephson junction is oriented along the x axis: and when the junction is rotated and the total supercurrent flows along the y axis: Having obtained the explicit functionalities for the anomalous phase shift as a function of magnetization and SOC components, we now present the results for critical supercurrent. We adopt the same assumptions made in the previous section. Namely, the superconductor leads are made of conventional superconductors, RDSOI and Zeeman field are restricted within the nonsuperconducting region, and the inverse proximity effect is negligible. For both ballistic and diffusive regimes, W d (W = 10d) is considered to avoid edge dictated effects and the Zeeman field considered is in-plane, i.e., h = (h x , h y , 0). The energies and lengths are normalized by the superconducting energy gap ∆ and superconducting coherence length ξ S , respectively. The superconducting coherence length in the diffusive regime is given by ξ S = D/∆ in which D is the diffusion constant Figure To illustrate how a Zeeman field also can weaken the indication of the persistent spin helices through critical supercurrent, we plot the critical supercurrent vs the α and β parameters of η a so and η b so RDSOI in Figs. 10 and 11 of the Appendix, the two components of Zeeman field are different in magnitude (h x = h y ). As seen, a unidirectional Zeeman field (h x = 0, h y = 0.75∆) in the presence of η a so (top row of Fig. For completeness, we turn our attention to the diffusive regime of the same Josephson configuration described earlier. Following Ref. 50, one can decompose the current into components, in the presence of η a so and η b so RDSOI, so that the current components contain specific components of the Green's function (f 0 , f x , f y , f z ): By the above decomposition, one is able to isolate the contribution of spin-singlet f 0 , spin triplet f x , f y , f z superconducting correlations, and the multiplication of spin-singlet and spin-triplet terms into a critical supercurrent flow. For example, J 0 (≡ J 00 ) and J x,y,z (≡ J xx,yy,zz ) can provide a rich overview for pure spin-singlet and spin-triplet supercurrents, respectively, whereas J 0x , J 0y , J xz , J yz contain crossed terms, involving both the spin-singlet and spin-triplet Green's functions. To determine the critical supercurrent accurately, we solve the coupled Usadel equations together with boundary conditions numerically, following Refs. 17 and 18. Substituting the numerical solutions into the current definition of Refs. 17 and 18, we obtain the supercurrent as a function of phase difference φ, i.e., I(φ), and determine the critical current: |I tot | = max (|I(φ; α, β, h)|). The current is normalized by πσ/e∆ throughout the supercurrent calculation in the diffusive regime. Next, we find the specific phase difference that causes maximum supercurrent φ max and obtain the current components at φ max . The numerical results are summarized in Figs. In summary, we have theoretically studied self-biased supercurrent (so called φ 0 -Josephson state) in a twodimensional Josephson junction driven by the interplay of Zeeman field with in-plane components (h x ,h y ,0) and two differing types of Rashba(α)-Dresselhaus(β) spin-orbit couplings (RDSOCs). In ballistic regime, we solve the Bogoliubov de Gennes numerically without incorporating simplifying assumptions to its associated wavefunctions and study current-phase profile by employing numerous sets of parameter values. Analyzing numerical results, we obtain explicit functionalities for the φ 0 phase shift with respect to the components of magnetization and RDSOC parameters. The findings illustrate that |α|=|β| removes the φ 0 phase shift independent of magnetization direction and strength, the density of nonmagnetic impurities, and junction direction, when μ is high enough compared to the energy gap (∆) in the superconductor leads; μ ∆. In the μ ∼ ∆ limit, however, except a certain case where |h x | = |h y |, the magnetization retrieves the φ 0 phase shift. In striking contrast to the μ ∆ limit, the φ 0 phase shift in the μ ∼ ∆ limit is directly proportional to h x h y terms. Also, we find that a low chemical potential compared to the superconducting gap μ ∼ ∆ is unfavorable for detecting the persistent spin helices whereas in a ballistic and short junction with μ ∆, the maximum of critical supercurrent is localized at and around |α| = |β| symmetry lines. We find that a proper fine-tunning of the in-plane Zeeman field can cause more pronounced indications for the persistent spin helices in the ballistic regime. In diffusive regime, we employ a quasiclassical technique that allows for isolating the spin-singlet and spin-triplet components of supercurrent. We show that due to the contribution of long-range spin-triplet supercurrent away from |α| = |β| symmetry lines, the critical supercurrent suppresses at and around |α| = |β|. Considering the accessibility of the φ 0 phase shift in both the ballistic and diffusive systems and the tuneability of RD-SOC, the uncovered φ 0 expressions and the behavior of critical supercurrent can be utilized as a tool for characterizing the type of spin-orbital interaction, confirming controllable persistent spin helices, experimentally extracting reliable values for the parameters of spin-orbital interaction in a system, and corroborating the existence of long-range spin-triplet superconducting correlations. Our results can be confirmed by GaAs quantum wells and zinc-blende materials.