We study the effects of random nonmagnetic impurities on superconducting transition temperature Tc in a Cu-doped Bi2Se3, for which four types of pair potentials have been proposed. Although all the candidates belong to s-wave symmetry, two orbital degree of freedom in electronic structures enriches the symmetry variety of a Cooper pair such as even-orbital-parity and odd-orbital-parity. We consider realistic electronic structures of Cu-doped Bi2Se3 by using tight-binding Hamiltonian on a hexagonal lattice and consider effects of impurity scatterings through the self-energy of the Green's function within the Born approximation. We find that even-orbital-parity spin-singlet superconductivity is basically robust even in the presence of impurities. The degree of the robustness depends on the electronic structures in the normal state and on the pairing symmetry in orbital space. On the other hand, two odd-orbital-parity spin-triplet order parameters are always fragile in the presence of potential disorder. The robustness of superconductivity in the presence of nonmagnetic impurities depends on symmetry of the pair potential. The transition temperature T c is insensitive to the impurity concentration in a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor Previous papers In this paper, we study the effects of impurities on T c of Cu-doped Bi 2 Se 3 . We describe electronic structures near the Fermi level by taking into account two p orbitals in Bi 2 Se 3 and the hybridization between them The simplified lattice structure of a Cu-doped Bi2Se3. The arrow indicates the hopping. tice vectors are √ 3a/2, a/2, 0 , (0, a, 0), (0, 0, c) where a and c are the lattice constants in the xy plane and along the z axis, respectively. We define the nearest neighbor vectors a 1 = √ 3a/2, a/2, 0 , a 2 = (0, a, 0), a 3 = -√ 3a/2, a/2, 0 , and a 4 = (0, 0, c). The tightbinding Hamiltonian in real space can be written as where ψ † σ,s (ψ σ,s ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at the orbital σ (= P 1 + z or P 2 - z ) with spin s (=↑ or ↓). We consider only the nearest neighbor hopping on the hexagonal lattice in the xy plane and that along the z axis. An orbital P 1 + z (P 2 - z ) mainly consists of p z orbital of a Bi (Se) atom. The matrix element of hopping ťai (i = 1 -4) is described as The nearest neighbor hopping elements are illustrated in Fig. The matrix structures of ťai are given in Appendix A. The tight-binding Hamiltonian can be written as where α i (k) (i = 1, 2, x, y, z) is We define the Pauli matrices ŝj in spin space, σj in orbital space, and τj in particle-hole space for j = 1 -3. The unit matrix in these spaces are ŝ0 , σ0 , and τ0 . In Eq. ( The superconducting state in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 is described by a Hamiltonian According to the previous proposal where g λ > 0 (λ = 1 -4) represents the attractive interaction between two electrons. Generally speaking, the pair correlation function can be represented as where we assume a spatially uniform equal-time Cooper pair. The momentum-symmetry is even-parity s-wave symmetry, which is a common property among the four candidates in a Cu-doped Bi 2 Se 3 . Because of the Fermi-Dirac statistics of electrons, the pairing correlation obeys The remaining symmetry options of the pairing function are orbitals and spins of a Cooper pair. Therefore, the pairing function must be either antisymmetric under s ↔ s ′ or antisymmetric under σ ↔ σ ′ . Both Eqs. ( Both Eqs. ( where ω n = (2n + 1)πT is a fermionic Matsubara frequency and T is a temperature. To discuss the transition temperature, we need to find the solutions of Eq. ( are common for all the pair potentials because the normal Green's function does not include the pair potential at the lowest order. The results of anomalous Green's function are given by, with The ŝ2 σ0 component in Eq. ( Eqs. ( We consider the random nonmagnetic impurities described by The schematic picture of potential disorder in a Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 is shown in Fig. where • • • means the ensemble average, n imp is the density of the impurities, and v imp is the strength of the impurity potential. We also assume that the attractive interactions between two electrons are insensitive to the impurity potentials 3 . We calculate the Green's function in the presence of the impurity potentials within the Born approximation. The Green's function is expanded up to the second order of the impurity potential. We transform the Eq. ( where Σintra and Σinter are the self-energy due to the intraorbital impurity scatterings and that of the interorbital impurity scatterings, respectively. We describe the total self-energy as follows. where we denote the momentum summation of the Green's function as . Therefore, the Gor'kov equation in the presence of the impurity potential is described by The normal part of self-energy ( Σg ) is calculated as follows. Within the first order of ∆, the normal Green's function becomes The imaginary (real) part of the self-energy renormalizes the Matsubara frequency (chemical potential). The anomalous Green's function after summing up the mo-menta is described as By substituting these expressions into Eq. ( Before demonstrating T c under the potential disorder, we briefly summarize a relation between the self-energy and the pair potential in the four cases. The results in Eq. ( 3. The superconducting transition temperature Tc is plotted as a function of ξ0/l. The vertical axis is normalized to the transition temperature in the clean limit T0. We fix T0 for all pair potentials. The gap equation for ∆ 1 results in By comparing with the gap equation in the clean limit in Eq. (32), the renormalized values are defined as The impurity self-energy renormalizes the pair potential and the Matsubara frequency in the same manner as ∆ 1 → ∆1 and ω n → ωn 1 . We solve the gap equation numerically and plot the transition temperature T c of ∆ 1 as a function of ξ 0 /l in Fig. The horizontal axis ξ 0 /l in Fig. The gap equation for ∆ 3 becomes The pair potential is renormalized by the impurity selfenergy as ∆ 3 → ∆ ′ 3 in Eq. ( The gap equations for ∆ 2 and ∆ 4 result in Both ∆ 2 and ∆ 4 represent spin-triplet interorbital pairing order antisymmetric under the permutation of two orbitals. The numerical results in Fig. We studied the effects of random nonmagnetic impurities on the superconducting transition temperature T c in Cu-doped Bi 2 Se 3 . We consider four types of momentumindependent pair potentials, which include the intraorbital pairing (∆ 1 ), the interorbital-even-parity pairing (∆ 3 ), and the interorbital-odd-parity pairings (∆ 2 and ∆ 4 ). The effects of the impurity scatterings are considered through the self-energy of the Green's function within the Born approximation. T c of ∆ 1 is insensitive to the impurity concentration, which is consistent with the previous theories. We find that ∆ 1 with the electronic structure of a Cu-doped Bi 2 Se 3 corresponds to a limiting case of idealistic models We found that the robustness of the even-orbital-parity order parameters depends on the details of the band structures and that the odd-orbital-parity order parameters are fragile irrespective of the band structures. In momentum space, the tight-binding Hamiltonian becomes with n being an integer for the Hamiltonian to preserve time-reversal symmetry. By tuning θ = 0 at n = 0, the two pair potentials have the same sign with each other because of φ 1 -φ 2 = 0. By tuning θ = π/2, on the other hand, H(0) k (π/2, 0, π) describes a state where two pair potentials have the opposite sign to each other. It is easy to show that H(0) k (π/2, 0, π) and H(0) k (0, 0, 0) are unitary equivalent to each other. We set g P 1 + z = g P 2 - z = g 1 and ∆ P 1 + z = ∆ P 2 - z = ∆ 1 in section II. Under the condition, ∆ 1 (iŝ 2 )σ 3 is unitary equivalent to ∆1 = ∆ 1 (iŝ 2 )σ 0 . ∆2ŝ1(iσ2) A1u Even Triplet Even Odd (Inter) ∆3(iŝ2)σ1 A2u Even Singlet Even Even (Inter) ∆4ŝ3(iσ2) Eu Even Triplet Even Odd (Inter)