Multiply twinned particles (MTPs) are fascinating crystallographic entities with a number of controllable properties originating from their symmetry and cyclic structure. In the focus of our studies are diamond MTPs hosting optically active defects -objects demonstrating a high application potential for emerging optoelectronic and quantum devices. In this work, we discuss the growth mechanisms along with the microstructural and optical properties of the MTPs aggregating high-density of "siliconvacancy" complexes on the specific crystal irregularities. It is demonstrated that the silicon impurities incite a rapid growth of MTPs via intensive formation of penetration twins on {100} facets of regular octahedral grains. We also show that the zero-phonon-line emission from the Si color centers embedded in the twin boundaries dominates in photo-and electroluminescence spectra of the MTP-based lightemitting devices defining their steady-state optical properties. Synthetic diamond becomes a key material for a number of emerging devices including integrated photonic circuits Over the last decade, a particular attention of the researchers focuses on "impurity-vacancy" color centers in diamond, i.e. negatively charged nitrogen-(NV) and silicon-vacancy (SiV) complexes Embedded into the diamond hetero-and nanostructures, such complexes exhibit attractive properties for quantum technologies In the most published works, the container hosting the nanoemitters has often the shape of a sharp tip fabricated from a bulk crystal by conventional micromachining methods. The color centers are created in the diamond lattice by implantation of the dopant atoms followed by "activation" via a high temperature annealing. The disadvantages of this "top-down" approach are lattice damages caused by the implantation along with a high surface roughness and inevitable deviations from the desired geometry of container due to the dry-etch processing. It leads to unwanted absorption, scattering, and deflection of the emitted photons In our previous work We discuss MTP crystallization mechanisms together with the specific PL and EL spectral features obtained from isolated MTPs and light-emitting Schottky diodes fabricated on continuous MTP layers. Particular attention is paid to the role of Si as an anti-surfactant agent, which greatly affects electrooptical and micro-structural properties of the diamond MTPs. Williamson dual-wavelength infrared pyrometer. Technical details on the CVD equipment along with a general description of the BEN/growth procedures can be found elsewhere A scanning confocal setup based on a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope is employed for micro-PL (μPL) and micro-EL (μEL) spectra acquisition and light intensity mapping. The μPL measurements of isolated MTPs are carried out at excitation laser intensity of <0.1 μW at 532 nm wavelength. For the μEL studies, edge-type SiV light emitting devices (SiV-LEDs) are fabricated on closed MTP layers by defining circular Au(400 nm)/Ti(5 nm) Schottky contacts using sputter deposition. Diameter of the contacts and thickness of the MTP layer are 500 μm and 2.5 μm, respectively. The manufactured SiV-LED arrays are mounted on the printed circuit board and then wire-bonded to the external pads. After loading an "epi-ready" Si(111) substrate into the CVD chamber, a 30 minutes carbonization process is carried out at 900 °C under low pressure and low microwave power conditions (see Table The purpose of this treatment is multifold. First, the carbonization produces (111)-oriented 3C-SixCy ultra-thin non-continuous films. Second, it increases the surface roughness of the substrate (Fig. As shown elsewhere, the three-dimensional (3D) morphology of the substrate surface might stabilize metastable crystal polytypes by 3D lattice replication The systematic SEM observations at different stages of the grain growth allows us to distinguish between five main crystallization phases (titled from A to E in Fig. As revealed by SEM observations, the Oh(111) grains grow twin-free till the area of the {100} facet surpasses a critical value of Ac ≈ 300300 nm 2 (phase A). In other words, for the (111) diamond grains on Si substrates at the actual growth conditions, a specific mean free path of adsorbed carbon species It is important to note that the obtained 3D morphology of the carbonized surface supports the growth of (111)-oriented Oh grains, but does not provide favorable conditions for a 3-axial epitaxial relationship. As a result, the BEN-assisted deposition on 3C-SiC/Si(111) produces "fiber-textured" (111) oriented grains, with no dedicated in-plane orientation. This structural irregularity does not affect the properties of the isolated MTPs, but has a radical impact on the closed MTP layer. As shown in Fig. Fig. PTs often appear on nominal {100} facets during growth and remain one of the most studied twin types in synthetic diamond In Fig. As a result, PT hillocks on {100} and {111} facets of regular Oh(111) pyramids transform into 5-foldtwinned tetragonal segments forming building blocks for Dh-and Ih-MTPs. The MTP formation initiated by the PTs results in the specific cyclic structure of the grain. It is characteristic by pronounced (111) twin boundaries (TBs) and by high densities of dislocations (i.e. of stacking faults, SFs) penetrating the twinned sections. Figs. Exposed to the H2-plasma a silicon surface is a natural source of background Si doping for the diamond MTPs Despite of a limited spatial resolution, the SIMS mapping highlights the grain boundary area as the main diffusion path and the segregation location for the Si atoms (Fig. PL spectrum measured at 10 K shows a ZPL's "blue shift" and FWHM of 2.8 nm (the observed linewidth is limited by the resolution of the spectrometer). This is an expected behavior, which was methodically discussed in many recent works on low-temperature behavior of SiV complexes (e.g. Ref. The HR-μPL observations are consistent with earlier studies (e.g. Ref. Finally, to demonstrate an applicability of MTPs as micro-scale light sources, SiV-LEDs based on a vertical diamond/Schottky structure were manufactured using closed MTP layers, and investigated by μEL. This simple geometry was preferred over p-i-n Here, the bright emitting spots correspond to the large MTP assemblies located near the edge of the metal layer. It fits well the observed surface morphology of the MTP-layer (see SEM image in Fig. On the other hand, optically active MTPs are discrete with a micrometer-scale distance between the intensively emitting spots. Therefore, we can conclude that not all the MTPs respond equally to the electrical stimulation. Electro-optical activity might relate to a charge carrier transport in the MTP-layer and this is a subject for future investigations. The ZPL-emission from the SiV-LED was characterized by HR-μEL using a forward bias of Us = -200 V (Is ≈ -1.5 mA) and an integration time of 100 ms. In Fig. All aforementioned SiV emission properties originate from the specific TB features arising from twinning tetragonal crystal units in the MTPs. The corresponding crystallization mechanisms as well as their impact on the TBs' microstructure and location are discussed in the next section. The terms "contact" and "penetration" twins are commonly used in CVD-diamond literature defining i) the twin/parent crystallographic relationship, and ii) the twin's interaction with the parent crystal In Ref. Such behavior causes a series of secondary twin formations, and finally, completion of cyclic Dh-and Ih-MTPs containing 5 and 20 tetragonal segments, respectively. Correspondingly, all the {111}||{111} ́ In contrast to the growth on iridium, the MTP formation on silicon is governed by the penetration twins (PT, see section III.C and Fig. Hence, during their growth, the PTs generate excessively large area of incoherent TBs, which are capable to incorporate a significant amount of impurity atoms simultaneously retaining a high density of unsaturated chemical bonds (i.e. vacancies). It leads to vital consequences. In contrast to the MTPs grown on iridium in an impurity-free environment, the re-deposition of silicon atoms sputtered by the plasma from the substrate changes the growth dynamic and MTP properties on silicon prominently. There are two important aspects of MTP growth on Si by plasma CVD. The first one is an impact of Si impurities on the 2D mobility of the carbon species on diamond {100} surface. It is widely accepted that the diamond growth in H2-plasma is a surfactant-mediated process. The atomic hydrogen saturates the carbon dangling bonds stabilizing sp 3 -bonded structure on the surface due to the energy minimization Plasma-CVD of diamond comprises a variety of highly competitive surface processes Based on the presented SEM data, we can estimate a "capture" efficiency of the Si surface impurities, which, according to our model, kinetically control the PT nucleation immobilizing the adsorbed hydrocarbon radicals (CH3, CH2, CH, etc.) on {100} facets. In our consideration, <PT> represents a characteristic length, which the CxHy species travel until the chemisorption onto potential PT nucleation sites (i.e. impurity, vacancy complex, step bunching, edge dislocation, etc.). <PT> is measured as a mean distance from the geometrical center of the largest twin-free {100} facet to its nearest edge. As discussed in section III.B (Fig. The second aspect of the MTP growth on silicon relates to the segregation of Si atoms onto diamond lattice irregularities (i.e. extended defects and TBs), which leads to the PT nucleation and SiV formation, respectively. Si segregation on extended defects is often reported for nanodiamond Moreover, in the interstitial state, Si may localize at the center of a double vacancy position The MTP crystallization occurring after the PT formation stage is a thermodynamically driven process (see Ref. As demonstrated by the experiments, the contribution from the SiVs localized at these ridges dominates in the ZPL emission preserving steady-state spectral features and long-time photo-stability of Si-doped MTPsproperties of the highest importance for the micro-scale monochromatic light sources. Multiply twinned particles are very intriguing crystallographic objects with a number of unique properties originating from their symmetry and cyclic structure. MTPs are rarely applied in the modern optoelectronic devices, but their application potential is enormous owning to the "self-assembling" growth mode and variability of physical properties via in situ control of the crystallization. Especially, it concerns diamond MTPs hosting particular color centersthey might be a perfect solution for emerging ultra-compact optoelectronic and quantum optic applications. Our aim in this work was to discuss specific properties of the diamond MTPs aggregating highdensity of the silicon-vacancy complexes in the twin boundaries during growth. We demonstrated that the silicon impurities affect greatly the growth of Dh-and Ih-MTPs via intensive formation of the penetration twins on the {100} facets of octahedral grains. We also propose that by chemosorption of Si adatoms at the crystal irregularities, the growing MTPs minimize their interface energy stimulating extension of the {111} twin boundaries. The most prominent feature of the twin boundaries is a steady-state atomic order defined by the crystallographic relationship of the twinned segments. It leads to the predictable positioning of the SiV complexes within the twin boundary in relation to the adjacent lattices, and results in the steady emission properties. The EL studies of SiV-LED structures based on closed MTP layers reveal exceptional photostability and constant spectral features of the ZPL emission over the whole SiV ensemble. These findings might be substantial for practical applications of diamond MTPs: the optically active SiVs are naturally located near the surface and their density and distribution in the boundaries can be controlled by the growth conditions. 