fields and matter-also known as acoustic waves or phonons-have long been a subject of study. In recent years, for the purpose of the next generation of high-speed telecommunication applications, specially designed functional devices have been developed to enhance the light-matter interaction strength, since the excitation of acoustic phonons by a continuous wave (cw) laser alone is insufficient. However, with such structure-dependent enhancements, the strength of the interaction cannot be aptly and instantly controlled. We propose a new technique to control the effective interaction strength, which is not via the material structure in the spatial domain, as with the abovementioned specially designed functional devices, but through the structure of light in the time domain. Here we show the effective excitation of acoustic phonons in a single mode fiber using our newly developed optical frequency comb (OFC). In addition to controlling the time structure of the OFC via its repetition frequency, we demonstrate coherent control over acoustic phonons by exciting, enhancing, and suppressing them. We believe this work to represent an important step towards "comb-matter interactions", that it will be useful in topical areas of research such as the investigation of optically-accessible magnons and skyrmions, and that it will lead to increasingly flexible tools in combination with the aforementioned functional devices. Research on the interaction between light fields and acoustic phonons in lattice media has greatly advanced over the past decade. It holds enormous potential in scientific studies and practical areas, where possible applications include the generation of ultra-low noise lasers 1 , optical frequency combs (OFCs) 2,3 , coherent control 4,5 , optical storage 6-8 , slow and fast light generation 9 , optical switching 10 , and Brillouin cooling 11 , to name of few. This light-matter interaction is caused by a permittivity change of a medium by an incident electric field. Due to the weak nature of the interaction, specially-designed photonic crystal fibers 5,12-14 , suspended waveguides We demonstrate here that if a second pulse is launched after a first one well within the lifetime of a given acoustic phonon, this acoustic phonon can be coherently enhanced or damped. To achieve this, we used the picosecond pulses from our own developed multi-GHz OFC which has its repetition rate set to the phonon resonance frequency (up to 16 GHz) Enhancing and damping can be controlled by the pulse repetition rate or the time delay between the pulses, which make multi-GHz OFCs suitable for the effective and coherent excitation of acoustic phonons. Brillouin scattering results from photon-phonon interactions through the electrostriction effect , where n FUT represents the refractive index of the fiber-under-test (FUT). This acoustic wave (FWD acoustic, sky blue line) scatters the FWD optical beam to create the BWD scattered light again and thus the cycle continues. When the speed of the FWD acoustic wave matches the speed of sound in the fiber ( v A ), stimulated scattering occurs. The phase-matching condition is expressed as where λ FWD represents the wavelength of the FWD optical wave and the concept is described Figures It should be noted that the phonon frequency depends on the optical frequency of the pump light, as shown with equation (1), and the center of the backscattered Rayleigh, Stokes and anti-Stokes gains are not perfectly matched over all the longitudinal modes of the OFC. The profile of the Brillouin gain in conventional single mode fibers at room temperature has a spectral width of several tens of MHz and the phase matching condition is more relaxed for pump light with spectral widths of sub-hundred GHz (corresponding to a pulse duration of several tens of ps). Figure ), and the BWD light is used to measure the phonon amplitude (meas.). To demonstrate coherent control of acoustic phonons, the repetition rate of the OFC was changed to 7.8 GHz (half the phonon resonance frequency), and a Michelson interferometer (MI) was inserted to produce double pulses as shown in Fig. In the experiment, by sweeping the length of one of the interferometer's arm via a motorized stage, double pulses with a normalized time delay ranging from 0 to 1.25 of the inverse of the phonon resonance frequency could be obtained. In conclusion, we demonstrate coherent control of acoustic phonons in a standard singlemode fiber by a repetition-frequency-tailored multi-GHz OFC. Not only was the phonon amplitude coherently enhanced, but the acoustic phonon was also controlled by the optical pulse delay. Our new approach to control the effective interaction strength between photons and phonons, can be applied in various areas of science, especially in the field of telecommunications. In this letter, we focus on acoustic phonon experiments, but the result opens an entirely new optical scheme to manipulate (quasi) particles in the field of solid-state physics, where there are a myriad of intriguing elemental excitations such as optically accessible skyrmions An OFC based on a Kerr-lens mode-locked Yb:Y2O3 ceramic laser with a repetition rate of 7.8/15.6 GHz was used. The center wavelength and pulse duration were 1080 nm (278 THz) and 152 fs, respectively. The repetition rate was stabilized to an analog signal generator via a phase-locked loop circuit and a piezo actuator mounted on one of the cavity mirrors. Other details of this OFC can be found in the reference The OFC output was spectrally filtered by a hand-made optical band-pass filter (OBPF) with a maximum frequency resolution of 2 GHz at the wavelength of 1080 nm. It is based on a multi-pass, high-resolution spectrograph The Michelson interferometer (MI) was used to generate double pulses. In one of the interferometer arms, a stepper-motorized mechanical stage was used to tune the pulse time interval between 0 and 160 ps. A piezo actuator and a noise source were used to scan the arm length in order to average out the spectral interference of the double pulse to achieve higher SNR. Without this piezo actuator, sub-wavelength stabilization of the interferometer's arm would be required, and the cost would be lengthy scan times and data averaging. While the use of a piezo actuator reduces the time resolution of the experiment to several hundreds of femtoseconds, such a high time resolution was not required for our measurements. The peakto-peak amplitude and the bandwidth were measured to be 3 μm and 300 Hz, respectively. The field distribution of the FWD and BWD optical modes in the fiber are expressed as where, A FWD (n) (z, t) and A BWD 