Ferromagnetism and superconductivity are generally considered to be antagonistic phenomena in condensed matter physics. Here, we theoretically study the interplay between the ferromagnetic and superconducting orders in a recent discovered monolayered CoSb superconductor with an orthorhombic symmetry and net magnetization, and demonstrate the pairing symmetry of CoSb as a candidate of non-unitary superconductor with time-reversal symmetry breaking. By performing the group theory analysis and the first-principles calculations, the superconducting order parameter is suggested to be a triplet pairing with the irreducible representation of 3 B2u, which displays intriguing nodal points and non-zero periodic modulation of Cooper pair spin polarization on the Fermi surface topologies. These findings not only provide a significant theoretical insight into the coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism, but also reveal the exotic spin polarized Cooper pairing driven by ferromagnetic spin fluctuations in a triplet superconductor. The search for exotic unconventional pairing superconductivity with time-reversal symmetry breaking is one of the most challenging tasks in condensed matter physics. Among them, the prominent chiral pairing superconductors originated from the contribution of orbital angular momentum of Cooper paired electrons. For example, the chiral p-wave pairing topological superconductors Additionally, another class of superconductors with time-reversal symmetry breaking, the intriguing nonunitary pairing superconductors In this paper, we theoretically propose the monolayered orthorhombic CoSb as a candidate of non-unitary pairing superconductor, which has been successfully grown on the SrTiO 3 (001) substrate by molecular beam epitaxy. Experimentally, symmetric superconducting gap around the Fermi level with coherence peaks at around ± 6 meV was observed by in-situ scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), accompanied with a weak net ferromagnetic (FM) moment lying in the basal plane found by ex-situ magnetization measurements The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In sec- tion II, we present the group symmetry analysis on the pairing symmetry of monolayered orthorhombic CoSb superconductor. The electronic and magnetic structures of monolayered CoSb are systemically addressed in section III by using the first-principles calculations. The theoretical Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation of superconductivity is clarified in section IV. Finally, we give a brief conclusion in section V. Considering the D 2h point group of the superconducting orthorhombic CoSb monolayer shown in Fig. The first-principles calculations are performed using the all-electron full potential linear augmented plane wave method unitary state non-unitary state is proportional to Z 4 (where Z is the atomic number; Z = 51 for Sb) In order to capture the magnetic behavior of Co 3d states in the monolayered orthorhombic CoSb, we consider a two-dimensional phenomenologically theoretical Heisenberg model on the Co ion sites as follow where S is the magnitude of Co spin. The i, j denotes the summation over the next-nearest neighbor Co ion sites. The parameters J 1x and J 1y describe the nearest neighboring exchange interactions along the x and ŷ direction shown in Fig. The calculated low-energy band structure, the corresponding Fermi surface topologies, and the PDOS on the spin-up and spin-down species of total, Co 3d and Sb 5p orbitals for the FM ordered state with fixed magnetization along the ŷ axis in the monolayered orthorhombic CoSb are shown in Fig. A simplified theoretical model of low-energy excitations in the non-unitary superconducting state is provided for further understanding of the behaviors of superconducting electrons based on the following BdG Hamil-tonian: where k is the momentum of the excitation, Ĥ0 ( k) describes an effective spin-dependent four-band normalstate free electron Hamiltonian obtained through an interpolation method by projecting the first-principles calculated bands shown in Fig. In the tensor products, the first sector represents the spin channels σ =↑, ↓ shown in the caption of Table By performing the group theory analysis and the firstprinciples calculations, we systemically study the electronic and magnetic properties in the monolayered orthorhombic CoSb superconductor, and find the normal state of CoSb to be a half metal with the easy axis of FM magnetization along the ŷ axis lying in the basal plane, suggesting the orthorhombic CoSb as a candidate of non-unitary superconductor in which only spin-down electrons are responsible for the Cooper pairing. Using the strong-coupling approximation, we suggest the pairing symmetry of CoSb to be a triplet pairing with the irreducible representations of 3 B 2u that displays intriguing nodal points and non-zero periodic modulation of Cooper pair spin polarization on the Fermi surface topologies. These findings imply the novel coexistence of FM and superconducting orders in CoSb and the exotic spin polarized Cooper pairing driven by FM spin fluctuations in a triplet superconductor. (ferromagnetically along the x-axis and antiferromagnetically along the ŷ-axis), and the Néel-AFM orders. The corresponding total energies of various magnetic ordering states are listed in Table Appendix B: Orbital resolved band structure calculations In this appendix, we present the detailed calculations of the orbital resolved energy bands of the NM and FM states of monolayered orthorhombic CoSb, as shown in Fig. Using the mean-field method of strong coupling limit for the superconducting CoSb monolayer, the superconducting pairing is decoupled from the magnetic Heisenberg model in Hamiltonian (1), where ∆ αβ ij (α, β =↑, ↓) are the superconducting pairing order parameters resulted from the magnetic spin fluctuations. Considering that the calculated magnitude of magnetic exchange coupling strength of J 1y is significantly much larger than that of J 1x and J 2 , the pairing amplitude along the ŷ-axis, ∆ αβ 1y , dominates in superconductivity. Furthermore, since the J 1y is negative, the pairing orders with parallel spin orientation, ∆ ↑↑ 1y and ∆ ↓↓ 1y , are energetically favorable rather than that with antiparallel ones. Therefore, the superconducting pairing order for CoSb superconductor has a typical spin-triplet, resulting from the ferromagnetic spin fluctuations 