The recently deduced normal and anomalous self-energies from photoemission spectra of cuprate superconductors via the machine learning technique are calling for an explanation. Here the normal and anomalous self-energies in cuprate superconductors are analyzed within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity. It is shown that the exchanged spin excitations give rise to the well-pronounced low-energy peak-structures in both the normal and anomalous self-energies, however, they do not cancel in the total self-energy. In particular, the peak-structure in the normal self-energy is mainly responsible for the peak-dip-hump structure in the single-particle excitation spectrum, and can persist into the normal-state, while the sharp peak in the anomalous self-energy gives rise to a crucial contribution to the superconducting gap, and vanishes in the normal-state. Moreover, the evolution of the peak-structure with doping and momentum are also analyzed. The strong electron correlation is foundational to the emergence of superconductivity in cuprate superconductors Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a direct tool to probe the energy and momentum of quasiparticles simultaneously Although both the normal and anomalous self-energies can not be measured directly from ARPES experiments, the Boltzmann-machine learning technique In the remainder of this paper, the general formalism of the single-particle diagonal and off-diagonal propagators (then the normal and anomalous self-energies) obtained within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity is introduced briefly in Sec. II, while the quantitative characteristics of the normal and anomalous self-energies and the related exotic features of the electron quasiparticle excitations are presented in Sec. III, where we show that the sharp low-energy peak-structures in both the normal and anomalous self-energies are dop-ing dependent. In particular, in the underdoped regime, the position of the peak in the anomalous self-energy at around the antinode moves further away from the Fermi energy with the increase of doping, while the peak in the normal self-energy at around the [π, 0] point of the Brillouin zone (BZ) moves towards to the Fermi energy. Furthermore, the sharp low-energy peak-structures also have a striking momentum dependence, with the position of the peak in the normal self-energy that shifts towards to the Fermi energy when one moves the momentum from the antinode to the node. Finally, we give a summary and discussions in Sec. IV. In cuprate superconductors, the single common feature in the layered crystal structure is the presence of the two-dimensional CuO 2 planes 1 , and then it seems evident that the unconventional behaviors in cuprate superconductors are dominated by the strongly correlated motion of the electrons in these CuO 2 planes. In this case, it has been suggested that the essential physics of the doped CuO 2 plane can be properly accounted by the t-J model on a square lattice 2 , where we consider only the nearest-neighbor (NN) and next NN hopping terms, the summations ll NN and ll NNN denote that l runs over all sites, and for each l, over its NN sites and next NN sites, respectively, C † lσ (C lσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron of spin σ on site l, S l is a local spin operator, and μ is the chemical potential. This t-J model ( In order to satisfy this local constraint, we employ the charge-spin separation fermion-spin formalism respectively, where the spinful fermion operator h lσ = e -iΦ lσ h l keeps track of the charge degree of freedom of the constrained electron together with some effects of spin configuration rearrangements due to the presence of the doped hole itself (charge carrier), while the spin operator S l represents the spin degree of freedom of the constrained electron, and then the local constraint of no double occupancy is satisfied at each site in analytical calculations. In this fermion-spin representation (2), the original t-J model ( where S - l = S x l -iS y l and S + l = S x l + iS y l are the spinlowering and spin-raising operators for the spin S = 1/2, respectively, J eff = (1 -δ) 2 J, and δ = h † lσ h lσ is the charge-carrier doping concentration. Based on the t-J model in this fermion-spin representation (3), the kineticenergy-driven SC mechanism has been established where the single-electron band energy while the total self-energy Σ tot (k, ω) is a well-known combination of the normal self-energy Σ ph (k, ω) and the anomalous self-energy Σ pp (k, ω) as, with the additional contribution W k (ω) below T c due to the SC gap opening, In the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity, both the normal and anomalous self-energies Σ ph (k, ω) and Σ pp (k, ω) arise from the interaction between electrons mediated by a strongly dispersive spin excitation, and have been derived explicitly in Ref. 23, where all order parameters and chemical potential are determined by the self-consistent calculation. In this sense, our calculation for both the normal and anomalous selfenergies is controllable without using adjustable parameters. In particular, the sharp peak visible for temperature T → 0 in the normal (anomalous) self-energy is actually a δ-functions, broadened by a small damping used in the numerical calculation at a finite lattice. The calculation in this paper for the normal (anomalous) self-energy is performed numerically on a 160 × 160 lattice in momentum space, with the infinitesimal i0 + → iΓ replaced by a small damping Γ = 0.1J. The single-particle spectral function A(k, ω) measured by ARPES experiments is related directly to the imaginary part of the single-particle diagonal propagator in Eq. (4a) as where ReΣ tot (k, ω) and ImΣ tot (k, ω) are the real and imaginary parts of the total self-energy Σ tot (k, ω), respectively. In ARPES experiments In an interacting electron system, the topology of the electron Fermi surface (EFS) plays a crucial role in the understanding of the physical properties, since everything happens near EFS. In particular, the strong coupling between the electrons and a strongly dispersive spin excitation in cuprate superconductors leads to a strong redistribution of the spectral weights on EFS However, there is a substantial difference between theory and machine learning in the high-energy region, namely, the weaker features in the real and imaginary parts of the normal and anomalous self-energies occur in the high-energy region, while the calculation anticipates a flat featureless with the values of both the real and imaginary parts of the normal self-energy that approach zero. However, the actual range of the low-energy peak structures of the normal and anomalous self-energies is very similar in theory and machine learning. In particular, the sharp peak in ImΣ pp (k AN , ω) locates at the same energy ω Im-Th ∼ -70 meV as that in ImΣ ph (k AN , ω), which has been confirmed by the deduced result of the normal (anomalous) self-energy based on the machine learning approach In the SC-state, although the normal and anomalous self-energies describe theoretically different parts of the interaction effects, all of them make the contributions to the dramatic change in the spectral line-shape of the single-particle excitation spectrum. To see this point more clearly, we plot the imaginary part of the total self-energy ImΣ tot (k AN , ω) [then the quasiparticle scattering rate Γ(k AN , ω) = -ImΣ tot (k AN , ω)] at the antinode as a function of energy for δ = 0.15 with T = 0.002J in Fig. where the corresponding energy spectrum ε 0k and the pseudogap ∆PG (k) are derived directly from the normal self-energy Σ ph (k, ω) and its antisymmetric part Σ pho (k, ω) as ε 0k = -Σ ph (k, 0)/Σ pho (k, 0) and ∆PG (k) = Σ ph (k, 0)/ -Σ pho (k, 0), respectively, and have been given explicitly in Ref. 23. This pseudogap ∆PG (k) is therefore identified as being a region of the electron self-energy effect by which it means the spectral intensity is suppressed. In particular, the result in Eq. ( ), and then the pseudogap ∆PG (k) plays the same role in the inducement of an intensity depletion in the single-particle excitation spectrum around the dip as that of ImΣ tot (k, ω). In other words, the pseudogapinduced low-energy peak-structure in ImΣ tot (k, ω) [then ∆PG (k)] in Fig. At the temperature above T c , the electrons are in a normal-state, where the SC gap Σ pp (k, ω) = 0. However, the low-energy peak-structure in the normal self-energy can persist into the normal-state. To see this point more clearly, we plot the results of the real (blue line) and imaginary (red line) parts of the normal self-energy at (a) the antinode and (b) the node as a function of energy for δ = 0.15 with T = 0.15J in Fig. In the machine learning analysis in Ref. 18, the lowenergy peak-structures in both the hidden normal and anomalous self-energies of cuprate superconductors are deduced solely from the complicated ARPES line-shape, which therefore provide a fingerprint of the SC mechanism. However, within the present machine learning method In summary, we have compared the results of the normal and anomalous self-energies deduced from the ARPES spectra of cuprate superconductors via the machine learning technique with these obtained based on the kinetic-energy-driven superconductivity, and the obtained results show that both the normal and anomalous self-energies due to the interaction between electrons mediated by a strongly dispersive spin excitation exhibit the notable low-energy peak-structures at all around EFS except for at the tips of the Fermi arcs, where the lowenergy peak-structures are predicted to be absent Furthermore, these low-energy peak-structures in both the normal and anomalous self-energies evolve with doping, where the low-energy peak in the anomalous selfenergy at around the antinode region moves further away from the Fermi energy as the doping concentration is increased in the underdoped regime. More specifically, these low-energy peaks have a special momentum dependence, where although the weight of the low-energy peak in the normal self-energy is gradually reduced when one moves the momentum from antinode to node, the position of the low-energy peak moves towards to the Fermi energy.