A major issue for the implementation of large scale superconducting quantum circuits is the interaction with interfacial two-level system defects (TLS) that leads to qubit relaxation and impedes qubit operation in certain frequency ranges that also drift in time. Another major challenge comes from non-equilibrium quasiparticles (QPs) that result in qubit dephasing and relaxation. In this work we show that such QPs can also serve as a source of TLS. Using spectral and temporal mapping of TLS-induced fluctuations in frequency tunable resonators, we identify a subset of the general TLS population that are highly coherent TLS with a low reconfiguration temperature ∼ 300 mK, and a non-uniform density of states. These properties can be understood if these TLS are formed by QPs trapped in shallow subgap states formed by spatial fluctutations of the superconducting order parameter ∆. Magnetic field measurements of one such TLS reveals a link to superconductivity. Our results imply that trapped QPs can induce qubit relaxation. It is becoming increasingly evident that the most coherence limiting TLS reside outside the qubit junctions on the surface of metals and dielectrics surrounding them Here we reveal the implications of a spatially fluctuating ∆ on such QPs. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy studies typically find spatial variations in ∆ of the order of δ∆ = 10 -20% in moderately disordered superconductors Crucially, we find that the optimal fluctuation able to trap a QP only has a few bound states. As a result a trapped QP behaves similar to 'textbook' TLS, as shown in Fig. To understand the emergence of qTLS from a fluctuating ∆ = ∆ 0 + δ∆(r) we consider a general model that assumes gaussian fluctuations of the gap, δ∆(r)δ∆(r ) = gδ(r -r ), where g δ∆∆ 0 ξ 2 0 is the strength of fluctuations, and ξ 0 the BCS coherence length. The exact origin of these fluctuations is not relevant for the conclusions. The density of subgap states is determined by rare fluctuations of the gap that reduce the QP energy sufficiently below the gap edge in a uniform material. The key point is that such fluctuations can create traps with a shape and depth that allow them to effectively trap QPs. As the QPs near the gap edge move with momenta close to the Fermi momentum p F , it follows that trapped QPs will have similar momenta, which can point in an arbitrary direction. This freedom results in the optimal trap being very anisotropic, with a shape elongated along the direction of p F . In Fig. Due to the presence of excited bound states, a QP in such a trap forms an effective TLS with typical energy splitting ω qTLS = ζ E where E is the energy of the trapped QP as measured from the gap edge and ζ ≈ 0.7 is found from theory where η ≈ 10. Likewise, small ω qT LS are suppressed since QPs in shallow traps anihilate each other efficiently, leading to in the absence of QP generation. Here τ exp is an experimental timescale. Due to the spatial asymmetry, the transition between the lowest and first excited state in each trap is expected to have a significant electric dipole moment, resulting in a strong interaction with quantum devices. In this picture the TLS is formed in a single well, in contrast to the more conventional double-well picture. In similar films δ∆ constitute 10% of the total gap The unusual shape of the traps and the presence of multiple bound states in each trap distinguish clean superconductors from the dirty limit We now turn to the experimental work where our observations can be explained by this model. To be able to study individual TLS and spectral and temporal fluctuations of superconducting resonator parameters we use kinetic inductance tunable superconducting resonators with centre frequencies f 0 in the range 3-7 GHz, described in detail in Ref. Here 0 is the TLS minimum energy and γ the TLS voltage coupling strength. In Fig. Occasionally we observe very dissipative TLS with linewidths in excess of several MHz in our measurement window (red arrow in Fig. We now turn to the qTLS DOS. Fig. The data in Fig. Finally, to determine if there indeed is a link between the qTLS and superconductivity we measure a strongly coupled qTLS in an applied magnetic field B parallel to the superconducting film, shown in Fig. High-resolution spectral mapping of TLS in qubits has only been performed in the range 5 -6 GHz We now turn to the implications that these qTLS states have for a range of superconducting technologies and for the coherence of qubits. A typical sample of ∼ 1 cm 2 size is hit by a high energy cosmic ray once in every ∼ 10 s, creating a shower of phonons that quickly relax to low frequencies where their relaxation time becomes long. These phonons produce QPs well above ∆. Eventually these QPs fall into the traps discussed here where they remain essentially forever at low temperatures. Such localization of QPs prevents their recombination and equilibration. Those close to a qubit can result in its excitation or relaxation, and hence the QP localization results in a long period of qubit performance degradation. As this degradation affects all qubits on a sample it becomes a catastrophic event for quantum computation, a conclusion supported by recent data on charge noise in qubits Identifying and eliminating strongly coupled TLS is crucially important for scaling-up of superconducting quantum computing. All the mechanisms that lead to gap fluctuations are difficult to control in thin films used for resonators and qubits, but our results suggest these must be carefully addressed in order to achieve this goal. Even in very clean superconducting films the gap varies significantly on the scale of superconducting coherence length, ξ 0 . For instance, in ultra clean NbN thin films spatial fluctuations of the order of ∼ 10% in ∆ have been reported in Without the loss of generality we can assume that spatial fluctuations in ∆ are described by a white Gaussian noise potential that is characterized by Gaussian statistics with auto-correlation function: where δ(r) is the dirac delta function. As we show below, the relevant scale for the quasipartcle traps is much larger than ξ 0 , justifying the δ-correlation. We now derive the density of subgap states, ν(E) and the shape of the optimal fluctuation of the gap that produces them. We focus on the low energy tail. Throughout we use = 1. The starting point is the Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) equations: where r = xx + ŷy (we consider the 2D problem, generalization to 3D is straightforward). ∆0 denotes the coherence length of the superconductor. If we regard u n (r) and v n (r) as the upper and lower components of a "spinor" ψ n (r), we can write the effective Hamiltonian acting on this spinor as a matrix: H = H 0 σ z + ∆σ x . In the limit H 0 ∆, we can use perturbation theory to reduce the Hamiltonian H to The BdG equations then reduce to: The BdG equations are valid on the atomic scale and therefore the spinor wave functions ν n (r), which vary on the length scale set by k -1 F , contains more information than needed. It is convenient to eliminate these irrelevant degrees of freedom by replacing the BdG equations by their quasiclassical limit. For this purpose one writes the spinor wave function ν n (r) as a rapidly oscillating phase factor (which changes on the atomic length scale) times a slowly varying amplitude (which changes on a length scale set by the coherence length), i.e. v n (r) ≈ φ n (x, y)e ik F x•r . In this quasiclassical approximation, the quasiparticles are moving along trajectories that are straight lines. We then rewrite the BdG equations neglecting higher derivatives in the x direction 1. We find that: and the BdG equations reduce to: After these simplifications, the problem becomes formally similar to the problem of finding the tail in the density of states in disordered conductors For the optimal fluctuation all the terms in Eq. S4 are of the same order. This implies that the optimal fluctuation has the size: En ξ 0 (S5) in x and y directions respectively. Notice that the scales of the two coordinates are different, i.e. x 0 y 0 , resulting in an optimal gap fluctuation with no spherical symmetry (see Fig. By using Eq. S1, we find that the probability to find the fluctuation δ∆ ∼ Ẽ with spatial extend x 0 and y 0 scale . For a 3D problem, similar reasoning gives: ln In order to find the exact value of the coefficient η = 2 √ 2η ∼ O(1) we need to determine the optimal gap fluctuation that dominates the density of states at energy Ẽ. We follow the derivation given in Ref. and the scaled wavefunction φ(x, ȳ) = g E φ(x, ȳ), we find that Eq. S4 reads: and the coefficient: The spectrum operator in Eq. S6 determines the presence (or absence) of excited bound states in the optimal gap fluctuation. Eq. S6 is a fourth order non linear differential equation that we can solve numerically. The solution φ(x, ȳ) is illustrated in Fig. is given by the solution of the Lagrange equation where λ is the Lagrange multiplier. The latter equation can be reduced to equation (S6) by the rescaling of the function φ. Thus, minimizing the functional F (φ) with appropriate choice of the operator M and rescaling the result we get the solution of equation (S6). The minimization procedure is numerically stable in contrast to the direct solution of the non-linear equation (S6). The non spherical symmetry is clearly seen and has important consequences for the estimates of the bound states in the typical well. We find that in the optimal trap, beside the ground state E, there is a distintive excited bound state at energy E(1 -ζ) with ζ ≈ 0.7. As a consequence when a quasiparticle is trapped in the optimal gap fluctuation, a qTLS with frequency ω qT LS ∼ ζ E can be formed. As a result of the numerical calculation, we find that the adimensional parameter given in Eq. S7 is η ≈ 28. Two bound states in the well form the qTLS. We now estimate the density of qTLS, ρ qT LS ( Ẽ). For energies into the low-energy tail, the density of states of the qTLS is given by the electron density of states: The reason is that at such a low energies, the qTLS are well localized into the optimal gap fluctuations. However, traps with value of energies E → 0 are very shallow and a trapped quasiparticle can tunnel out of the well and, depending on the time of experiment τ exp , eventually find a partner and annhilate. If this happens, the qTLS formed in such a shallow trap disappears. We therefore expect that the density of qTLS varies strongly depending on the qTLS frequency. In particular, one would expect that at very high frequencies qTLS are exponentially rare, the majority of qTLS are centered around some typical frequency, and at eneriges corresponding to very shallow traps there are again no qTLS. This is in agreement with what has been observed in the experiment (see Fig. and expect that two quasiparticles cannot annhilate if , the condition given in Eq. S12 is satisfied if This translate into the fact that each shallow trap is associated a surface S = x 0 y 0 [ln (∆ 0 τ exp )] 2 and only for trap densities ν 0 ( E) < S -1 , the shallow trap behaves effectively as a qTLS. It is a strightforward calculation to show that: As a result one expects that the densities of qTLS at high frequencies decrease as ρ qT LS < ν 0 ( E). Fig. Finally we make a note on the qTLS electric dipole moment. As the size of the qTLS trap is on the scale ∼ ξ 3 0 one would expect a significant dipole moment, however, screening inside the superconductor reduces the effective dipole moment significantly. Any bulk qTLS would have vanishing coupling; only qTLS located at the superconductor surface are expected to couple to external fields. However, even in the most favourable situation when a qTLS trap is located at and oriented parallel to the surface of the superconductor the relevant screening length for perpendicular electric fields is on the atomic scale, ∼ 1 Å. This sets the scale of the dipole moment for both microwave and electric field induced by the electrostatic gate. The dipole moment we observe both through the coupling to the microwave field and to the DC gate electrode is consistent with this length-scale. The resonator design and fabrication is outlined in detail in Figure Our typical measurement setup is depicted in Fig. We next verify the background loss in our resonators, originating from a large ensemble of weakly coupled TLS (the expected usual dielectric TLS material defects in addition to qTLS), by measuring the intrinsic dielectric loss tangent. The intrinsic loss tangent F tan δ i (at zero frequency detuning) of each resonator was determined on multiple cooldowns by sweeping the temperature of the cryostat and measuring the resonance frequency versus temperature using a VNA. The intrinsic loss tangent is given by Here δf 0 (T ) = f 0 -f (T ), Ψ is the di-gamma function, F is a geometric filling factor and T 0 is a reference temperature. The measured data and fits to Eq. (S15) are shown in Fig. Again we find similar values for A 0 as in previous studies. We then repeat this measurement as a function of resonator frequency detuning and plot A 0 (δf 0 ) in Fig. g , where γ = p 0 sin θ/z 0 , tracing out a hyperbola as a function of applied electric field. The static electric field distribution is expected to be the same for all resonators. Fig. In Fig. We next show the saturation properties which further evidences the TLS nature of the observed fluctuations. Fig. We then fit the Q -1 TLS (P ) data to Q -1 TLS (P ) = Q -1 TLS,0 P α TLS and plot the loss rate versus the power saturation exponent α TLS in Fig. Fig. Here we show using our constant wave on-chip electron spin resonance (ESR) technique that the samples used here hold the same density and types of surface spins previously analysed in detail Here we show additional data from repeated measurements of thermal cycling of the sample, experiments that all indicate a typical energy scale ∼ 300 mK. Fig. Another aspect to consider is whether the applied tuning current has any impact on the observed qTLS. In Fig. We now turn to the evaluation of the E-field numerical simulations of our device for the evaluation of the conventional background TLS density using several different approaches. First, following the method in To evaluate the TLS density and contribution to device loss the above and other approaches used so far are almost exclusively reliant on the evaluation of either a participation ratio or filling factor of the dielectric volume of interest. These approaches have two critical disadvantages when delaing with very thin (and often unknown) layers of TLS on surfaces in the form of thin native oxide layers or surface adsorbants. First, an assumption about the layer thickness has to be made, and chosing the correct thickness is not trivial, however, it can have a significant impact on the final result. Furthermore, the dielectric constant of the volume where the TLS are situated is required, and in particular for a monolayer of surface adsorbates this is not very well defined. Here we instead derive a direct approach to obtaining the TLS density assuming all TLS of relevance reside on a surface. The only quantity that needs to be determined is the electric field strength generated by the device, at the surface of interest, and an assumption of the density of TLS (here assumed to be constant both in energy and spatially). This approach is valid for a distribution of TLS out of the plane of the surface (i.e. thin layers of finite thickness), as long as the electric field strength does not change significantly when the TLS is located outside the evaluated surface. In the low power limit we can write the total TLS-limited loss as the sum of loss originating from a larger number of TLS. The absorption of a single TLS is given by its polarisation where Ω = 1 2 p • E/h is the Rabi frequency due to the coupling of the TLS dipole to the resonator RF electric field. In the low temperature, low drive regime we thus have First, integrating over all possible detunings (assuming a uniform distribution in frequency of TLS) we get where ρ ∆ is the energy density of TLS (in number of TLS per Hz). We then assume the ensemble average p 0 of dipole moments where θ n is the angle between each TLS dipole and the local electric field. As the RF electric field is perpendicular to the metal surface, the averaging of θ goes over all possible angles of the TLS orientation only (an approximation that holds for the metal surface but not the substrate-air). The local electric field can be expressed as E = E(x, y). We can decompose the electric field into a component running along the resonator and one component along the perimeter of the metal. Along the length L of the resonator the field is decaying sinusodially (λ/2 or 3λ/2 resonator), such that the integrand in y becomes L/2. The remaining integral is carried out in COMSOL by evaluating the electric field around the surface of the superconductor. Details of such simulation for our device is presented in Fig. For the measured single photon Q TLS,tot = 10 5 we get ρ ∆ ≈ 3.4 • 10 6 GHz -1 integrated over the area of the resonator, or ∼ 330 resonant TLS (within the bandwidth of the resonator). Dividing out the area of the surface of the superconductor in our resonator we find ρ ∆,A ≈ 50 GHz -1 μm -2 . These resonant TLS are weakly coupled and each TLS do not contribute significantly to the total loss, for instance these could be the vast majority of TLS with a dipole moment mostly perpendicular to the electric field oriantation. In the high power limit we instead get , where we can identify a 'critical' field strength for saturation of the TLS E n,crit = h Γ 1,n Γ 2,n /p n . qTLS magnetic field measurements Finally, we here outline the details of the qTLS measurement in mangetic field shown in Fig. The experiments presented in the main manuscript were carried out at zero current detuning, and we instead tune the TLS into resonance with the resonator using the electrostatic gate in the sample enclosure. The reason for this was purely technical, for larger tuning currents the resonator becomes more sensitive to current noise, and most likely due to mechanical resonances and eddy currents in the coaxial cables excited by the pulse tubes of the cryostat, we saw an increased instability of the resonator frequency at larger magnetic fields. By staying at zero current detuning we minimise this noise.