Recently, the domain of topological insulators in condensed matter physics has been teeming with intriguing and very exciting discoveries. Notably, the capacity of guiding currents towards specific directions according to the spin of the travelling electrons has a great potential for electronic devices. This new phenomenon has been transposed to the classical domain in electromagnetics and acoustics, unveiling the pseudo-spin locking of guided waves. However, these macroscopic analogues are photonic/phononic crystals which are intrinsically wavelength scaled. In this work, we realize a genuine acoustic analogue of the valley-Hall effect in the audible regime using a lattice of soda cans. The crystalline description of this very simple metamaterial allows us to demonstrate experimentally the unidirectional excitation of sound guided at a scale much smaller than the wavelength of operation. These results not only open the tantalizing valley-topological phenomena to the audible regime but also allow to envision compact applications for acoustic manipulation. Introduction. -Sound manipulation is of great interest in numerous domains of application such as acoustic isolation, ultrasonic imaging, sonars and communication for example. In the last decades, it has been demonstrated that phononic crystals Nevertheless, due to the resonant nature of its constituents, multiple scattering occurs within the unit cell of such locally resonant metamaterials In this letter, we characterize numerically and experimentally an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-Hall effect using a very genuine metamaterial made of soda cans, in the audible regime. We first establish a clear connection between structure and composition comparing the honeycomb and Kagome lattices. From there, inspired by a previous work in the microwave domain Correspondence between Honeycomb and Kagome lattices of soda cans. -Several macroscopic analogues of the quantum valley-Hall effect have been demonstrated for acoustic waves, with phononic crystals Composition-structure connection to induce valley differentiation. -In a previous work in the microwave domain These simulated results are in complete agreement with the behaviour obtained in the case of a bi-disperse honeycomb lattice Subwavelength Acoustic valley-Hall effect. -We now want to obtain an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-Hall effect. The usual procedure to follow is to make an interface between two media on which opposite valleys are superposed. This can be done simply by applying a mirror symmetry with respect to the KK' direction within our breathing Kagome lattice of soda cans. It results in two different interfaces displayed on Fig. Hence, these numerical simulations truly evidence that we managed to obtain an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley- Hall effect with our structured lattice of soda cans. Particularly, we created two different subwavelength waveguides carrying an additional degree of freedom which we fully characterized as the combination of two counter-rotating patterns locally displayed on the interface metamolecules. Numerical study of the directional excitation of the guided wave. -In the following, we exploit this intriguing property of the guided waves in order to make them propagate preferentially in one direction. As we know precisely where the modes are rotating spatially, we can therefore induce a rotational excitation simply by placing two sources at appropriate positions and by applying a phase shift between them. For instance, relevant locations are the corners of one of the two hybrid triangles described above in Fig. From now, we focus on the green triangle and only represent it for matters of clarity. Nevertheless, one must keep in mind that the actual mode presents a combination of the two rotations linked to its propagation direction. We first verify this idea numerically. The transmission dependence towards the phase shift between the two sources is presented on Fig. Experimental demonstration of directional excitation of sound on a sub-wavelength scale. -We now go further and implement this procedure experimentally, in the case of the red interface. The experimental setup is displayed on Fig. Conclusion. -To conclude, in this work we exploit the crystalline description of locally resonant metamaterials to obtain experimentally an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-Hall effect with a lattice of soda cans. This microscopic approach of metamaterials allows to establish strong parallels between different lattices to induce field rotations within the medium simply by modifying its subwavelength structure. We then use it in order to guide waves along specific domain walls whose direction of propagation is tightly linked to the rotation of sound at the level of the interface. We exploit this singular property to send sonic waves preferentially in one direction by tailoring the excitation in a very simple manner. This numerical work and experimental verification clearly show that crystalline metamaterials have a great potential as a table-top platform to investigate tantalizing solid-state physics phenomena. *** S.Y. acknowledges funding from French Direction Générale de l'Armement. This work is supported by LABEX WIFI (Laboratory of Excellence within the French Program "Investments for the Future" ) under references ANR-10-LABX-24 and ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* and by Agence Nationale de la Recherche under reference ANR-16-CE31-0015.