In order to develop predictive wear laws, relevant material parameters and their influence on the wear rate need to be identified. Despite decades of research, there is no agreement on the mathematical form of wear equations and even the simplest models, such as Archard's, contain unpredictable fit parameters. Here, we propose a simple model for adhesive wear in dry sliding conditions that contains no fit parameters and is only based on material properties and surface parameters. The model connects elastoplastic contact solutions with the insight that volume detachment from sliding surfaces occurs in the form of wear particles, the minimum size of which can be estimated. A novelty of the model is the explicit tracking of the sliding process, which allows us to meaningfully connect particle emission rates and sizes to the macroscopic wear rate. The results are qualitatively promising, but we identify the necessity for more controlled wear experiments and the parameters needed from such work in order to fully verify and improve our model. In engineering practice, wear is usually predicted by (semi-)empirical laws instead of mechanistically informed models. Unfortunately, these laws are numerous and not necessarily transferable, while experiments which reveal sufficient information to validate them are scarce Hence, our focus lies here on the case of adhesive wear of brittle materials in the unlubricated regime. Adhesive wear is perhaps one of the most common types of wear, in which wear particles detach at points where strong enough junctions form between asperities from two contacting surfaces sliding relative to one another which assume that the wear rate is proportional to the real contact area given by F N divided by the material's hardness p with some proportionality constant k. The contribution of While where f is a geometry factor (often set to ≈ 3, see A first approach to advance Archard's model based on this deterministic particle formation criterion was developed by Based on these results, it is not yet clear if the critical length scale of Eq. 2 is helpful in predicting macroscopic wear rates. Indeed, the value of d * decreases with increasing hardness of the material, which might suggest that a harder material can more easily produce wear debris even from small contacts and thus wear more, in contradiction to the typical experimental observation. The mechanistic model by The goal of the present contribution is therefore to show that a critical ingredient of the wear process was not considered in sufficient detail before: The surfaces slide relative to each other during wear. The explicit inclusion of a very simple facsimile of the sliding process into our model allows us to make sense of the seeming contradiction between the microscopic length scale d * and the macroscopic wear laws. Furthermore, we find that the material properties used to calculate d * cannot be divorced from the physics of the contact solution and that the relation between wear particle formation and wear rate is nontrivial. A comparison with an experimental work by Our proposed new wear modeling approach is based on the work of where A i is the area of contact junction i and the sum is over all junctions. The wear rate is then simply W = kω i A i , where ω is an average shape factor on the order of unity that accounts for the local contact and wear particle geometries. We call this model "static" because the relative sliding motion is only implied in the derivation of the per-junction wear rate. It is clear that a purely elastic contact solution is not realistic We start our model development by investigating the influence of plasticity on the wear prediction for the static wear model. For this set of simulations, we describe all quantities in reduced units in terms of the Young's modulus E and the side length L of the surface. We used five realizations of each pair of rough surfaces, each surface being discretized into 4096 × 4096 pixels and described by a Hurst exponent H = 0.7 (a typical value observed experimentally, see each of those pairs, 1280 different offsets parallel to the surface planes between the top and bottom surface were used, since they were needed anyway for the sliding model described in section 3 later on. We used an isotropic material with Poisson's ratio ν = 0.3. For the shear strength, values of τ ∈ {0.006, 0.008, 0.010, 0.012} E were chosen, from which the flow pressure was derived as p m = p = 3 √ 3τ . Values for the fracture energy were G ∈ {0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0} • 10 -6 EL. The geometry factor was set to f = 3 under the assumption of spherical asperities, leading to a range of d * /L ≈ 0.004 to 0.064, i.e., in between λ l and λ u . Sixteen different normal loads were used, so that in total 409,600 contact solutions were computed (the fracture energy only appears in d * and has no bearing on the contact solution). Despite the addition of more realistic contact physics, the results resemble the work of The intermediate conclusion is either that the critical length scale model contradicts experimental evidence or that a wear model based on a single, static contact solution is missing a critical ingredient. We will argue for the latter by implementing a simple sliding process. In order to explicitly include the evolution of wear particle formation during the sliding process in our simulations, we extended the model presented in the previous section by continuously displacing the top and bottom surfaces against each other. We do not calculate wear rates directly from the real contact areas, but instead estimate wear volumes under the assumption that the junctions are circular and the resulting wear particles spherical (take A i as the area of the contact spot i and use d i ≈ 2 A i /π, resulting in a wear particle volume v i ≈ πd 3 i /6). The algorithm-also shown in Fig. where the sum goes over all contact junctions i, which were identified using a flood-fill algorithm. 2. Displace the top surface by a sliding increment δs and recompute the contact solution. Due to the periodic boundary conditions, the part of the top surface that leaves the simulation box on one side is in fact reinserted on the opposite side. 3. Find all contact junctions. Iterate over them and mark any junction that shares at least one pixel with a junction that has formed a wear particle in the previous step as "disabled". The same for any junction that shares at least one pixel with a junction that was in the disabled state in the previous step. All other junctions are marked "active". Thus, a junction (which represents an asperity-asperity contact) goes through several phases: When it first appears, it is approximately a single point and only grows during further sliding. Should it reach a size of d > d * before disappearing, a wear particle is formed and the junction is marked as disabled afterwards. It will retain its disabled state until the junction shrinks and disappears, at which point its state is no longer stored. This mimics the ongoing detachment of a wear particle, whose volume should only be counted once, but which still contributes to carrying normal load. Because the long-distance rolling of a wear particle cannot be modeled in the present framework, we assume the particle is lost quickly. 4. Increment the wear volume by 5. Unless the desired total sliding distance was reached, go to step 2. The output of this algorithm is a cumulative wear volume as a function of sliding distance. We chose a total sliding distance of L/2. Video 1 shows an example simulation of a smaller surface. The surface size was reduced to make the features of the model more easily visible. Figure Figure The initial points indicated in the inset correspond to the instantaneous wear volume V 0 , which is much higher than any subsequent increment δV . Material parameters used for these simulations were τ = 0.012 E and G = 0.5 • 10 -6 EL. however, not find a way to predict the running-in distance: The decay constant is not uniform for different surfaces or normal loads and there is no relation between the size of the largest contacts and running in, as one might have suspected. For the following study, we thus defined a sliding distance of L/4 as a safety margin after which the system is definitely run in, which we confirmed by inspecting the simulation data. This running-in distance has no physical meaning. We chose a sliding increment δs corresponding to 4 pixels in the running-in period and 1 pixel afterwards. The critical length scale d * provides a minimum size for a junction to form a wear particle and therefore a minimum wear particle volume v * ≈ πd * 3 /6. The result in the static model of section 2 is a variety of wear particle sizes v i ≥ v * (see, e.g., Fig. Given that the contribution of the initial particle creation to the wear rate is large compared to the particle growth rate Here, ω (= π/6 in the present work) is again a shape factor accounting for the wear particle shape and N * + is the total number of wear particles formed during the sliding distance s, which is also the cumulative number of junctions that have newly grown to a size of at least d * . This number N * + should be a linear function of s to obtain a constant wear rate. Note that the total number of junctions greater than d * at a given sliding distance, denoted N * , is roughly constant after running in. For more details, see Appendix B. Typically, it is assumed that the wear rate, just like the real contact area, is independent of the apparent contact area In elastic contact solutions, the real contact area scales linearly with the inverse of the RMS of slopes Another surprising property is that the wear rates do not change between two values of the RMS of heights h RMS tested by us (see Appendix E). For an elastic contact solution this would be unexpected, since the RMS of heights also influences the RMS of slopes and thus the contact solution. In our case, it seems that the nature of the sliding model combined with the saturated-pressure contact solution cancels any influence of h RMS , at least in a certain range of h RMS and F N . This can be rationalized by first taking into account that sharper peaks also increase the local pressure and thereby provide the necessary energy to flatten them, as well as the fact that the wear rates in our model depend more strongly on the number of contact junctions, which is likely not affected as strongly by h RMS . Further study is necessary to draw definite conclusions. We used the surfaces described in section 2 as input to our sliding model with identical variations of material parameters. The results are shown in Fig. First, we kept the material hardness constant and varied the fracture energy G (Fig. Second, by keeping the fracture energy constant and varying the material strength τ , we can observe the effects of simultaneously changing the contact solution-which is a function of the indentation hardness p ∝ τ -and the critical length scale d * ∝ τ -2 (Fig. Finally, by keeping d * approximately constant and varying τ and G together (Fig. It is also instructive to look at the number of wear particles, or rather the rate at which they are emitted over a given sliding distance: dN * + /ds. This is shown in Fig. Experiments often exhibit wear coefficients at least one or two orders of magnitude below the present results In terms of the surface geometries, we used a side length of L K = 200 μm (roughly the apparent contact area of the experiment, although their contact area is an ellipse due to Hertzian contact); H = 0.7, λ l = L K /512 = 0.39 μm, and λ u = L K /8 = 25 μm. As such, d * lies in between λ l and λ u , keeping the computational demands (discretization) reasonable. The RMS of heights was chosen to be the steady-state value of the wear experiment (see Table The results are plotted in Figs. completeness's sake in Appendix F. Apart from this, Fig. Due to the computational demands, the present model is relatively simple. It is clear that a saturatedpressure contact solution is not as satisfactory as a more realistic von Mises plasticity There are also several physical processes that are not explicitly included. First, a reduced adhesion between the surfaces, either due to surface contamination or lubrication, is known to modify d * Despite all of this, a major advantage of the current work is the simplicity of Eq. 4. The main complication is to provide a reliable estimate of N * + or dN * + /ds. If a closed form solution could be obtained, the computational demand would be significantly reduced and the model could be widely and cheaply tested and applied. We developed a wear model based on a combination of a simple elastoplastic contact solution algorithm, an evolution of the contact interface through a sliding process, and a critical length scale criterion for wear particle formation. The model contains no fit parameters and yields at least qualitatively reasonable results. We find that the critical length scale d * , i.e., the minimum size a contact needs to have to detach and form a wear particle, is a necessary ingredient in this model: It defines not only a minimum wear particle size, but rather a typical wear particle size. Often, this leads to materials with larger d * wearing more, which are materials that are soft but tough (see Eq. 2), thereby reconciling the concept of the critical length scale with Archard's wear law. For smaller loads increased toughness can suppress wear particle formation since no large enough contact junction forms, making tough materials more wear resistant in some load ranges. The statistical distribution of contact junctions that form during sliding is thus also a relevant parameter. It remains to be seen if the behaviors at different load ranges can be related to experiments. Nevertheless, an Archard-like wear behavior is approximately recovered and the qualitative agreement with an experimental work is promising. However, the present comparison is not quantitatively satisfying, since we can only compare to rolling wear, while we intrinsically model sliding wear, for which we could not find sufficient data. It is our hope that such modeling inspires more detailed dry, adhesive wear experiments, which report simultaneously the necessary material parameters, surface roughness description after running in, and resulting wear rates. Preferably the work would be performed over large load ranges in order to evaluate and improve models such as the one presented in the present paper. In order to verify that the discretization errors are sufficiently small, we ran simulations with a ratio λ l /∆x = 16 as used in the results in this paper, as well as λ l /∆x = 32, i.e., a two times finer discretization. All test simulations, presented in Fig. In order to study the behavior of our model as a function of the apparent contact area, we also produced five pairs of surfaces with a side length of L 1 = 0.5 L (we will not normalize material properties and results to L 1 , but stay with L as a length unit for easier comparison). Otherwise, all surface and material parameters were the same as for the surfaces with side length L: H = 0.7, λ l = L/256 = L 1 /128, λ u = L/16 = L 1 /8, and h RMS = 0.005 L, as well as material properties of ν = 0.3, τ = 0.010 E, and G = 0.50 • 10 -6 EL. Figure C.9(a) shows that the wear rates are indeed comparable up to normal loads of F N ≈ 0.5 • 10 -3 EL 2 . At higher loads, the larger surface continues a roughly linear increase of wear rate with load, while the wear rate of the smaller surface breaks down. Since the wear rate depends on the number of junctions growing to the critical size, we also looked at the average number of contact junctions as a function of load (Fig. Note that we chose the larger surface to obtain the results in the main text since it can sustain a larger range of loads. Because we originally started our investigations with the smaller surface, though, it was used for the verification studies in the appendices unless otherwise noted. simulations, see Fig. Video 2: The same as Video 1, but with a normal load of F N = 0.5 • 10 -3 EL 2 . Due to the merging of contact junctions, the wear rate is signi cantly lower than at smaller normal loads, indicating the limits of the model for high loads and small surfaces. Filename: video2-load_500e-6.mp4. We tested several, uniform values of δs for the whole sliding distance, but found that changes in slope, i.e., wear rate, due to large steps occur quickly. Increasing the step size only in the running-in phase did not however influence the slope after running in up to a running-in step size corresponding to 16 pixels. We thus settled on the present values as sufficient safety margins, while still accelarating the simulations significantly.