Topological superconductors (TSCs) are correlated quantum states with simultaneous off-diagonal long-range order and nontrivial topological invariants. They produce gapless or zero energy boundary excitations, including Majorana zero modes and chiral Majorana edge states with topologically protected phase coherence essential for fault-tolerant quantum computing. Candidate TSCs are very rare in nature. Here, we propose a novel route toward emergent quasi-one-dimensional (1D) TSCs in naturally embedded quantum structures such as atomic line defects in unconventional spin-singlet s-wave and d-wave superconductors. We show that inversion symmetry breaking and charge transfer due to the missing atoms lead to the occupation of incipient impurity bands and mixed parity spin singlet and triplet Cooper pairing of neighboring electrons traversing the line defect. Nontrivial topological invariants arise and occupy a large part of the parameter space, including the time reversal symmetry breaking Zeeman coupling due to applied magnetic field or defect-induced magnetism, creating TSCs in different topological classes with robust Majorana zero modes at both ends of the line defect. Beyond providing a novel mechanism for the recent discovery of zero-energy bound states at both ends of an atomic line defect in monolayer Fe(Te,Se) superconductors, the findings pave the way for new material realizations of the simplest and most robust 1D TSCs using embedded quantum structures in unconventional superconductors with large pairing energy gaps and high transition temperatures. Superfluid and superconductors are fundamental quantum states exhibiting off-diagonal long-range order We report here that quasi-1D TSCs of mixed-parity in multiple topological classes can emerge in naturally embedded * Electronic address: jiangkun@iphy.ac.cn † Electronic address: wangzi@bc.edu quantum structures, such as an atomic line defect, in unconventional spin-singlet superconductors with high transition temperature (T c ) and large pairing energy gaps. The idea was motivated by the recent experimental discovery It is important to note that such a quantum structure is very different from the usual crystallography line defects which correspond to edge dislocations or screw dislocations described by the Burgers vectors. The atomic line defects we study here are lines made of point-like defects such as atomic vacancies or adatoms. It is sometimes referred to as the Shockley line defect for its connection to the original work of Shockley on the surface states due to band inversion Because of these unique properties of the embedded quantum structure, the coupling of the RALD to the bulk unconventional superconductor can be described microscopically by the coherent processes of hopping, pairing, and spin-orbit coupling, leading to the induced quasi-1D mixed-parity pairing states on the RALD in a systematic and controllable manner. This overcomes the difficulties associated with achieving proximity effect coupling to short coherence length unconventional superconductors using nanowires We find that the broken inversion symmetry causes mixed parity pairing We also study the RALD embedded in unconventional dwave superconductors such as the high-T c cuprates. In this case, the d x 2 -y 2 pairing order parameter is odd under the mirror reflection. We find that the d-vector of the spin-triplet pairing developed on the impurity bands depends on the direction of the line defect with respect to the nodal line of the bulk d-wave superconductor. Remarkably, when the line defect is embedded along the nodal direction, the induced pairing state is a purely parity-odd and mirror-odd spin-triplet SC state. We show that the resulting TSC is described by two time-reversal partners in class D The remaining paper is organized as follows. In section II, we present physical discussions of our findings for the embedded RALD in 2D unconventional s-wave and d-wave superconductors in terms of simplified 1D effective models. The phase diagram, the topological properties such as the topological invariants and the classification of the TSC, as well as the nature of the zero-energy boundary states will be studied. We then present the 2D model describing the impurity bands along the RALD and its couplings to the bulk superconductor in section III, and discuss the results obtained directly from the 2D unconventional superconductors with the embedded quantum structure. The microscopic realizations, the parameter space, as well as the novelties of the RALD platform will be discussed for both s-wave and d-wave superconductors. In section IV, the effects of time-reversal symmetry breaking by a vector Zeeman field will be discussed. Summary and outlook will be given in section V. While the microscopic realizations will be derived from the 2D theory later, the general form of the idealized effective 1D model can be written down based on symmetry considerations. For simplicity, we consider a single occupied impurity band ε L (k) for the quasiparticles f kσ traversing the line defect, where k denotes the 1D momentum and σ the spin. In the Nambu basis where is the normal state Hamiltonian and σ i are the Pauli matrices acting in the spin sector. Here, α R is the Rashba SOC generated by the broken inversion symmetry, and α D the Dresselhaus SOC reflecting the possible broken mirror symmetry. When α D = 0, the RALD is a mirror line, unless the mirror symmetry is spontaneously broken by the off-diagonal Cooper pairing ∆(k) in Eq. ( where ∆ s (k) = ∆ s (-k) denotes the spin-singlet pairing, while d(-k) = -d(k) is the d-vector describing the spin-triplet pairing components Note that the odd-parity d-vector emerges as an intrinsic spin-triplet pairing between the neighboring electrons occupying the impurity bands produced by the embedded RALD. It does not arise in Rashba nanowires in proximity to s-wave superconductors A. 1D model for RALD with d y (k) spin-triplet pairing For a RALD embedded in an unconventional s-wave SC, we find that the d-vector points along the y-direction, i.e. d(k) = d y (k)ŷ and d(k) • σ = d y (k)σ y . This corresponds to the even combination of odd-parity, equal spin pairing with d y (k) = -i 2 (∆ ↑↑ + ∆ ↓↓ ). The effective 1D model is therefore, where the triplet pairing is expressed as ∆ t (k) = -d y (k). The impurity band ε L (k) splits into two Rashba bands by α R and α D with separated pairs of Fermi points at ±k + and ±k -as shown schematically in Fig. In the absence of the Dresselhaus SOC, i.e. for α D = 0, the 1D model has a mirror symmetry M y = -iτ 0 σ y and [H 1D (k), M y ] = 0. The embedded RALD thus corresponds to a mirror line in the bulk superconductor, and the effective 1D model describes a topological mirror superconductor where H ± A are the Hamiltonian in the subspaces with mirror eigenvalues ±i, Since the mirror operator M y commutes with the particle-hole operator Θ, i.e. [M y , Θ] = 0, there is no particle-hole symmetry within each subspace When the mirror symmetry about the embedded RALD is broken, the effective 1D model must acquire a nonzero Dresselhaus SOC, i.e. α D 0. An example is the atomic line defect observed in monolayer Fe(Te,Se) For α D 0 and however small, the Hamiltonian H 1D cannot be diagonalized into reducible mirror eigen blocks. The time-reversal T , particle-hole Θ, and the chiral symmetry C together put the RALD in the class DIII of time-reversal invariant (TRI) superconductors characterized by a topological Z 2 invariant (N). A nontrivial N corresponds a TRI 1D TSC The topological invariant N can be obtained from the timereversed pairing function δ nk = n, k|T ∆ † k |n, k for each band n We next obtain the topological phase diagram by calculating the nontrivial topological Z 2 invariant N for the effective 1D model. For simplicity, we consider ε L (k) = -2t cos kμ and nearest neighbor pairing gap functions ∆ s (k) = 2∆ s cos k and ∆ t (k) = 2∆ p sin k. The onsite pairing is ignored since it is suppressed in unconventional superconductors due to the strong local Coulomb repulsion. Evaluating the topological invariant, we obtain Calculating N results in the topological phase diagram shown in Fig. Studying an embedded 1D quantum structure in a 2D dwave SC, we find that the topological properties depend on its orientation relative to the nodal direction of the pairing gap function. A RALD created along the anti-nodal direction still represents a mirror line, and the results are qualitatively similar to the s-wave case discussed above. However, when the atomic line defect is embedded along the nodal lines denoted as the x-direction, the d-wave pairing potential is odd under the mirror reflection M y . Let us refer to this configuration as a nodal-RALD. Intriguingly, the microscopic couplings between the nodal-RALD and the bulk dwave SC produce an odd-parity spin-triplet pairing with the d-vector pointing along the x-direction, i.e. Moreover, the even parity spin-singlet pairing is forbidden by symmetry. Consequently, the effective 1D model in Eq. ( where the α D term is left out for simplicity. Since the triplet pairing part is odd under the M y -symmetry discussed above, i.e. it anticommutes with the mirror σ y -operation, H d 1D (k) is invariant under M - y = -iτ z σ y , and can therefore be blockdiagonalized in the eigenbasis of M - y . Specifically, we find that the unitary transformation, The Hamiltonians H ± D in the mirror M - y subspaces that mix the spin and particle-hole sectors are given by where τ i continues to operate in the particle-hole sector in the transformed basis. Note that since {M - y , Θ} = 0, H ± D in each subspace maintains the particle-hole symmetry , where s i denotes the Pauli matrices acting in the mirror subspace, is also blockdiagonal. In contrast, the time-reversal operator transforms as x K, which is not block-diagonal and does not preserve time-reversal symmetry in each block. As a result, the effective 1D model is in the topological class The energy dispersions of Eq. ( For |∆ p | > |α R |, the spectrum is fully gapped and the topological invariant is nontrivial with N D = -1 when |μ| < 2t, giving rise to a TRI topological mirror superconductor marked by the blue region in the phase diagram shown in Fig. Increasing the magnitude of the chemical potential μ causes a gap closing transition at |μ| = 2t and turns the TSC into a trivial strong pairing superconductor for |μ| > 2t. Remarkably, the TSC becomes gapless in the region which correspond to two curved boundary lines to gapped topological trivial SC phase as illustrated in Fig. We next go beyond the effective 1D model and show that this mechanism applies directly to a 2D unconventional swave or d-wave superconductor embedded with a RALD quantum structure. The monolayer FeTe 1-x Se x , where the electronic structure as a function of x has been studied by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy We use the spinors c i = (c i↑ , c i↓ ) T for the electronic states in the bulk and f i = ( f i↑ , f i↓ ) T for those on the RALD. The 2D model Hamiltonian can be written as where i, j run over the 2D lattice of the bulk superconductor except at the line defect. We include the 1st and 2nd nearest neighbor hopping t i j and spin-singlet pairing ∆ i j with amplitudes t 1,2 and ∆ 1,2 , respectively, as depicted in Fig. where μ d , t ′ 2 , and ∆ ′ 2 are the local potential, the nearest neighbor hopping, and spin-singlet pairing marked in Fig. The embedded RALD couples to the bulk superconductor according to where, in addition to the couplings by the nearest and second nearest neighbor hopping and pairing terms that appeared in H c (Eq. 13), the nearest neighbor Rashba SOC α 1 is also included as illustrated in Fig. We first study the case of s-wave SCs, where ∆ 1,2 are uniform among the nearest and second nearest neighbors, respectively. It is straightforward to show that integrating out the bulk states (c and c † ) produces essentially the effective 1D model in Eq. ( is the equaltime correlator of the bulk states with ε d = μ d -μ 0 the energy separation between the impurity band and the Fermi level. Processes of this type, as depicted in Figs. for the nearest neighbor p-wave and further neighbor odd-parity pairing terms involving higher order lattice harmonics. The coherent generation of the odd-parity component in the off-diagonal long-range order is key to produce a robust nontrivial topological invariant to support the TSC. We now present results directly obtained from diagonalizing the 2D Hamiltonian H 2D in Eqs. . Consider first the case α 1 = 0, where even parity pairing dominates along the RALD. The normal state energy dispersions (Fig. A crucial part of the topological phase diagram in Fig. ient spin-triplet pairing therefore points in the y-direction, as described by Eq. ( In general cases relevant to real materials such as Fe(Te,Se), the SC state developed in the RALD with nonzero α 1 , t 1,2 , and ∆ 1,2 is in the regime of mixed parity. We find that the TRI quasi-1D TSC emerges over a wide region in the phase space. Fig. One important advantage for materializing the quasi-1D TSC with an intrinsic quantum structure embedded in unconventional superconductors is that the incipient TSC and the MZMs can be protected by a large SC gap and operate at higher temperatures. For example, the perturbation analysis discussed above indicates that the nearest-neighbor s-wave and p-wave pairing gaps follow ∆ s ∼ t 1 ∆ 1 /ε d and ∆ p ∼ α 1 ∆ 1 /ε d . Since both pairing gaps scale with the bulk SC gap ∆ 1 , the topological gap along the line defect should be proportional to the SC gap of the unconventional superconductor. However, because the induced pairing functions along the line defect are complicated and involve further neighbors in both the even and odd parity channels (Fig. SOC is in the range of the parameters used in Fig. To explore the robustness of the quasi-1D TSC with Majorana zero-energy end states, we have also studied non-straight RALDs composed of continuous zigzag segments embedded in the unconventional s-wave superconductor as shown in Figs. Due to the electron-electron correlations, there is another important class of unconventional superconductors, the dwave superconductors, discovered in the high-T c cuprates and certain heavy-fermion superconductors. In this section, we study embedded 1D quantum structures such as the RALD in unconventional d-wave superconductors on the 2D square lattice. This system continues to be described by the Hamiltonian H 2D given in Eqs. Because the d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing order parameter changes signs under the C 4 lattice rotation, the nature of the incipient TSC depends intriguingly on the direction of the line defect with respect to the nodal line of the bulk d-wave superconductor. We thus discuss these cases separately. Consider the line defect embedded along the x direction, which is the antinodal direction of the nearest neighbor dwave pairing with ∆ x = -∆ y = ∆ 1 , as shown in Fig. The microscopic mechanism for generating the quasi-1D SC state by the coherent couplings of the line defect to the bulk superconductor is similar to the s-wave case discussed above and gives rise to the important odd-parity, spin triplet pairing component. For the RALD aligned in the antinodal direction, it can be seen from Fig. The more intriguing case is when the quantum structure is embedded along the nodal direction of the bulk d-wave superconductor. Such a RALD aligned with the (1, 1) direction is depicted in Fig. Carrying out the 2D calculations, we find that the only incipient pairing induced coherently on the impurity bands is the equal-spin triplet pairing order parameter P k = 1 √ 2 (iσ 0σ z )P o (k). The minus sign indicates that the d-vector of the spin-triplet pairing is different from that in the RALD embedded in s-wave or along the antinodal direction in d-wave superconductors. The d-vector is thus given by 1 √ 2 (1, 1), pointing along the direction of the RALD. If we rotate the coordi- , and α 2 = 0. nates so that the RALD aligns with the x-direction, the triplet pairing d-vector is then in the x-direction, i.e. d(k) • σ = d x (k)σ x , giving rise to the odd-combination of the equal spin pairing described by the effective 1D model in Eq. ( The discussions thus far have focused on the situation with time-reversal symmetry. In this section, we study the response of the TSC developed in the RALD along the x-direction to general time-reversal symmetry breaking Zeeman fields, The reason is two-fold. First, it is possible that the line of missing atoms causes incipient local magnetic order in the neighboring atoms. For example, in the monolayer Fe(Te,Se), the line of missing Te/Se atoms may cause the Fe atoms underneath to become magnetic. The current experiments have not seen evidence for this to happen, but more experiments are necessary A. RALD embedded in s-wave superconductors Mirror symmetric RALD -We first study the case where the system has perfect mirror symmetry, so that the Dresselhaus SOC vanishes, i.e. α D = 0. Any h 0 in Eq. ( Mirror symmetry breaking RALD -When mirror symmetry is broken, e.g. by a nonzero Dresselhaus SOC α D 0 in Eq. ( Next, we study the Zeeman field response of the TSC developed in the nodal-RALD embedded in unconventional dwave superconductors. In this case, the emergent SC state is described by the mirror-odd, purely spin-triplet pairing with the d-vector pointing along the line defect given in Eq. ( We presented a new route for materializing quasi-1D topological superconductors using naturally embedded quantum structures, such as the Rashba atomic line defects, in spinsinglet unconventional superconductors. The advantage of this platform, besides the high transition temperature and large pairing energy gap, is that the topological superconductivity develops from the coherent quantum processes via the microscopic couplings between the incipient impurity bands and the bulk superconductor. This avoids relying on proximityeffect induced superconductivity that is difficult to achieve and hard to control in unconventional superconductors, and at the same time, brings out the crystalline symmetry for the emergent TSCs to be reckoned with. As a result, several quasi-1D TSCs in distinct topological classes with different zero-energy boundary states can be realized, all involving the odd-parity, spin-triplet pairing order parameter with the d-vector microscopically determined by direct calculations in the bulk superconductor with the embedded quantum structure. For a mirror-line RALD embedded in s-wave superconductors, a quasi-1D mirror TSC in class AIII arises with zeroenergy fermion end states. When the mirror symmetry is broken, the TRI quasi-1D TSC is in class DIII characterized by a nontrivial Z 2 invariant, with a Kramers doublet of MZMs localized at each end. The two cases can be distinguished by their different responses to the Zeeman field due to an external magnetic field or an incipient magnetic order. While a nonzero Zeeman field in any direction destroys the mirrorbroken, time-reversal symmetry protected TSC in class DIII together with the zero-energy bound states, a Zeeman coupling in the plane spanned by the line defect and the normal direction (xz-plane) puts the mirror-line TSC in class BIII with MZMs end states characterized by a nontrivial topological Z invariant. Yet another interesting quasi-1D topological crystalline superconductor in class D emerges when a RALD is embedded in a d-wave superconductor along the nodal direction of the d-wave gap function. Two pairs of mirror doublet of MZMs emerge at both ends of the line defect, which remain stable under a Zeeman field aligned in the y-direction, but are destroyed together with the TSC when the Zeeman field has a nonzero component in the xz-plane. This new mechanism for the emergent quasi-1D TSC provides a possible explanation for the zero-energy bound states discovered at the ends of the atomic line defects in monolayer Fe(Te,Se) high-T c superconductors. However, the nature of the zero-energy end states, i.e. MZMs versus fermion zero-energy bound states, depends on whether the atomic line defect breaks the mirror symmetry, as discussed above. Although we argued that the substitutional Te/Se alloying breaks the mirror symmetry, whether these zero-energy end states are indeed MZMs requires further experimental investigation. Their responses to an applied magnetic field discussed here offer a concrete and amenable experimental test. There are a few key ingredients that enable this mechanism for the emergent TSCs in embedded quantum structures. At the very basic level, it requires the occupation of an incipient impurity band in the presence of a large Rashba SOC associated with the local inversion symmetry breaking. This is sufficient for producing a quasi-1D SC state of mixed parity by the microscopic couplings of the impurity band states to the bulk spin-singlet unconventional superconductor, without detailed requirements on the shape and length of the 1D quantum structure. The occupation of the impurity band is determined by the local electrostatic environment and plays an important role. The most robust quasi-1D TSC emerges when the impurity band is around half-filling, where the induced spin-triplet pairing dominates over the singlet pairing near the Fermi level and supports a nontrivial topological invariant along the quantum structure. The atomic line defect of Te/Se vacancies in monolayer Fe(Te,Se) films turns out to contain these essential ingredients with an excess of close to one-electron per unit cell occupying an incipient impurity band under a strong Rashba SOC. We note that Teo and Kane have studied the defect states such as crystalline dislocations in superconductors belonging to different topological classes In addition to the naturally developed atomic line defects during growth, the embedded quantum structures can be created and/or manipulated post-growth by atomic defect engineering using modern techniques such as atomic force microscope Eq. (A15) then leads two nontrivial winding numbers Z ± = 1 in the two mirror eigen spaces, guaranteeing the presence of a pair of zero-energy bound states at each end of the mirror-line RALD. As discussed in the main text, when the mirror-line RALD described by Eq. ( The upper off-diagonal block in Eq. (A14) becomes and its determinant is given by The topological invariant Z can be obtained by calculating the winding number using Eq. (A15), which evolves from Z = 2 to Z = 1 with increasing Zeeman field and eventually becomes trivial with Z = 0 for large enough Zeeman field. Following the discussion in the main text, there exists a hidden chiral symmetry C associated with the anomalous time reversal reversal operator T obeying T 2 = +1 in the 1D model, despite the broken TRI by h z 0. Thus for h z not large enough to satisfy Eq. (A11) and the system has a trivial invariant for class D, but the RALD remains a TSC in class BDI characterized by an integer Z topological invariant √ 2 for a; and 54√ 2, √ 2, 30 √ 2, √ 2, 30 √ 2, √ 2, 30 √ 2, √2, and 105 √ 2 for c. b and d, The corresponding LDOS at both ends of the non-straight line defects, showing robust zero-bias peaks due to the zero-energy end states. The parameters used are: μ 0 =-4.0, μ d =-0.8, t ′ 2 = 0.1, t 1 = 0.1, ∆ 1 = 0.1, ∆ 2 = ∆ ′ 2 = 0, α 1 =0.5, and α 2 = 0.