An important objective of designing lithium-ion rechargeable battery cells is to maximize their rate performance without compromising the energy density, which is mainly achieved through computationally expensive numerical simulations at present. Here we present a simple analytical model for predicting the rate performance of battery cells limited by electrolyte transport without any fitting parameters. It exhibits very good agreement with simulations over a wide range of discharge rate and electrode thickness and offers a speedup of >10 5 times . The optimal electrode properties predicted by the model are of less than 10% difference from simulation results, suggesting it as a attractive computational tool for the cell-level battery architecture design. The model also offers important insights on ways to improve the rate performance of thick electrodes, including avoiding electrode materials (e.g. LiFePO 4 , Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 ) whose open-circuit potentials are insensitive to the state of charge and utilizing lithium metal anode to synergistically accelerate electrolyte transport within thick cathodes. Nearly thirty years after the debut of commercial rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), LIBs was recognized by the 2019 Nobel Prize in Chemistry as a key energy storage technology for wide-ranging applications from portable devices, electrical vehicles to grid load balancing. In the drive towards developing better batteries with lower costs, there exists a perpetual trade-off between the energy and power densities. As illustrated by the well-known Ragone plot The current standard approach to predicting the rate performance of battery cells and optimizing their structures is numerical simulations In contrast to P2D simulations, (semi-)empirical battery models such as equivalent-circuit models Analytical models are often derived by simplifying the P2D model for situation where one kinetic process is much more sluggish than the others and dominates the (dis)charge behavior. Examples include the single-particle model Compelling evidence shows that the rate performance of LIBs based on today's commercial electrode materials and liquid electrolytes is mainly limited by electrolyte transport In this work, we present a quantitative analytical model for predicting the (dis)charge behavior of battery cells limited by electrolyte transport. We developed the model by decoupling the governing equations of the porous electrode theory by making reasonable assumptions of the electrolyte transport and electrode reaction behavior generalized from P2D simulations. The model gives analytical expressions of the galvanostatic discharge capacity of both half and full cells. Without any fitting parameters, the model exhibits very good agreement with P2D simulations over a wide range of electrode thickness and discharge rate, which can be applied to battery cell optimization with >10 5 -fold speedup compared to P2D simulations. Furthermore, simple scaling relations derived from the model offer valuable insights on the dependence of discharge performance on the electrode properties, including: i) electrode materials that exhibit a strong SOC dependence of open-circuit potentials such as NMC and graphite have intrinsically better rate performance than those that do not (e.g. LiFePO 4 and Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 ) in the electrolytetransport-limited regime and are preferred for thick electrode applications, and ii) thick cathodes have significantly better rate capability when paired with Li metal than conventional intercalation anodes (e.g. graphite or Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 ), which points to a clear synergy between the development of the Li metal anode and the wider adoption of thick-electrode batteries. The analytical model is developed based on two key observations from P2D simulations, i.e. i) electrolyte transport can attain a (pseudo-)steady state during discharge, which allows the timedependent simulations to be reduced to a stationary problem, and ii) the electrode reaction flux distribution can be categorized into two types of distinct behavior exhibited by common electrode materials. The first type of electrode materials include the mainstream layered oxide cathodes NMC and NCA, which are characterized by a strong dependence of their equilibrium (or open-circuit) potentials U eq on SOC. The second type of electrode compounds, exemplified by LiFePO 4 (LFP) and Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 (LTO), feature SOC-independent U eq due to prominent first-order phase transition(s) upon (dis)charging. Below we use representative P2D simulations to elucidate these two types of discharging behavior and motivate the simplifying assumptions employed in the analytical model. Type 1: "Uniform-reaction" electrodes. Figure ii) Electrode reaction flux is zero in the salt DZ and has a uniform value in the salt PZ. iii) Discharging ends when electrode particles in PZ are fully discharged. We emphasize that here "uniform reaction" implies a homogeneous reaction flux within PZ instead of the whole electrode. Doyle and Newman (DN) previously developed an analytical model that also assumes a uniform reaction distribution Type 2: "Moving-zone-reaction" electrodes. Figure The MZR behavior is analogous to the reaction zone model proposed by Tiedemann and Newman for ohmically limited electrodes j in is controlled by the surface overpotential η ≡ Φ L -Φ S + U eq (SOC s ) , where SOC s is the local SOC at the particle surface. Suppose that SOC is uniform at the beginning of discharge. The ionic / electronic resistances within a cell result in spatially varied Φ L -Φ S and initially nonuniform j in as illustrated in Figure The reaction behavior of anode in a full cell can also be described as the UR or MZR type. The discharge simulations of NMC/LTO and LFP/LTO full cells are presented in Figure The simplified UR and MZR behavior described in the last section allows for analytical predictions of discharge performance. Because the width of salt PZ, or the penetration depth L PZ , is central to the rate performance of the electrolyte-limited discharge process, we set to obtain an analytical expression of L PZ as a function of discharge current, electrode, electrolyte and separator properties. We start from the mass balance and current continuity equations of a binary electrolyte in the porous electrode theory where subscript i represents cathode (i = cat) or separator (i = sep). With the assumption of (pseudo-)steady-state electrolyte transport, Eq. 2 becomes: in which a constant t + and homogeneous in-plane c are assumed. Inside PZ, j in is equal to I/Fa cat L PZ for UR and 0 for MZR electrodes, respectively. Since c is 0 in DZ, Eq. 4 only needs to be solved within PZ and separator with the following boundary conditions at the PZ/DZ interface, Setting x = 0 at the cathode/current-collector interface and treating D amb as constant, the solution to Eqs. 4-6 is given by For half cells, the unknown L PZ in the solution is determined by substituting Eq. 7 and 8 into the salt conservation equation The obtained L PZ expressions for half cells with UR and MZR cathodes are listed in Eqs. 10 and 11, respectively. To derive L PZ for full cells, Eq. 4 needs to be extended to the anode region. Although Gr anode exhibits the hybrid reaction behavior, it develops a homogeneous reaction distribution at the later discharging stage (Figure UR-cathode/Li half cell: MZR-cathode/Li half cell: UR-cathode/Gr full cell: MZR-cathode/Gr full cell: The normalized discharge capacity DoD f can be estimated by the ratio of L PZ to the cathode thickness L cat . When L PZ > L cat , DoD f should be set to 1 since this means that electrolyte transport does not limits the discharge capacity at all. The model may give negative L PZ for full cells with large electrode thickness and discharge rates, in which case DoD f = 0 is assigned. Therefore, In addition to predicting the discharge capacity, the model can also reveal other useful quantities of the discharge process such as the potential drops across the electrodes and separator and the overall energy efficiency, which can be calculated from the electrolyte concentration profiles given by Eqs. 7 and 8 together with Eqs. S1 and S2 in SI. With minor modification, the model is also applicable to the galvanostatic charging process limited by electrolyte transport. In practical applications, however, charging usually needs to be terminated before salt depletion occurs to prevent lithium plating on anode particle surface, which is a major concern for capacity fading. In this case, our model will give less conservative predictions. In this section, we examine how well the derived analytical model approximates P2D simulations. Figure With additional approximations, the expressions of L PZ shown in Eqs. 10-13 can be further simplified to provide a less accurate but more revealing scaling description of the relation between L PZ and various cell properties and discharge rate. A simpler expression of L PZ for half cells can be obtained by neglecting the separator thickness (L sep = 0) in Eqs. 10 and 11: where γ h = 6 or 2 for UR or MZR cathodes, respectively. To simplify the expression of L PZ for full cells with Gr anode, we start from the solution of c(x) (Eqs. 7 and 8), from which one can write down: where c cat/sep is the salt concentration at the cathode/separator interface, and λ = 2 or 1 for UR-or MZR-type cathodes, respectively. Eq. 16 is in fact valid for both full and half cells. Interestingly, P2D simulations (Figure where γ f = 2 or 12/11 for UR or MZR cathodes, respectively. We note that a similar expression of the electrolyte penetration depth as Eq. 17 is given by Gallagher et al. in Ref. 5, in which the proportionality factor γ f is numerically determined to be ~1.8 by fitting to P2D simulations of NCA/Gr full cells. Since NCA is a UR-type electrode, our model naturally explains this result and further the generality of the γ f value is not limited to NCA alone. In Supplementary Note S2, we show that Eq. 17 is also applicable to full cells with LTO anode with different γ f values: γ f = 12/7 (UR) or 1 (MZR). Valuable insights can be obtained from the simple scaling relations given in Eqs. 15 and 17. First, they show that UR-type cathodes (e.g. NMC, NCA) with their larger γ h / γ f values have inherently better rate capability than MZR-type cathodes like LFP in the electrolyte-transportlimited regime. This is because the presence of a uniform reaction flux in UR-type cathodes causes the salt concentration to decrease more slowly with the distance to separator, which results in a larger penetration depth. At the same cathode thickness and C rate, NMC's DoD f is 1.7-2 times of LFP in both half and full cells. The reaction behavior of the anode has a similar effect on the discharge performance, where LTO has a smaller γ f than Gr. In addition to the poorer rate performance, MZR-type electrodes are subject to high local reaction flux during (dis)charging, which makes them prone to excessive stress concentration and localized heat generation that will accelerate battery degradation. Therefore, UR-type electrode materials are more advantageous than MZR-type electrodes in thick electrode applications. Second, Eqs. 15 and 17 reveal that half cells have intrinsically better rate capability than full cells, with L PZ / L cat scaling with (IL cat ) -1/2 or (CL cat 2 ) -1/2 in the former vs (IL cat ) -1 or (CL cat 2 ) -1 in the latter. The different scaling relations suggest that DoD f decays more rapidly with L cat and I (or C rate) in full cells for identical cathodes. This is clearly seen in P2D simulations (Figure Because L sep = 0 is assumed in Eqs. 15 and 17, the simple scaling relations tend to overestimate L PZ since a separator of finite thickness will further slow down electrolyte transport. The scaling exponents predicted by Eqs. 15 and 17, n = -1/2 for hall cells and -1 for full cells, hence represent an upper limit of the actual exponent values. This is illustrated in Figure It shows that n is very close to -1/2 (or -1) in half (or full) cells near DoD f = 1 but decreases as DoD f (or L PZ /L cat ) is reduced. Eqs. 15 and 17 are thus most accurate when DoD f is relatively high or salt depletion is not severe. Figure 18) The validity of Eq. 18 is supported by existing experimental works The qualitative difference in the discharge characteristics of half vs full cells has significant practical implications. As a common practice, the rate capability of electrodes is often tested in half cells for convenience. However, our finding cautions that this approach may significantly overestimate the electrode performance in full-cell applications when discharge is kinetically limited by electrolyte transport. From another perspective, a half cell is essentially a cathode paired with a Li metal anode. Replacing conventional anodes with Li metal thus not only increases the specific/volumetric anode capacity Despite the difference, Eq. 18 suggests that L cat ∝ C -1/2 in both half and full cells at a fixed DoD f . In other words, cathode thickness should decrease parabolically with the C rate, or conversely C should decrease quadratically with L cat , to maintain the same level of capacity utilization. This prediction explains a number of experimental observations The analytical model derived in this work provides a fast and convenient computational tool for battery cell optimization. As a demonstration, we apply it to search for the optimal electrode porosity and thickness that maximize the specific capacity of NMC/Gr full cells and NMC half cells at a given discharge rate. In the computation, L cat and ε cat are parameters subject to optimization, L an is fixed at 1.15L cat and ε an is correlated to ε cat to give a constant anode/cathode capacity ratio of 1.18. Other parameters are the same as in the P2D simulations reported above. The properties of various cell components used in the calculation of the specific capacity are given in Table Figure While the analytical model is capable of making reliable predictions, it offers enormous computational saving over P2D simulations. For simulations performed in this work, it took an average of 236 s to complete a discharge simulation in COMSOL run on a workstation (DELL Precision 5820 with Intel Xeon W-2155 processor and 128 GB memory). On the other hand, it requires only 300 ms to complete 10 6 evaluations of the model in MATLAB on a laptop (2.2 GHz Intel Core i5 processor, 8 GB RAM), which amounts to a speedup of 10 9 times per evaluation over P2D. Even considering the acceleration of P2D simulations via state-of-the-art techniques In conclusion, an analytically solvable model is developed in this work to predict the rate performance of battery cells controlled by electrolyte transport, which is the dominant kinetic limiting factor in battery (dis)charging. The model simplifies the governing equations of the porous electrode theory by assuming (pseudo-)steady-state electrolyte transport and two types of electrode reaction distributions (UR vs MZR), which apply to electrode materials with (e.g. NMC) and without (e.g. LFP) a strong SOC dependence of open-circuit potentials, respectively. We derive analytical expressions of the galvanostatic discharge capacity for different combinations of electrodes and cell configurations (Eqs. 10-13, Supplementary Table ii) Battery half cells (i.e. cathode/Li cells) have inherently better rate capability than their full cell counterparts in electrolyte-limited discharge process. Testing electrodes in the half cell form thus does not provide reliable indications of their performance in full cells. iii) Pairing thick cathodes with Li metal not only increases the anode's specific capacity but also synergistically improves the discharge performance of thick cathodes, which is a promising strategy to enable thick electrodes for high-power applications. The analytical model complements P2D simulations and provides an efficient computational tool for battery performance prediction, design and optimization. P2D Simulations. Detailed description of the P2D model can be found in numerous works in literature where a i = 3(1ε i ) / r i (i = cat or an). The effective ionic current density ! i and electronic current density ! i S are expressed as where subscript i = cat or an. The reaction flux on electrode particle surface j in obeys the Butler-Volmer equation (Eq. 1), in which the exchange current density i 0 is given by The reaction flux on the Li metal anode surface is similarly described. Solid-state diffusion of Li in electrodes at the particle scale is approximated as a radial diffusion process in spherical particles: Eq. 23 is coupled to mass transport in electrolyte through the boundary condition at the particle surface D S ∂c S ∂r r=r i = j in In full cell simulations, the anode/cathode capacity ratio is fixed at 1.18, which results in an anode/cathode thickness ratio of 1.15 (Gr/NMC), 0.95 (Gr/LFP), 1.43 (LTO/NMC) and 1.18 (LTO/LFP) when the electrode porosity values listed in Supplementary Table Final depth of discharge or normalized discharge capacity Because LTO exhibits MZR behavior, we assume that a penetration zone also exists near the separator inside the anode during discharge. All the anode particles within this zone are fully deintercalated, those outside the zone remain fully intercalated, and an infinitely sharp reaction flux is present at the boundary between these two regions but zero elsewhere. The width of the penetration zone in anode LPZ,an is correlated with the penetration depth LPZ in the cathode because of the conservation of Li in the solid phase: Initial salt concentration (mol•m -3 ) 1000 1+ ∂ln f ± / ∂ln c an (x -L cat -L sep -L an ) 2 + I(1-t + ) 456 2S3)The obtained expressions of LPZ are given in Eqs. 12 and 13 in the main text.II. Full cells with LTO anode