Four-wave-mixing-based quantum cascade laser frequency combs (QCL-FC) are a powerful photonic tool, driving a recent revolution in major molecular fingerprint regions, i.e. mid-and far-infrared domains. Their compact and frequency-agile design, together with their high optical power and spectral purity, promise to deliver an all-in-one source for the most challenging spectroscopic applications. Here, we demonstrate a metrological-grade hybrid dual comb spectrometer, combining the advantages of a THz QCL-FC with the accuracy and absolute frequency referencing provided by a free-standing, optically-rectified THz frequency comb. A proof-of-principle application to methanol molecular transitions is presented. The multi-heterodyne molecular spectra retrieved provide state-ofthe-art results in line-center determination, with the same accuracy levels of nowadays available molecular databases. The devised setup provides a solid platform for a new generation of THz spectrometers, paving the way to more refined and sophisticated systems exploiting full phase control of QCL-FCs, or Doppler-free spectroscopic schemes. High-precision molecular spectroscopy in the terahertz range of the electromagnetic spectrum (0.1-10 THz) has attracted, in the last decades, ubiquitous attention from the scientific community. Indeed, it promises to enable fundamental physics research (e.g. time variation of fundamental constants, 1,2 assessment of the electric dipole moment of the electron, In the frequency domain, a FC consists of a series of coherent and equally spaced lines, with a fixed phase relation, covering a broad spectrum. The coherence of the optical modes allows all the modes of a FC to be fully controlled in phase by only two parameters: repetition and carrier offset frequencies. The possibility of migrating FC sources, and therefore DCS setups, in the THz region has been initially allowed by down-converted frequency combs (DC-FCs), obtained by down-conversion of visible or near-IR pulses in photoconductive antennas Here, we demonstrate a hybrid approach to THz DCS, capable of merging the two main advantages of DC-FCs and QCL-FCs based dual-comb spectrometers, i.e. the accurate and absolute referencing of the retrieved molecular absorption frequency on one side, and the high sensitivity ensured by the high emitted power on the other. We believe that the proof-of-principle demonstration of this novel approach can finally unleash the full potential of THz DCS setups. Our spectrometer has been characterized and tested on molecular absorption profiles of methanol vapours, returning a state-of-the-art absolute accuracy of about 5•10 -8 on the measured transitions line center determination. The THz hybrid dual-comb spectrometer setup is based on multi-heterodyne down-conversion of a THz QCL-FC and a fully-stabilized optically rectified THz frequency comb (OR-FC), generated by means of a femtosecond telecom laser (Menlo Systems, FC1500) and a non-linear crystal waveguide. An example of the RF-FC spectrum acquired by the spectrum analyzer is presented in fig. The QCL-FC emitted frequencies can be simultaneously tuned by changing either the device driving current, its operational temperature, or, in case of active injection locking loop, by changing the local oscillator frequency fLO. This latter possibility does not add, at the moment, any improvement in terms of spectroscopic accuracy, but will be an interesting feature in the next future, as discussed in the next section. While performing these scans, we acquire both the direct absorption and the DCS signals. The former is acquired by means of a pyroelectric detector and, to this purpose, the QCL beam is first modulated by a chopper wheel (see fig Thanks to the frequency scale provided by the OR-FC, the RF frequencies of the HBN can be readily converted into absolute THz frequencies, as thoroughly explained in the Methods section. It is worth noticing that the proposed setup is also robust with respect to experimental instabilities (mechanical vibrations, current and temperature fluctuations). In fact, these are translated into frequency variations of the QCL-FC modes, that are taken into account thanks to the absolute frequency scale. In this work, the hybrid THz dual comb spectrometer has been tested on methanol vapours at low pressure, and the QCL-FC frequency scans are performed at a fixed heat sink temperature of 29.5 K, while the device current is tuned in a 15 mA current range, with steps of about 0.05 mA. Figure Thanks to the absolute frequency scale, the two methanol transitions have been identified as the (J, K) = (11, 11 → 12, 12), and the (J, K) = (12, 11 → 13, 12), where J and K are the quantum numbers identifying the total angular momentum and its projection on the molecule axis. From here on these transitions are reported as transitions T1 and T2, respectively. In order to allow comparison of the absolute center frequency with molecular databases, the self pressure shift of each transition has to be measured. For this reason the two molecular profiles were probed and acquired at different methanol gas pressure. Figure Finally, fig. We have devised a THz hybrid DCS setup capable of performing molecular multi-heterodyne spectroscopy with state-of-the-art accuracy, challenging existing molecular databases. The proof-of-principle demonstration of frequency scans over the wide spectral coverage of a a state of the art, high dynamic range QCL-FC, at this level of accuracy, can pave the way to a new generation of trace gas analyzers based on THz radiation. In fact, while the transitions probed in this work were probed by the same mode, it is easy to imagine an ad-hoc designed QCL-FC capable of simultaneously probing different transitions of a molecular gas, or even transitions of different molecular samples in a low-pressure gas mixture. The spectrometer, however, presents some limitations that can be overcome in the next future. The limited tunability of the modes of the QCL device with temperature/current scans, that in our case is of few hundreds MHz, can be more than enough to perform high-accuracy acquisitions on selected molecular transitions, but might be a limitation in the analysis of complex gas mixtures. For these challenging applications, our spectrometer can in principle be equipped with an array of slightly frequency detuned THz QCLs, as well as broader dynamic range devices, such as dispersion compensated lasers, The accuracy on retrieval of linecenter frequencies is limited by the signal to noise ratio of the spectroscopic acquisitions. This limitation can be readily overcome by performing acquisitions with a fully phase-locked QCL-FC. The absolute frequency of each and every QCL-FC emitted mode can be retrieved thanks to the absolute frequency scale provided by the phase stabilized OR-FC, as schematically depicted in fig. where M is the order of the OR-FC mode beating with the N th QCL-FC mode at higher or lower frequency, corresponding to different signs of the HBN frequency fb,N. As thoroughly explained in ref. This procedure has been carried out twice, while the QCL is close to resonance with transitions T1 and T2, respectively. The linear fits retrieving the order of the OR-FC mode beating with QCL-FC mode 11 are presented in fig. the order M of the OR-FC. Once the absolute frequency scale of the QCL-FC modes is calibrated, any variations in their frequencies, due to current or temperature tuning, as well as to experimental instabilities, is translated into exactly the same frequency variations of the corresponding HBN of the RF-FC. In this way it is possible to constantly track and monitor all the emitted QCL-FC frequencies simultaneously. 