Despite mounting evidence that materials imperfections are a major obstacle to practical applications of superconducting qubits, connections between microscopic material properties and qubit coherence are poorly understood. Here, we perform measurements of transmon qubit relaxation times T1 in parallel with spectroscopy and microscopy of the thin polycrystalline niobium films used in qubit fabrication. By comparing results for films deposited using three techniques, we reveal correlations between T1 and grain size, enhanced oxygen diffusion along grain boundaries, and the concentration of suboxides near the surface. Physical mechanisms connect these microscopic properties to residual surface resistance and T1 through losses arising from the grain boundaries and from defects in the suboxides. Further, experiments show that the residual resistance ratio can be used as a figure of merit for qubit lifetime. This comprehensive approach to understanding qubit decoherence charts a pathway for materials-driven improvements of superconducting qubit performance. Following two decades of dramatic improvement, superconducting qubit technology has emerged as a promising platform for fault-tolerant quantum computation. Game-changing enhancements in coherence have especially been achieved through novel designs and improved fabrication processes. However, performance improvements by these means have started to plateau, indicating that the dominant sources of decoherence are not well understood In particular, recent breakthroughs have highlighted the central role played by uncontrolled surfaces and interfaces in the decoherence of transmon qubits In this study, we bridge the gap between qubit performance and microscopic materials properties through a combined materials-and-device investigation of transmon qubits. Using spatially resolved x-ray spectroscopy and microscopy, we characterized the structural and electronic properties of the niobium (Nb) thin films used to fabricate transmon qubit devices. We compared three different deposition methods for the Nb films, yielding a quantifiable variation in nanostructure, surface oxide composition, and transport properties. Several of these film properties correlate with the measured qubit relaxation time T 1 . Specifically, for qubits with shorter relaxation times, the corresponding films exhibited smaller grain size, larger voids at grain boundaries, enhanced oxygen diffusion along grain boundaries near the surface, and excess suboxides at the interface between the Nb metal and the Nb 2 O 5 passivation layer. Additionally, we observed a correlation between shorter relaxation times and higher residual resistance in the Nb films. We discuss mechanisms that link the observed microscopic features to residual resistance and T 1 , specifically dissipation at grain boundaries and defect-induced dielectric loss from suboxides. These results are a critical first step in connecting precise materials properties with microscopic models for decoherence and establishing a materials-based approach to enhance qubit performance. Qubit Design and Performance. Qubit characterization was performed on transmon qubits, which are widely used for quantum computing and quantum simulation applications We employ three different deposition methods for the Nb films used to fabricate the coplanar waveguide resonators, qubit capacitor pads, and ground plane in the transmon devices. All films are deposited on sapphire substrates. First, we use DC sputter deposition, which is common in superconducting qubit fabrication. We additionally study two variations of high-power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS), where the DC ionization voltage is replaced with short, high-power pulses, potentially leading to a higher degree of ionization and denser films We performed relaxation (T 1 ) measurements to characterize the dependence of qubit performance on deposition technique. Since T 1 is limited by microwave losses in the superconductors and substrate, it is a valuable probe of materials-induced loss channels. We measured three rounds of devices, where a given round consisted of one device made with each Nb deposition technique, to maintain as consistent fabrication, packaging, and shielding as possible within each round. Details of qubit fabrication, measurement setup, and qubit performance are in the Supplementary Information. The measured T 1 times for each film type show a clear statistical separation between the three deposition techniques (Fig. Surface oxides. The surface oxides on the three types of Nb films were investigated using a combination of soft and hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS). The experimental details can be found in the Methods section. split Nb 3d 3/2 and 3d 5/2 core levels, measured on the sputtered film with an incident energy of 3330 eV. Also shown are the fits to distinct materials components. The PES spectra are best fit with five doublet components, revealing that there are four coexisting oxidation states besides Nb metal: NbO x (x<1), NbO, NbO 2 , and Nb 2 O 5 , with respective shifts in binding energy of +0.5 eV, +1.8 eV, +3.8 eV, and +5.6 eV compared to Nb metal. The presence of five total oxidation states including Nb metal is consistent with previous PES studies PES measurements of the Nb 3d core levels were performed for seven values of the incident photon energy between 420 eV and 5000 eV. Since higher incident photon energies probe deeper into the film, this energy range resulted in surface sensitivity from the topmost monolayers down to a depth of ≈20 nm. The relative intensities of the signals from the five oxidation states were extracted for different photon energies, as shown for Nb metal and Nb 2 O 5 in Figure The resulting depth profiles of the relative concentrations of the different oxidation states are shown in Figure 3. For all three film types, we observe a surface oxide layer with Nb 2 O 5 as the main constituent, followed by a transition layer of lower oxidation states whose thickness, depth distribution, and composition vary between the different films. The oxide/metal interface is sharpest for the sputtered film and is increasingly diffuse for the HiPIMS optimized and then the HiPIMS normal film. The HiPIMS optimized film shows some Nb 2 O 5 -NbO 2 interdiffusion in the 2 nm to 6 nm range, as seen from the respectively decreasing and increasing profiles of Nb 2 O 5 and NbO 2 , and it also shows a thicker NbO x layer than the sputtered film. The Nb 2 O 5 -NbO 2 interdiffusion is strongest in the HiPIMS normal film, and the formation of NbO is also evident around 6 nm. Significantly, the NbO x penetrates most deeply in the HiPIMS normal film, extending beyond the 20 nm depth sensitivity allowed by this technique. The relative concentrations of the different Nb oxidation states, estimated by integrating over the 20 nm depth profiles and expressed in percents, are displayed in Table RIXS is a complementary probe of the electronic structure that offers sensitivity to low-energy excitations of the electronic and lattice degrees of freedom (phonons) Figure Figure Structural and chemical imaging. In order to correlate our surface oxide spectroscopy findings with morphology and grain size, we performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM), spatially resolved electronenergy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and atomic-force mi- To characterize local chemical properties near the surface, we performed spatially resolved EELS. The second row shows O-K-edge EELS spectra that were measured at the locations indicated by colored dots on the HAADF-STEM images. In each EELS panel, the left plot shows chemical variation from the surface into the grain, and the right plot shows variation along grain boundaries. The main O-K-edge feature near 534 eV shows a transi- tion from a clear double-peak line shape near the surface to a single broad peak near the interface with Nb metal. Based on EELS spectra previously reported for different Nb reference oxides To further characterize grain boundaries, bright-field TEM images that rely on a diffraction contrast from the transmitted beam were taken at cross sections of each sample, as shown in the third row of Figure the thickness of the films (see Supplementary Figure Further information about the grain morphology and size can be extracted from the complementary, top-down view provided by the AFM images shown in the bottom row of Figure Residual resistance ratio. Measured values of residual resistance ratio (RRR) for all three film types are displayed in Table We observe correlations between T 1 , RRR, grain size, and suboxide concentration near the surface, as shown by the data in Table First, we discuss how smaller grain size enhances microwave surface resistance. The correlation we observe between grain size, RRR, and T c is consistent with a body of literature that links these quantities in polycrystalline Nb thin films The HiPIMS normal films not only exhibit smaller grain size, but also a lower packing density, leading to significant grain boundary voids which host oxides near the surface (Fig. Another potential dissipation mechanism involves the quality of the surface oxide layer. The Nb 2 O 5 passivation layer is found to have the lowest concentration of oxygen vacancies and to be most homogeneous in the sputtered film (Figs. In conclusion, this study builds a significant bridge between the performance of superconducting transmon qubits and the materials properties of Nb films, a critical component in qubit fabrication. Our cross-cutting investigation exploits microscopic variations among Nb thin films deposited using three sputtering techniques, and reveals correlations between qubit relaxation time and structural and chemical Nb film properties, specifi-cally grain size, suboxide intergranular penetration, and suboxide intragrain concentration near the surface. Significantly, the measured RRR serves as a proxy for the observed variation in qubit relaxation time and these film properties. We anticipate that further improvements in relaxation times will arise from optimizations of grain size in Nb deposition techniques and from exploring the use of superconductors that show a more chemically homogeneous surface oxide layer than Nb, such as tantalum Synchrotron measurements were carried out at the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) Soft X-ray PES measurements were performed using the ambient pressure PES (APPES) endstation at the 23-ID-2 (IOS). The samples were mounted on a sample holder by carbon tape and all measurements were performed in UHV at room temperature. The endstation has a base pressure of 3x10 -7 Pa and it is equipped with a SPECS PHOIBOS 150 NAP analyzer. The incidence angle of the X-ray beam and the photoemission angle were 50 degrees and 20 degrees from the sample normal, respectively. Survey spectra were measured at a photon energy of 1260 eV while Nb 3d spectra were measured at 420 eV and 1260 eV. All spectra were measured with a pass energy of 10 eV. RIXS measurements were performed using the Soft Inelastic X-ray (SIX) 2-ID beamline Transmission electron microscopy work (bright field imaging, HAADF-STEM imaging, and STEM-EELS) was performed at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials (CFN) in BNL using an FEI (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) Talos F200X at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV and Gatan Enfinium EELS. TEM samples were prepared with a focused ion beam method using FEI Helios NanoLab DualBeam, via the standard in-situ lift-out method. Temperature dependence of the resistivity of the Nb films, from 295 K down to 4 K, was performed in a Janis (model ST-3T) micromanipulated probe station at the CFN. The pressure during measurement was kept in the low 10 -4 Pa range. The Nb films had an approximate length and width of 7 mm and 3 mm, respectively. Contacts to the films were established with 25 μm Al wires in a 4-point-measurement configuration. Silver paint was used to expand the current leads across the width of the films to achieve homogeneous longitudinal current flow. Current-voltage curves, from which the resistance of the films was extracted, were measured with three Keithley source-meter units (model 2636A) as current sources (one for each Nb film) and a Keithley nanovoltmeter (model 2182A). AFM measurements were performed at the CFN at room temperature using a commercial Park NX20-AFM instrument in tapping mode. Standard Si cantilevers with nominal resonant frequency of 330 kHz were used for scanning topography. The XEI software was used for image analysis. Niobium was deposited on 530 μm thick C-plane sapphire from CrysTec GmbH Kristalltechnologie. Prior to deposition, the sapphire was sonicated for 2 minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol, then rinsed in deionized water and blow-dried with nitrogen. The wafer was then loaded into an AJA hybrid deposition system, where it was heated to 350 • C for 20 minutes, then cooled for 20 minutes. Sputter deposition was performed at a pressure of 1.1 Pa, a power setpoint of 300 W, and a shutter delay of 60 seconds after reaching full power. The deposition was run for 252 seconds, resulting in a film thickness of 185 nm. Niobium was deposited on 530 μm thick C-plane sapphire from CrysTec GmbH Kristalltechnologie. At Princeton University, the sapphire wafers were sonicated for 2 minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol, then rinsed in deionized water and blowdried with nitrogen. Then, the substrates were sent to Angstrom Engineering for HiPIMS deposition of Nb. Detailed deposition parameters and photographs are presented in Supplementary Table Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. Official contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology; not subject to copyright in the United States. Qubits were fabricated on each film type using the same process, except as noted. After Nb film deposition, photoresist was spun on the wafer to protect the films from dicing. The films were diced into one-inch square chips, on which photolithography was performed to define the coplanar waveguide resonator and qubit capacitor pads. The protective resist was stripped in Microposit 1165. Then, the chip was sonicated for two minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol prior to spinning photoresist AZ1505. The resist was patterned in a Heidelberg DWL66+ into a grid of nine devices, each with inputs, outputs, a resonator, and capacitor pads. To develop the resist, the chip was gently swirled in AZ300MIF for one minute, then held under running water for one minute. The exposed niobium was then descumed and etched in a PlasmaTherm APEX SLR metals etcher in an oxygen plasma and fluorine chemistry, respectively. Manhattan Josephson junctions were patterned using electron beam lithography. After stripping photoresist, the chip was again sonicated for two minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol. Then, a bilayer of MMA (8.5) MAA and 950 PMMA A2 (Microchem) was spun. The MMA was baked for two minutes, and the bilayer was baked for 30 minutes after spinning PMMA. A 40 nm aluminum anticharge layer was deposited using electron-beam evaporation in a Plassys MEB 550S. Then, the chip was diced into individual 7 mm by 7 mm devices. Next, the resist was patterned in an Elionix ELS-F125 electron beam lithography system: lower doses only exposed the MMA, leading to an "undercut" geometry. The anticharge layer was removed by placing the device in AZ300MIF for 4 minutes and DI water for one minute. The device was swirled in 1:3 MIBK:IPA for 50 s to develop the resist. Manhattan junctions were double-angle evaporated in a Plassys MEB 550S with a 20 nm bottom Al layer, oxidation for 15 minutes at 2 × 10 4 Pa, a 70 nm top Al layer, and a final oxidation for 20 minutes at 4 × 10 3 Pa. The resist was lifted off in Remover PG at 80 • C for at least three hours. To complete liftoff, the device was sonicated in Remover RG for four seconds and sprayed with IPA. The qubits were fabricated using the same CAD files, and were thus designed to have the same qubit and cavity frequencies. The measured qubit and cavity frequencies are presented in Supplementary Table Our study presents three rounds of devices, where each round had consistent fabrication, packaging, and shielding between all types of Nb film. After the first round, we improved the following procedures: (1) we used a new supply of MMA and PMMA electron-beam lithography resists, and (2) we ensured and experimentally confirmed improved thermalization between the device and the mixing chamber of the dilution refrigerator. We believe that these two changes led to overall improvements in qubit performance. All materials characterization presented in this work (PES, HAXPES, RIXS, HAADF-STEM, TEM-EELS, AFM, and resistivity) was performed on films which came from the same one-inch square chip as the qubits for a given film type. The films used in the materials characterization underwent the same chemical processes as the qubits, described above. Each device had a coplanar waveguide resonator coupled at one end to a qubit. The input line was coupled to the opposite end of the resonator, and the output line was coupled near the qubit end of the resonator, where the voltage is maximal. Devices were tightly sandwiched between a high-resistivity copper mount and a printed circuit board. Wirebonds connected the PCB to the input line, output line, and ground plane. A high-resistivity copper cap was placed atop the PCB where the device was exposed. The copper mount was thermally sunk to the mixing chamber of a dilution refrigerator at 30 mK with a high-resistivity copper rod. The entire device package was shielded with one inner layer of indium-coated copper and two outer layers of μ-metal. Each μ-metal shield was covered in aluminized mylar on the outside, and the inside of the inner copper shield was coated with stycast and grains of SiC. Refer to Supplementary Figure We performed time-domain measurements to characterize qubit performance. Relaxation (T 1 ) measurements were performed by exciting the qubit with a Gaussian π-pulse at the qubit frequency, then reading out the qubit state after delay time τ. Ramsey (T 2R ) measurements were performed with two Gaussian π 2 pulses at the qubit frequency separated by delay time τ. The phase of the second pulse was given by 2π f fringe τ, where f fringe is the desired fringe frequency to aid fits. Readout occurred immediately after the second pulse. Echo (T 2E ) measurements involved, in addition to the Ramsey pulse scheme, an additional π pulse halfway between the two π 2 pulses, in phase with the first pulse. In cases where T 2E was fit using exponential decay rather than exponentially decaying fringes, the fringe frequency f fringe was set to zero. Measured relaxation, Ramsey, and echo times are presented in Supplementary Table The control and measurement setup is shown in Supplementary Figure The output was sent through a Quinstar four-port circulator mounted to the mixing chamber with two inputs terminated with 50 ohms, then sent to a high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) low-noise amplifier mounted to the 4K stage. At room temperature, a high-pass filter at 6.3 GHz filtered out the qubit pulse to avoid saturating the subsequent amplifiers (Miteq and Minicircuits). The signal was mixed in homodyne with a local oscillator, which was produced by the same Holzworth as the readout tone and was thus phase-locked with the signal. The resulting I and Q DC signals were cleaned up with low-pass filters and amplified twice each using an SRS SR445A, then sent directly to an Agilent ADC U1082A. The Tektronix AWG and ADC were triggered with a Keysight 33600A Series waveform generator using a square pulse at 50 % duty cycle. Each point in a single T 1 trace was the average of 4000 -20000 trigger cycles. For each trigger cycle, the ADC read the I and Q signals for 8.2 μs with a sample rate of 1 GHz. Finally, all electronic equipment was clocked with an SRS F2725 Rubidium Frequency Standard. Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. The large peak in the darkest green spectra corresponds to oxidation in the sapphire substrate. The reddest spectrum for each film shows very little oxidation away from the grain boundary. Spectra taken along the grain boundary do not show stronger oxidation than the reddest spectrum for any film, indicating that the grain boundaries at this interface are consistently unoxidized at this level.