In this paper, we present some properties of Lead Zirconate Titanate/Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride) (PZT/PVDF) composites. The obtained results indicate that 0.9÷1.8 μm PZT/PVDF fibers involved films were achieved using electrospinning method. In other hand, the effect of grain size, content and other factors under the purview of Young's modulus and ferroelectric properties. The use of ceramic nanoparticles in various organic polymers may provide performance and multifunctional materials with applications in many technological fields such as actuators, sensors, solar cells, optoelectronic devices, etc. Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) is a fluorinated polymer with excellent mechanical and electric properties, which it was chosen as matrix due to their applications in a wide range of industrial fields. Research in the field of material science and engineering has been devoted to the development of innovative materials known as ceramic-polymer composites A variety of experimental techniques have been developed to induce β-phase formation in PVDF. For example, Matsushige and Takemura showed that crystallization from the melt at pressures which exceed 350 MPa led to the formation of the β-form of PVDF. Uniaxial or biaxial drawing of PVDF films has also been shown to induce an α-β transition. In addition, a number of reports also indicate that nanoclays, carbon nanotubes, graphene oxides and metal oxides can induce the β-crystal formation in PVDF nanocomposites prepared via melt processing or solution processing. Besides, electrospinning also produces pre-dominantly the β-phase. Ceramic-polymer composites are studied regarding possible preparation procedures, their ferroelectric properties and their tensile behavior. Furthermore, different arrangements of functional ingredients are investigated such as 1-3, 2-2 and 0-3 composites Especially composites with ceramic fillers randomly dispersed in a polymer matrix are broadly studied because of good preparation opportunities in order to vary the filler content, the filler and the matrix materials. Such composites are called 0-3 composites according to Newnham's connectivity notation. Then, the PZT ceramic particles with excellent piezoelectric properties were evenly dispersed in a three-dimensional connected flexible polymer matrix. This type of composite has excellent comprehensive properties The influence of preparation processes on the structure and electrical properties of piezoelectric lead zirconate titanate/poly(vinylidene fluoride) composites was investigated. Electrospinning method can enhance obviously the ferroelectric, dielectric and piezoelectric properties of PZT/PVDF composites by reducing the void in piezoelectric composites and decreasing the interface defect between ceramic phase and polymer phase The PVDF used was Aldrich chemistry (France), average Mw~534,000. The solvents used were N,Ndimethylformamide (DMF, Merck 99.5%) and acetone (Merck, 99.7%). The PZT ceramic (d33 = 317 pC/N, ɛr = 1800), which was prepared via the conventional solid-state reaction method, PZT powers are prepared with a mortar and pestle, the mean particle size of the PZT powders is about 200 -500 nm (Figure The crystalline structure analysis was performed at room temperature using an X-ray diffraction system (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance, Germany) with Cu Kα radiation (λ= 0.154 nm) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, Prestige 21 Shimadzu, Japan, Department of Chemical, Hue University of Education) spectroscopy, respectively. The surface morphology was examined using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM 450-FEI) operated at an accelerating voltage of 10-20 kV), the Raman spectra was recorded by a Micro Raman Spectrophotometer (JASCO Raman NRS-3000) using 633 nm excited laser at room temperature. The polarization-electric field (P-E) hysteresis loops were measured with a HIOKI 3532 (Radiant Technologies) which testing unit connected with a high-voltage interface. The electrospinning apparatus was assembled by Hue University of Science (Vietnam); it consisted of a high-voltage power supply, an automated syringe pump (KDS101, KD Scientific, USA) with speed from 1mL/h to 999 mL/h and a 10-mL syringe with a 25-gauge diameter of needle (~0.5 mm); The high electric potential (EG = 0 ÷ 30 kV) and the stretching force (FG) applied during electrospinning, a steel rotating (E-HUSC-01, Hue University of Science, Vietnam) with 1500 rpm mandrel was used as the collector The PVDF precursor solutions 16 wt% were prepared by dissolving the PVDF powder in 3:1 DMF/acetone solution. The solution was heated at 65 o C in silicon oil bath for 30 min to completely dissolve the polymer. The solution flow rate was precisely maintained at 1.5 mL/h using the syringe pump. A 12-cm distance and an applied voltage of 14 kV were maintained between the needle and the collector The PZT/PVDF thin films were deposited by spin coating the solution after 4 h on the silver substrates at room temperature. The wet films were annealed at 135 °C for different durations in an oven. Besides on, these composite films was found that the number of particles increases with the increase in the PZT volume fraction. There is a non-uniformity observed in particle size of the samples due to the presence of different particle sizes of PZT. The SEM micrographs also reveals that there is an increase in the reinforcement of PZT particles in the PVDF matrix which indicates that there is a change in volume fraction, Fig 2 Figure The electrospinning parameters can be adjusted to control final PVDF fiber characteristics. One of the important parameters to consider is molecular weight of PZT. Figure The effect of the PZT content on the morphology and average diameters of the PZT/PVDF nanofibers is shown in Fig. Figure The FTIR spectrums of the nanofilms (Figure In order to confirm the crystalline phase of the samples and the influence of PZT ceramic particles in the polymer matrix an X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out in the range 10° to 70° as shown in Fig. By comparing the PZT powder with of the PZT-PVDF composites, it is found that there is no additional evidence of structural change, XRD analysis is in good agreement with FTIR analysis. We prepared the 0-3 composites of pure PVDF and doped them with PZT the concentration (5-25 wt%). The PZT content was done to increase the conductivity of the matrix as this increased conductivity will enhance the poling of ceramic at a later stage. Figure PZT doping will significantly benefits the β-phase crystallization of PVDF nanocomposites and remnant polarization, however, if the PZT-doping concentration is too high, will damage the film quality, increase the thickness of film spin-coating, make the film less transparent, warp the substrate, and in the worst case, make the PZT/PVDF film peel off. This may have been due to the addition of PZT hindering the movement of the PVDF molecular chain, which reduced the elasticity and the elongation of the composite PZT can effectively improve the piezoelectric properties of PVDF, although excessive PZT doping will limit the flexibility of composite film as it sustains less elongation just before failure. However, it had been found that high doping concentrations will increased remnant polarization because there will be a significant increase in the dielectric constant and thus the piezoelectric signal will increase A series of P-E hysteresis loops for PZT/PVDF composite measured at room temperature were shown in Fig. A remnant polarization increasing from 2,1 to 6.2 mC/m 2 were achieved by optimizing the concentration of 25 wt% of PZT, while simultaneously reducing the coercive field at the same time. The modification of the physical properties can be explained by alterations in PVDF fiber due to drawing and poling and to the presence of PZT (Table In this study, PZT-PVDF composites with 0-3 connectivity was successfully fabricated from a series of PZT volume fractions from 5 to 25 by electrospinning method. With the increase of the PZT content, an enhancement of the β phase was observed. The PZT-PVDF composites open new opportunities to develop a large scale manufacturing of flexible devices, piezoelectric devices, sensors, force transducer, and so on with technological applications. Experimental density values of the composites were found to be harmonized with calculated density values. SEM observations revealed a homogeneous mixture of PZT-PVDF phases. The values of stress -strain coefficient and ferroelectric character obtained in this work revealed that it may be more suitable for widely future applications. of the PZT/PVDF composite films by electrospinning: The PZT, which was added to the PVDF solutions at concentration of 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25wt%, respectively (Table