The effect of Laponite® (a synthetic clay) on the structure, thermal and water vapor barrier properties of nanocomposite gelatin films produced by casting with 0, 4.5 and 15% w Lap/w gelatin, was studied. X-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, thermogravimetric analysis and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy measurements were reported. The X-ray diffraction patterns showed dual crystalline structure of the films with collagen-type bundles of triple helices, intercalated inside clay platelets, increasing interlayer distances. Depending on the renaturation of triple-helices and Laponite content, the glass transition temperatures substantially decreased. The amount of helices decreased with Lap concentration, affecting the enthalpy of melting. The nanocomposite gelatin films showed improved thermal stability. Changes of water vapor permeability could be related to the presence of larger free volume of the coils and intercalated structures, facilitating water transfer through the film. There is interest in using biodegradable films from renewable resources, such as polysaccharides and proteins. Natural biopolymer-based packaging materials have the potential to extend food shelf life and safety as an innovative packaging and processing technology Gelatin has been one of the most studied biopolymers due to its film-forming ability and its use as an outer film to protect food from drying and exposure to light and oxygen Although all biodegradable films are not suitable barriers against water vapor and do not have adequate mechanical strength, they can be used as a carrier of antimicrobial substances or preservatives. To overcome the poor mechanical properties of biodegradable films, nanoparticles can be dispersed in the matrix to reinforce it, and to enhance the strength and stiffness of the films The use of clays in food nanocomposite films has been proposed It is generally assumed that two factors, the opening up or intercalation of the clay sheets, and the dispersion of the intercalated platelets, determine the properties of dispersions The objective of this study was to measure the structure and thermal properties of gelatin films containing variable concentrations of Lap. These properties will be correlated to water barrier properties of the nanocomposite films (with Lap) and gelatin films (without Lap). A pigskin gelatin, type A, bloom 245, average molecular weight M w =5.2 × 10 4 Da, moisture content=9.98%, (Gelnex South America, Itá, Santa Catarina, Brazil) was used as the biopolymer, and glycerol (Synth, Sao Paulo, Brazil) was used as the plasticizer. Laponite® RD, (Rockwood Additives, Widnes, Cheshire, UK) was used as a synthetic nanoclay. Distilled water was used as solvent. The nanocomposite films and gelatin films were prepared according to Ayala- All the films were prepared by casting; the film-forming solutions were poured into Petri dishes (diameter 14 cm) and dried in an oven with forced air circulation (MA037, Marconi, Sao Paulo, Brazil) at 30°C and controlled relative humidity (55-65%), for 24 h, then the films were cut with a scalpel into rectangular dimensions. Finally, the films were placed over silica gel for 7 days, and then conditioned in desiccators containing saturated solutions of LiCl (11% relative humidity, RH) at 25°C for at least 15 days. Moisture content was determined gravimetrically by using oven drying at 105°C for 24 h X-ray diffractograms (XRD) of nanocomposite films, gelatin films, and Lap powder were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (D 5005, AXS Analytical X-ray Systems, Siemens, Berlin, Germany), operating at 40 kV and 40 mA (CuKα radiation λ=1.54056 Å). Samples (3 × 3 cm) were packed in an aluminum frame. The spectra were measured at 25°C between 2θ = 2° and 70°, at 2°/min. From the angular positions (2θ) of the peaks, the corresponding distances (d) where calculated using the Bragg relation (dsin All films were measured using DSC to determine the glass transition temperature (T g ), melting temperature (T m ), as well as the enthalpy of melting (ΔH). The analyses were done using a system TA2010 from TA Instruments, Dover, USA, equipped with a cryogenic quench cooling accessory. Samples were placed in aluminum TA pans and weighed with a precision (±0.01 mg) balance (PA114C, Ohaus, L.A., USA). An empty pan was used as the reference. These analyses were done under an inert atmosphere (nitrogen gas flow of 45 ml/min), heating samples at 5°C/min from -150 to +150°C. The T g was calculated as the inflexion point at the change of the baseline caused by the discontinuity of the specific heat. The T m was calculated at the maximum of the endothermic peak. The ΔH value was calculated as the area under the endothermic peak TGA and derivative thermo gravimetry (DTG) measurements were done using an equipment STA 449 F3 Jupiter® , Netzsch, Berlin, Germany. The measurements were done from 25 to 700°C at a heating rate of 10°C/min and with a nitrogen flow rate of 20 ml/min) to avoid thermo-oxidative reactions FTIR spectra of dried films were done using a FTIR spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer Spectrum One, Stuttgart, Germany) from the wavenumber 650 to 4000 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 . Sixteen scans were done using the Universal Attenuator Total Reflectance (UATR) accessory. The FTIR spectra were taken in transmittance mode WVP was determined gravimetrically, according to the standard ASTM E96 where Δg/Δt is the rate of weight change (g/h), x is the sample thickness (mm), A is the permeation (constant) area (0.0032 m 2 ) and ΔP is the partial pressure difference across the films (3.169 kPa at 25°C) (Ayala- One way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's test of multiple comparisons were done with a significance level of 5% using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 10.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The solutions of Lap without gelatin had a high pH (9.5-9.6), while the gelatin solution had a low pH=5.33. The gelatin solutions containing 4.5 and 15% of Lap had pH = 5.97 and 7.03, respectively. All FFS showed some turbidity (Figure Turbidity of the FFS showed that strong electrostatic interactions occurred between the two components and the formation of protein-Lap complexes (called coacervates) leading to a liquid-liquid phase separation. Several points have been discussed in the literature: a) Lap suspensions are stable at pH >10 and show progressive dissolution at pH <9 Gelatin A is a polyampholyte with an isoelectric point around pI ~8-9. The zeta potential is positive at pH <pI and decreases with pH. This protein is cationic below the isoelectric point (pH <8). During the long maturation, gelation starts with the gelatin chains forming triple helices and building a network c) Upon mixing the two solutions, the pH changes and turbidity appears. Gelatin type A chains bind to Lap platelets by electrostatic interactions modulated by the pH (in the present case, pH ~6-7). Gelatin solution concentration was higher, as was Lap concentration, but the electrostatic interactions in these systems should be comparable to the previous reference. The average molecular weight of gelatin was M w =5.2 x 10 4 Da 1. In the 4.5% Lap sample, 0.76x10 -4 moles of gelatin are mixed with 2.35x10 -4 moles of Lap which gives a mole ratio gelatin A:Lap ~0.32 close to the ratio 0.33 determined by Gelation prevents sedimentation. 2. In the 15% Lap the mole ratio gelatin A:Lap ~0.1. Lap platelets are in excess with respect to the neutralization ratio. The mixed solutions contain large platelet-rich domains, with some gelatin chains attached to their surfaces and fully intercalated domains. These solutions also undergo gelation, so they do not macroscopically phase separate. The phase separation between the two Lap populations favors a heterogeneous association between coils and platelets. Suspensions with the two different Lap concentrations formed different structures in the resulting films, shown in particular with the X-ray diffraction measurements. The X-ray patterns of gelatin films and of Lap powders (Figure The Lap powder pattern has multiple sharp peaks in the range 0 <80°, (Figure Å with 5 <RH <94% The nanocomposite films contain a superposition of gelatin and Lap patterns, which shows the coexistence of two crystalline organizations mainly identified by the diffraction peaks at small angles (2θ <10°). The broad amorphous peak, due to gelatin and solvent becomes non-symmetrical in the 15% Lap (number 3, Figure To identify the interlayer spacing of Lap, the difference between the intensities diffracted by the nanocomposite films and the gelatin films in the range 2θ <10° were plotted (Figure These data allow the following discussions: The interlayer spacings of Lap in nanocomposite films increased substantially, compared to Lap powder. The interlayer spacings deduced from the diffraction peaks are d interlayer =25 and 22 Å with 4.5 and 15% Lap, respectively. According to Lap sample, 22-11 of 11 Å. In the initial Lap powder (Figure The diffraction peak due to the bundles (packing) of triple helices is d collagen =11.8 Å in the gelatin film, with a slight increase in the nanocomposite films. Small changes of d collagen suggested local changes of hydration in the films. The packing distance d collagen <d interlayer is compatible with the intercalation of a layer of bundles between Lap platelets in the nanocomposite films. Electrostatic attraction promotes the adsorption of gelatin coils onto the surface of the Lap platelets in the initial stages. While gelatin chains change their conformation from coil to triple helix during maturation, the complexes with Lap are maintained including the triple helices between the platelets. The 15% Lap shows a diffraction pattern after maturation that was interpreted as more distinctly phase-separated structures allowing larger stacks of platelets to form, including also the adsorbed gelatin chains; the interlayer was large, 22 Å, and compatible with the packing of triple helices formed during gel formation. Figure Regardless of Lap concentration, in the first scan, all the films showed a typical behavior of partially crystalline materials (Figure The change of glass transition temperatures is a consequence of the interactions with Lap: compared to T g of gelatin films, in nanocomposite films with 4.5% Lap, T g decreases by 8°C, and increases again in the 15% Lap films (Table With 4.5% Lap, the Tg decreased. This corresponds to homogeneously distributed polymers and platelets. This effect can be interpreted as a weak attraction between positively charged amino acids of gelatin chains and the negatively charged surface of the platelets. The basal distance of the platelets in the films is large. The free volume of the amorphous coils inside the nanocomposite could be increased, compared to bulk gelatin with the same conditions. As a consequence, the Tg is lowered and the mobility of the amorphous parts is increased (faster relaxation) at the same temperature. The change of T g is likely to have significant consequences on the permeability of the films at room temperature. The second scan (Figure This behavior was also observed in the Lap nanocomposites. A significant decrease in T g (second scan) compared to the first scan was observed. In the 4.5% Lap the decrease is T g =-18 oC and in the 15% Lap, the decrease was -17 oC. T g were larger in nanocomposite films compared to gelatin films. The contribution of Lap to T g depends on the microstructure of the films: although there is only one T g , the spread of the values is important in the second scan of nanocomposite films compared to the second scan of gelatin films (Table The melting temperature of gelatin films, T m =96.3°C, was higher than with 4.5% Lap (T m =89°C). The decrease of melting temperature may be a consequence of interactions between gelatin and Lap; the helical structure contains more defects, such as loops or shorter sequences, resulting in less stable structures. At 15% Lap the melting temperature increased back to the initial value, but showed a larger dispersion. As explained in section 3.1, these films showed more segregated structures; gelatin-rich coexist with Lap-rich domains. Triple helices are present in both domains; the average T m value is closer to the gelatin-rich domains, while the spread of T m is due to the segregation effects. The enthalpy of melting was 21.1 J/g gelatin (Table In both nanocomposite films with 4.5 and 15% Lap the enthalpy of melting decreases (p <0.05). The enthalpy decreased because the total amount of renaturated triple helices decreased in the presence of the nanoclay. Hellio-Serughetti and The triple helices content decreased, respectively, to 32 and 20% (Table The temperature T g max ~59°C, was observed for homogeneous semi-crystalline films of gelatin (first scan) or segregated semi-crystalline nanocomposite films containing 15% Lap (first scan). The temperature T g min ~33°C, was observed for interpenetrated, amorphous films with 4.5% Lap (second scan), where adsorption of gelatin on Lap platelets leads to a homogeneous repartition of the constituents in the nanocomposite film, and increases locally the free volume of the gelatin coils. The difference between the two extremes is large, T g =26°C. T g reflects the permeability of the films. It is above room temperature in these films, but it is very much dependent on the composition, of the triple helix contribution and it may approach room temperature in extreme cases. TGA and DTG explore the thermal stability of films over a large range of temperatures. There were three steps in the thermal degradation of the films (Figure Table The DTG curves for nanocomposite films (Figure The incorporation of Lap in gelatin films led to a delay in mass loss in the temperature range of gelatin degradation (Figure Table In a more fundamental study, The width and intensity of FTIR spectral bands as well as the position of peaks are all sensitive to chemical functions changes and conformations of macromolecules The amide I band (~1600 cm -1 ) of gelatin films originates from C=O stretching/hydrogen bonding in combination with COO -, and this peak shifted to higher wavelengths, around 1634 cm 1 for nanocomposite films, suggesting that the different concentrations of Lap led to conformational changes of the secondary structure of proteins The incorporation of Lap, regardless of the concentration, led to the appearance of bands at ~995 cm -1 , which can be associated with the C-O vibration of glycerol and Si-O-Si stretching band in Lap Although not statistically significant, the addition of 4.5 and 15% of Lap in films affected the WVP of nanocomposite films, which slightly increased compared to the gelatin film, which was 0.39±0.02 g mm/m 2 h kPa. These changes could be related to the presence of intercalated structures and larger free volume of the coils, facilitating water transfer increase of clay content. Again, no X-ray or DSC studies were reported. Their initial value (pure gelatin film) of WVP was 0.86 g mm/kPa m 2 h which was high compared with this study and with addition of 18% nanoclay it decreased to 0.42 g mm/kPa m 2 h, which is closer to the value observed in this study. However their X-ray diffraction diagram showed poor crystallinity of the clay in the film, which contradicts their analysis. Improvement of permeation properties could result from the tortuosity (winding paths with Lap stacks) as was suggested in the general review by The Lap forms distinct intercalated structures with a high degree of crystallinity. The basal distance with intercalated gelatin chains is greatly increased. The stacks are not totally spread over the entire film, as some phase separation takes place in particular for the most concentrated Lap films. The free volume of the gelatin coils in the intercalated nanoclays increases. These changes decrease the permeation barrier of the films. The tortuosity in principle, increases only with the most structured piles. At room temperature, the improvement of the barrier properties related to the tortuosity of Lap stacks is counterbalanced by the increase of chain mobility of gelatin coils. The overall result is a slight increase of permeability, which is inconsistent with the benefits expected using the nanocomposite films. In summary, this investigation highlighted the influence of composition and structure on the barrier properties of the gelatin films containing nanoclays; the main factors were: i) the presence of triple helices, ii) the changes of free volume of gelatin chains, iii) the spatial distribution of the clay stacks throughout the film, iv) the changes of the thickness after drying (compaction). The presence of Lap improves the thermal stability of the gelatin matrix due to the reinforcement effect of the clay. In nanocomposite films, a lower amount of triple helix re-assembled, due to the adsorption with electrostatic interactions of gelatin on Lap platelets. The intercalated structures of the nanocomposite led to a substantial increase of the basal distance of the platelets. The X-ray diffraction patterns showed a dual crystalline arrangement adaptable to the different Lap compositions. This study showed that the collagen-type bundles of triple helices were inside the crystalline stacks of clay platelets and/or independently in the more heterogeneous structures. The Tg of the nanocomposite films were strongly influenced, intrinsically, by the *