We present a novel method for embedding spin and charge fluctuations in an anisotropic, multiband and full-bandwidth Eliashberg treatment of superconductivity. Our analytical framework, based on the random phase approximation, allows for a selfconsistent calculation of material specific characteristics in the interacting, and more specifically, the superconducting state. We apply this approach to bulk FeSe as representative for the iron-based superconductors and successfully solve for the superconducting transition temperature Tc, the gap symmetry and the gap magnitude. We obtain Tc ≈ 6 K, consistent with experiment (Tc ≈ 8 K), as well as other quantities in good agreement with experimental observations, thus supporting spin fluctuations mediated pairing in bulk FeSe. On the contrary, applying our approach to monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3 we find that spin fluctuations within the full Eliashberg framework give a d-wave gap with Tc ≤ 11 K and therefore cannot provide an explanation for a critical temperature as high as observed experimentally (Tc ≈ 70 K). Our results hence point towards interfacial electron-phonon coupling as the dominant Cooper pairing mediator in this system. Ever since the discovery of superconductivity in ironbased compounds The case of monolayer FeSe on STO is markedly different from bulk FeSe. Due to substrate doping the Fermi surface of FeSe/STO does not exhibit the same nesting properties as FeSe We develop here a full Eliashberg theory generalization of the multiorbital Hubbard-type model and show that it provides the amplitude, symmetry and momentum dependence of the superconducting gap over multiple bands, the renormalization of the electron mass and energy for all Brillouin zone (BZ) momenta, electronic energies and temperatures and therefore also the superconducting T c ; all calculated on the same footing. Our theory hence opens the door for treating both phononic and electronic pairing mechanisms on the same footing to settle the question about the dominant pairing mediator. In the following we introduce a generic way of selfconsistently solving the anisotropic, full-bandwidth and multi-band Eliashberg equations for spin and charge fluctuations on an RPA level. Subsequently, we apply our microscopic theory to bulk FeSe as a representative example for the iron-based superconductors. The only ingredient that is needed to selfconsistently solve for the critical temperature, the gap magnitude and its associated symmetry, is a tight-binding model reliably reproducing density functional theory (DFT) calculations for the electronic dispersions In the following we introduce in Sec. II the methodology used to compute spin-and charge-fluctuations mediated superconductivity in a full Eliashberg framework. We then directly apply the method to bulk FeSe and compute several properties representative of its superconducting state. In Sec. III we apply the same methodology to monolayer FeSe on STO. Finding that spinfluctuations mediated pairing can explain superconductivity in bulk FeSe but not in FeSe/STO, we analyze deeper the origin of this result and compare to simplified approaches within BCS theory. Our conclusions on the plausible mechanisms for superconductivity in bulk FeSe and FeSe/STO are given in Sec. IV. In this section we present a recipe of how to embed spin and charge fluctuations in a full-bandwidth, multiband and anisotropic Eliashberg theory. As a representative example for the iron-based superconductors we investigate bulk FeSe and solve for the main characteristics of this system in the superconducting state. The full system is modeled as Ĥ = Ĥ0 + Ĥint , where the interacting part Ĥint is explained below in Section II B. For the noninteracting part we consider a tightbinding model as introduced in Ref. where we use k, p and σ as labels for momentum, orbital character and spin, respectively. ĉ † kpσ (ĉ kpσ ) are electronic creation (annihilation) operators and ξ kp describes the dispersion in orbital space. From the diagonalization of Ĥ0 we find the band dependent energies ξ kn as shown in Fig. The interaction part of our Hamiltonian is given by the intrasite Hubbard-type terms where ˆ S is is the spin operator for orbital index s at site i, compare Ref. is shown in Fig. where P denotes the principal value. From here we define the static bare susceptibility as which, as in Eq. ( Within the RPA the spin and charge susceptibilities are defined via Dyson equations, with Stoner tensors U S for spin and U C for charge. The nonzero elements are given by We solve Eqs. ( which allow us to directly identify the Stoner instabilities. More explicitly, we define static susceptibilities, in analogy to Eq. ( where the aforementioned mapping is inverted to retrieve back the four-rank tensors corresponding to outcomes of Eqs. The RPA susceptibilities do not change appreciably with (U, J). This can be explicitly seen in Fig. changes are minor in this quantity because we stay always well separated from χ C,stat q < 0. In the following we want to look at the frequency dependence of Eqs. Note, that these dynamical susceptibilities always pertain to the imaginary parts in our notation. For J = U/2 and a rather critical value of U = 0.827 eV we plot in Fig. calculated from Eq. ( Before turning to the full Eliashberg problem we need to calculate band dependent interaction kernels in Matsubara space. To achieve this we first define V (-) q (ω) where we distinguish between a kernel for electron mass and energy dispersion renormalization (+) and the superconducting pairing (-), corresponding to diagonal and off-diagonal elements of the Green's function, respectively. Setting q = kk and averaging over k we transform these kernels from orbital into band space: Since we are interested in imaginary frequencies on the Matsubara axis, we transform the result of Eq. ( where q m = 2πT m is a bosonic frequency. In analogy to Fig. V s,inter where the focus lies on the kernel of the superconducting channel. For similar choices of (U, J) as in Fig. As an overall trend one observes increasing kernel values with growing U . In contrast to the spin susceptibilities plotted in Section II B, this increase applies to values throughout the whole BZ. While peaks at X are still dominant in all panels of both figures, V s,intra q grows large also at Γ with increasing J and U . Furthermore, a nonnegligible background develops as we slowly approach the Stoner instability (the values shown correspond to noncritical regions). This is caused by taking the full Stoner continuum into account when transforming from real to Matsubara frequencies and causes potential problems for Cooper pair formation due to e.g. frustration effects, see Section II D for details. Next we focus on the Matsubara axis and define frequency dependent counterparts to Eqs. ( The results are drawn in Fig. To resolve the aforementioned difficulty concerning the Stoner continuum we introduce a frequency cutoff ω cut > 0 to truncate the integration in Eq. ( At this stage ω cut can be considered a variational parameter. Its main effect is to controllably remove high energy parts of the magnetic excitation spectrum, especially the incoherent part which should be irrelevant to superconductivity. The need for this cutoff will become clear later below. To make contact between ω cut and the real-frequency dependence of kernels as obtained from Eq. ( Note that V d,• q is used for kernels as function of ω, while V d,• q in Eqs. ( To show possible consequences arising from the cutoff in Eq. ( In Fig. which overall can lead to a different momentum structure of the order parameter. We consider the former situation as more physical, since we employ a low-energy theory, hence any large frequency effects should not drastically change the qualitative picture of our results. As another direct consequence of ω cut we note the changes along Matsubara frequencies in Fig. We are now in the position to address the selfconsistent Eliashberg problem for spin-fluctuation mediated pairing. The interaction kernels introduced in the previous section are used to solve the following set of coupled and selfconsistent equations: Here we use Z kn (iω m ) as the electronic mass renormalization with fermionic frequencies ω m = πT (2m + 1), Γ kn (iω m ) is the chemical potential renormalization and φ kn (iω m ) the superconducting order parameter. The gap function is found via ∆ kn (iω m ) = φ kn (iω m )/Z kn (iω m ), the zero-frequency component of which is accessible in experiment. Note that all functions in Eqs. ( We now consider all three U/J ratios highlighted in Fig. very confined region of the phase space, pointing towards two characteristic cutoffs that we identify as 0.42 eV and 0.66 eV. This corresponds to an energy range where nothing (0.42 eV) or only a very small fraction (at 0.66 eV) of the Stoner continuum is included when calculating the Matsubara frequency dependent kernels. We therefore see here explicitly what is already discussed in Sec. II C, namely, that including the Stoner continuum does not allow for a selfconsistently obtained superconducting state. This is due to frustration effects Next we perform a temperature variation for the aforementioned two cutoffs to obtain the corresponding transition temperatures. Following the evolution of maximal zero frequency gaps in Fig. We conclude the discussion of bulk FeSe by turning to the gap symmetry, choosing (U, J) as before, ω cut = 0.42 eV, and T = 5 K. Having access to the fully momentum dependent zero-frequency component ∆ kn (0), we project our results on the FS, drawn in Fig. We conclude this part by referring again to Appendix A, where several further aspects of our calculations are discussed. These details concern the mathematical and numerical steps in all subsections presented so far. Having introduced our method in Sec. II we now want to apply it to FeSe/STO, imposing that spin fluctuations are the only relevant ingredient for the superconducting state in this system. Any influence of the interfacial phonon that presumably plays an important role for superconductivity The electronic energies are given by a tight-binding model that we take from Ref. With these energy dispersions we calculate the real and imaginary parts of the bare susceptibility, Eqs. ( Inserting the bare susceptibilities into Eqs. ( Since the bandwidths of both tight-binding models are comparable, the scales of U and J do not differ much. Further, the overall shapes are very alike, except for a small piece of allowed phase space missing in Fig. The appearance of a Stoner continuum is reflected in interaction kernels similarly as discussed in Sec. II C. We calculate full frequency, momentum and orbitaldependent couplings from Eqs. ( We solve the coupled set of Eliashberg equations ( As function of ω cut there are three dome-like regions allowing for a finite gap. Such behavior points towards distinct branches in V (±) q (ω) nn , which can be constructive or destructive for Cooper pairing. Without the need of plotting these kernels we can understand the underlying mechanism already on the level of the dynamic spin susceptibility, see Fig. When we compare the three panels of Fig. As we show in the inset of Fig. The largest critical temperature for J = U/10, panel (a), is for cut = 0.45 eV as = 10.6 K (∆/T c ≈ 4). other cutoffs lead to smaller values of T c = 9 K (∆/T c ≈ 3.6) and 6.2 K (∆/T c ≈ 6), as seen from the blue and yellow curves. Results for J = U/2 do not change much in this respect: The maximal critical temperature is found for the intermediate ω cut = 0.54 eV, and is again T c = 10.6 K (∆/T c ≈ 5.6). From Fig. Next we examine the FS momentum dependence and hence the symmetry of ∆ kn (0), which is a direct result from our selfconsistent calculations. To achieve this we calculate the renormalized FS as which does not noticeably deviate from the bare electron pockets. The band-dependent superconducting gap is projected onto ξkn in Fig. From the specifics of the interaction kernels discussed in connection to Fig. Since we are interested in FS properties, and only a single band in our dispersion crosses the Fermi level, we can remove the band index and the associated sum on the right-hand side. As a drastic simplification we may write the potential as sum of delta peaks at the high-symmetry points, such that where V (Γ,M,X) is the approximate kernel size at the respective momentum. We directly can neglect the contribution at X, since no FS points can be connected by this reciprocal space vector. Evaluating the sum over k leads to where we use the sign change of V d,intra q=Γ , as discussed in Sec. III A, and set V (Γ) = -|V (Γ) |. From here it is easy to see that φ kF is maximal if φ kF-M = -φ kF , which is just the symmetry observed in Fig. From the results presented in this section one can conclude that spin fluctuation mediated pairing cannot be the prevailing mechanism in monolayer FeSe on STO. The onset of superconductivity as found here does not compare well with experimentally obtained values of T c ∼ 60 -100 K Now we want to examine the influence of two specific aspects within the tight-binding model used for the calculation. On the one hand we dope the system by means of a global chemical potential, ξ kn → ξ kn -μ with μ = 140 meV. This significantly increases the size of our electronic FS pockets, while placing the hole bands at rather deep energies, which are not confirmed by experiment, see Ref. When examining a decrease in distance between the bottom of the electron band at X and the top of hole bands at M we do not find any superconductivity for J = U/10 in Fig. It has been proposed that the just-discussed incipient band coupling can provide an explanation for the high critical temperature in FeSe/STO, imposing an uncon-ventional pairing mechanism To further examine the relevance of incipient pairing within our theory, we now remove all hole bands in the electron dispersions and couplings artificially on the level of Matsubara kernels from Eq. For cutoff ω cut = 0.21 eV we find a decrease of T c from 9.0 K to 7.6 K due to neglecting the hole bands, while the critical temperature goes from 10.6 K to 8.8 K for frequency ω cut = 0.45 eV. Hence we find that both cases almost 85% of the stems from the electron bands only. This in turn reveals that the of hole bands is rather minor in monolayer FeSe, compared to its bulk parent compound. From the results Fig. tory enhancement of T c to values near the experimentally observed ones in a full bandwidth Eliashberg theory for spin fluctuations. We now want to compare our results to computationally less demanding and more effective theories, as they are rather commonly employed In Eq. ( A less drastic approximation can be made by neglecting only the Matsubara frequency components but keeping the full momentum dependence. The selfconsistent BCS equation for the superconducting gap is then found as with E kn = ∆ 2 kn + ξ 2 kn Our calculations in the current section reveal that spinfluctuation mediated pairing is drastically overestimated within theories as BCS that neglect any frequency dependence The inset of Fig. Let us start from the BCS Eq. ( Since in the unfolded BZ only a single band is crossing the Fermi level we omit the band index n and get The leading instability occurs at q = M , so we write V q = V δ(q -M ) with V a function of the intraorbital coupling only. Using the sign change among FS pockets which can be solved graphically as function of V = V (U ), see Fig. As an alternative one can start from an estimate of the scaling for V (U ) by considering the spin susceptibility in Eq. We fit the zero-frequency maximum kernel for the superconducting channel by and find U crit = 1.594 eV. If ∆ kF is sufficiently large we can neglect the hyperbolic tangent in Eq. ( From the above discussions we learn that the scaling of the interaction kernel is directly translated to the order parameter, leading to a 1/U divergence of the superconducting gap as U → U crit in the BCS approximation. Such a behavior does not correspond to the actual physical situation and is an artifact of a too simplistic modeling. Below we show that such a divergence does not occur in our Eliashberg formalism due to the explicit inclusion of the electronic mass renormalization. We use similar assumptions as before, i.e. we confine Matsubara frequency indices to m = m = 0 and k at the Fermi level. The latter condition within Eliashberg theory translates as ξ kn +Γ kn (0) = 0, hence we only consider Eqs. ( Taking the kernel again as V q = V δ(q -M ), together with Z kF-M = Z kF leads to Z kF ∼ 1 + V /π 2 T Z kF . The solution to this second order polynomial is given by Next, we assume that the mass renormalization does not change significantly when going to the superconducting state. The order parameter can then be simplified as kF , where we use similar arguments that led to Eqs. In Fig. From these results we learn two important aspects: First, the Eliashberg formalism employed in this work removes the unphysical divergence of the superconducting gap (and hence T c ) as function of U . This is due to a mild divergence of the mass renormalization, which counteracts the scaling of the interaction kernel, ∆ grows only linear with U in the instability region close to magnetic On the other hand, we can consider our results for the superconducting gap, and hence the transition temperatures, of Fig. Before formulating our conclusions it is appropriate to discuss possible limitations of the here-developed formalism. First, to start with, there is the influence that the employed tight-binding energy bands could have. For example, the tight-binding models used here do not account for spin-orbit coupling. Nonetheless, we have taken care to simulate the influences due to changes in the near-Fermi energy bands of FeSe/STO in Sec. III C and did not find an appreciable change in the superconductivity characteristics. We have furthermore performed our simulations in the unfolded, instead of the folded BZ due to computational performance, but changes due to this aspect are presumably small as well. Second, in the theory presented in Sec. II we introduce a frequency cutoff to truncate the real-frequency dependent kernels when transforming into Matsubara space. This particular cutoff is one of the key ingredients to find selfconsistent solutions in the superconducting state. With this procedure, we are able to controllably remove the Stoner continuum-like incoherent end of the magnetic spectrum and the concomitant high energy diverging tendencies which are not relevant to the low-energy superconducting phenomena. Ideally, these high-energy degrees of freedom should be integrated out and used to renormalize the remaining interactions, in a manner similar to the well-known treatment of the Coulomb interaction in the electron-phonon problem that leads to the low-energy Coulomb pseudopotential μ * Third, as a further step closer to the definite answer to the superconductivity mediating mechanisms in bulk FeSe and FeSe/STO, Eliashberg theory calculations, wherein both spin fluctuations and electron-phonon coupling are treated on the same footing are required. Nonetheless, a clear hint towards the outcome of such an investigation is provided in this work, together with studies Summarizing, we have presented a full Eliashberg treatment of spin-fluctuations mediated superconductivity with broad applicability. While our results for bulk and monolayer FeSe are representative for a wide spectrum in the class of iron-based superconductors, the herepresented Eliashberg formalism provides a way of examining the influence of magnetic fluctuations in arbitrary materials, with and without superconductivity. With a faithful tight-binding model for bulk FeSe as the only input needed for our treatment, we achieve for FeSe good agreement with known experimental quantities in the superconducting state: our maximum gap is 1.4 meV, compared to measurements that yield 1.67 meV Applying the same methodology to monolayer FeSe on STO we find a clear discrepancy between computed results for the superconducting state and well established experimental facts as e.g. the critical temperature. Although the tight-binding model we use for our main findings might deviate to some degree from reality, we have explicitly tested the influence of changing the FS size and distance between electron and hole bands. For the former situation, i.e. a rigid shift in the electronic dispersions, the maximum gap size is increased to ∼ 7 meV. Changing the electron-hole distance on the other hand leads to even ∼ 8 meV, which is not far from experimental values. The critical temperature, however, does not noticeably increase and stays at the order of 10 K. Our results further indicate that band incipiency has on T c and therefore, solely spin fluctuation in combination with band incipiency cannot explain superconductivity in FeSe/STO. As we showed, the T c value computed with full-bandwidth Eliashberg theory is notably lower than that predicted by BCS theories based on spin fluctuations, due to approximations involved in the latter. We have explicitly shown that within Eliashberg theory there exists an upper limit to the obtained T c as U → U crit , in contrast to BCS theory calculations where the gap values and critical temperatures can be almost arbitrarily increased by choosing U close to U crit of the antiferromagnetic transition. This emphasizes an important quantitative limitation of the RPA-BCS approach one should be aware of when comparing with experiments. Overall, our results lead us to surmise that superconductivity due to spin and charge fluctuations could be possible in FeSe/STO, but only at temperatures slightly larger than the T c ∼ 8 K of bulk FeSe. Consequently, we conclude that a spin-fluctuations mechanism alone cannot explain the observed high T c and that another, dominant pairing mechanism such as interfacial electron-phonon coupling must be responsible. where we used k = kq in the first step and replaced k → k in the second step. This expression simply means that the system's linear response respects causality. We hence calculate the imaginary susceptibilities only for ω < 0. The delta function in Eq. ( with the broadening matrix that adapts to the electronic velocities. The parameter α can be chosen close to unity and ∆k is the spacing of the momentum grid As stated in the main text, the real bare susceptibility is found by using a Kramers-Kronig relation. The integration bounds of ±∞, see Eq. ( Re χ 0 q (ω) Let us now turn to characteristic properties of the bare susceptibility. The real part in Eq. ( We plot χ 0 as function of temperature in Fig. For RPA susceptibilities we keep only the imaginary parts from solutions to Eqs. ( where L o is the number of orbitals and Note that this mapping is unidirectional, i.e. from knowing p, q, s, t one cannot solve for the associated i, j analytically. One can, however, at any time convert the matrices back to four-rank tensors numerically, so the mapping can be considered invertible. For implementing Eqs. The integral in Eq. ( To summarize, we realize a relative shift of the hole bands by diagonalizing Ĥ0 , which gives the matrix elements â. These are used to calculate Ĥ 0 from Eq. (C2), which again needs to be made diagonal to have access to the desired dispersion ξ and the associated â . The discussions in Sec. III C are made for energies as plotted in Fig. Both rigid and nonrigid shifts produce changes in the bare susceptibilities due to the evaluation of Fermi-Dirac functions in Eq. ( 