Capturing the interplay between electronic correlations and many-particle entanglement requires a unified framework for Hamiltonian and eigenbasis renormalization. In this work, we apply the unitary renormalization group (URG) scheme developed in a companion work Strongly correlated electron systems on a lattice in two spatial dimensions or higher are known to host several exotic emergent quantum phenomena that are yet to be understood clearly, e.g., high-T c superconductivity, non-Fermi liquids, topological order, many body localization Such careful computations has led to a better quantification of the effective theories in terms of measurables like susceptibility, spectral function etc In this work, we apply a novel unitary RG (URG) method developed in Refs. For the electronic Sachdev-Ye (SY 4 ) model, we perform a URG study by disentangling electronic states that are ordered in terms of their on-site energy (from higher to lower). By placing the model on a D spatial-dimensional volume describing a specified geometry, we obtain a variety of phases from numerical evaluations of the RG equations obtained from the URG procedure. Some of these are described by effective Hamiltonians that possess translational invariant, while some other that do not. The former category includes the phases observed for the single band four-fermi interacting model discussed above. Among the phases that lack translation invariance, our analysis reveals glassy variants of the Fermi liquid as well as non-Fermi liquid phases, and display features of the phenomenon of many body localization (MBL). On the other hand, we also find regimes describing thermalized phases, where the effective stable fixed point theory is related to the parent SY 4 model via marginal deformations, as well as a phase corresponding to the Anderson model of disordered noninteracting electrons. Importantly, in keeping with our presentation in Ref. In a companion manuscript We represent a general fermionic Hamiltonian H as a 2 × 2 block matrix in the number-occupation basis of an electronic state. By performing a Gauss-Jordan elimination of one of the blocks via a rotation of the many-particle eigenbasis, we obtain a block-diagonal representation of the matrix. Such a procedure can be realized as a unitary transformation U of the Hamiltonian, H = U HU † . The unitary transformation U (j) is identified as a disentangler that separate an electronic state j from the rest in the renormalization group step j. Below, we present the form of the U -operation where η † (j) and η (j) are electron-hole transition operators fulfilling the algebra {η † (j) , η (j) } = 1 and [η † (j) , η (j) ] = 2n j -1. Importantly, note that U (j) can also be represented as the exponential of a phase operator corresponding to a rotation of π/2 in the many-particle state space gathered via the generator i(η (j) -η † (j) ). The operator η (j) is written in terms of 2n-point offdiagonal scattering vertices (with respect to a given electronic state j) in the numerator and diagonal 2n-point vertices in the denominator Here, ω(j) represents the quantum fluctuation operator, and accounts for the noncommutativity between different off-diagonal 2n-point vertices. It is mathematically defined as where the number diagonal part of the Hamiltonian (H D (j) ) is associated with n-particle self/correlation energies, and the term H X, j (j) represents coupling only among the other degrees of freedom {1, . . . , j -1}. ω(j) can be given a spectral decomposition as follows where |Φ i (j) are eigenstates of ω(j) , and ω i (j) are the quantum fluctuation eigenvalues. At each RG step, the ω (j) attains a block-diagonal form. We note that if in a number-occupation subspace P , the off-diagonal vertices attain an RG fixed point, then the fluctuation operator attains a number diagonal form in that subspace: P ω(j * ) P = H D (j * ) . Thus, stable fixed points are identified by the fact that |Φ i become simultaneous eigenstates of H D (j * ) and ω (j * ) . The RG flow equation for the Hamiltonian is given by and with the above form for the unitary map eq.( The first and second terms represent H D (j-1) and H X, j (j-1) mentioned above, while the third represents the off-diagonal processes (H X,j (j) ) that are responsible for quantum fluctuations in the occupation number of state j. Note that the above Hamiltonian H (j-1) commutes with N -j Pauli-Z gates τ i = ni -1/2 (i = j, . . . , N ). The Hamiltonian H can be interpreted as a tensor network formed from the 2npoint vertex tensors We now explain the various terms and notations in the above equation. Eq.8 shows the decomposition of the Hamiltonian into number-diagonal H D (j) and offdiagonal H X (j) parts. The index i ranges from 1 to 2 j-1 , and labels the eigenbasis element |Φ i (j) of ω(j) in the entangled subspace of j electronic states. The index α := {(l, μ)} is a set of paired labels: l labels the electronic states participating in the entangled subspace and μ = (0, 1) represents an electron occupied/unoccupied state. Therefore, c † α represents a string of electron creation and annihilation operators. The index α := {(l, μ)} is similar to α: l represents the same collection of indices, but where μ is the complement of μ, i.e., μ = 1, 0 refers to unoccupied (1) and occupied (0). The symbol Γ 2n,(j) αβ represents the collection of 2n-point offdiagonal vertex tensors, with β being an index defined similarly to α. Finally, a j represents the maximum order of the off-diagonal vertex tensor. The iterative unitary mapping of the Hamiltonian generates an RG flow for the vertex tensor network ∆Γ 2n,(j) αβ where 2n = p 1 + p 3 -2p 2 . The RG flow equation for the eigenstate of the Hamiltonian is given by where . There are N -j good quantum numbers at RG step j, such that the state |Ψ i (j) satisfies the following eigenvalue relation As a result, the many-body state |Ψ i (j-1) can be represented as a coefficient tensor network The coefficient C i,(j) α is a tensor with m legs representing the superposition weight of the configurations with m occupied electronic states. α represents a set of electronic labels for the occupied electronic states. |Q j represents the occupationnumber configuration of the disentangled states. In another recent work where N (j) is the normalization. Here, α := {(l, μ)} is a ordered set of m pairs of indices with μ = 1 throughout and 1 ≤ l < j. α := {(a, μ)} is an ordered set of p pairs of indices (p < m) and μ = 0 throughout. Note that the electronic state labels that comprise α is a subset of those within α . Finally, β := {(b, μ)} is an ordered set of 2n -p pairs of indices with μ = 1 throughout. The set β is an ordered set of m -2p + 2n pairs of indices that emerges from the convolution of the sets above, β := (β ∪ γ ) -γ. The sign sgn(α, α , β) is the net phase gathered via counting the number of electrons exchanged in the scattering process ∆Γ 2n β α involving a string of 2n -p electron creation and p annhilation operators Here p k=1 P k and 2n-p k=1 Q k are the net phases that arises from the number of electron exchanged via the string of electron annihilation and creation operators respectively. Below, we quantify the phases P k and Q k Finally, in the definition of Q k , the number count n i = 1 if i ∈ α and 0 otherwise. Importantly, we note that in cases when pairs of electronic states condense into bounds states, the fermion exchange sign trivializes to sgn(α, α , β) = 1 in the RG equation Relation between thermal (k B T ) and quantum (ω) fluctuation energy scales In the URG formalism, the renormalized Hamiltonian is partitioned in various eigen-subspaces (|Φ i (j) in eq.( The above relation shows that the finite lifetime (τ ) of the single-particle states with self-energy Σ can be viewed as an effective temperature scale arising out of the unitary disentanglement: it is the highest temperature upto which the one-particle excitations can survive, and are replaced by 2e-1h composite excitation beyond. We will see in later sections that the RG transformations lead generically to either a gapped or a gapless phase. For the first case, the above equation quantifies the thermal upper bound for the validity of the emergent condensate. On the other hand, for the second scenario, it indicates the lifetime of the gapless excitations in the neighbourhood of the Fermi surface. As any nonlocal unitary rotation can be decomposed as a tensor product of 2local and local qubit rotations, the unitary operators of the URG framework form a entanglement holographic mapping network We have given an explicit demonstration of this entropy bound for the parent metallic state and the insulating ground state of the 2D Hubbard model at halffillingin Ref. Here φ 1,l |φ 0,l = 0 = Ψ 1,(j) |Ψ 0,(j) . Note that for l < j, the electronic state is a part of the entangled subspace, ensuring that the Schmidt coefficients a 1 and a 0 take values between 0 and 1. The states |Ψ 0,(j) and |Ψ 1,(j) can be written in terms of the coefficient tensors as follows 1,(j) Here the labels α 1 and β 1 represent the collection of electronic states that are occupied. Given the orthogonality condition Ψ 0,(j) |Ψ 1,(j) = 0, the Schmidt coefficients have the following expression with the constraint a 2 1,(j) + a 2 0,(j) = 1. The one-electron entanglement entropy is obtained in terms of Schmidt coefficients where x = 1 -4a 2 1,(j) a 2 0,(j) . We now obtain the leading terms in S (j) for two extreme cases: (i) when the URG flow leads to IR fixed points where the ground state is completely separable, and (ii) when the URG flow generates a highly entangled subspace in the IR. For case (i), and with x = 1 -( → 0), we have For case (ii0, with x → 0, we find Next, we will obtain the renormalization of entanglement entropy S 1 (j) for case (i) in the lowest order of ∆C Note that for a separable state, either a 1,(j) → 1 or a 0,(j) → 1, resulting in Similarly, for highly entangled states in case (ii), ∆S 2 (j) (k) = β 1 4Re(C 1,(j) β 1 ). Finally, note that, following the Ryu-Takyanagi formula where N (j) (R) is the number of electrons in the region R that belong to the entangled subspace at RG step j. In a later section, we will obtain the entropy bound scaling relation for various gapless and gapped IR fixed points obtained from a generic strongly correlated model. Tensor RG theory for the single band four-fermi interacting model The URG formalism, introduced in a companion work where p is the net pair-momentum and k-k is the momentum transfer. The fourfermion interaction vertex can be compactly represented as V αβ = V σσ kk p , where α := {(k, σ, 1); (p -k, σ , 1)}, β := {(p -k , σ , 0); (k , σ, 0)}, and the indices 1 and 0 represent the c † and c operators respectively. The zero momentum transfer vertices are denoted as V αα (where α = {(k, σ, 0); (p -k, σ , 0)}). For an overall understanding of the various zero temperature phases, we develop below the Hamiltonian renormalization group scheme eq.( where the form of the e-h transition operators η (j,l) are shown in eq.( 3.1. Derivation of the RG equation for 1 particle self energy Σ kσ (ω) Translational invariance of H SF IM ensures that the two-point vertices are purely number diagonal in momentum space: Γ 2,(j) Λ,ŝ (ω (j) ). Further, from eq.( Here, G 6,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) and G 10,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) are Green's function operators that contain the kinetic and interaction energies of three particles and five particles respectively, with explicit forms given by G 6,(j) and respectively. The labels α, γ and α are defined similar to that discussed below eq.( αβ and Γ 6 αβ Using the RG flow equation heirarchy of eq.( Here, G 4,(j,l) γγ (ω (j,l) ), G 6,(j,l) γγ (ω (j,l) ), G 8,(j,l) γγ (ω (j,l) ) are four-, six-and eight-point Green's functions respectively. We also note that the four-point off-diagonal vertex scattering between normals ŝ and ŝ takes places either directly (ŝ → ŝ ) or via correlated (i.e., higher order) tangential scattering processes (e.g., ŝ → ŝ1 → ŝ , ŝ → ŝ1 → ŝ2 → ŝ ). Taken together, the first term in eq.( 4,(j) γnγ n Γ 4,(j) In the above expression, the renormalization contribution from the k-correlated 4-point off-diagonal scattering vertex (i.e., Γ 4 G 4 Γ 4 . . . k-times . . . Γ 4 G 4 Γ 4 ) for a Ddimensional system scales with volume as L (k-1)(D-1) L -kD = L -D-k+1 . Thus, in the thermodynamic limit (TL, L → ∞), the leading contribution comes from the k = 2 scattering (in comparison to all k > 2 processes). The same holds true for the Γ 6 G 8 Γ 6 and Γ 6 G 6 Γ 4 renormalization contributions to Γ 4,(j) in eq.( Accounting for the leading contributions in the thermodynamic limit, a compact form of the flow equations for 4-point vertices and 6 point off-diagonal vertices is given by ∆Γ 4,(j) Finally, the RG flow equations for the 6-point diagonal vertices are given by ∆Γ 6,(j) In the above flow equations, the Green's functions G 2,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) and G 8,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) contain the energy contributions from one-particle self energies, as well as two-and three-particle correlation energies. The form of the two-particle The four-particle Green's function G 8,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) can be obtained similarly, while the three-particle Green's function G 6,(j) γγ (ω (j) ) has already been given earlier. An important point can now be made. When relevant under RG flow, the contribution of six-point scattering vertices Γ 6,(j) αβ is responsible for the dynamical mixing of opposite spin electron-electron and electron-hole configurations. This feature results from the non-commutativity between the composite electron creation operator (1 -nkσ )c † k σ and the ee/eh pseudospin pair operators This is manifested in the RG equations of Γ 4,(j) , obtained in a rotated basis of occupied and unoccupied electronic states ∆Γ 4,(j) where the ee/eh hybridized pair-dispersion is given by In the above RG equation, the indices α, β, γ, α , β , γ 1 are related as follows: for In order to manifest the dominant effect of the six-point off-diagonal vertices, the hybridisation parameter p(ω) is chosen so as to maximize the spin-charge hybridized Green's function G p,j (ω H (j) We begin with an illustration in Fig. respectively. The notation αβ and αα employed for the 4-point vertices are 4-element sets chosen as follows: where the first two indices label the state and μ = 1, 0 represents creation or annhilation operation on that state and μ is its compliment. Similarly, the 6-point vertices are decomposed into diagonal Γ 6,(j) Again, the notation αβ and αα for the six point vertices are 6-element sets chosen as follows: Given the complex tensorial structure of the vertices, a simplified representation is needed by which families of RG flow equations can be characterized into different phases. Thus, we define the quantities Importantly, we add that our analysis is confined to models with off-diagonal 4point vertices that are either V σσ kk p < 0 or V σσ kk p > 0 for all k, k , p. It is clear from this assumption that -1 < r σσ ,(j) p < 1, 0 < s σσ σ,(j) < 1. As shown in Tables Fermi liquid theory leading to the RG irrelevance for both the off-diagonal and diagonal vertices, i.e., ) → 0. Further, condition 2 in regime I ensures that in the limit of large system sizes (L → ∞), the off-diagonal vertices vanishes V σσ ,(j) k,k ,p → 0, whereas the diagonal vertices reach a intermediate value given by the fixed point condition (corresponding to a vanishing of the denominator in eq.( The tree diagram Fig. For a quantitative demonstration of the Fermi liquid fixed point theory from our URG analysis, we numerically analyse below the URG equations for various 2-and 3-particle vertices, the 1-particle self-energy (Σ) and the quasiparticle residue (Z). For this, we consider a screened interaction potential V (|q|) = η 2 V (0)/(q 2 + η 2 ), with V (0) = 20.5, η = 0.2, a two-dimensional circular Fermi surface with |k F | = π/20 and ω = Λ 0 + 0.1 (Regime-I of Table 6,(j) αβ similar to Langer and Ambegaokar's definition of scattering phase shift The reduced BCS theory 6,(j) αβ has a negative signature: G 4,(j) k Λ j ŝ,p appears in the RG flow eq.( ) are RG irrelevant. Further, condition 4 ensures that all scattering vertices with identical spin (V σ,σ,(j) k,k ,p ) are RG irrelevant. Given the range of the fluctuation scale ω (j) in condition 1, and for This Green's function appears in the RG flow equation eq.( → 0, as shown in regime-II Table | L→∞ → 0+ in regime II. All of these features finally lead to the fixed point condition where we have used the band symmetry k = -k . Further, at this RG fixed point, the 1-particle self-energy Σ kk diverges. This can be seen as follows. The RG flow equation for Σ (j) k (eq.( From this relation, we see that the self-energy is RG relevant. For the electronic states labelled k (i.e., residing within the emergent window), the self-energy RG flow equation has a fixed point at Σ ŝ , indicating the breakdown of the Landau quasiparticles of the Fermi liquid. As discussed in an earlier section, the diverging self-energy corresponds to zeros in the single-particle Green's function This indicates the breakdown of the Luttinger volume sum-rule, i.e., N e = kσ G(k, ω) . Instead, we find that the total number of Cooper pairs N CP within the low-energy window equals the net Friedel's phase shift, ∆N = T r(log(U (j) )) = N CP ∈ 2Z, i.e., two electronic states are lost for each bound pair. This provides a way for taking accounts for the Luttinger surface of zeros where the set α = {(k Λ ŝ , σ); (-k Λ ŝ , -σ)}. This is the generalized reduced BCS Hamiltonian/pairing-force model In order to verify quantitatively the effective theory given in eq.52, we numerically simulated the RG equations for the bare couplings V X,p = -0.25, V D,p = 0.1 and the fluctuation energy scale ω = Λ 0 -0.5 (Regime-II in Table ) at low-energies, and the magnitude of V * X,p monotonically decreases with increasing pair-momentum (p). The relevance of off-diagonal p = 0 momentum scattering vertices, together with the RG irrelevance of number-diagonal scattering vertices, describes the effective Hamiltonian H * ,XY RBCS (eq.( Thus, the emergence of the constraint nk Λŝ σ = n-k Λŝ -σ describes the phenomenon of condensation of Cooper pairs within the low-energy window of the BCS fixed point theory. For the case of a spherical Fermi surface, i.e., Λŝ = Λ , the phase described by the BCS reduced model (eq.( The above equation is obtained from the self-energy of the electronic state at the momentum-space boundary of the emergent phase in eq.( , where 0 Λ j * is the bare dispersion magnitude. The temperature scale T * is greater than the critical temperature T c obtained from the BCS mean-field solution For the case when V σσ k,p > V σσ k,k ,p (regime-IV in Table As an outcome, the fixed point is described by a modified XXZ pseudospin Hamiltonian where is the value of the Ising coupling at the fixed point. The RG flow features for this phase is represented via the tree diagram Fig. In regime IV of Table finite p pair-momentum pseudospins attain a reduced BCS theory like fixed-point Hamiltonian. The fixed point is given by the condition 1 2 and with an effective fixed point Hamiltonian described by where the set ν = {(k Λŝ , σ); (p-k Λŝ , -σ)} corresponds to a pair of electronic states with net momentum p. The ground state of H * ,XY SP DW is composed of symmetryunbroken pair-density waves (SPDWs) Given that Ising terms are absent from the effective Hamiltonian, we obtain the quantity r σ,-σ,(j * ) p = -1 for the fixed point theory. The RG flow features for this phase is represented via the tree diagram in Fig. V. Reduced BCS theory for finite momentum pairs-XXZ regime Similarly, in regime V in Table Finite magnitudes for both the number-diagonal and off-diagonal interactions leads to the quantity r σ,-σ,(j * ) p=0 = -r, where r < 1. The tree diagram Fig. The above fixed point Hamiltonians for regimes I-V Table1 and 2 can be broadly classified into gapless and gapped phases. The Fermi liquid corresponds to the gapless phase containing purely number-diagonal interactions, such that H * F L eq(46) is purely number-diagonal in Fock space and various terms in it commute. Therefore, all the number operators nkσ corresponding to states |kσ (lying within the window whose boundaries are given by the states k Λ * ŝ, eq.( In this subsection, we explore the possibility of a metallic phase different from the Fermi liquid being found within the parameter space of the H SF IM model. For this, one possible distinguishing feature could be the nature of long-lived excitations in the proximity of the Fermi surface that replace the Landau quasiparticles of the Fermi liquid. Thus, we investigate the physics of the lowest-order decay channel of 1-particle (Landau quasiparticle) excitations, i.e., 2-electron 1-hole composites with a net charge e and net spin 1/2. Although 6-point (or 3-particle) scattering vertices are absent in the bare Hamiltonian H SF IM (eq.( Then, the RG flow equations for the 6-point diagonal (eq.( ∆Γ 6,(j) αα In the above expressions, G 6,(j) γγ is obtained from eq.( eigenconfiguration of the three-fermion string τ k Λ j ŝ1 σ σ p-k Λ j ŝ1 σ σ p-k Λŝ σ = -1 8 , leading to a negative sign in the RG equations given above in eqs.( p-k Λŝ > 0 , we have G 4,(j) γγ < 0 (eq As the 2-point Green's function G 2,σ,(j) γγ = (ω (j) -1 2 (j) ) > 0 carries positive signature in the energy range of eq.( In order to numerically evaluate the renormalized six-point vertices generated under RG and their precise ordering (eq.( where, by using eq.( In order to obtain the stable fixed point theory, we choose an intermediate configuration (n k Λ j ŝσ = 1, np-k Λ j ŝσ = 1, np -k Λ j ŝσ = 0) for the 6-point Green's function. The net configurational energy for such a composite 3-particle is given by a combination of their individual 1-particle energies and the net 3-particle energy Thus, the 6-point Green's function eq.( Figure The set γ = {(k Λŝ , σ, 1), (k , σ , 1), (k , -σ , 0)}, while the set γ involves the same momentum and spin labels, but with the 1s and 0s interchanged. In this basis, the RG flows for the off-diagonal 3-particle vertex and the diagonal 2-electron 1-hole dispersion are given by ∆Γ Finally, from the RG flow of the couplings eq.( Additionally, we note that given 1 2 ( 1 is immediately satisfied for the energy of the electron-occupied states lying above E F and the energy of the hole configuration lying below E F . At the fixed point theory, the dynamics of the states within the window 0 < Λ < Λ j * is governed by the effective Hamiltonian For Λ < 0.98Λ 0 , the RG flows of six-point vertices have no contribution from twoparticle vertices (as already observed in Fig. where is the collective energy due to 4-p 1-h intermediate configuration of electronic states. Here, E is the net energy due to 3-electron 2-hole composite given by eq.( where ∆ log b ŝ represent the uniform pieces of the off-diagonal/diagonal parts of the three-particle vertex. From eq.( Thus, the self energy for states near the F S has the universal k-independent form The real part of the self-energy in eq.( The finite T resistivity per unit length ρ(T )/L for layered 2d systems can be obtained from eq.( Here, ∆k = 2πL -1 is the momentum space lattice spacing, L is the system length, N e (E F ) number of electrons around FS that comprise the transport. This obtains a universal Planckian T -linear resistivity form starting from a very general microscopic single band model H SF IM , and supports various experimental observations and theoretical proposals The left and right panels of Fig. We have seen earlier that the off-diagonal three particle vertices causes dynamical mixing between electron-electron and electron-hole pairs (eq.( For the Umklapp and spin backscattering processes, the RG flow hierarchy yields The spin-type configuration 1e-1h/1h-1e for the set α is constrained by the relation and has an associated kinetic energy lying within the range The intermediate configuration of eq.( The operators A +/k,p corresponds to finite momentum pseudospin raising and lowering operators given in eq.( produce a log-divergence in the composite self-energy (shown in a companion manuscript where p = 1 -p, ee,(j) Similarly, the spin backscattering RG flow equation is given by ∆Γ leading to the effective pseudospin XXZ Hamiltonian given by Having numerically verified the RG flows to various IR fixed point theories, we can now gather all our results into the form of a RG phase diagram. In order to characterize efficiently various phases obtained from the RG flows for H SF IM , we define the following two quantities r 2 and r 3 The quantity -1 < r 2 < 1 represent the ratio of (i) the root mean square magnitude (RMS) for bare 4-point off-diagonal (OD) vertices, and (ii) the sum of the mean squares of 4-point diagonal (D) and OD vertices. Thus, r 2 carries the (+/-) sign for OD terms representing attractive/repulsive interactions respectively. Similarly, the quantity 0 ≤ r 3 ≤ 1 is the ratio of (i) the RMS for 6-point D vertices, and (ii) the square root sum of the mean squares of 6-point D and OD vertices. Recall that the index α represents a set of two (momentum, spin) indices for 2particle vertices (Γ 2 ) and a set of three (momentum, spin) indices for 3-particle vertices (Γ 3 ). We show below that the parameters r 2 and r 3 allow for an efficient encoding of the numerically evaluated RG flows shown earlier at various points. Fig. In this section, we analyze the RG scaling relations for the holographic entanglement entropy bound for the various phases of the H SF IM model obtained by isolating a given region R. Among the IR fixed points, the gapless theories reached via URG comprise the number-diagonal Hamiltonians for the Fermi liquid (eq.( Note that in arriving at this RG equation, we have restricted ourselves to the contributions from only 4-point (∆Γ 4,(j) μν ) vertex RG flows (eq.( μμ (c is a constant) and G -1 0,(j) = ω -(j) . This leads to the continuum RG equation for the scattering vertex where G -1 0,Λ = ω -v F Λ, we have assumed a spherical Fermi surface Λ j ŝ = v F Λ, and we have replaced the finite difference ∆(log Λ Λ 0 ) by the differential quantity In reaching eq.(94) from eq.( As we approach the Fermi surface, the coefficient tensor C 0,(j) α 1 (corresponding to the ground state configuration |α ) scale towards 1, while all other coefficients scale towards 0. As a result, the fermion signatures for the RG scaling towards the ground state vanish. Taking these points into account, we find that the entropy scaling relation is given by Finally, we obtain the holographic entanglement entropy bound obtained by isolating the Fermi surface (in two dimensions) from the rest of the system is given by For the MFL and reduced BCS theories, the entanglement entropy RG equations are given respectively by In the MFL, the renormalization is carried out primarily by six-point vertices as the quasiparticle degrees of freedom are ill-defined (eq. ( In Ref. where we have rewritten the pseudospin operator A o k Λ,ŝ as A o Λ,ŝ for o = (x, y, z), Λ = Λ + n δΛ, δΛ = 2πL -1 and ŝ = R m ŝ. This Wilson line can in turn be represented as a composition of local Wilson lines (green lines with arrows in Fig. where ) (ŝ 1 is the rotated normal Fig. )) represents the Wilson line for translation by δΛ along ŝ. Here, Rx = -sin θx + cos θŷ is the smallest δ rotation of the x vector normal to the FS. We adopt the gauge choice of first multiplying all Wilson lines along one direction, and then multiply the result obtained with the Wilson lines along the perpendicular direction. All other paths with the end points fixed are equivalent gauge choices, such that the net Wilson line is path independent. We will now define two sets of generalized translation and twist operators for the ŝ and ŝ⊥ directions Ôo The local Wilson lines along a reference pair of directions ŝ, ŝ⊥ = x,-ŷ (blue hatched/solid line in Fig. Wilson line along ŝ⊥ : ) Wilson line along ŝ : where the number of pseudospins is taken to be N = 2(2k + 1). The Wilson lines (W o F,x→Rx ,W o 0→δΛ,x ) in eq.( and where x are Wilson loops for the minor and major axis of the torus along the reference directions (solid blue/hatched lines). The interaction terms A o Λ,ŝ A o Λ ,ŝ can now be represented as the momentumspace projections of the product of translated Wilson loops as follows The reduced BCS Hamiltonian can in turn be written as a U (1) gauge theory in terms of non-local Wilson loops The above Hamiltonian commutes with the global Wilson loop given by where x is a Wilson loop obtained by translating W F by n units. Remarkably, the Wilson loop W (eq.( We will now present a simpler version of the above gauge theory for the case of the effective Hamiltonian H * ,XXZ RBCS with the couplings Γ where represent the various components of the collective pseudospin vector. We now define nonlocal versions of the twist operators in the space of pseudospins The collective pseudospin vectors can be written in terms of nonlocal twist ( Ôo ŝ ) and translation (T ŝ) operators. To show this, we obtain the following identity for the nonlocal Wilson loop composed of twist and translation operators For every normal vector ŝ, there exists a opposite normal vector -ŝ, such that the total number of pseudospins (N ) is even. Therefore, the overall phase collected from the strip along one of the minor circles of the torus is trivial: Thus, the collective pseudospin components A o can be represented by a nonlocal Wilson loop This enables us to write the Hamiltonian eq.( We will now display certain features of topological order for this emergent gauge theory, e.g., ground state degeneracy and charge fractionalisation. Note that the transformations carried out by T ŝ eq(103) impart equal and opposite momentum to opposite spin electrons, k Λ,ŝ , ↑→ k Λ+δΛ,ŝ , ↑ and k Λ,-ŝ , ↓→ k Λ+δΛ,-ŝ , ↓, such that there is no net pair momentum p = 0. This observation supports the following representation of T ŝ in the position basis where the spacing in the momentum along ŝ is δΛ = 2π N . A degeneracy of the ground state manifold can show up in its nontrivial topology. Below we probe this using spectral flow arguments that originated with the work of Lieb, Schultz and Mattis The Hamiltonian H * ,XXZ RBCS commutes with S z = r S z r , and its low-energy manifold is comprised of states |S = 2k + 1, S z = 0 with net S z = 0. Using the fact that the total number of pseudospins N = 2(2k +1) = L x L y (i.e., L x , L y corresponds to the number of pseudospins along the x and y directions of the torus), the second exponential term in the above expression is simple: In this way, we obtain an equivalent of the LSM relation implies that the eigenstates of the twist operator T ŝ (corresponding to eigenstates of the center of mass momentum P cm = 0, πŝ) are simultaneously eigenstates of the Hamiltonian. Therefore, the two groundstates |P cm = 0, S = 2k + 1, S z = 0 and |P cm = πŝ, S = 2k + 1, S z = 0 , both possessing ground state energy E g = -J ⊥ (2k + 1)(2k + 2), are degenerate and protected from excitations via a manybody gap 2J ⊥ (2k + 1). The adiabatic passage between these degenerate ground states, achieved via the application of the twist operator T ŝ, involves the creation of a charge-1/2 excitation In order to understand the interplay between disorder and interactions in a model of correlated electrons and place it on a D spatial-dimensional volume containing 2N points and with a specified geometry. Here, the indices ranging i ∈ [1, 2N ] (2N being number of points) correspond to the real-space position vectors r i . The terms V σσ ijkl = V σσ * klij , t ji = t ij and iσ are random tensors drawn from separate Gaussian distributions, each with a well-defined mean and standard deviation. The single particle energies iσ can be sorted as follows and employed for implementing the iterative steps of the unitary RG, (here disorder bandwidth is defined as W = N -1 ). The Hamiltonian RG flow equation is given by eq.( We note that a similar decomposition for the 2-point Green's function was carried out by Ishikawa and Matsuyama On the other hand, the RG flows for the single-particle self-energy Σ i ) are observed to grow in Fig. Finally, the left panel of Fig. Taken together, Figs.26 and 27 establish that in Regime III, the IR fixed point effective Hamiltonian is that for disordered noninteracting electrons with long range hopping (H III in Table In this work, we have applied the URG formalism In the generalised Sachdev-Ye (SY 4 ) model, the non-translationally invariant (NTI) phases can be separated into two subclasses: one with remnant electronic interactions and the other without. The first NTI subclass contains many-body localised (MBL) and thermalized phases. Our study reveals the MBL phases to be glassy variants of the Fermi and non-Fermi liquid phases. On the other hand, we find that the thermalized phase is described by a theory that involves only a marginal deformation of the parent Hamiltonian (H SY 4 ), and involves a strong interplay between fermion exchange signatures and electronic correlation. The second NTI subclass contains a phase corresponding to the Anderson model of disordered electrons. Further, there is also a finite parameter-space window obtained from the SY 4 for translationally invariant (TI) models such as H SF IM , which upon further renormalization lead to the various metallic and insulating phases described earlier for H SF IM . We have also shown that the entanglement renormalization towards gapless and gapped IR phases is distinct: while gapless phases are characterised by the presence of fermion exchange phases along the RG flow, the passage to gapped phases displays the mitigation of the effects arising from fermion signs. This is due to the fact that dominant RG flow in the latter case occurs in a reduced pseudospin subspace where the elementary degrees of freedoms are pairwise electronic states. Furthermore, we obtained the RG scaling form for the holographic entropy bound of the Fermi liquid phase, and argued with regards to its distinction from that for the marginal Fermi liquid and reduced BCS phases. We also showed separately that the effective IR theories for gapped models support a gauge-theoretic description. In this way, the URG offers an ab-initio formulation of the gauge-gravity duality: the passage from UV to IR involves the holographic generation of spacetime via entanglement renormalization The net correlation energy for the five electronic states E j 5,1 close to the Fermi surface in eqs.( + 1 N j l,k<j,r (V σσ,(j) (r, r ij , r il )) 2 G 6,σσ ,(j) jlk , (B.7) With these RG equations in place, we have laid the platform for investigating the low energy fixed point Hamiltonians of various quantum fluctuation energy scales and parameter regimes. Table 2: Table representing various parameter space regimes (Column II) and the associated flow of quantities describing nature of fixed point theory (Column III). Regimes IV, V, VI leads to fixed point Hamiltonians H * ,XY SP DW , H * ,XXZ SP DW , H * M F L respectively in main text. σσ,(j) k,k ,p V σ -σ,(j) k,k ,p Γ 6,(j) Γ 6,(j) αα Γ 6,(j) αβ T r(η (j) -η † (j) ). Further, we note that this is