In this article, we present a nano-electromechanical system (NEMS) designed to detect changes in the Casimir Energy. The Casimir effect is a result of the appearance of quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic vacuum. Previous experiments have used nano-or microscale parallel plate capacitors to detect the Casimir force by measuring the small attractive force these fluctuations exert between the two surfaces. In this new set of experiments, we aim to directly detect shifts in the Casimir energy in the vacuum due to the presence of metallic parallel plates, one of which is a superconductor. A change in the Casimir energy of this configuration is predicted to shift the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) because of an interaction between it and the superconducting condensation energy. The experiment we discuss consists of taking a superconducting film, carefully measuring its transition temperature, bringing a conducting plate close to the film, creating a Casimir cavity, and then measuring the transition temperature again. The expected shifts will be small, comparable to the normal shifts one sees in cycling superconducting films to cryogenic temperatures and so using a NEMS resonator and doing this in situ is the only practical way to obtain accurate, reproducible data. Using a thin Pb film and opposing Au surface, we observe no shift in Tc greater than 12 μK down to a minimum spacing of approximately 70 nm. The Casimir force was first derived in 1948 as a result of calculating the van der Waals force using retarded potentials Given that the metallic conductivity changes the magnitude of the Casimir force, the question immediately comes to mind "what happens if the plates become superconducting?" The answer sadly is "not much." The Casimir Effect averages the conductivity of the material over very large energy scales while the superconducting gap is relevant only for the far IR However, as pointed out in work by Bimonte and co-workers (Hc||(T)) 2  F(T) Ref. Where Econd(T) is due to superconductivity and ECas(T) is due to the Casimir Energy. For small modulations in this Casimir term, the critical field is modulated by a factor proportional to the ratio ΔECas/Econd. Calculations done in ref. There are a number of experimental challenges posed by the concept shown in Figure Experiments are performed by assembling a target chip and a source chip into a single package, cooling the system down to cryogenic temperatures, depositing a superconducting thin film onto the target die and forming a Casimir cavity, characterizing the film, then dynamically tuning the size of the Casimir cavity while monitoring the film resistance. Ex situ characterization of the film and cavity using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) is also done after the experiment is complete. The following results are presented according to this sequence. The non-rigid Casimir cavity imposes serious nanofabrication challenges that must be overcome to successfully obtain a functional device. Firstly, due to process incompatibilities we need to be able to deposit the superconducting sample underneath the metallic plate after releasing the movable structures. Secondly, due to the oxidation of the thin film, the evaporation and resistance measurement need to be done without breaking vacuum conditions. Finally, low temperatures can be used to reduce the migration of the evaporated material along the substrate enabling high quality films. Figure After the system is cooled to ≈ 3 K, the micro-sources are slowly heated until evaporation of the Pb occurs. By applying short voltage pulses through the micro-sources, very small amounts of material can be evaporated in a controlled manner. Because the target die is cooled to cryogenic temperatures, the Pb reaching the target forms a quenched-condensed film of just 20 nm to 30 nm (see ex situ AFM results). According to the mask pattern displayed in figure Shown in figure The experiment is carried out by setting the temperature of the cryostat to the steepest point of the transition (T ≈ 6.88 K), where the measured resistance is most sensitive to changes in temperature. Then, the plate drive voltage is swept through its mechanical resonance while measuring the modulation of the resistance of the sample at the mechanical motion frequency. By operating the NEMS around resonance, we are not only able to produce large changes in gap size, but also perform the measurement at a high frequency (> 1 MHz) which greatly reduces measurement noise. Plotted in figure The abscissa of the plots in figure After running the experiment in the cryostat, SEM and AFM characterization of the nanocavity (with the top Au surface removed) is performed. In Figure Because the plate comes into contact with the oxide pillars, it is possible to estimate the vertical displacement of the center of the plate, however in order to do this, an assumption of the shape of the deformed Au must be made. The difficulty of this estimate is that the stress state of the suspended Au layer at cryogenic temperature is unknown. Using a series of finite element simulations, a likely range of minimum Au/Pb spacing (i.e. when the amplitude of the plate is maximum) is estimated to be between 63 nm and 73 nm. Across the entire length of the sample, the average Au/Pb spacing at maximum amplitude is estimated to lie in between 85 nm and 141 nm. This analysis is explained further in Methods. We have developed a platform based on a variable gap cavity including a Au nanoscale mechanical resonator and a high-quality quenched-condensed superconductor film, enabling simultaneous electro-mechanical control of the nanometric gap between plates and transport measurement of the superconducting film using a four-probe configuration. The high frequency detection method presented makes use of the natural resonance of the plate to obtain large modulations of cavity size and allows for phase sensitive detection of changes in the sample resistance due to plate motion only. In this set of experiments, the temperature of the cryostat is set to the steepest part of the superconducting transition (T ≈ 6.88 K) and three long-duration sweeps are made driving the plate to resonance from low to high frequency until it abruptly loses amplitude due to its nonlinear resonant response. An important feature in the plate response is the evidence in all three trials of a sudden clear deviation from the Duffing-nonlinear oscillator model in the amplitude and phase behavior occurring at around 811.2 kHz. This is due to the onset of the plate interacting with the oxide stops. Any additional non-linearities in the plate mechanics due to deformation alone would not appear in this discontinuous manner, but instead would likely appear gradually. In addition, the amplitude is nearly fixed beyond this point, which is further indication of contact. Upon contacting the pillars, the maximum peak displacement of the most deflected point on the plate center line is estimated to be between 183 nm and 193 nm, resulting in a minimum Casimir cavity size of between 63 nm and 73 nm. Along the entire length of the superconducting sample and plate center, we estimate the average gap size at closest approach to be in between 85 nm and 141 nm. After the plate reaches its maximum amplitude at resonance (around 815 kHz), the plate amplitude abruptly drops to zero and the undeflected Casimir cavity size returns to ≈ 256 nm. This jump is where we might expect to see more clearly a corresponding change in the sample resistance if there were indeed a dependence of the superconducting transition temperature on the cavity size, however no such statistically-significant correlation is observed. Another feature of the high frequency ΔT measurements are seemingly random jumps of (300 to 400) μK. The cause of these instabilities is unknown; however, based on analyzing the three trials together, we do not believe they are related to the plate position. For example, in trial #1, we observe a large displacement at 820 kHz, which is well after the large plate oscillations have ceased. In trial #2, there is a large jump that is interestingly close to the minimum gap range, but a closer inspection of the data in figure In order to accurately quantify the uncertainty of the temperature measurement, we first consider this stochastic spread of the raw data as well as the uncertainty in the slope of the transition. For this value, we use the lower 95 % confidence bound of the slope (11 kΩ/K) in order to conservatively claim a resolution. Using one standard deviation from each dataset shown in the green areas of figure We look for the change in the critical temperature at the point of the abrupt change from high amplitude vibration to almost negligible vibration of the plate. At this jump, we quantify the change in the measured data by averaging 4 individual ΔT points immediately before and immediately after the jump and subtracting the averaged values. The average difference from the three experimental runs is (7 ± 12) μK. Thus, any effect of plate position on the transition temperature of the superconductor in our system is well below the one standard deviation statistical uncertainty of 12 μK. In all three trials, no clear correlation between plate amplitude or position and transition temperature is observed above our measurement resolution of 28 μK, and from the three trials combined, no change in Tc is observed to exceed the one standard deviation uncertainty of 12 μK. There are a few reasons which may explain this null result. No observation of this effect may be due to one or more of the following: 1). geometrical limitations, 2). superconductor limitations, 3). theoretical uncertainties. In the first case, the device geometry may not allow for a small enough cavity to clearly observe a shift. The minimum cavity size we are able to reach with the current configuration is at best on the order of 70 nm. Although this brings us into a theoretically interesting range, it may not be small enough to produce a measurable shift with the current materials. The uncertainty in the exact gap size exists due to the uncertain stress in the structure near 7 K, which is expanded upon in the Methods section. Using a basic scaling law shown in equation 8 (derived from calculations done in ref. Regarding the superconducting film itself, there are certain key material properties to consider when conducting this type of experiment. First of all, a low Tc value is generally desired because the condensation energy scales  Tc 2.6 Finally, there is the question of what we expect theoretically in the limit of zero applied magnetic field. The calculation methods used in this low field limit are not possible due to the condensation energy and the change in free energy becoming comparable We have developed a unique nanomechanical transducer-based measurement technique and undertaken a careful series of experiments endeavoring to directly measure shifts in the Casimir energy by placing a superconducting Pb film in a cavity and tuning the gap, looking for effects on the superconducting transition temperature of the film. Our chip-scale system can deposit and measure a superconducting thin film while simultaneously actuating a nearby plate, forming a tunable Casimir cavity. The in situ deposition process is achieved with two arrays of MEMS heaters that have been pre-loaded with a thick film of Pb, and can be pulsed at low temperature to evaporate small amounts of material. The thin film is produced by using a shadow mask to define a precise pattern of the evaporated Pb (incident on the mask from two sides), that connects four metallic measurement leads and also creates a thin section of Pb directly underneath the movable Au plate. By driving a current with two sets of leads and measuring the voltage drop with the other two, we can measure the resistance of the Pb. We monitor this resistance as the Au plate is driven to its mechanical resonance and back to zero amplitude. Using finite element analysis, we are able to estimate the deformed mode shape at resonance which puts the minimum separation of the Pb and Au somewhere between 63 nm and 73 nm. We estimate that at this gap size, the presence of the Au plate may be expected to produce relative changes in the Casimir free energy of the Pb film of 2x to 4x. Our results conclude that for this arrangement however, there are no observed Casimir-induced changes on the Tc greater than 12 μK. An experiment is performed in a closed cycle cryostat specially designed for low mechanical vibrations. A typical experiment is done the following way: 1) The source and target are mounted opposite one another and cooled to ≈ 3 K in the closed cycle system, 2) at low temperatures, Pb is evaporated onto the substrate producing a smooth, continuous superconducting film, 3) the resistance of the Pb film is measured across its transition and 4) the spacing of the Casimir cavity is modulated by applying an alternating voltage between the drive electrode and the suspended Au plate while the temperature of the system is held at the shoulder of the superconducting transition. The resistance and transition of the Pb film is initially measured using a four-point configuration, shown schematically in figure The dynamic detection scheme involves measuring Vdiff at the same frequency the plate is moving. First, we set the cryostat temperature to just below Tc where the resistance measurement will be most sensitive to changes in temperature. Then, if the position of the plate does indeed influence the sample resistance due to the Casimir effect, we expect a small modulation of Rs at the plate frequency. The voltage difference measured would then be: Where Rs,0 is the nominal sample resistance and ΔR(t) is the small variation due to the plate. We can further break down ΔR: The 'Casimir' term is the theorized change in Tc of the Pb sample due to the changing position of the plate, d(t). This is what we intend to detect. Thus, if we consider only the component of Vdiff at the plate frequency, whose amplitude we will label |Vdiff|plate, we can re-arrange equation ΔR to obtain the amplitude of this expected effect: In this case, a more complex detection circuit is required. In figure It is possible to estimate the relative variation in Casimir free energy difference using the result from ref. To a first approximation, we assume δECas(t) would vary Tc(t) linearly. Because the phase sensitive detection used in the experiment is only measuring the time-averaged component of the signal at ω, we can approximate equation 7 by considering only the time averaged magnitude of the first harmonic term as a function of A. Numerically solving for the magnitude of the first Fourier coefficient of δECas(t,A) over the range A = 0 nm to A = 200 nm and using d0 = 256 nm, we find that it can be well-approximated by a third order polynomial: |δE Cas | = c 1 A + c 2 A 3 Determining the exact amplitude of the plate and therefore the Casimir gap size is challenging, due to the significant change in dynamics that occurs between room temperature and cryogenic temperature. This is evidenced by a large change in resonant frequency, from ≈ 700 kHz to ≈ 1.8 MHz between 300 K and 3 K respectively, indicating substantial tensile stress occurring in the top Au layer due to thermal contraction of the Au relative to the substrate. By examining the behavior of the signal at the sense electrode, it is possible to determine when contact with the oxide pillars occurs, however determining the distance between the Pb sample and the center of the plate (parallel to the Pb sample) requires knowledge of the deformed shape of the Au plate at its resonance. Using a commercial finite element software package to calculate mechanical eigenmodes, three different initial stress cases are considered in order to place bounds on the distance which the center of the plate deflects at resonance. The first case considers zero initial stress, and the second and third case include two different values of a uniaxially applied initial stress (0.1 GPa and 0.26 GPa). After a mode shape is obtained, it is scaled in amplitude (Z) until any part of the surface comes into contact with any of the oxide pillars, and then the profile parallel to the sample is extracted. Values of maximum separation, minimum separation, and average separation are reported as well as two lengths: L10 and L25, which are the lengths of the sample which are within 10 % and 25 % respectively of the minimum gap size. Case 1: Although there is clearly evidence of significant initial stress in the movable Au layer, it is necessary to estimate an upper bound of plate deflection by considering the zero stress case. Solving for the first eigenfrequency of the device geometry returns a value of 470 kHz, which is, as expected, well below the measured 1.8 MHz. Case 2: Clearly, in order for the simulation to match the measured resonant frequency, a pre-stress must be applied. The reason for the two different stress cases 2 and 3 is that in the high stress limit, finite element analysis suggests that the fundamental mode and the second mode become near degenerate and mix due to the slight layout asymmetry in the center cut of the moving plate. This resulting high stress mode shape is essentially only one side of the cavity moving up and down, while the other side moves with much smaller amplitude. Case 2 considers an intermediate stress case before this degeneracy is reached, and the shape of the fundamental mode still resembles that of the zero stress case. In this simulation, the uniaxial pre-stress is equal to 0.1 GPa and the resulting resonant frequency is 1.12 MHz. Case 3: In this simulation, the uniaxial pre-stress is increased until we reach a resonant frequency that matches experiment (≈ 1.8 MHz). This stress is equal to 0.26 GPa and is generally consistent with the estimates from the differential thermal expansion. However, in this high stress condition, the mode shape is very asymmetric due to the mixing of the fundamental and the second modes. As a result, only one edge of the Au gets close to the sample (see figure The top Au is then lithographically patterned for the second time using poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) positive electron beam resist and electron beam lithography (EBL). The pattern is then transferred through to the Au layer with anisotropic argon ion milling, with the wafer rotating, the stage cooled to 10 °C and the incidence angle 10° off normal Finally, 1.25 mm x 1.25 mm chips, each containing one centered device, are singulated using a dicing saw. Movable structures in the top Au layer were released by wet etching in a buffered oxide etch (BOE) 6:1 solution for (6 to 7) min followed by sequential rinsing in water and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) baths. The resultant Silicon Oxide lateral undercut distance is about 2.5 μm. Finally, to prevent the suspended top gold from sticking to the bottom gold, the device was dried in a CO2 critical point dryer (CPD). Note that after BOE step both Ti layers are wet etched from bottom and top of the corresponding Au layers. In figure The evaporation of the Pb is done from two different dies, a left and a right. By adjusting the center-to-center spacing between the left and right die, one can tune the angle of evaporation through the mask (see figure Each micro-source unit consists of a freely suspended square MEMS plate, 100x100 μm 2 in area and 1.5 μm thick, connected with serpentine electrical leads (see figure The technique used to evaporate Pb from the micro-sources involves applying very small, very short pulses of power to the heaters in order to sublime very small volumes of material from the evaporated Pb. In this regime, very low atomic fluxes can be achieved, and high quality, thin films can be deposited on the target. Voltage pulses are applied to each group of sources sequentially, starting from the outside (groups A) and moving inwards towards groups D (see figure 