We present a wide-bandwidth, voltage-controlled current source that is easily integrated with radiofrequency magnetic field coils. Our design uses current feedback to compensate for the frequency-dependent impedance of a radiofrequency antenna. We are able to deliver peak currents greater than 100 mA over a 300 kHz to 54 MHz frequency span. The radiofrequency current source fits onto a printed circuit board smaller than 4 cm 2 and consumes less than 1.3 W of power. It is suitable for use in deployable quantum sensors and nuclear-magnetic-resonance systems. Radiofrequency (RF) manipulation of electronic and nuclear spins is essential to many fields. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) requires RF excitation to initialize spin precession and has applications including magnetic resonance imaging, 1,2 chemical analysis, One approach to reducing the size of RF amplification systems is co-locating a RF metal-oxide-semiconductor fieldeffect transistor (MOSFET) and the antenna. We realize a wide-bandwidth, voltage-controlled RF current source. Our design employs current feedback to compensate for the frequency-dependent impedance of the RF antenna. It can drive peak currents I p > 100 mA through a 300 nH test antenna from 300 kHz to 54 MHz. The VCCS fits onto a printed circuit board (PCB) smaller than 4 cm 2 , making it compatible with compact quantum devices and NMR systems. The design files for the RF VCCS, including schematics, board layouts, and bills of materials, are available online. 22 The active element in our design is a current-feedback operational amplifier (CFA). In contrast to the more common voltage-feedback operational amplifier (VFA), a CFA buffers the voltage applied to its noninverting input onto its inverting input. lows us to match the input dynamic range of the VCCS to the output dynamic range of a RF signal source, such as a direct digital synthesizer. Figure The prescence of the loop antenna within the CFA's feedback loop causes the current source's AC response to deviate from that of a simple non-inverting amplifier. We model the CFA's transimpedance as Z t (ω) = R t /(1 + jωR t C t ), where j is the imaginary unit, R t ≈ 850 kΩ is the amplifier's DC transimpedance, and the capacitance C t ≈ 1 pF sets the amplifier's open-loop bandwidth. where R i ≈ 30 Ω is the inverting input impedance of the CFA and we have assumed that R p and C p are negligible. The contribution of L c to the feedback impedance Z f also constricts the bandwidth of the RF VCCS. To alleviate the bandwidth constriction imposed by L c , we select R f below the recommended value in the THS3091 datasheet. Figure The dashed and dash-dotted curves in Fig. The performance of the RF VCCS can also calculated from the full transfer function for the circuit in Fig. The test antenna limits both the bandwidth and the current output of the RF VCCS. We have demonstrated a wideband RF voltage-controlled current source with an integrated antenna. The RF VCCS uses a CFA to deliver peak currents greater than 100 mA over a frequency range of 300 kHz to 54 MHz with power consumption less than 1.3 W. It is suitable for manipulating spin systems in the low magnetic fields typically used in quantum sensors. The linear response of the RF VCCS is given by Y(ω)V p , where V p is the RF input voltage amplitude. We have found that the full transfer function of Eq. S2 does not usefully guide selection of R f , R g , and L g . Rather, we select R f so that R f + R p + jωL c approaches the recommended value of the feedback impedance as ω approaches the operating bandwidth of the CFA and choose R g to achieve the desired DC gain G. Antennas with negligible R p and L c 10 nH will exhibit underdamped poles (ζ < 1). To flatten the response of the RF VCCS, we add a real pole to the transfer function using L g . When R i R g , the pole introduced by L g occurs at s = R g /L g , so L g must be larger than R g /ω n to flatten Y(ω). To find the open-loop transfer function, we ground the noninverting input of the CFA and break the feedback loop at the CFA's output. The input voltage V in is now applied directly to the antenna. Applying Kirchoff's rules to the open-loop circuit leads to V out = I e R t 1 + R t C t s , 