In this work, Pt-Ti core-shell nanoparticles (NP) of 2 nm to 3 nm in size and 30000 u ± 1500 u as specified single particle mass, deposited on flat silicon substrates by means of a massselected cluster beam source, were used for the investigation of the modification of the X-Ray Standing Wave (XSW) field intensity with increasing NP surface coverage. The focus of the investigation is on the determination of the range of validity of the undisturbed flat surface approach of the XSW intensity in dependence of the actual coverage rate of the surface. Therefore, the nanoparticles were characterized using reference-free grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence analysis (GIXRF) employing radiometrically calibrated instrumentation. In addition, near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) measurements were performed to investigate the binding state of titanium in the core-shell nanoparticles which was found to be amorphous TiO2. The combination of GIXRF measurements and of the calculated XSW field intensities allow for a quantification of the core-shell nanoparticle surface coverage. For six different samples, the peak surface coverage could be determined to vary from 7 % to 130 % of a complete monolayer-equivalent coverage. A result of the current investigation is that coreshell nanoparticles modify the intensity distribution of the XSW field with increasing surface coverage. This experimental result is in line with calculated XSW field intensity distributions at different surface coverages using an effective density approach. The development of the design and synthesis of nanoparticles is proceeding rapidly Nanoparticles have been investigated with XRF methods in different geometries such as total reflection (TXRF) At the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), the national metrology institute of Germany, the working group "X-ray Spectrometry" is determining elemental mass depositions by means of reference-free, fundamental parameter based X-ray fluorescence analysis. In the PTB laboratory at the electron storage ring BESSY II The samples were prepared in the University of Birmingham (BHAM) For the determination of the elemental composition of the core-shell nanoparticles, XRF measurements were performed in an ultra-high vacuum chamber For the reference-free quantification, knowledge of all relevant instrumental and experimental parameter is needed as well as the respective fundamental parameters and Here, μ , is the mass attenuation coefficient for the element i at the excitation photon energy E , μ , , is the mass attenuation coefficient for the element i at the photon energy E , , τ , is the partial photoelectric cross section of the absorption edge X (of the element i), π is the fluorescence yield of the absorption edge X (of the element i) and g , is the transition probability of the fluorescence line j. P i,j is the photon flux from the fluorescence line j of the element i, P 0 is the photon flux of the incident radiation, I XSW(E 0 ) is the relative intensity of the XSW field, Ω det is the solid angle of detection, Ψ in is the incident angle and Ψ out = 90°-Ψ in the observation angle. The NEXAFS measurements at the Ti L3,2 absorption edges were carried out at the PGM beamline. Prior to the NEXAFS experiments, angular dependent GIXRF measurements were conducted to determine the incidence angle for the NEXAFS experiments, as exhibited in Figure The NEXAFS spectra were recorded in fluorescence detection mode, which means that for every photon energy a fluorescence spectrum was acquired by an energy-dispersive SDD and the Ti L fluorescence line intensities were evaluated. Afterwards, they were normalized to the incident photon flux and the efficiency of the detector. In this work, no further background corrections are necessary due to the excitation conditions chosen. In this work, the characterization of the core-shell nanoparticles consists of the determination of the elemental composition, the surface coverage, which is the main part of the characterization, and the chemical speciation, i.e. information on the binding state. For the determination of the surface coverage, the reference-free, fundamental parameter-based XRF analysis is used to determine the mass deposition of titanium. The knowledge of the mass deposition of titanium then leads to the determination of the number of Pt-Ti core-shell nanoparticles on the surface using the a-priori information about the weight or specified single particle mass (30000 u) of the core-shell nanoparticles, and in the final step to the surface coverage with the assumption that the entire mass lies within the unit area of 1 cm 2 . In order to do that, the areal weight (mass) ratio from titanium and platinum has to be determined as well, which is described in the next section. This knowledge of the surface contamination or surface elemental mass deposition is then used for the investigation of the XSW field calculation with regard to its degradation. In order to link dimensional nanometrology with analytical nanometrology, the areal weight ratio of titanium and platinum must be known. The areal weight ratio is the ratio of the mass deposition between Ti and Pt. Therefore, the elemental composition of the core-shell nanoparticles is analyzed using reference-free GIXRF. The excitation energy was set to 12.5 keV, which is above the titanium K-and the platinum L3 edges. The incident angle was set to 0.125° with respect to the sample surface, which is below the critical angle of total external reflection, in order to have a decent signal-to-background ratio. In Figure The varying intensity distribution of the XSW-field influences the fluorescence line intensity of an element for different incident angles. Therefore, knowledge about the XSW-field intensity is necessary for a reliable quantitative analysis. But, the surface coverage of the core-shell nanoparticle can modify the XSW-field and thereby change the observed fluorescence intensities. Therefore, a determination of the surface coverage is necessary for a further analysis of the XSW-field. A detailed characterization of the core-shell nanoparticle which reveals the surface coverage can be performed using the combination of the measured fluorescence intensity of an element in the sample (here the titanium L fluorescence lines), as a function of the incident angle of the excitation radiation (GIXRF), and a calculation of the X-ray standing wave (XSW) field. The parameters needed for the calculation of the XSW field provide additional information about the core-shell nanoparticle, such as surface coverage. The GIXRF measurements were performed in the soft X-ray range, because the critical angle of total reflection at the substrate is considerably higher in this regime. As a result, the relevant angular regime for the fluorescence line intensity in the soft X-ray range is shifted and stilted towards higher incident angles in comparison to hard X-rays. This leads to a reduction in the uncertainty of the solid angle of detection in the relevant angular regime. Using the reference-free XRF quantification algorithm In the soft X-ray range, the total uncertainty of the reference-free quantification is dominated by the uncertainty contribution of the fundamental parameters in this energy range, which can be up to 40% The incident photon energy in the soft X-ray range was chosen to be 520 eV, which is above the titanium L2-edge. As a result, the titanium L3 and L2 lines appear in the spectrum and cannot be separated by the SDD used. The quantification with this excitation condition also involves more fundamental parameters such as the L3 and L2 subshell photoionization cross sections and the L2-L3 Coster-Kronig transition probability, which increases the uncertainty of the determined mass deposition. The determined mass deposition of titanium in the hard Xray range can be used for the determination of the fluorescence production cross-section in the soft X-ray range of the same samples. This fluorescence production cross-section can then be used for the determination of the mass deposition of titanium in all other samples in the soft X-ray range. The uncertainty of the determined mass deposition in the soft X-ray range is significantly reduced by using this fluorescence production cross-section. However, the inhomogeneity of the sample used for the correction factor has to be rather small in order to minimize the uncertainty of this correction. The fluorescence production cross-section has been determined for the two samples, and they are not identical due to the inhomogeneity of the samples. Here, the mean value of the two determined correction factors is used for the quantification in the soft X-ray range of all samples. The inhomogeneity of the samples dominates the total uncertainty budget for the correction of the quantification in the soft X-ray range. In order to reduce this contribution, the lateral distribution of the core-shell nanoparticles could be mapped with a μm-sized synchrotron beam Titanium mass deposition † / g / cm 2 Uncertainty / g / cm 2 (k=1) As shown in Figure In Figure As shown in 3.1, the areal weight (mass) ratio of Pt and Ti was determined with referencefree XRF to 0.63(5) : 0.37 The knowledge of the total mass of Pt and Ti in one core-shell nanoparticle in combination with the determined mass ratio allows for an estimation of the average size of a core-shell nanoparticle. The bond lengths of 277.5 pm for the Pt-Pt bond and 162.0 pm for the Ti-O bond were taken from Sutton et al. That is lower than the result of the analysis of the STEM images, which is 2 nm to 3 nm. A possible explanation is that the current estimation is to calculate the diameter of a sphere, not considering any deviating arrangement of the nanoparticles on a surface area, which would increase the diameter significantly. For an estimation with the assumption that all Pt and Ti atoms are arranged in one layer (circle-area), the diameter of one core-shell nanoparticle increases to about 3.8 nm. So the STEM value-interval lies well in between the sphere size estimation and the circle-area size estimation. Other explanations may be that the estimated bond lengths and the estimation for the packing density do not match the reality well enough. An estimate of the surface coverage using the quantification of the titanium mass deposition can be done as follows: The assumption of particles not laying on top of each other in conjunction with the a-priori information about the mass and size of one core-shell nanoparticle leads to the number of particles in the area of one square-centimeter (1 cm 2 ). One core-shell nanoparticle has the nominal size of 2 nm to 3 nm in diameter (determined with STEM), so the area of 1 cm 2 can contain about 2x10 13 nanoparticles to reach 100 % surface coverage. For this estimation, the average size of the core-shell nanoparticles was assumed to be 2.5 nm and the area of one core-shell nanoparticle was assumed to be circular. The mass of one core-shell nanoparticle is specified to 30000 u (Pt/Ti) before oxidation and the compounds are specified to Pt/TiO2, as confirmed using NEXAFS measurements (see section above). The oxidation of titanium increases the total mass of the core-shell nanoparticle, but is not considered in the 30000 u. The mass proportion for titanium and platinum were experimentally determined to be 0.63(5) and 0.37 It can be seen that the results for the determined peak surface coverages vary, but are often too high in comparison with the nominal total values. In Figure The surface coverage of the Pt-Ti core-shell nanoparticles also influences the intensity distribution within the XSW field. For a very low surface coverage, the XSW field above the surface of the reflecting medium is undisturbed, and can in the present case, be calculated using the optical constants of the silicon substrate and vacuum above the reflecting surface. With increasing coverage, the reflection properties of the surface change due to the nanoparticles and have to be taken into account in the XSW field calculation. Using an effective density approach, where the nanoparticles are assumed to be a continuous layer with reduced density to take into account the coverage, this can be done. Such calculations, which were performed using software developed in-house Figure For the quantification in the hard X-ray regime, the uncertainties of the fundamental parameters are the main contribution to the total uncertainty budget. The correction factor for the quantification in the soft X-ray range has a major contribution to the uncertainty due to the inhomogeneity of the sample used. In In this work, two complementary investigations were performed: On the one hand side, very monodisperse core-shell nanoparticles of titanium and platinum were analyzed by means of Si traceable XRF. On the other hand side, those characterized particles were employed under GIXRF conditions to probe the modification of the XSW-field intensity due to surface coverage by these core-shell nanoparticles. The reference-free GIXRF analysis using hard X-ray radiation for the excitation leads to a mass ratio of titanium 0.63(5) and platinum 0.37 † The soft x-ray quantification was performed using the fluorescence production cross-section derived from the absolute quantification in the hard X-ray range.