Recent discovery of topological superconductors (TSCs) has sparked enormous interest. Realization of TSC requires a delicate tuning of multiple microscopic parameters, which remains a great challenge. Here, we develop a first-principles approach to quantify realistic conditions of TSC by solving self-consistently Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation based on Wannier function construction of band structure, in presence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman splitting and electron-phonon coupling. We further demonstrate the power of this new method by predicting the Mn-doped GeTe (Ge 1-x Mn x Te) monolayer -a well-known dilute magnetic semiconductor showing superconductivity under hole doping -to be a Class D TSC with Chern number of -1 and chiral Majorana edge modes. By constructing a first-principles phase diagram in the parameter space of temperature and Mn concentration, we propose the TSC phase can be induced at a lower-limit transition temperature of ~40 mK and the Mn concentration of x~0.015%. Our approach can be generally applied to TSCs with a phonon-mediated pairing, providing useful guidance for future experiments. The topological phase of superconductors (SC) has recently received intense research interest as the superconducting quasi-particles residing in the non-trivial gapless/zero-energy boundary states are considered a form of Majorana fermions. Majorana fermions are their own anti-particles Unlike the successful first-principles prediction of electronic and topological materials, theoretical predictions of TSCs are challenging because of the uncertainty in the parameters used to construct Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian. Usually, only the pre-conditions of TSC, e.g. Rashba splitting In this article, we attempt to further extend first-principles calculations to the field of TSCs, by developing a verstile approach to quantify realistic conditions of TSC. We construct and solve self-consistently a material-specific first-principles BdG Hamiltonian, based on Wannier function construction of band structure, in presence of Rashba SOC, Zeeman splitting and electron-phonon coupling (EPC). Furthermore, we demonstrate the usefulness of this new method by predicting the Mn-doped GeTe (Ge 1-x Mn x Te) monolayer to be a TSC by constructing a first-principles phase diagram in the parameter space of temperature and Mn concentration. Generally, TSC materials can be classified as intrinsic or extrinsic, depending on the experimental conditions of realizing the non-trivial phase. Intrinsic TSCs exhibit inherently a non-trivial superconducting gap without the need of applying an external field or constructing a heterostructure. They may be p-wave SCs with natural spin-triplet pairing To the best of our knowledge, all the known Class D TSCs formed by the s-wave superconductivity are extrinsic, such as the semiconductor nanowire with strong SOC 28 , the ferromagnetic atomic chains 29 , the nanoscale magnetic islands 30 , the ferromagnet Given the necessary conditions for realizing Class D TSCs with 2D Rashba electrons Specifically, we focus on the recent experimentally exfoliated GeTe monolayer 47 , which was predicted to be useful in optoelectronic devices and may be a type-II Ising superconductor upon slight hole doping The crystal structure of GeTe monolayer is shown in Fig. To predict the TSC formed by 2D Rashba electrons Having demonstrated the Rashba spin splitting in the GeTe monolayer, we now discuss the second ingredient, the Zeeman gap. It has been reported that a Zeeman gap can be opened in the bulk Ge 1-x Mn x Te with a ferromagnetic order parallel to the (111) direction 46 , which is the easy magnetization direction for small x 53 . By reproducing the experimental results of bulk Ge 1-x Mn x Te based on the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) 54 , the spin state of Mn dopants was determined to be S=5/2 (Supplementary Note 1). Consequently, the out-of-plane high-spin state (S=5/2) of Mn dopants is adopted in Ge 1-x Mn x Te monolayer under VCA. As expected, the Zeeman gaps δ z of Rashba and Ising bands opened at Γ increase monotonically with the increasing Mn concentration (Fig. We next discuss the phonon mediated superconductivity of the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer. From the calculated phonon spectra (Fig. . The λ(ω) increases quickly to 1.13 at the frequency of ~10 meV, which is about 81% of the total EPC λ=1.39. This indicates that the EPC stems mainly from the acoustic modes. The convergence of EPC calculation has been carefully checked (Supplementary Note 2). On the other hand, only the vibration modes with a finite wave vector can couple with electrons. This is because for all the FS contours surrounding Γ (Fig. To estimate the superconducting transition temperature (T c ), we construct a material-specific BdG Hamiltonian ( ) ( ) ( ) Here the basis of ( ) Here the intra-orbitals spin-singlet pairing H Δ ensures m=n. The absolute pairing strength g nn is assumed identical for each band 55 and calculated as g nn = (λ-μ * )/N F . The Coulomb repulsion μ * is described by the Morel-Anderson pseudopotential ( ) We emphasize that this new method is not only different from the conventional method employing the McMillan's formula for a single-band s-wave SC 57 . Its reliability is further confirmed by reproducing superconductivity of three representative known SCs, i.e. bulk lead (Supplementary Fig. For the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer, we assume the Debye temperature (~200 K) and Coulomb repulsion μ * to be same as that of bulk GeTe and extract the MLWFs using the p orbitals of Ge and Te. Also, we heuristically reduce the calculated λ from 1.39 to ~0.76 by ~45.5%, based on the benchmark of correlation effect in MoS 2 monolayer 63 . This should set a lower limit on EPC since the correlation effect of D θ p-orbitals is usually weaker than that of d-orbitals. The resulting g nn (~0.4) is comparable to that of bulk GeTe (~0.49) 64 , which enables us to predict the superconducting gap Δ of the 0.1-hole-doped GeTe monolayer at different temperatures. From Fig. Next we simulate the superconductivity of Mn-doped GeTe (Ge 1-x Mn x Te) monolayer by adding an out-of-plane Zeeman energy B z in Here z σ is the Pauli matrix in spin space and the Then the new BdG Hamiltonian z BdG H k can be constructed through the Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. The reliability of such treatment in simulating the SC without TRS is confirmed by reproducing the in-plane critical magnetic field of MoS 2 monolayer (Supplementary Note 3.2) By diagonalizing the z MLWFs H k with different B z in momentum-space, we obtain the Zeeman gap z δ ′ of Rashba and Ising bands opened at Γ point (Supplementary Fig. To realize TSC formed by 2D Rashba electrons, model analysis proposes that the half of the Zeeman gap opened at the Dirac point of Rashba bands, i.e. δ z /2, should be larger than the superconducting gap Δ 25-27 . In the following, the first-principles approach has been extended to characterize the TSC phase based on a material-specific BdG Hamiltonian z BdG H k for the first time. Specifically, we take Δ=0.2 meV and B z =7.5 meV with δ z ~0.9 meV to construct the z BdG H k in the momentum space, we obtain the dispersion relation of superconducting quasi-particles (Fig. For 2D systems, the Chern number of l-th band is calculated by integrating the Berry curvature ( ) ( ) total Chern number N c can be obtained by summing up the Chern numbers of all the states below the superconducting gap, which is quantized to -1. The Berry curvature resides mainly at the Γ point associated with the Zeeman gap opening (Fig. We finally construct a phase diagram of the 0.1-hole-doped Ge 1-x Mn x Te monolayer in Fig. Lastly, in addition to the monolayer Ge 1-x Mn x Te we demonstrated here, we suggest three more candidate materials for Class D TSC. First, it was theoretically reported a ferromagnetic order can be induced by hole doping in monolayer GaSe, attributed to the exchange splitting of electronic states that exhibit a sharp van Hove singularity below the Fermi level The Vienna ab initio simulation pack (VASP) The QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE) package To perform first-principles prediction of TSC, the main challenge is to construct a BdG Hamiltonian of superconducting quasi-particles from the electronic Hamiltonian of normal state. Here we propose a strategy to overcome this obstacle by employing the MLWFs ( , , , ) BdG H B k without TRS can be constructed for a specific material by using the above procedure. Under the basis of , ,..., , ,... , the multi-band Hamiltonian with s-wave pairing can be written as: † 0 ( ) With the relation of Here m and n are the band index. Diagonalizing the Hamiltonian H into the form of † , , , 0, Solving this gap equation self-consistently enables us to extimates the superconducting transation temperature T c and the critical magnetic field/doping-concentration of specific materils based on the material-specific BdG calculating the in-plane critical magnetic field B c2 of MoS 2 monolayer in comparison with experiment 65 . It is worth noting that apparently this cannot be done by conventional first-principles method. Specifically, we consider an electron doping concentration of 1.2×10 14 cm -2 , simulated by adding 0.1 electron per primitive cell into MoS 2 monolayer. At this doping concentration, our calculated superconducting gap (Supplementary Fig. The electronic band structure is shown in Supplementary Fig. The in-plane magnetic field was simulated by substituting the Pauli matrix z σ of Eq. 4 with x σ . Then the electronic Hamiltonian of MoS 2 monolayer is re-written as: where B x is the in-plane Zeeman energy. Next, the new BdG Hamiltonian ( ) was constructed through Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. The gap equation (Eq. 3) was solved selfconsistently on a 200×200×1 k-points sampling in first BZ using the absolute pairing strength g nn of 0.29. The results for a series of in-plane Zeeman energy B x , e.g. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 meV are shown in Supplementary Fig. Bohr magneton. The in-plane upper critical magnetic field B c2 for the MoS 2 monolayer is normalized by the Pauli paramagnetic limit (in units of tesla) B p =1.86T c . The B c2 /B p as a function of T c /T c,0 are shown in Supplementary Fig. Given that the signature of Majorana fermions depends highly on the orientation of the magnetic field, it is necessary to discuss the effect of magnetic anisotropy on the TSC of Ge 1-x Mn x Te monolayer. The electronic band structure of Ge 0.99 Mn 0.01 Te monolayer with the angle η between the ferromagnetic ordering direction of Mn dopant and the normal direction of monolayer being set at 30° is shown in Supplementary Fig. Notably, δ z remains open for different angle η, indicating the robust TSC of Ge 1-x Mn x Te monolayer as long as η ≠90°. For η 90°, no Zeeman gap opens in either Ising or Rashba band due to a zero in-plane magnetic component at the Dirac point, so that the topological invariant is not well-defined. To demonstrate the topological non-triviality of Ge 1-x Mn x Te monolayer for η ≠90°, we take η 30° as an example by adding a Zeeman energy 0.01 into the electronic Hamiltonian ( ) A Zeeman gap of ~2 meV is opened in the Rashba bands, corresponding to 0.01< x < 0.02 (Supplementary Fig. xz BdG H k was constructed using Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 with the superconducting gap being set to 0.6 meV. By diagonalizing ( ) xz BdG H k in the momentum space, we obtain the dispersion relation of superconducting quasi-particles (Supplementary Fig. for the states below the gap, where Our calculated result (red lines in Supplementary Fig. Next, we briefly discuss the TSC of GeTe thin film with Te-and Ge-terminated polar surface (Supplementary Fig. x Mn x Te monolayer is also feasible to be experimentally confirmed, albeit without the need of applying an external magnetic field. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 meV. (c) The electronic band structure of MoS 2 monolayer doped with 0.1 electrons per primitive cell, corresponding to an electron doping concentration of 1.2×10 14 cm 