Disorder, ubiquitously present in realistic structures, is generally thought to disturb the performance of analog wave devices, as it often causes strong multiple scattering effects that largely arrest wave transportation. Contrary to this general view, here, it is shown that, in some wave systems with non-trivial topological character, strong randomness can be highly beneficial, acting as a powerful stimulator to enable desired analog filtering operations. This is achieved in a topological Anderson sonic crystal that, in the regime of dominating randomness, provides a well-defined filtering response characterized by a Lorentzian spectral line-shape. Our theoretical and experimental results, serving as the first realization of topological Anderson insulator phase in acoustics, suggest the striking possibility of achieving specific, non-random analog filtering operations by adding randomness to clean structures. The performance of most wave systems, such as lasers, switches, modulators, signal processors etc., is largely impeded by disorder. Even at very low concentration, impurities or geometrical imperfections can cause severe self-interference effects, largely hindering wave propagation and device performance. Recently, inspired by the notion of topological insulators (TIs) in condensed matter systems[1-3], a fascinating solution to mitigate these harmful consequences has been suggested. TIs are insulating phases with non-trivial topological order, supporting edge states that are resilient to certain types and levels of disorder Although TIs have somewhat enhanced the robustness of analog wave systems to disorder, their topological protection is still limited by a phenomenon, known as Anderson localization (AL) In this work, we provide the first experimental observation of TAI phase in acoustics. We show that the much-sought disorder-induced character of such phases can be leveraged to trigger a well-defined analog filtering operation, namely first-order band-pass filtering Our findings, defying the conventional view that disorder is detrimental to analog wave systems, hold great promises for a large variety of analog devices in which disorder acts as a powerful engine, forcing the system to perform the functionality of interest. with the specified parameters, and build a two-port scattering system by coupling a finite crystal piece with 100 unit cells to two external waveguides. a, Evolution of the corresponding (averaged) transmission spectrum versus disorder strength. Starting from an ordinary trivial insulator in the clean limit (red region), the system switches into a topological insulator in the regime D 1 < D s < D 2 (TAI regime), characterized by a zero-energy edge state which manifests itself as a resonance peak in the spectrum. For extremely high disorder intensities (yellow region), the transportation is arrested by Anderson localization. b, Averaged transmission coefficient of the system for several representative disorder strengths. In the TAI regime (green area), the spectrum exhibits a Lorentzian profile near f 0 , corresponding to the transfer function of a first-order band-pass filter. c, Demonstration of disorder-induced analog filtering. We suppose that the system is excited with a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal signal and calculate the corresponding transmission coefficient (T) and output time signal (f(t)), when gradually increasing the disorder strength from zero to the regime of TAI. It is seen that disorder acts like an actuator in our system, applying the desired filtering operation to the input signal. Let us start with considering the tight-binding toy Hamiltonian of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) chain in which a n † , a n are creation and annihilation operators for the site n , K , and J stand, respectively, for the intra-cell and extra-cell coupling coefficients, and ω 0 = 1 is the on-site energy of the atoms. We suppose that the parameters K and J are defined as K = K 0 (1 + 0.5D s W) and J = J 0 (1 + D s W), in which K 0 = 0.1, J 0 = 0.09, D s is a parameter quantifying the strength of disorder, and W is a site-dependent random number. Since K > J in the clean limit (D s → 0), the disorder-free system corresponds to a trivial topological phase (BDI class), characterized by a zero winding number Notice that on average, regardless of D s , the parameter K is always smaller than J. Yet, and quite surprisingly, the difference in their standard deviations can create a topological phase transition in a certain range of values for D s (see Note I Supporting information), leading to an insulator with non-trivial topological index (non-zero winding number). In order to examine such a possibility, we consider a finite two-port scattering system made of 100 unit cells coupled to external waveguides and report in Figure To validate these findings in a full-wave 3D geometry, we map the proposed tight-binding model into a one-dimensional phononic crystal, built from a chain of acoustic quasi-bound states in the continuum (BICs) The proposed disorder-induced acoustic filter can be used to manipulate the spectral characteristics of two-dimensional signals, i.e. images, as well. Consider the image of the Eiffel tower, shown in Figure Anderson system, when more and more disorder is introduced. The associated experimental results, shown in Figure Here, we investigate the response of the proposed acoustic system, when it is excited with input signals other than a typical Gaussian pulse. To this end, we consider an irregularly shaped pulse, modulated with the frequency of f 0 (Figure In this section, we discuss the possibility of performing other types of filtering operations using the proposed disorder-induced acoustic system. We start with describing how a nth order analog filter can be realized by constructing a network of the proposed disordered system. In frequency domain, the transfer function of a nth order analog filter is expressed as a second order filter. In order to verify the functionality of the system, we consider an arbitrarily shaped signal as the excitation (Figure We note that an alternative route to realize transfer functions other than Lorentzian is to cascade two or several topological Anderson insulators, allowing their edge modes to couple to each other. The constructive and destructive interference between the associated edge modes may create a Fano-like spectra (rather than Lorentzian) in the regime of strong randomness, opening the way for more complex and sharper transfer functions including comb-like spectra. While in the main text we focused our attention on the transmission of the proposed system, the corresponding reflected signal is relevant for another kind of filtering operation, namely band-stop filtering. As explained in the main text, near the resonance frequency of the edge mode of the topological Anderson insulator phase, there exists a resonance peak in the averaged transmission spectrum. This corresponds to a dip (zero) of the reflection spectrum (Figure is similar to the transfer function of a differentiator filter. As a result, for the input signals that are sufficiently wide in temporal domain, the reflected signal is nothing but the derivative of the incident field. In order to demonstrate this, we consider again our tight-binding toy model and assume that it is excited with a Gaussian-type input signal (Figure One common technique to detect the outlines of an image is to use a differentiation filter. We have shown that our proposed disorder-induced system can act as such a filter. As such, it is capable of resolving the edges of incident image (in one direction). In order to demonstrate this possibility, we assume that the input signal is modulated with the image shown in Figure Here we explore the possibility of generalizing the proposed disorder-induced topological acoustic filter to electromagnetics. To this end, similar to the acoustic case, we consider a regular photonic crystal consisting of a conventional metallic waveguide. In Comsol Multiphysics, we model the waveguide via a rectangular pipe surrounded with perfect electric conductors. On the other hand, we model the rods with cylinders filled with a material (silicon) with the refractive index of 3.4. We then introduce some disorder into the successive distance between the inclusions of the photonic crystal. In the regime where the strength of disorder is weak, the transmission spectrum is gapped around the resonance frequency of the resonators, due to the topologically trivial nature of the system in the clean limit. Adding disorder to the system, however, closes the trivial gap and re-opens it as topological, as broadly discussed in the main text. This gives rise to a zero-energy edge state, manifesting itself as a Lorentzian resonance peak in the averaged transmission spectrum, which is employed to perform first-order band-pass filtering. To demonstrate these predictions, we consider a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal signal (with frequency of f 0 and the variance of σ = 0. 1f 0 ) as the input signal. We then study what the system returns both in the clean and TAI regimes. Figures In order to obtain the signal coming out of the proposed system, we calculated the inverse Fourier transform of the disorder-averaged transmission coefficient multiplied by the Fourier transform of the input signal. The alternative, more straightforward, strategy is to calculate the output signal via direct FDTD simulations. To do that, we suppose that the system is excited with a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal and study the corresponding averaged output. In In this section, we compare our proposed disorder-induced topological analog filter with a trivial ordinary one. Consider, for example, the resonant structure shown in Figure 