Protection of silver mirror stacks from environmental degradation before launching is crucial for space applications. Hereby, we report a comparative study of the advanced protection of silver mirror stacks for space telescopes provided by SiO2 and Al2O3 coatings in conditions of accelerated aging by sulfidation. The model silver stack samples were deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering on a reference silica substrate for optical applications and a surfacepretreated SiC substrate. Accelerated aging was performed in dry and more severe wet conditions. Optical micrographic observations, surface and interface analysis by Time-of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and reflectivity measurements were combined to comparatively study the effects of degradation. The results show a lower kinetics of degradation by accelerated aging of the stacks protected by the alumina coating in comparable test conditions. Environmental degradation in earth atmosphere is of major concern for the space industry since it is a limiting factor for the long-term durability of silver mirrors for demanding applications such as space telescopes. Local degradation by tarnishing of the reflective silver layer is observed during indoor qualification and storage phases after satellite assembly and before launching. It occurs despite the presence of protection and confinement coatings that have been developed to improve the durability of the mirrors Recently, model stack samples consisting of thin silver layers protected by SiO2 overcoats deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering were studied on SiC Here we report a comparative study of the advanced protection provided by SiO2 and Al2O3 overcoats in conditions of dry and more severe wet accelerated aging by sulfidation. The model silver stack samples were deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering on a reference silica substrate for optical applications and a surface-pretreated SiC substrate. Accelerated aging was performed in dry and more severe wet conditions. Optical micrographic observations, surface and interface analysis by Time-of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and reflectivity measurements were combined to comparatively study the effects of degradation. Substrate samples (10×10×1.5 mm 3 ) made of silica and Boostec® silicon carbide were bought from Mersen Boostec. The SiO2 substrate samples have an optical surface finish with a typical roughness of less than 1 nm. The SiC CVD samples had one face pretreated by chemical vapor deposition at Mersen Boostec so as to deposit a ∼200 μm thick high purity SiC layer in order to suppress the surface pores left by the material processing. After pretreatment, these SiC CVD substrate samples had an optical finish with a nominal roughness of 1.2 nm of the pretreated surface. The PACA2M deposition platform at CILAS, in its premises of Aubagne After coating deposition, the stack samples, taken out to clean room atmosphere, were enclosed in membrane boxes under ambient pressure before shipping to CNRS-Chimie ParisTech for accelerated aging and surface and interface analysis. Dry accelerated aging was performed in H2S gas as detailed before Wet accelerated aging was performed in a non-deaerated aqueous solution of 1 mM Na2S and 0.1 M NaOH of pH 13, prepared from reagent grade chemicals and ultra-pure water. At this pH, all (99.9%) sulfide species are HS -ions, the pKa values of the H2S/HS -and HS - /S2 -couples being 7.0 and 17.1, respectively Optical microscope images were taken before and after sulphidation for all tested samples. Surface and interface analyses were performed by ToF-SIMS on selected samples. A IonTof 5 spectrometer operating at a base pressure of approximately 10 -9 mbar was used. Chemical imaging was performed in static SIMS conditions. A pulsed 25 keV Bi + primary ion source was employed, delivering 0.15 pA of current over a 100 × 100 μm 2 area analyzed with a resolution of about 150 nm. For depth profiling analysis, static SIMS analytical conditions were also used with a pulsed 25 keV Bi + primary ion source delivering a target current of 1.2 pA over a 100 × 100 μm 2 area. It was interlaced with sputtering performed with another gun of 2 keV Cs + ions and delivering 100 nA of target current over a 300 × 300 μm 2 area. Analysis in static SIMS conditions was centered in the sputtered crater to avoid edge effects. Data acquisition and post-processing analyses were performed with the Ion-Spec software. Figure Figure On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure Figure On the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure Thus in-depth profile analysis of the stacks after dry accelerated aging confirms the better protection provided by the alumina overcoat for the mirror stack deposited on the silica substrate. Penetration of H2S via the connected porosity of the protection layer would occur with both types of overcoats but would more slowly reach the silver layer with the alumina overcoat, suggesting a more compact coating with lower connected porosity delaying the initiation of localized degradation by sulfidation and the local growth of silver sulfide columns through the overcoat. Figure These observations suggest a higher resistance to propagation with the alumina overcoat for the stacks deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. The higher probability of initiation of localized degradation could be either due a different amount of localized defects on the SiC CVD substrate or a lower resistance to the initiation of localized degradation. Figure The ToF-SIMS elemental depth profiles measured on both samples after the dry accelerated aging test are shown on Figure On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure Compared with the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure On the samples with the alumina overcoat (Figure Figure On the samples with the alumina overcoat (Figure Advanced protection against environmental degradation provided to silver mirrors for space telescopes by SiO2 and Al2O3 overcoats was studied on stack model samples deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering on two types of substrates, a reference silica substrate commonly used in optical applications and a CVD surface-pretreated SiC substrate. Accelerated aging by sulfidation was performed in dry (H2S gas, 1000 mbar, 75°C) and more severe wet (HS -ions-containing aqueous solution of pH 7 or 13) conditions. For the stacks deposited on the silica substrate and submitted to dry accelerated aging, the alumina overcoat was found to provide higher protection against delamination at the sample edges and against localized sulfidation in regions not affected by edge effects. The optical micrography and ToF-SIMS data are consistent with the mechanism previously proposed for localized degradation with pre-existing channels (connected porosity) in the protection layer enabling H2S penetration down to the silver layer followed by local growth of silver sulfide with columns emerging at the stack surface. The lower connected porosity in the alumina overcoat would increase the barrier property, thereby delaying the initiation of localized degradation by sulfidation and the local growth of silver sulfide columns through the overcoat. For the stacks deposited on the surface-pretreated SiC substrate, higher resistance to propagation of local silver sulfide growth was confirmed with the alumina protection. However, variability in the surface pretreatment might be at the origin of the lower resistance observed in the initiation of localized degradation, with a more connected porosity developed above the substrate surface sites imperfectly healed by the pretreatment. In the more severe wet accelerated aging conditions, the alumina overcoat provides protection against sulfidation only at pH 7 where it is stable but not at pH 13 where it dissolves. The same trend of lower resistance to the initiation of local sulfidation but higher resistance to the growth of the silver sulfide columns was observed for the stacks more prone to local degradation deposited on the surface-pretreated SiC substrate. Specular reflectivity measurements confirmed the advanced protection provided by the overcoats. With the alumina overcoat, no significant loss of the optical performance was observed in the whole spectral range after the most severe aging test at pH 7. With the silica overcoat, the loss of the optical performance was limited to a few percent of reflectivity after aging at pH 13. 