Hafnium oxide (HfO2)-based ferroelectrics offer remarkable promise for memory and logic devices in view of their compatibility with traditional silicon CMOS technology, high switchable polarization, good endurance and thickness scalability. These factors have led to steep rise in research on this class of materials over the past number of years. At the same time, only a few reports on the direct sensing of nanoscale ferroelectric properties exist, with many questions remaining regarding the emergence of ferroelectricity in these materials. While piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is ideally suited to probe piezo-and ferro-electricity on the nanoscale, it is known to suffer artifacts which complicate quantitative interpretation of results and can even lead to claims of ferroelectricity in materials which are not ferroelectric. In this paper we explore the possibility of using an improved PFM method based on interferometric displacement sensing (IDS) to study nanoscale ferroelectricity in bare Si doped HfO2. Our results indicate a clear difference in the local remnant state of various HfO2 crystallites with reported values for the piezoelectric coupling in range 0.6-1.5 pm/V. In addition, we report unusual ferroelectric polarization switching including possible contributions from electrostriction and Vegard effect, which may indicate oxygen vacancies or interfacial effects influence the emergence of nanoscale ferroelectricity in HfO2. Hafnium oxide (HfO2) based ferroelectrics are one of the most studied binary oxide systems for applications in non-volatile memory applications. Relevant approaches include temperature-dependent dielectric permittivity measurements, second harmonic generation, as well as classical polarization-electric field (P-E) hysteresis measurements with macroscopic electrodes. While macroscopic characterization techniques on electrode devices help our understanding regarding global ferroelectric behavior, however, these measurements provide little knowledge on possible nanoscale origins of ferroelectricity in FE-HfO2. Unfortunately, such macroscopic experiments are not entirely suitable for exploring polycrystalline FE-HfO2 films which are expected to have heterogenous ferroelectric behavior. This necessitates tools capable of exploring intrinsic ferroelectric on the length scales of the local inhomogeneities themselves (e.g. phases, domains, defects). Therefore, a full understanding of the switching processes in these devices, requires the development of reliable experimental techniques for probing ferroelectricity at the relevant scale. Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) Regards investigation of fundamental understanding of FE-HfO2 , significant efforts have been reported including ab initio simulations We focus this study on silicon doped HfO2 (Si:HfO2), that is a widespread material system with demonstrated uses as active layer in multiple ferroelectric devices. To summarize, electrically extracted values for remnant polarization (Pr) and coercive field (Ec) To explore the emergence of nanoscale ferroelectricity we interrogate the bare film using PFM. In PFM an ac voltage V applied to a probe tip held in contact with the sample resulting in a periodic surface displacement. The surface displacement arises due to the converse piezoelectric effect and is most commonly measured using the optical beam deflection (OBD) or "beam bounce" method. From topography channel, Figure To avoid such effects and gain sensitivity we first explore the use of band excitation (BE)-PFM. In supplementary Figure Interestingly, we see clear evidence of localized regions which remain void of piezoelectric response. The inactive regions accounted for ~20% of the total area. Finally, after repeated scanning over the same area, it was possible to identify the previously scanned regions from a larger zoom area. (Figure The anomalously low electromechanical coupling value may be a significant underlying factor behind the lack of convincing reports of ferroelectricity on the nanoscale using PFM on bare film. Unfortunately, the weak electrochemical coupling exhibited by the bare HfO2 surface required the application of moderately large ac voltages (e.g. 2-4Vac) to achieve good signal-to-noise values. However, as shown in Figure The AFM used in this study combines a commercial Cypher AFM (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, CA) with an integrated quantitative Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV) system (Polytec GmbH, Waldbronn, Germany) to achieve highly sensitive electromechanical imaging and spectroscopy. All PFM measurements were captured using Pt-coated cantilevers with a spring constant of ∼2 N/m and resonance frequency of ∼75 kHz was used. The Cypher AFM was equipped with external data acquisition electronics based on an NI-6115 fast DAQ card to generate the probing signal and store local hysteresis loops and correlate them with surface topography. BE was achieved by coupling the AFM with external data acquisition electronics based on an NI-6115 fast DAQ card to generate the probing signal and store local BE and hysteresis loops and correlate them with surface topography. Complications associated with single frequency PFM. (Figure 