Emerging technologies based on tailorable interactions between photons and phonons promise new capabilities ranging from high-fidelity microwave signal processing to non-reciprocal optics and quantum state control. While such light-sound couplings have been studied in a variety of physical systems, many implementations rely on non-standard materials and fabrication schemes that are challenging to co-implement with standard integrated photonic circuitry. Notably, despite significant advances in integrated electro-optic modulators, related acousto-optic modulator concepts have remained relatively unexplored in silicon photonics. In this article, we demonstrate direct acousto-optic modulation within silicon photonic waveguides using electrically-driven surface acoustic waves (SAWs). By co-integrating SAW transducers in piezoelectric aluminum nitride with a standard silicon-on-insulator photonic platform, we harness silicon's strong elasto-optic effect to mediate non-local light-sound coupling. Through lithographic design, acousto-optic phase modulators and single-sideband amplitude modulators in the range of 1-5 GHz are fabricated, exhibiting refractive index modulation strengths comparable to existing electro-optic technologies. Extending this traveling-wave, acousto-optic interaction to centimeter-scales, we create electrically-driven nonreciprocal modulators in silicon. Non-reciprocal operation bandwidths of >100 GHz and insertion losses <0.6 dB are achieved. Building on these results, we show that unity-efficiency non-reciprocal modulation, necessary to produce a robust acousto-optic isolator, is within reach. The acousto-optic modulator design is compatible with both complementary metaloxidesemiconductor (CMOS) fabrication processes, and with existing silicon photonic device technologies. These results represent a promising new approach to implement compact and scalable acousto-optic modulators, frequencyshifters, and non-magnetic optical isolators and circulators in integrated photonic circuits. Light-sound interactions in solid-state systems show strong potential as a basis for diverse applications ranging from quantum information control In particular, distributed acousto-optic modulation has emerged as a promising means to implement low-loss, nonmagnetic isolators and circulators in integrated photonic circuits However, acousto-optic devices have remained largely unrealized in silicon-the leading material for integrated photonics. Despite an impressive array of silicon photonic device technologies, including miniaturized electrooptic modulators In this article, we demonstrate electrically-driven acousto-optic modulation in silicon photonic waveguides and use this capability to create broadband, integrated non-reciprocal optical modulators. Direct electromechanical transduction is achieved using a CMOS-compatible aluminum nitride on silicon-on-insulator (AlN-on-SOI) material platform. Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) launched at integrated, low-loss optical waveguides produce linear acousto-optic modulation via traveling-wave elasto-optic coupling. Through lithographic control of device geometry, we realize both optical phase modulation and single-sideband amplitude modulation in the frequency range of 1-5 GHz. These modulators utilize no suspended structures or optical pumping, and achieve modulation figures of merit V π L = 1-3 V•cm, comparable to existing electro-optic modulator technologies. Next, we show how these interactions can be extended to longer interaction lengths, a necessary condition for the creation of non-reciprocal devices based on optical modulation. Using a serpentine waveguide structure, we demonstrate enhanced modulation efficiency (> 10 -1 ) and electricallydriven non-reciprocal modulation and optical mode conversion over a 100 GHz (0.8 nm) optical bandwidth, representing a significant step toward practical optical isolators and circulators in silicon. The implementation of robust acousto-optic modulators on-chip may enable a range of applications including chip-based heterodyne detection, frequency modulation, waveform synthesis, and switching. More generally, this design approach opens the door to a variety of electro-opto-mechanical devices, as well as flexible acousto-optic modulators and non-reciprocal operations, that can be directly integrated within silicon photonic circuits. We fabricate on-chip acousto-optic modulators (AOMs) using the device platform depicted in Fig. Polycrystalline aluminum nitride (AlN) is deposited on top of the oxide layer using a magnetron reactive sputtering process. AlN was chosen for the top clad material because it offers strong piezoelectric coupling, can be deposited c-axis-oriented with good film uniformity (Xray diffraction rocking curve full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) = 1.6 • ), and because its low-temperature sputter deposition process is CMOS-compatible This AlN-on-SOI material stack allows separate fabrication of low-loss optical waveguides and efficient electromechanical transducers on the same platform. The silicon ridge waveguides guide TE-like optical modes with symmetric (Fig. The basic operation scheme of the acousto-optic modulator devices is depicted in Fig. Modulation of incident optical waves through the integrated AOM devices is studied using the experimental setup diagrammed in Fig. The electrical reflection coefficient S 11 of several IDTs, measured using an electrical network analyzer, is plotted in Fig 2c .i. as a function of drive frequency Ω/2π. This plot reveals efficient transduction of acoustic waves as narrowband dips in the reflected power spectra when the drive frequency matches the frequency of propagating SAWs with acoustic wavelengths equal to the transducer pitch. (For more details on the IDT performance and design, see Supplementary Note I.) The corresponding modulation efficiency, in terms of the normalized optical sideband power (shorthand S 21 ), is plotted in Fig. Thus far, we have described the AlN-on-SOI platform used to realize acousto-optic devices in silicon, and demonstrated acousto-optic modulation from 1-5 GHz frequencies. Next, we explore these interactions in detail, and show how the device design can be tailored to realize either intra-modal phase modulation (coupling light waves guided in a single spatial mode), or inter-modal single-sideband modulation. Thereafter, we will build on these fundamental capabilities to create and characterize a non-reciprocal modulator structure which produces both broadband, uni-directional light scattering, and enhanced acousto-optic coupling. We first begin by studying the behavior of an acoustooptic phase modulator in Fig. Phase-matching for an acousto-optic scattering process requires that the sums of the wavevectors of the initial and final particle states are equal. For the +Ω (anti-Stokes, or blue-shifting) process, this requires that whereas phase-matching for the -Ω (Stokes, or redshifting) process requires that where k(ω) is the wavevector of the symmetric optical mode at frequency ω. These phase-matching conditions ii. FIG. Provided that the optical group velocity v g does not change appreciably over the frequency shift Ω (in other words that the dispersion is linear over frequency detunings of a few GHz), a condition well-satisfied in most waveguide systems, both Eqs. 1-2 can be approximated as Ω∂k/∂ω = Ω/v g = q. Because the IDT in this system excites acoustic waves with identically zero wavevector (q = 0), the scattering process is not precisely phasematched, with a wavevector mismatch ∆q given by ∆q = Ω/v gq = Ω/v g ≈ 100 m -1 . ( As long as ∆qL/2 1 is satisfied, where L is the total device length, this phase mismatch is not appreciable over the interaction length, and the modulation process is approximately phase-matched. This is the case for our test structures, where L ≈ 240 μm, so ∆qL/2 ≈ .02. Because phase-matching conditions for both Stokes and anti-Stokes processes are simultaneously satisfied in this device geometry, acousto-optic scattering to both sidebands occurs with equal efficiency, as diagrammed in Fig. Detailed experimental results for one device, with IDT pitch and acoustic wavelength Λ = Λ ac /2 = 750 nm and optical waveguide width w = 750 nm are depicted in Fig. ∆Ω ao /2π = 20 MHz and sinc-squared-like acousto-optic response result from the finite transducer length and equal finger weighting Since the phase matching conditions in Eqs. 1-2 are approximately satisfied independent of optical wavelength, the phase modulation process is optically broadband; Fig. The power dependence of the modulation efficiency is plotted in Fig. Next, we engineer inter-modal acousto-optic scattering in multimode optical waveguides. In contrast to the intra-modal (single-mode) process studied in the previous section, the inter-modal process scatters light waves between distinct waveguide modes, producing dynamics reminiscent of wavevector-selective Bragg scattering in bulk acousto-optic modulators. The inter-modal acousto-optic modulator is studied in Fig Here, the electrically-driven elastic wave propagates at an angle θ with respect to an optical waveguide, corresponding to a nonzero axial wavevector q. As a result of this nonzero q, the SAW can phase-match to inter-modal (or inter-band) photonic transitions where incident and modulated light are guided in distinct optical waveguide modes. To study inter-modal scattering, we interface a multimode optical waveguide with integrated mode multiplexers (labeled MC), as shown in Fig. A representative inter-modal transition is diagrammed in Fig. This operation scheme produces mode conversion and frequency-shifting of guided optical waves through the inter-band photonic transition diagrammed in Fig. where k + (ω) and k -(ω) refer to the dispersion relations for the symmetric and anti-symmetric optical modes, respectively. In contrast to the intra-modal modulation studied in Fig. where n p,-(ω) and n p,+ (ω) are the phase indices of the anti-symmetric and symmetric optical modes, and are functions of optical frequency ω (wavelength λ). According to this relationship, λ 0 is set through lithographic definition of the acoustic wavevector q, which depends on the IDT angle θ and pitch Λ. For further details on the relationship between q and design parameters, see Supplementary Note III. As the incident optical wavelength is detuned from λ 0 , the scattering process accumulates a phase mismatch ∆q pm given by where n g,-and n g,+ are the group indices of the antisymmetric and symmetric optical modes. This phase mismatch results in a finite operation bandwidth of the intermodal modulator: where the factor of 1.39 comes from the shape of the resulting sinc-squared response (for more details see Supplementary Note IV). For a device of interaction length L = 240 μm, and |n g,-n g,+ | = 0.12, corresponding to the designs of our devices, ∆λ FWHM = 75 nm. Beyond requiring strict phase-matching, an additional condition for efficient inter-modal acousto-optic scattering is that the incident elastic wave should have the correct shape and symmetry to mediate efficient acousto-optic coupling between the two guided optical modes. For the symmetric and anti-symmetric modes guided in our silicon waveguides (Fig. We fabricated single-sideband modulator devices of various widths (acoustic wavelengths) ranging from w = Λ ac = 1 -1.5 μm on the AlN-SOI platform. Experimental results for one such device with IDT pitch Λ = 747.5 nm (Λ ac = 1500 nm) and optical waveguide width w = 1500 nm are depicted in Fig. We study the wavelength-dependence of the acoustooptic response and single-sideband modulation in Fig. The power-dependence of the scattered sideband amplitude is plotted in Fig. We have demonstrated acousto-optic modulation using the AlN-on-SOI platform and shown how guided-wave Forward Propagation Backward Propagation In the counter-propagating regions, the waveguide is tapered down to w -∆w, changing the propagation constants of the optical modes so that phase matching is not satisfied, and hence modulation is inhibited. (c) plots the measured electrical reflection spectrum S11 of the IDT, while (d) shows the acousto-optic response as a function of drive frequency Ω. (e) plots the modulation efficiency as a function of RF drive power when Ω/2π = 3.11 GHz and λ = 1525.4 nm, showing a >10-fold enhancement over the shorter devices. (f-h) diagram the origin of non-reciprocal modulation in these devices. In the forward direction, shown in (h) and the righthand side of (f), inter-modal acousto-optic scattering is phase-matched around optical frequency ω f , where the incident elastic wave (green arrow) scatters light between inital (open circle) and final (filled circle) states on the optical dispersion bands. This leads to mode conversion and frequency shifting within the modulator device. In the backward direction, shown in (g) and the lefthand side of (f), a non-reciprocal wavevector mismatch ∆qnr arising from the nonzero group velocities of the optical modes prevents phase-matching, and no modulation occurs within the device. However, modulation may be phasematched around a nearby frequency, ω b . Note that in (f-g), we considered back-scattered light at a frequency ω f + Ω, since this the frequency of output light in (h) that could be back-scattered into the device by an external scatterer. However, this device supports broadband operation such that the response is similar for back-injected light in a wide band around ω f . (i) shows the experimental observation of non-reciprocal modulation, showing significant non-reciprocal contrast across the device's 0.8 nm (100 GHz) operation bandwidth. acousto-optic interactions can be engineered to produce optical phase modulation and single-sideband modulation. In this section, we show how these couplings can be extended to longer device lengths, dramatically enhancing net modulation strength, and enabling non-reciprocal modulation and mode conversion. This traveling-wave non-reciprocal modulator represents a fundamental building block for silicon-based acousto-optic isolators and circulators. We demonstrate non-reciprocal modulation using a serpentine single-sideband modulator which permits acoustooptic coupling over long interaction lengths. One such de-vice is shown in the micrograph of Fig. A fabricated device is shown in Fig. We first examine the modulation efficiency of this device at a wavelength of λ 0 = 1525.4 nm. The frequencydependent modulation efficiency at an RF drive power of 10 mW (acoustic power ≈0.6 mW) is plotted in Fig. The increased propagation length L tot of this serpentine modulator design enables a powerful form of travelingwave non-reciprocal modulation, previously studied in Refs. The origin of non-reciprocal modulation can be understood through the phase matching diagram in Fig. Provided that ∆q nr L tot 1, this process is not phasematched around ω f . In this case, light injected in the backward direction passes through the device without experiencing modulation, shown in Fig. Provided that ω fω b is much greater than the FWHM operation bandwidth of the modulator device, strong nonreciprocity should be supported. Interestingly, this condition turns out to be functionally identical to the condition that the non-reciprocal phase mismatch ∆q nr L tot is large. Through the use of a serpentine design, long total interaction lengths L tot are possible even when the acousto-optic coupling occurs only over relatively short waveguide segments (see Supplementary Note IV for details). For our device, ∆q nr L tot ≈ 9 indicating that modulation should be non-reciprocal. To experimentally characterize the non-reciprocal response of our devices, we fix the drive frequency to Ω/2π = 3.11 GHz and inject probe light in either the forward and backward directions of a single device. The resulting modulation efficiency as a function of optical wavelength is plotted in Fig. We fabricated electromechanical SAW transducers on an AlN-on-SOI material stack, and used this platform to demonstrate acousto-optic modulation in integrated silicon waveguides. Harnessing intra-and inter-modal scattering processes, we separately engineered the acoustooptic interaction to produce optical phase modulation or wavevector-selective single-sideband amplitude modulation with ≥ 30-dB of single-sideband suppression. The latter represents a practical analogue of bulk acousto-optic frequency shifters implemented within integrated photonics, opening the door to a variety of applications including signal (de-)modulation, sensing, waveform synthesis, and on-chip heterodyne detection. By scaling the acoustooptic interaction to longer lengths in a serpentine modulator structure, we demonstrated efficient light scattering and electrically-driven non-reciprocal modulation in silicon. These compact AOM devices require no optical pumping of acoustic waves and no suspended structures, and utilize elasto-optic modulation within standard silicon waveguides. These first-generation modulators exhibited reasonable modulation efficiencies of 1 -13.5% over short (<1 mm) acousto-optic coupling lengths, which can be immediately improved through several strategies. First, due to the ultra-low propagation losses of the silicon ridge waveguides, these interactions can easily be extended to longer interaction lengths (measured losses of the symmetric mode: <0.15 dB/cm; anti-symmetric mode: <0.35 dB/cm at waveguide width w = 1.5 μm). For example, extended serpentine structures can be designed to achieve acoustooptic modulation (with efficiency ∝ L 2 ao ) over cm-scales with negligible optical insertion losses. Second, power efficiency may be improved through the use of improved IDT designs over the simple inter-digitated electrodes used here. For example, structural and impedance-matching optimizations, the use of unidirectional transducers, or the design of SAW transducers which couple more efficiently to elastic modes with strong acousto-optic overlap could all improve modulation efficiency dramatically. (For more details on acousto-optic overlap calculations, see Supplementary Note II.) Finally, modulation strength may also be improved through the use of SAW cavities, edge reflectors or other forms of acoustic reflectors or resonators, or through the use of materials with stronger piezo-electric coupling such as ScAlN Building on these foundational results, we developed distributed, non-reciprocal acousto-optic modulators, enabling uni-directional modulation and mode conversion with a combination of significant non-reciprocal contrast (∼15 dB), low insertion losses (<0.6 dB), broad optical bandwidth (100 GHz; 0.8 nm), and high modulation efficiency (> 10 -1 ), all in a silicon waveguide platform. These results represent a significant advance toward the creation of practical, non-magnetic integrated isolators and circulators In summary, we have demonstrated strong electricallydriven acousto-optic modulation in integrated silicon waveguides. Using this approach, we realized acoustooptic phase modulation, single-sideband amplitude modulation, and broadband (>100 GHz) non-reciprocal light propagation. The implementation of electro-mechanical transducers in a piezoelectric top cladding can be extended to other material systems as a general approach for realizing linear acousto-optic interactions in integrated photonic circuits. Because the optical waveguides are spatially separated from the acoustic transducers, we preserve the ultra-low losses of buried silicon waveguides as a path to efficient and low-loss integrated AOMs. These results represent a promising technique to add miniaturized acoustooptic modulators, frequency-shifters, and non-reciprocal components to the toolkit of integrated photonics. The integrated acousto-optic modulators were fabricated through a multi-layer lithography process. First, ridge waveguides were patterned in hydrogen silesquioxane (HSQ) using electron beam lithography. After development in TMAH, a Cl 2 /BCl 3 dry etch was used to etch the ridge waveguides and grating couplers with a 90 nm etch depth. The remaining HSQ was removed in 5% HF, and a 700 nm silicon dioxide overcladding was deposited using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. Following an anneal at 750 • for four hours to improve the silicon dioxide purity, 600 nm of piezoelectric c-axis-oriented AlN was deposited using an AC magnetron sputtering process (OEM Group). Finally, inter-digitated transducers were patterened in 50 nm evaporated Al metal using a liftoff process on ZEP520A photoresist. The IDTs are excited using RF signals from an analog signal generator (Keysight E8257D), and heterodyne measurements of acousto-optic modulation are analyzed using a RF signal analyzer (Keysight N9030B). To measure the electrical power reflection S 11 of the IDT devices, the RF synthesizer is replaced with a calibrated electrical vector network analyzer (Keysight E5071C). For modula-tion efficiency measurements with incident RF power >10 dBm, an additional low-noise microwave amplifier is used (Mini-Circuits ZX60-83LN-S+). Optical interrogation of the AOM devices is achieved using a semiconductor laser (Santec TSL-710) that is tunable between 1480-1640 nm. Light is coupled on-and off-chip through integrated grating couplers interfaced with commercial four-port fiber arrays (OZ Optics). Typical fiber-to-chip coupling losses are <6 dB/facet at 1535 nm. To facilitate efficient electro-mechanical transduction of surface acoustic waves (SAWs), inter-digitated transducers (IDTs) are fabricated in a 50-nm-thick Al metal layer on top of the AlN-SOI material platform. Representative micrographs at various levels of detail are shown in Fig. The electro-mechanical response of our inter-digitated transducers (IDTs) is well-described by a Mason equivalent circuit model where the radiation conductance G a (f ) and motional susceptance B a (f ) comprise the electromechanical response, and are given by and is the frequency detuning from the center frequency f 0 . In these equations, K 2 is the material electromechanical coupling coefficient, and N is the number of transducer finger pairs. Furthermore, for an inter-digitated capacitor with 50% duty cycle (filling factor), C T can be calculated as where w T is the transducer width (aperture) given by the finger overlap length, and ε p is the effective permittivity of the substrate. For our transducers with w T ≈ 240 μm and ε p ≈ 9ε 0 , we calculate a static capacitance per finger pair of C T /N = .021 pF/N, or around C T = 2.25 pF for a transducer with N = 106. Our transducers exhibit a parasitic resistance R p resulting from the finite conductivity of the aluminum metal, and a small parasitic inductance L p , which are captured by the series circuit model of Fig. The fit values of these circuit parameters are combined with the model of Eqs. 2-3 and narrowband impedance measurements of Y T to determine G 0 . For the device in Fig. The parasitic resistance R p can be thought of as having contributions from the long, wide side electrodes, and from the thin fingers themselves. The parasitic resistance of an inter-digitated electrode consisting of N finger pairs is given by where l is the finger length, Λ is the IDT pitch (equal to twice the finger width), t is the metal thickness, and ρ is the bulk resistivity of the Al metal. For a typical Al IDT used here, where we have used ρ = 2.7 × 10 -8 Ω•m for aluminum. This resistance is much lower than the value of R p that we measure. If we consider the resistance of a single side bar, with designed width of 14 μm (cross-sectional area A = t × 14 μm, and length l bar = 2ΛN + 40 μm, this leads to a contribution For our IDT, assuming ρ is that of bulk aluminum, R bar p = 7.7 Ω, which is closer to the observed value of R p . To first order, we can estimate the total parasitic resistance as resulting from these two contributions adding in series: This simple model agrees quite well with results measured for a number of different IDT devices during early fabrication runs, as plotted in Fig. Acousto-optic coupling results from the photoelastic (or elasto-optic) effect, where an applied elastic strain field S leads to a change in the material dielectric tensor ε given by where p jkmn are the elements of the material photoelastic tensor. In cubic media, such as silicon, there are only three independent photoelastic coefficients, which can be expressed using contracted notation with 11 → 1, 22 → 2, 33 → 3, and 23, 32 → 4, and p 13 = p 12 by symmetry. The SAWs excited through our experiments have strong in-plane displacement, resulting in an approximate elasto-optic refractive index change given by ∆n(x, y) ≈ - where n 0 is the equilibrium refractive index of the material. A time-harmonic strain field results in a spatiotemporally-varying index modulation, which can produce light scattering. Provided that ∆n(x, y) has the correct symmetry, this can lead to different forms of optical modulation, such as the form of inter-modal Bragg scattering studied in the latter half of the main article. In addition to phase-matching (correct overlap in the z direction), the cross-sectional index modulation must have strong spatial overlap with the participating optical modes. Mathematically, this condition can be approximated through the acousto-optic coupling integral Here E x 1 (r ⊥ ) and E x 2 (r ⊥ ) are the transverse x-directed electric field profiles of the participating optical modes, and the acousto-optic modulation efficiency (power scattering rate) is ∝ |g ao | 2 . The integral is taken to be over the transverse cross-section of the optical waveguide. In our structure, the primary contribution is from the silicon waveguide core, which tightly confines the optical modes and has photoelastic coefficients (p 11 , p 12 , p 44 ) = (-0.09, 0.017, -0.051) For intra-modal phase modulation, simulations show that g ao is maximized when the acoustic wavelength Λ ac ≈ 2w, where w is the optical waveguide width. As plotted in Fig. For optimal overlap, it is also essential that the SAW has large displacement (strain) in the waveguide core, which is affected by the film thicknesses of the material stack. Finally, thickness of the piezoelectric AlN layer should be optimized to produce efficient electro-mechanical transduction. These parameters are varied through finite element simulations using the commercially-available software package COMSOL, with simulation geometry and typical results shown in Fig. Because SAWs tend to only penetrate to a depth that is a few multiples of Λ ac , this same film stack is not optimal for acousto-optic coupling at high frequencies (small SAW wavelengths). As a result, observed acousto-optic modulation efficiencies decrease above ≈4 GHz, as shown in Fig. The inter-modal modulation process is mediated by an incident SAW with a well-defined axial wavevector q, with phase-matching conditions of the form: where k + (ω) and k -(ω) refer to the dispersion relations for the symmetric and anti-symmetric optical modes. This process is plotted in Fig. where the muliplication symbols (×) were added for clarity. Using the approximations that |n p,-n p,+ |ω p Ω × n p,+ , and that n p,-does not change dramatically over a frequency detuning Ω, this expression can be rewritten as By simulating n p,-and n p,+ as a function of wavelength for a given waveguide structure, this equation serves as a design rule to specify the target value for q. The SAW is generated electro-mechanically using an IDT with pitch Λ defined by the inter-digital spacing as plotted in Fig. The transducer is oriented with an angle θ with respect to normal of the optical axis. This angle directly sets the axial wavevector q, and relates the transducer pitch Λ to the transverse acoustic wavelength (from the perspective of the optical waveguide) Λ ac by Combined with the overlap rule that Λ ac ≈ w for efficient inter-modal scattering, where w is the waveguide width, Eqs. 15 and 17 lead to the expression which specifies the angle θ necessary to mediate inter-modal scattering at wavelength λ p . Fig. For a given SAW wavevector q, Eq. 13 is exactly satisfied at a single optical frequency ω 0 (wavelength λ 0 ). However, as the operating frequency ω p is detuned from ω 0 , the acousto-optic scattering process is no longer precisely phase-matched, with an approximate wavevector mismatch ∆q pm found by linearizing Eq. 13 around ω p = ω 0 as where n g,+ and n g,-are the group velocities of the symmetric and anti-symmetric modes, and ∆ω = ω pω 0 . The total modulated optical power P as is related to the integrated phase mismatch over a propagation length L as given by the integral Assuming that the acousto-optic coupling rate g ao (z) is constant along the propagation length z, this integral can be evaluated as: This sinc 2 response envelope is equal to 1/2 when ∆q pm L/2 = 1.39, resulting in a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) operation bandwidth ∆ω FWHM given by where c is the speed of light. This bandwidth can be expressed in terms of wavelength as For a given device length, the operating bandwidth can be increased by dispersion engineering that tailors the group indices of the propagating modes to be nearly equal (see Ref. As discussed in the main article, an inter-modal modulator induces a non-reciprocal wavevector mismatch ∆q nr between forward-and backward-propagating waves, where This term implies that the center operation frequency ω 0 takes on different values ω f and ω b for forward-and backward-propagating optical waves, respectively, given by Expressed simply, the condition for significant non-reciprocal modulation contrast between forward and backward propagating waves, necessary to build a high-extinction non-reciprocal modulator is: which places a constraint on device length to support strong non-reciprocity: For one of our fabricated optical waveguides, with measured n g,-= 3.84, n g,+ = 3.72, and Ω = 2π × 3.11 GHz, this condition is L 1.1 cm. However, due to the relatively small IDT apertures used, our acousto-optic interaction lengths are much shorter than this length (L ao = 0.24-0.96 mm). Therefore, to artificially achieve a sufficiently narrow operation bandwidth for non-reciprocal modulation, we can distribute this modulation over a much longer optical propagation length through the use of the serpentine modulator design. We numerically study this behavior using Eq. 20 with different distributions of g ao (z) as shown in Fig. As a point of comparison, we consider a device where the coupling g ao (z) = 0 except at z = 0 and z = 15.3 mm (a double-δ-function modulation profile.) The resulting modulation strength as a function of frequency detuning can be calculated from Eq. 20 as This response is studied in Fig. Finally, we consider the case of the serpentine modulator studied in the text, where g ao (z) is nonzero for four 0.24-mm-long segments distributed along the total device length L tot = 15.3 mm. As depicted in Fig. Experimental data are plotted for a single serpentine modulator of Λ = 721 nm, θ = 6.28 • , w = 1.45 and μm. This device has measured center wavelength λ f = 1544 nm; its modulation response is plotted as a function of Ω and λ p in Fig. In this article, we studied inter-modal acousto-optic modulation and mode conversion through anti-Stokes (blue-shifting) scattering processes. However, all of the main results can be reproduced with similar behavior using a Stokes (red-shifting) scattering process, as studied in Fig. Forward and backward modulation response data within the serpentine modulator device studied in the main article are plotted for both anti-Stokes (Fig. This equivalence also highlights the need for low-crosstalk mode multiplexers, since light multiplexed into the unwanted mode produces scattering to the opposite (potentially unwanted) frequency sideband. 