In recent years, the H formulation of Maxwell's equation has become the de facto standard for simulating the time-dependent electromagnetic behavior of superconducting applications with commercial software. However, there are cases where other formulations are desirable, for example for modeling superconducting turns in electrical machines or situations where the superconductor is better described by the critical state than by a power-law resistivity. In order to accurately and efficiently handle those situations, here we consider two published approaches based on the magnetic vector potential: the T -A formulation of Maxwell's equations (with power-law resistivity) and Campbell's implementation of the critical state model. In this contribution, we extend the T -A formulation to thick conductors so that large coils with different coupling scenarios between the turns can be considered. We also revise Campbell's model and discuss it in terms of its ability to calculate AC losses: in particular, we investigate the dependence of the calculated AC losses on the frequency of the AC excitation and the possibility of using quick one-step (instead of full cycle) simulations to calculate the AC losses. N UMERICAL models have become popular tools for understanding the behavior of superconductors and for designing applications. Among the models used for investigating the electromagnetic behavior of superconductors, the finite-element method (FEM) based on the H formulation of Maxwell's equations combined with the power-law model of the superconductor is by far the most widely adopted approach, used by tens of research group around the world In this contribution, we discuss two approaches based on the magnetic vector potential, which -for different reasonscan be considered as an alternative to the H formulation for some application contexts. The T -A formulation, proposed by Zhang et al. in Numerical formulations using the vector potential A can be also combined with different (from the power law) constitutive models of the superconductor. In this paper the quasi critical state model (QCSM) proposed by A. M. Campbell in All the models considered in this article are 2D models simulating the cross section of superconductors in the xy plane, with the current flowing in the z direction (Fig. The T -A formulation was proposed as a means to tackle the computational challenge of simulating HTS coated conductors, which are characterized by a superconducting layer with very large width-to-thickness ratio. The HTS tapes are modeled as 1D objects and the current vector potential T is used as state arXiv:2004.01913v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Apr 2020 variable in Faraday's equation. The magnetic field in all the simulated domains (including non-superconducting regions) is calculated with the magnetic vector potential A formulation. The two formulations are coupled, so that the electromagnetic interaction between multiple tapes can be calculated. In the T -A formulation, the current I flowing in a conductor of cross section S is given by where L represents the boundary edges of the cross section S. Then, the main difference between thin and thick superconductors is in the way to impose such condition. In thin conductors, the current is imposed by setting appropriate (0D) boundary conditions at the extremities of each tape, as explained in In thick conductors of rectangular cross section, different sets of conditions can be set for the two components of the current vector potential, T x and T y . Four examples are represented in Fig. where E c is the critical electric field, J c is the critical current density and n the power-law exponent defining the steepness of the E-J curve. The quasi critical state model (QCSM) solves the equation where J takes values approximating the transition between +J c and -J c or zero. In the version discussed here (implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics), we model this transition as erf is the error function . Instead of erf, other functions based on exponentials In addition, since we consider 2D problems, the magnetic vector potential has only one component (along z in Fig. By substituting ( This equation, which corresponds to the backward Euler solution of non-linear and time-dependent problem, allows solving the time evolution of A by simulating a series of static problems (one for each time step). An external magnetic field or a transport current is imposed by setting the appropriate conditions for the magnetic vector potential on the boundary of the air domain surrounding the superconductor. For example, in 2D cartesian coordinates, a boundary condition generates a magnetic field of amplitude B 0 , angle θ with respect to the y axis, and sinusoidal time dependence. A boundary condition A = A 0 sin(ωt), where A 0 is a constant, generates a sinusoidal transport current in the superconductor. The value of the current can be calculated a posteriori in the post-processing, by integrating J over the superconductor's cross section at the peak of the current. In the article where the quasi critical state model was originally proposed where Ω is the superconductor's domain. This expression was also mentioned in The T -A formulation with power-law and the A formulation with the quasi critical state model are validated with a comparison with other models: the Minimum Electro-Magnetic Entropy Production (MEMEP) model and a 'pure' critical state model, respectively. This subsection quickly summarizes these two models. Fig. The MEMEP model uses the current density as state variable, avoiding meshing the air. Differently from integral methods, it solves J by minimizing a certain functional As for the 'pure' CSM, a sharp shift to ±J c is produced by a non-zero electric field regardless of its magnitude. This means that only the sign of the electric field rather than its magnitude determines the electrodynamics of the system. For calculating the numerical solution arising form the CSM assumption, we follow the approach developed in As mentioned in section II-A, the T -A formulation for thick conductors can be used for simulating not only individual conductors with rectangular cross section, but also stacks of coupled coated conductors. Here we present the validation of the model for the latter case, in particular for the stand-alone racetrack coil considered in The results are in very good agreement with each other: with the exception of a few points at very low current ratios for the coupled case, the difference between the models is in the range of only a few %. Due to the non uniform current distribution among the tapes, the AC losses of the coupled case are about twice as high as those of the uncoupled case. The T -A formulation can be used to study the difference between the two coupling scenarios in electrical machines. As an example, Fig. We compared the one-step and full-cycle simulations of the QCSM for the magnetization losses of a superconductor of elliptical cross section caused by an inclined magnetic field -a case for which one-step simulations and Eq. ( The AC applied field was set equal to 20 and 120 mT. These two values correspond to cases of partial and total penetration in the superconductor for θ = 0°. In both cases, the orientation of the field was varied from 0 to 90°(see insets of Figs. As a second comparison between the one-step and full-cycle simulations, we calculated the losses of a thin ellipse (η = 1, see Fig. Finally, with the full-cycle model, we varied the frequency of the external AC field (20 mT, θ = 0°) applied to the thin elliptical conductor of Fig. IV. CONCLUSION With this contribution, we have extended the T -A formulation to the case of thick superconductors. This extension also allows simulating stacks (or windings) of electromagnetically coupled HTS coated conductors. The formulation has been applied to calculate the losses of the stator coils of a superconducting motor and to compare the case of uncoupled and coupled turns. Full-cycle and one-step simulations of the quasi critical state model have been compared in terms of AC loss calculation. In the case of individual superconducting tapes subjected to external AC magnetic fields, the difference of the AC loss results is rather marginal. In that case, the static model can be used to rapidly evaluate the AC losses of superconducting tapes. In the case of simultaneous AC current and AC field, however, the losses calculated with the one-step model can be significantly different from those calculated with full-cycle simulations, particularly in the case of high current and high fields. In the low-current and low-field range, however, the agreement between the two types of simulation is excellent and one-step simulations can be used for a very rapid estimation of the losses. In addition, the full-cycle simulations with the quasi critical state model revealed a dependence of the AC loss results on the frequency of the AC excitation, if the frequency range is sufficiently large. This dependence should be taken into account, especially for the simulation of slow varying fields. APPENDIX Imposing a transport current I(t) by using (1) in a 2D superconductor of arbitrary shape proved to be not straightforward in COMSOL Multiphysics. In particular, the simple imposition of a global constrain proved to be ineffective. A procedure that works is the following. First, define a new variable Y in a newly created Global ODE physics: where intop1 is an integral operator and intop1(J) represents the calculated integral of the current density on the superconductor's cross section. Then, in the PDE physics for the T potential, add a Weak Contribution on the superconductors boundary (Y-Ttan) * test(Ttan) 