The fundamental question whether the structure of curled topological states, such as ferroelectric vortices, can be controlled by the application of an irrotational electric field is open. In this work, we studied the influence of irrotational external electric fields on the formation, evolution, and relaxation of ferroelectric vortices in spherical nanoparticles. In the framework of the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire approach coupled with electrostatic equations, we performed finite element modeling of the polarization behavior in a ferroelectric barium titanate core covered with a "tunable" paraelectric strontium titanate shell placed in a polymer or liquid medium. A stable two-dimensional vortex is formed in the core after a zero-field relaxation of an initial random or poly-domain distribution of the polarization, where the vortex axis is directed along one of the core crystallographic axes. Subsequently, sinusoidal pulses of a homogeneous electric field with variable period, strength, and direction are applied. The field-induced changes of the vortex structure consist in the appearance of an axial kernel in the form of a prolate nanodomain, the kernel growth, an increasing orientation of the polarization along the field, and the onset of a single-domain state. We introduced the term "kernel" to name the prolate nanodomain developed near the vortex axis and polarized perpendicular to the vortex plane. In ferromagnetism, this region is generally known as the vortex core. Unexpectedly, the in-field evolution of the polarization includes the formation of Bloch point structures, located at two diametrically opposite positions near the core surface. After removal of the electric field, the vortex recovers spontaneously; but its structure, axis orientation, and vorticity can be different from the initial state. As a rule, the final state is a stable three-dimensional polarization vortex with an axial dipolar kernel, which has a lower energy compared to the initial purely azimuthal vortex. The nature of this counterintuitive result is that the gradient energy of the axial vortex without a kernel is significantly higher, while the formation of a vortex kernel only leads to a smaller increase of the depolarization energy. The analysis of the torque and electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle in an irrotational electric field showed that the torque acting on the vortex with a kernel tends to rotate the nanoparticle in such way that the vortex axis becomes parallel to the field direction. The vortex (with or without a kernel) is electrostatically neutral, and therefore the force acting on the nanoparticle is absent for a homogeneous electric field, and nonzero for the field with a strong spatial gradient. The vortex states with a kernel possess a manifold degeneracy, appearing from three equiprobable directions of vortex axis, clockwise and counterclockwise directions of polarization rotation along the vortex axis, and two polarization directions in the kernel. This multitude of the vortex states in a single core are promising for applications of core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multi-bit memory and related logic units. The rotation of a vortex kernel over a sphere, possible for the core-shell nanoparticles in a soft matter medium with controllable viscosity, may be used to imitate qubit features. Nanosized ferroelectrics attract permanent attention of researchers as unique model systems for fundamental studies of polar surface properties, various screening mechanisms of spontaneous polarization by free carriers, and often the emergence of versatile multi-domain states with complex topology of electric dipoles It follows from many theoretical studies that a homogeneous electric field alone is practically incapable of controlling the vortex polarization of nanosized ferroelectrics, and that additional features are required, such as particle curvature or specific defects However, there are several experimental studies on the behavior of vortex polarization in nanosized ferroelectrics under the application of an irrotational electric field A much greater number of studies is devoted to the phase-field modeling of polarization vortices in nanosized ferroelectrics and their reaction to an external stimulus using a continuum phenomenological Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach combined with electrostatic equations (see Ref. It should be underlined that the electric field control of a nanosized ferroelectric polarization is of particular interest due to its perspective applications in modern electrocaloric (EC) convertors working around phase transition temperatures To the best of our knowledge, existing theoretical papers (cited above and many others) did not consider analytically the possibility of controlling the vortex polarization in nanosized ferroelectrics by irrotational electric fields, which can be easily created. Motivated to fill this gap in knowledge, we simulate numerically and describe analytically the formation of polarization vortices in spherical nanoparticles consisting of a ferroelectric core covered with a paraelectric shell, and analyze the vortex behavior in irrotational electric fields. We calculate analytically the torque and the electrostatic force acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in a liquid (or viscous) cell in the presence of a homogeneous electric field or its spatial gradient. The controllability feature of the nanoparticle's core polarization by the shell screening in combination with external irrotational electric fields looks very attractive for new applications, such as multi-bit memory, qubit simulation, and logic units. The remainder of the paper has the following structure. The formulation of the problem is presented in Section II, which contains the method description and calculation details. Results of finite element modeling and their analytical description are presented in Section III, where special attention is paid to the evolution of the polarization under an applied voltage, the structure of the initial and final polarization states, and the polarization behavior in an external electric field. The torque and electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in homogeneous and inhomogeneous (gradient) electric fields are analyzed in Section IV. Possible applications of core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multi-bit memory and related multi-value logic units, as well as speculations about their ability to imitate qubit features at room temperature are discussed in Section V. Obtained results are summarized in Section VI. A. Method. We use the LGD approach combined with electrostatic equations, because this allows us to establish the physical origin of anomalies in the phase diagrams, to determine polar and dielectric properties of ferroelectric nanoparticles We performed finite element modeling (FEM) of the polarization and electric field evolution in a 10 nm barium titanate (BaTiO3) nanoparticle covered with a 4 nm thick "tunable" strontium titanate (SrTiO3) shell with a ultra-high temperature-dependent relative dielectric permittivity S ~ (3000 -300), which is placed in a polymer or liquid medium with a relative dielectric permittivity e~10. The main role of the paraelectric shell is to provide an effective tunable screening of the core polarization The mathematical formulation of the problem, consisting in the electrostatic equations and time-dependent LGD equations with boundary conditions, is given in detail in Ref. B. Calculation details. The simulated model system is shown in Fig. 1. The position of the electrodes is defined by the angles  and . 2. The voltage between the electrodes is absent in the time interval -500 K to 0 K (see Figs. 2, left part), where the time is measured in units of the Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time K It is shown Our simulations demonstrate that the minimal external field required to change the vortex structure is about The discrepancy between the calculated thermodynamic coercive field (~ 250 mV/nm) and the experimentally observed coercive field of bulk BaTiO3 (~ 0.1 mV/nm) may originate from the influence of intrinsic charged defects, which we do not consider. All of these fields are significantly smaller than the breakdown field of a surrounding liquid medium or polymer ~ (500 -700) mV/nm Figure We chose a situation where the vortex axis coincides with the [001] crystallographic direction before applying the voltage pulse, at t<0. The sinusoidal voltage pulse is shown in Fig. When the electric field is directed, e.g., along the [111] axis, the "relaxed" vortex axis can lie along any of three possible directions ([001], [010] or the initial [100]), depending on the computational fluctuations. Thus, there are three equilibrium directions of the vortex axis, between which the vortex can be switched via the application and subsequent removal of an external electric field. Each direction and each vortex circulation direction (clockwise or anti-clockwise) has three local minima, namely a simple vortex (excited state "0") and two vortex states with a kernel having mutually opposite polarization (ground states "1"). Actually, for any given sense of rotation (vorticity), the state "1" is two-fold degenerate, as there are two equivalent states that differ by the sign of the polarization within the kernel. These types of the lowest states "0" and "1" have a relatively small energy difference G+ 1.210 -20 J, corresponding to the barrier height 2.9 k B T at 298 K and a relative energy difference of only about 0.1%. The formation of the state "1" with a kernel can be attributed to a significant reduction of the gradient energy contribution, since an empty vortex axis has a higher density of gradient energy near the central axis in the state "0". The density becomes significantly smaller in the states "1", when the "empty" region surrounding the vortex axis transforms into a prolate nanodomain. On the other hand, the kernel formation leads to an increase of the depolarization field energy. The difference in the free energies of the states "0" and "1" suggests that, for this specific sample, the decrease of gradient energy of the almost homogeneously polarized kernel is partially compensated by the increase of depolarization energy that arises from the kernel dipole moment. Given the relative proximity of the simple vortex energy G1 and the energy G0 of a vortex with a kernel, the polarization of a nanoparticle core can pass from one local minimum to another under certain external conditions. By placing a particle with a simple vortex polarization in an external electric field, which has a nonzero average over the particle volume, it turns a simple vortex into a vortex with a kernel regardless of the field direction, as can be seen from Fig. In view of this result, we can expect that a simple vortex state "0" is a metastable state, i.e. that it represents an energetic local minimum. This raises the question whether the state "0" might be an unstable minimum, i.e. a saddle point, which is only formed in perfectly random (or polydomain) conditions of the simulation. A saddle point could become unstable by applying an arbitrarily small field, breaking the symmetry along the axis. However, we repeatedly found in our simulations that a simple vortex is formed spontaneously (at E ext =0) from any small random distribution of polarization, which has a certain (but rather small) degree of asymmetry The polarization of a two-fold degenerate kernel state and its quasi-static evolution at small voltages are shown in Fig. Note that the switching between the two-fold degenerate ground vortex states "1" and the excited vortex state "0" can be realized by external electric fields in an ensemble of non-interacting ferroelectric nanoparticles placed in a liquid or polymer matrix. Our results indicate that the internal kernel structure of three-dimensional vortices is a general feature of nanoscale ferroelectric vortices that has so far not been thoroughly addressed. This is further corroborated by results reported by Mangeri et al. A typical distribution of polarization components and their derivatives before the voltage pulse is initially applied and the final state formed a long time ( Using the argumentation presented in Appendix B, we have "guessed" the following trial functions: For the initial state "0", that is a single vortex without a kernel, the fitting parameters are listed in Table Analytical expressions (2) are interpolation trial functions, which are selected from general considerations, but not derived. Unfortunately, we are not aware of any analytical model for the structure and dynamics of a ferroelectric or ferromagnetic vortex in nanospheres. At the same time, micromagnetic simulations of vortex structures in ferromagnetic nanodisks performed under an external field. These magnetic vortices result from the tendency of the magnetization to form flux-closure patterns, which are frequently found in confined mesoscopic ferromagnets. A typical vortex structure is characterized by the circulation of the in-plane magnetization around a nanometer-sized kernel, whose radius is determined by the competition between the magnetostatic and exchange energies. The functional form of the vortex kernel profile is analyzed in Ref. Although the situation in a nanosphere is quite different from that in a cylinder or thin film, it seems possible to extend the above conclusions made for magnetic vortices to ferroelectric nanospheres and underline some important differences between ferromagnetic and ferroelectric vortices. The first important difference is that in contrast to the ferroelectric vortices discussed above, the kernel of ferromagnetic vortices is an integral part of the vortex structure, whose existence is enforced by topology. In a ferromagnetic vortex, the kernel is a consequence of both the smoothness of the magnetization field M in ferromagnets, which is due to the dominant ferromagnetic exchange on short length scales, and the nonlinear constraint |M| = const., which means that M is a directional field of constant magnitude. In contrast to this, the polarizability of ferroelectric materials makes it possible to have low-dimensional regions representing topological defects, such as Ising-type domain walls where the polarization vanishes on the central plane between two oppositely polarized domains. The only case where such topological defects may occur in homogeneous ferromagnetic materials is the specific three-dimensional structures known as Bloch point structures (BPS), which are typically formed at the center of special types of magnetic vortices. For these structures, the transition between oppositely magnetized regions cannot proceed continuously For a ferroelectric vortex state "0" we calculated that P = Pe r around its axis z [see Eqs. V. To the best of our knowledge, the BPS are new topological structures in ferroelectrics. Remarkably, our results evidence a close analogy with micromagnetism concerning the BPS, because there, too, they typically appear during switching processes. In magnetism, this was discovered more than 40 years ago by Arrott et al. The dependencies of the polarization P averaged over the core volume, with a periodic voltage Since P(U) = ±P k + AU at |U| < U cr , the average polarization is linearly proportional to the effective electric field E eff (U) inside the particle core: where ±P k is the small spontaneous polarization of the kernel, ε 0 is the universal dielectric constant, and χ eff is the effective linear dielectric susceptibility of the ferroelectric core. The kernel polarization is bi-stable, because it can be positive or negative depending on the field gradient (increase or decrease). The effective field E eff (U) can be estimated from the expression, Thus E eff is proportional to an external field E ext (U) multiplied by a depolarization factor η(ε f ). The factor depends on the relative thickness of the shell, Δ = ΔR R ; ε f , ε S , and ε e are the ferroelectric core, paraelectric shell, and surrounding media permittivities, respectively. Equation (3b) is derived in Appendix C (section C.2.1). The value χ eff ≈ 360 was estimated from the curve slope in Fig. . Note, the value is essentially higher than the relative susceptibility It is seen that the polarization P(U) induced by the electric field with a period Tp = (10 4 -10 3 )K is quasi-linear in the region |U| < 5V [see green dash-dotted and black solid curves in The sub-linear increase of P(U) starts at higher voltages, being the most pronounced for E ext [100]. A rather slim hysteresis loop P(U) opens with decreasing Tp; and these loops are almost the same for different directions of E ext (see red dashed curves calculated for Tp = 30 K). The loops acquire a quasi-elliptic shape for a small period Tp = 3K (see blue dotted curves calculated for Tp = 3 ). Using FEM, we calculated the electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in a liquid (or viscous) medium under an external electric field. The electric field E in the ferroelectric core consists of external and depolarization contributions, E = E ext + E d , where E d is generally inhomogeneous. The only exceptions are homogeneously polarized ellipsoids, for which the internal depolarization field is homogeneous The electrostatic force F and torque M components acting on a core-shell nanoparticle placed in the external electric field E ext can be calculated from the expressions where summation on i = 1, 2, 3 is performed, the polarization P c = P S + ε 0 (ε f -1)E in the ferroelectric core, and P sh = ε 0 (ε s -1)E in the paraelectric shell. The scalar product , and the integration is performed over the core and shell regions with total volume V = V c + V s . Following Landau et al. As it follows from Eq.(4a where P ̅ z = is directed in the crystallographic direction z over a time that is long enough (>100 K) to orient the nanoparticle polarization P in the z-direction (red curve with label "Ez"). The torque is absent for the case P   ext . At this point the z-directed field is removed and a subsequent field is applied in the xdirected field over a period of one K (blue curve with label "Ex"). As one can see from Fig. As it follows from the above discussion, the studied spherical nanoparticles with a vortex polarization do not have any net electrostatic charge (monopole moment), and therefore such particles do not experience any force in a homogeneous electric field. To study the effect of an inhomogeneous field, it is necessary to analyze the particle dipole moment. If the nanoparticle core is in the state "0", representing a vortex without a central axial kernel, then it can be recognized immediately that the dipole moment is zero for symmetry reasons. However, if the vortex possesses a kernel forming an axial nanodomain (states "1"), then the kernel has a sizable dipole moment, and in that case an inhomogeneous external field will exert a force on the nanoparticle. The experimentally observed particle motion in the inhomogeneous electric field created by a charged tip or wire [42-47] can thus be attributed to the dipole moment of the vortex kernel, which (if not already present) might be induced into the vortex structure. The dipole moment of the vortex kernel leads to an attractive gradient force in the inhomogeneous electric field: F = (p•)E As a next step, the electrostatic force acting on a core-shell nanoparticle is calculated. The ferroelectric core has an average spontaneous polarization P k = {P k1 , P k2 , P k3 }, which originates from the polarized vortex kernel. The particle is placed in a strongly inhomogeneous electric field that is produced by the charged tip electrode [see Fig. After lengthy calculations made in the Section C.2.2 of Appendix C, we derived that the force consists of two contributions, The first force component, FC, is proportional to the core spontaneous polarization, i.e. it is proportional to the kernel dipole moment. FC is expressed via an effective dipole moment, p f : Note that the depolarizing factor η(ε f ) has the same functional form as in Eq.(3b), η(ε f ) = (1+Δ) 3 2(ε e -ε s )(ε s -ε f )+(1+Δ) 3 (2ε e +ε s )(ε f +2ε s ) , and depends on ε f , which is the sum of background permittivity ε b and effective susceptibility χ eff , ε f = ε b + χ eff . In accordance with Eqs.(3), the estimate ε f ≈365 is valid for voltages |U| < U cr . The force (6b) is a typical dipole force decreasing with distance as The second contribution, F Q , is a dielectrophoretic force [76] , with an expansion coefficient The dielectrophoretic force decreases with distance as 1 h 5 ⁄ . If the particle is far enough from the probe tip (h ≫ R + ΔR), only the first term with n=1 is significant in Eq.(6c), and the force components acquire a much simpler form: where the dielectric factor μ(ε f ) = (1 + Δ) 3 Since the vortex axis should have significantly enhanced electro-conductivity in comparison to the rest of the particle volume Free charges from the surrounding medium screen the bound charges, and in turn significantly enhance the surface conductivity around the vortex axis. The enhanced conductivity of the nanodomain walls, which is almost uncharged inside the BaTiO3 core, and its physical nature related to flexoelectricity and deformation potential has been studied in detail in Ref. The energy of the vortex state "0" demonstrates a 6-fold degeneracy consisting in the 3 equally probable axis directions multiplied by clockwise and counterclockwise directions of polarization rotation across the vortex axis. For the vortex state "1" with a kernel, the degeneracy becomes 12fold, since the above 6-fold degeneracy doubles by 2 equiprobable signs of polarization inside the vortex kernel. The 18-fold degeneracy can be obtained as a sum of 6 vortex states "0" and 12 states "1" of vortex with an axial kernel. As we have established in this work, the manifold degeneracy of vortex states corresponds to three energy minima, where an "excited" vortex state "0" and the vortex ground states "1" with positive and negative axial dipolar kernels have a relatively close energy difference G 0 -G ±1 ≈+ 1.210 -20 J corresponding to 2.9 kBT at 298 K. The manifold degeneracy and energy proximity open possible applications of core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multibit memory and related multi-value logic units To imagine a multi-bit memory cell, let us consider an ensemble of non-interacting core-shell nanoparticles with a vortex polarization placed in a soft matter environment (e.g. wax, liquid crystal, or colloid) with a viscosity that is strongly temperature-dependent around the working (i.e. room) temperature. The nanoparticles can freely rotate and move in the liquid soft matter, and are prevented from rotating when the matter becomes solid. The ferroelectric transition temperature of the particle core (~ 390 K) is much higher than the soft matter melting temperature. The direction of the crystallographic axes in a given ferroelectric core is random with respect to the electrodes, which coat opposite sides of the cell, and the core-shell nanoparticles sit between these electrodes. Since the equilibrium vortex axis should coincide with one of the crystallographic directions [100], [010], or [001], a given nanoparticle in the composite can be in any of three types of vortex states, with an axial kernel (two states "1") and without one (state "0"). The resulting polarization of a nanocomposite can be presented as a sum of these states, The real number Cijk is a relative fraction of the state |ijk⟩ in the composite, ∑ C ijk 2 ijk = 1 and 0 ≤ C ijk ≤ 1. The first subscript i=1, 2, 3 designates the vortex axis, the second subscript j= -1, 0, +1 indicates the kernel "color" (i.e. polarization sign "1" or "-1" in the kernel, "0" without a kernel), and the third subscript k= "l" or "r" corresponds to the "chirality", defined as a clockwise or counterclockwise direction of the vortex polarization rotation. For a given nanoparticle the coefficients can be interpreted as probabilities. The kernel characteristic "color" introduced here is similar to the spin-flavor characteristics used to describe specific states of elementary particles in magnetic fields. Note that cannot distinguish between some of the 18 states that are calculated using Eq.7 and those measured using current atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) to determine the of local conductivity. Actually, imagine that a single-layer of spherical core-shell nanoparticles with the vortex polarization of the ferroelectric core is placed in a plane capacitor with sizes that are slightly larger than the particle diameter 2(R + ΔR) (see Fig. where  is the angle between the kernel axis and the normal to the electrodes, ρ W is the specific resistivity of the soft matter, and ρ k is the specific resistivity of kernel domain walls. To observe the C-AFM contrast between the soft matter and the nanoparticle, the strong inequality ρ W ≫ ρ k should be valid. Hence, the measurements of local conductivity can distinguish only the projection of the kernel axis on the electrode plane, proportional to cos (α). The states with α = ± π 2 and a simple vortex without a kernel are indistinguishable [see Fig. A single core-shell nanoparticle, whose polarization vortex has a dipolar kernel, placed in a soft matter environment, can be considered as a candidate for a nanosized field effect transistor (nano-FET) containing a "rotating" channel with an angular dependence of the local resistivity ρ L (α). Actually, the voltage applied between the FET gates can rotate or shift the particle (in order to rotate/move the kernel axis) [see Fig. . Note, that the soft matter softening or hardening with temperature can provide an additional temperature control of the channel conductivity. The vortex stability and kernel rotation feasibility are advantages of the nano-FET operation. Its drawback is a relatively low operation speed due to the sluggishness of sphere rotation and/or a translational motion towards the gate. Another interesting aspect is that a "classical" behavior of the vortex axis (with or without a conductive kernel) can simulate a "qubit" at room temperature, since it formally appeared that some basic properties of qubits necessary for a quantum computation For a core-shell nanoparticle placed in a liquid medium an almost free rotation of a vortex axis is possible. The rotation is characterized by two spherical angles,  and . Since the absolute value of the kernel polarization is conserved at zero external field (E=0), the polarization vector can be expanded in orthogonal basis vectors, |P⟩ = A|P A ⟩ + B|P B ⟩. Ket vectors |P A ⟩ = (1,0) and |P B ⟩ = (0,1) are the orthogonal basis of one-particle polarization states [see Fig. ) and B = sin ( θ 2 ) e iψ are probability amplitudes for the superposition state, thus |A| 2 + |B| 2 = 1; and the local conductivity is sensitive to the superposition. Since the vortex state "0" without a kernel (A = B = 0) falls into the center of the sphere, the situation for all three polarization states "0" and "1" is more complex than the Bloch representation. The general state of a qubit can be a coherent superposition of two binary "pure" states "0" or "1", while the classical bit can be only either in the state "0" or in the state "1". Whereas a measurement of a classical bit would not disturb its state, a measurement of a qubit would irreversibly destroy its coherence and superposition state (so-called "collapse" of the wave function [85, 86] ). Actually, we cannot measure the direction of the vortex axis in a given nanoparticle by application of a voltage between the electrodes, because the particle would rotate in the electric field, and after the rotation time (that is on the order of the Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time K ~ (10 -9 -10 -6 ) s, see Fig. The higher the voltage, the faster the vortices are destroyed. The "collapse" of the core states can be avoided by freezing the soft matter. In this case, the nanoparticle axes cannot rotate and we can measure a "snapshot" of the vortex axes directions (at least hypothetically) in a solid nanocomposite. Multiple qubits can quantum entanglement unlike classical bits. Quantum entanglement is a nonlocal property of two or more qubits that allows a set of qubits to express a higher correlation than is possible in classical systems Two core-shell nanoparticles, "A" and "B", shown in Fig. Since it seems possible to imitate a quantum CNOT operation using the considered multidegenerate ferroelectric vortex states, it may be reasonable to further elaborate on the states possibilities for the imitation of quantum computing In the framework of Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire approach coupled with electrostatic equations, we studied the influence of irrotational external electric fields on the formation, evolution, and relaxation of polarization vortices in spherical ferroelectric nanoparticles. In particular, we performed FEM of the zero-field and in-field polarization evolution in a ferroelectric BaTiO3 core covered with a "tunable" paraelectric SrTiO3 shell placed in a dielectric polymer or liquid medium. The role of the tunable paraelectric shell is to provide an effective screening of the core polarization. A stable two-dimensional vortex was formed in the core after a zero-field relaxation of a random or poly-domain distribution of polarization, with the vortex axis directed along one of the core crystallographic axes. In order to analyze field-induced changes of the vortex structure, a sinusoidal pulse of a homogeneous electric field was applied, and its period, strength, and direction were varied. A small quasi-static field induced an axial kernel inside the vortex, which formed of a prolate nanodomain with near-homogeneous spontaneous polarization. Similar to ferromagnetic vortexes, the kernel of a ferroelectric vortex acts like a dipole and opens the possibility to rotate the vortex axis by a small quasi-static homogeneous electric field. Due to the strong ferroelectric anisotropy, which effectively prevents the rotation of the dipolar kernel and tends to align it parallel to the one of crystallographic directions, the in-field orientation of the kernel is conditioned by the minimum of dipolar and anisotropy energies. As the kernel is coupled to the azimuthal vortex, and the vortex plane is perpendicular to the kernel axis, it is rotated with the kernel. The kernel increases in size with an increasing electric field, and eventually the nanoparticle becomes single-domain. Quite unexpectedly, we revealed the appearance of Bloch point structures during the switching process. In the case of ferromagnetic materials, Bloch points are typically formed at the center of special types of three-dimensional vortices, where the transition between oppositely oriented regions cannot proceed continuously. Here we found analogous situations leading to a Bloch point with a vanishing polarization (P = 0). In the considered case, the in-field evolution of the polarization distribution contains two diametrically opposite Bloch points located at the core surface. After the electric field is removed, the polarization vortex recovers spontaneously, but its structure, axis orientation, and polarization rotation direction can be different from the initial state. As a rule, the final state is a three-dimensional polarization vortex with an axial dipolar kernel, whose energy is less than the energy of the initial two-dimensional "empty" vortex by ~ 3 kBT at room temperature. The nature of this counterintuitive result is a significant reduction of the gradient energy in the axial region of the vortex by the formation of a kernel, which is only partly compensated by an increase in the energy of the depolarization field for a vortex with a prolate single-domain kernel. The relatively small difference in energies means the possible coexistence of both vortex states. We also calculated the torque and the electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in an applied electric field. The torque acting on the polarization vortex with an axial kernel tends to rotate the nanoparticle in such way that the vortex axis becomes parallel to the field direction. The vortex (with or without a kernel) is electrostatically neutral, and therefore the nanoparticle does not move in a homogeneous field. Because of the kernel dipole moment, a particle motion can be observed in electric fields with a strong spatial gradient. The vortex states possess a sixfold degeneracy regarding the vortex orientation and circulation, consisting of three crystallographic axis directions multiplied by the clockwise and counterclockwise directions of the polarization rotation along the axis. As two different "colors" of vortex states can exist, with and without an axial dipolar kernel (the latter with a two-fold degeneracy in terms of the polarization direction on the kernel), the number of states can further be multiplied by three. This multitude of vortex states in a single core makes core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles promising candidates for multi-bit memory and related logic units. The opportunity to use the rotation of a vortex kernel, which is possible in the case of core-shell nanoparticles placed in a soft matter matrix with controllable viscosity, may be used to imitate qubit properties. APPENDIX A contains a mathematical formulation of the problem in the framework of Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire theory, and parameters of BaTiO3 (core) and SrTiO3 (shell) materials used in FEM. APPENDIX B contains the approximate solutions of Euler-Lagrange equations and fitting parameters for vortex states. where R d is the "net" screening length of the shell. As mentioned in the introduction, there are several possible ways to change the dielectric permittivity tensor of the shell. In all these cases the external stimuli (electric field, temperature, light, heat, etc.) affect the dielectric properties of the shell, which can influence the spatial distribution of ferro-active ions inside the core via electrostatic interactions and electric boundary conditions. Outside the shell  satisfies the Laplace equation: 2 ) φ e = 0, r > R + ΔR, (A.1c) Equations (A.1) are supplemented with the continuity conditions for electric potential and normal components of the electric displacements at the particle surface and core-shell interface: Since we do not apply an external field, the potential vanishes either at infinity, φ e | r→∞ = 0, or at the surface of remote electrodes located at the boundaries of the computational region. The LGD free energy functional G additively includes a Landau expansion on powers of where u ij is the strain tensor. We will assume that s ijkl S ≈ s ijkl for a "soft" shell. Elastic boundary conditions at the particle core-shell interface r = R + ΔR are the continuity of the elastic displacement vector and normal stresses. Below we consider a tunable shell of paraelectric strontium titanate (SrTiO3), which has an isotropic and strongly temperature-dependent dielectric permittivity, ε ij S = δ ij ε s , with the following expression with the Curie-Weiss parameter T =0.7510 6 m/(F K) and characteristic temperatures T 0 (E) =30 K and T q (E) =54 K where PS is the spontaneous polarization, x 3 -x 0 is the distance from center of the domain wall plane, and 2 Rc is the domain wall width Note that the boundary condition (B.5) imposed at the spherical surface r=R weakly affects the solution (B.7) for the specific case a 1 (S) = 0, |x 0 | ≪ R and R ≫ R c . Assuming that these inequalities are valid, the solution (B.7) can be considered as a relevant trial function. For the three-component solution the sum of three (or more) tanh-functions can be used as a trial function. ) should be valid for P(r, ψ) = 0, we obtain that the first-order harmonic correction to P ψ (r) is proportional to sin(θ)cos(4ψ). Note that it is easy to check that P ̅ = ∫ PdV V = 0, if divP = 0 and P n = 0 at the particle surface. The torque M acting on a particle in a constant homogeneous field E ext is equal to It is easy to check that ∫ P(r)d 3 r V = 0 for the "empty" vortex without a kernel, and therefore M = 0 for any "true" vortex polarization distribution. Unlike an empty vortex, the vortex with a kernel oriented where the subscripts "f", "s", and "e" denote the physical quantities related to the ferroelectric core, Next let us consider the case when an inhomogeneous external field is produced by a charged tip (see Fig. For this case the electrostatic potential satisfies the Laplace equation in all of the regions, except for the point charge location: We used the identity L n (1) ≡ 1 in the last term of Eq.(C.18a). The dipole moment, 2-4-6 of the polarization, G Landau ; a polarization gradient energy contribution, G grad ; an electrostatic contribution, G; as well as elastic, electrostriction, flexoelectric contributions, G es+flexo , and surface energy, where α T is the inverse Curie-Weiss constant and T C (R) is the ferroelectric Curie temperature renormalized by electrostriction and surface tension. Actually, the surface tension induces additional surface stresses Case I. Static one-component and one-dimensional partial solution. If only one component of the polarization is position dependent, and the other components are zero, the one-dimensional profile of the uncharged domain wall is given by expression 12πP