In this paper, a metasurface composed of 3-bit coding linear polarization conversion elements and its application to RCS reduction of the patch antenna is intensively studied. At first, 3-bit coding metamaterials are constructed by a sequence of eight coded unit cells, which have a similar cross-polarized reflected amplitude response and gradient reflected phase responses covering 0~2π, respectively. Equivalent circuit models (ECMs) of these unit cells are created to describe their electrical behavior for the two linear incident polarizations at the same time. Then, a patch antenna is integrated on the 3-bit metasurface, of which the elements are placed with a 2-dimensional linear coding sequence. The metal square ring is set around the patch antenna to protect it from the disturbance of metasurface. Both the simulation and experiment results demonstrate that the designed metasurface can primarily reduce the antenna RCS at a broadband, while the antenna performances are not degraded significantly. The antenna is always one of the dominant scatters of a carrier With the development of metasurfaces, also called the two-dimensional version of metamaterials The cornerstone of coding metasurfaces is the design of multi-bits elements. Most multi-bits elements have similar amplitude responses and different phase responses. Moreover, they cannot change the polarization state of the electromagnetic wave. Linear polarization conversion phase gradient metasurfaces are introduced in In this paper, a metasurface composed of 3-bit coding linear polarization conversion elements and its application to RCS reduction of the patch antenna is intensively studied. Firstly, 3-bit coding metamaterials are constructed by a linear phase sequence of eight unit cells. And, ECMs of these unit cells are built to describe their electrical behavior. Then, a patch antenna is integrated on the metasurface, of which the elements are placed with 2-dimensional linear coding sequence. At last, the antenna is fabricated and tested. Both the simulated and measured results indicate the proposed antenna has strong RCS reduction compared with the reference antenna over a wide frequency band, while its radiation performances are not obviously degraded. The unit cell consists of a top metallic periodic structure, a dielectric layer (F4B, εr =2.65, tan δ=0.001) with a height of h and a bottom metallic ground plane, as shown in Fig Where r xx or r yy represents the co-polarized reflection coefficient. r yx or r xy represents the cross-polarized reflection coefficient under x-or y-polarized incident wave. From Fig. To further understand the polarization conversion mechanism of these unit cells, we set up a four ports network according to the reference Where Y u or Y v is the parallel admittance under the normal incidence of u-or v-polarized wave. The equivalent circuit of Tc must exhibit the architecture in Fig. In this letter, a metasurface composed of 3-bit coding linear polarization conversion elements is designed. And its application to RCS reduction of the patch antenna is intensively studied. The 3-bit coding metamaterials are constructed by eight unit cells. Related ECMs of these unit cells are created to describe their electrical behavior for the two linear incident polarizations at the same time. A patch antenna is integrated on the metasurface composed of the coded elements placed with a 2-dimensional linear coding sequence. Both the simulation and experiment results demonstrate that the designed metasurface can largely reduce the antenna RCS at broadband from 6 to 18 GHz. In contrast, the antenna performances are not degraded significantly.