We present a multijunction detailed balance model that includes the effects of luminescent coupling, light trapping and nonradiative recombination, suitable for treatment of multijunction solar cells and photonic power converters -photovoltaic devices designed to convert narrow-band light. The model includes both specular and Lambertian reflections using a ray-optic formalism and treats nonradiative processes using an internal radiative efficiency. Using this model, we calculate and optimize the efficiency of multijunction photonic power converters for a range of material qualities and light-trapping schemes. Multijunction devices allow increased voltage with lower current, decreasing series resistance losses. We show that efficiency increases significantly with increased number of junctions, even without series resistance, when the device has an absorbing substrate. Such an increase does not occur when the device has a back reflector. We explain this effect using a simplified model, which illustrates the origin of the decreased radiative losses in multijunction devices on substrates. In both solar and monochromatic photovoltaics, it is well-known that a multijunction device reduces seriesresistance loss compared to a single-junction equivalent, because of the low-current, high-voltage operation. High efficiency devices also rely on both photon recycling within a layer and luminescent coupling (LC) between layers, effects that are essential to accurate prediction of device performance. Monochromatic photovoltaics, also called photonic power converters (PPC's), are increasingly important components of optical power transmission systems. LC has been well studied in solar cells High-efficiency PPC's enable wireless power transmission isolated from electromagnetic disturbance, with applications in electric vehicles, biomedical implants, telecommunications, drones, and satellites In 2001, Green used the detailed-balance formalism to show that monochromatic photovoltaic conversion can be 100% efficient at infinite incident intensity 12 . Green's theory is a single-layer model, which does not capture the low current, high voltage of multi-layer operation and does not consider LC in a multi-layer device. In this work, we extend Green's theory to a multi-layer detailedbalance model and include bidirectional LC. Our model treats both specular and Lambertian top and bottom surfaces, variable incident light bandwidth, energy offset between incident light and material band gap, and nonradiative recombination by parametrizing with an internal radiative efficiency η int . We use this model to study a range of devices based on the record-efficiency PPC Section II introduces the detailed balance model for a 1-layer device, including treatment of reflections from top and bottom surfaces. Section III extends this theory to the multi-layer case. Section IV shows how to transform the nonlinear equations for current J as a function of voltage V into a set of linear equations that allow computationally efficient extraction of V (J). Section V applies the multi-layer theory to PPC's with a range of η int values and light-trapping configurations, showing the intrinsic efficiency increase with number of layers when the device has an absorbing substrate. Section VI explains the intrinsic efficiency increase using an analytic 2-layer model. We model a planar cell with infinite area and finite thickness L of the active region, as shown in Fig. where J is the extracted current density, J in is the number of incident photons absorbed per area per time, J loss is the net loss of current density due to electron-hole recombination, and we set the electric charge q = 1. J loss is a function of the quasi-Fermi level separation μ, described further below. We make standard detailed balance assumptions that carrier mobilities are infinite so μ equals the applied voltage and that one photon generates one electron-hole pair where P in is the incident power density. The maximum efficiency is obtained by optimizing η with respect to μ. To model both J in and J loss , we trace the absorption and emission of photons using ray optics. We use an angle-resolved 2D model, isotropic in the azimuth, suitable for layered structures. As shown in Fig. The only challenging part of evaluating Eq. 1 lies in keeping track of the reflections off the top and bottom surfaces, both from incident and radiatively produced radiation. Both of these processes share the same algebraic form, and we now describe the resulting self-consistency condition including reflections. Consider the inward-directed photon fluxes from the top and bottom surfaces with angle θ and energy E, φ t (θ, E), and φ b (θ, E), respectively. A self-consistency relation connects these quantities; it was used to model photon recycling -reabsorption of internally emitted photons in a single-layer device -in Ref. Consider first specular reflections from top and bottom surfaces. As shown in Fig. where R t S (θ, E) and R b S (θ, E) are internal specular reflectivity at the top and bottom surface, respectively. We also define θ-and E-resolved transmittance and absorbance: where α (E) is the absorption coefficient, which we assume to be uniform in space inside the cell. Eqs. ( From the Lambert cosine law, the θ-resolved fluxes are related to the θ-averaged fluxes as ? : Therefore, combining Eqs. 3, 4 and 7 to 10, where R t L (E) and R b L (E) are E-resolved Lambertian reflectivities of the top and bottom surfaces, respectively. Internal and external sources of photons add to these self-consistent fluxes, as shown in Fig. where the θ, E dependence of all variables has been suppressed. We solve for φ t (θ, E) and φ b (θ, E) in terms of the source terms, for all four combinations of specular and Lambertian cases. The results are listed in Table With the multiple-reflection problem solved, we can express J in from Eq. 1. We consider illumination arriving at only the top surface, hence we take the source terms in Table where φ in (θ, E) is the number of incident photons hitting the top surface of the cell per area per time per angle per energy, R t ext (θ, E) is the external top surface reflectivity. In experiments, the incident flux and external reflectivity is measured in external angles, which are related to the internal angle θ through Snell's law with a specular surface or the Lambert cosine law with a Lambertian surface. We express the incident flux and external reflectivity using internal angle for simplicity of notation, and connection to experiment requires adjusting angles accordingly. We substitute Eq. 15 into Table where the subscript denotes that these fluxes are due only to the incident photons and their reflections, not to any internal radiative process, which will be counted in J loss . We calculate J loss using the internal per volume emission rate and our ray-optics model to trace the reabsorption events. We calculate the θ-and E-resolved net loss of current and integrate over solid angles and energy to obtain the total loss of current, J loss . Note that for the single-layer case, this explicit ray tracing of internally emitted photons is not required, as the formulation of Green showed 12 . When we move to the multi-layer case, however, we must be able to track internally emitted photons and determine where they are absorbed, which requires the formalism presented here. The θ-and E-resolved net loss of current is divided into three parts: (1) photon flux emitted out of the cell in either up or down direction, φ r (θ, E, μ), not including any reflections, (2) carriers lost through nonradiative recombination, φ nr (E, μ), and (3) recycled photons ab- Lambertian top Lambertian bottom 2cosθ L sorbed after internal reflections, which enter as a negative loss, φ lc (E, μ). In the multi-layer case, this term will represent luminescent coupling between layers. Then, J loss is Note that the factors of 2 in Eq. 17 account for both up and down propagation of photons at angle θ, since we only integrate the solid angle over a hemisphere. From here, angular integrations are always over only a hemisphere. The three terms in Eq. 17 all depend on the internal radiative emission rate S r , which has dimensions of number per time per volume per energy per solid angle where n (E) is the refractive index, h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light, k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature of the cell, and μ is the quasi-Fermi level splitting in the cell. We assume that μ, T , n, and α are spatially uniform inside the cell, leading to spatial uniformity of S r . Eq. 18 implies that emission events produce photons isotropically in the cell. A photon emitted upwards at angle θ and at position L -z has a probability of e -α(E)z cosθ to escape the cell, if there are no internal reflections. On integrating z from 0 to L, we obtain φ r in Eq. 17: We define the geometry factor, g r : We include nonradiative recombination using η int , internal radiative efficiency, which is defined as the fraction of recombination events that are radiative. In principle, η int can depend on position and voltage, but we assume uniform and constant η int in the cell. Then, the total nonradiative loss is proportional to L and S r . Similar to Eq. 21, we express φ nr in Eq. 17 as φ nr (E, μ) = g nr (E, θ) S r (E, μ) where The flux of photons that are internally emitted then reflected satisfies the self-consistency relation as discussed in Section II A. We use Table where bdy is either t or b and R bdy is specular or Lambertian reflectivity, depending on the boundary conditions chosen. Then φ lc in Eq. 17 is We observe from Table Putting these results together, we express J loss using the total geometry factor, g (E, θ): where g (E, θ) = 2g r (E, θ) + 2g nr (E, θ) + g lc (E, θ), and we can now evaluate all terms in Eq. 17 for J loss (μ).With these ideas and notation established, we now extend this formalism to a multi-layer model. As shown in Fig. The detailed balance condition is satisfied in every layer: where J i is the extracted current density from layer i, J in i is the rate of absorption of incident photons per area in layer i and J loss i is the net loss of current density due to recombinations in layer i. J loss i includes LC as a negative loss. We start with J in i . The incident photon flux in each layer is calculated similarly to the single layer case: where we define the absorbance of each layer: and the transmittance through all layers between but not including i and j as: for i > j + 1, and t ji = t ij . Note that for |i -j| ≤ 1, t ij = 1. For convenience, we define t ti as transmittance through all layers above layer i, t bi as transmittance through all layers below i, and t tb as the transmittance through the whole stack. In Eq. 27, φ t in and φ b in are calculated using Table We now calculate J loss i in Eq. 26. J loss i includes three terms: (1) radiative loss, φ r i (θ, E, μ i ), (2) nonradiative loss, φ nr i (θ, E, μ i ), (3) luminescent coupling (LC) from layer j to layer i, φ lc ij (θ, E, μ j ). Similarly to the singlelayer case in Eq. 25, we express J loss i using a geometry tensor: where S r j (E, μ j ) is given by Eq. 18 with the layer-specific α i (E), n i (E), and μ i . In PPC's, all α i and n i are the same in every layer, but we include the possibility of varying α and n to to include the case of solar cells, in which each layer can have different material properties. We proceed to calculate the geometry tensor. Similarly to the single layer model, where δ ij is the Kronecker delta. Analogous to Eqs. 21 and 22, the radiative and nonradiative geometry factors in each layer are: We divide the LC term, g lc (θ, E), into one-pass and afterreflection contributions: Without reflection, the geometry factor is where we use (1 -δ ij ) because one-pass reabsorption within the same layer is already included in g r i . We obtain φ R ij = g R ij S r j from the self-consistent reflected fluxes at the top and bottom surfaces from Table where bdy is t or b, and find φ bdy j from Table Using Eqs. 27 and 30 to 37, we obtain J i in Eq. 26. When all layers are series connected, they share the same current density, J i = J, which depends on the set of quasi-Fermi levels, μ i . At one J value, we can solve for a set of μ i values, the sum of which gives the voltage of the device. The efficiency is then written in terms of J: Optimizing with respect to J gives the maximum efficiency. IV. EFFICIENT COMPUTATION OF V (J) Finding η(J) involves solving Eq. 26 with J i = J, which is a system of m nonlinear equations in μ i , and is computationally challenging. We can significantly reduce the computational cost by making simplifying assumptions on α (E) and the top and bottom reflectivities. First, we rewrite Eq. 26 using Eq. 30: We can simplify the calculation of J(V ) if (1) α i (E) is zero for E less than the band gap E i g and a constant for E > E i g and ( where Eq. 40 is a linear system of equations with unknowns R j . Thus for fixed J we can efficiently solve for R j . We then invert R j to find μ j , using Eqs. 18 and 42, which allows us to find the external bias V = i μ i . We thus calculate V (J) instead of J(V ). Either way, the power output is JV , and the maximum power point can be found numerically. In this section, we demonstrate the use of this model by considering a set of monochromatic devices inspired by the record-efficiency PPC device but with m vertically stacked layers, varied η int , and top and bottom boundary conditions. The effects of input power density, wavelength, linewidth, external radiative efficiency, which is different from η int , absorbance and band gap were previ- ously studied in a single-layer model For these examples, we consider a set of simple reflectivity models to approximate different levels of light trapping. We only consider models that are angle-dependent but not E-dependent to reduce computational costs, as discussed in Section IV. The general model of Section III allows any reflectivity configuration with dependence on θ and E. We consider two models for the internal reflectivity at the top interface. In the following discussion, the top surface is an interface between air (n air = 1) and a material with index n. We consider perfect transmission of external light into the sample, but there must be total internal reflection of optical modes on the inside surface. In the "Total internal reflection" model, we consider specular reflection of all incident rays with θ > θ c , so R t S (θ) is a step function that is zero for θ < θ c , and one for all larger angles. As usual, the critical angle is θ c = sin -1 (n air /n). The second top surface we consider is an ideal Lambertian surface, which randomizes the angle of propagation for reflected and transmitted photons. An ideal Lambertian surface admits all incident photons into the cell from the exterior while reflecting internal photons with ? . At the bottom surface, we consider three surface models. In the case of an absorbing substrate, we consider all photons hitting the bottom surface to be lost, i.e., R b S = 0 for all angles. A specular mirror reflects all photons back into the cell at the same angle as incidence, i.e., R b S = 1 for all angles. A Lambertian mirror also reflects all photons back into the cell but at a random angle of reflection. We consider all six combinations of these models for the top and bottom surface reflectivities, as listed in Table III. We label the six scenarios from A to F and also include an icon for each scenario. We first consider Configuration A in Table The key results are shown in Fig. We show in Fig. A back reflector and light trapping are helpful for PPC efficiency. The record-efficiency device, however, is on a thick GaAs substrate with a full metal contact 1120 . Since the GaAs substrate is absorbing and optically thick, this architecture is equivalent to an absorbing substrate without a back reflector. In such a system, this intrinsic increase of efficiency with m is an intriguing route to high efficiency, which reinforces the simpler series-resistance advantages of multi-layer devices. In order to understand the physical origin of this increased efficiency, we present a toy model of a 1-and 2-layer device, with and without a back reflector. In this section, we reduce our full model from Section III, to a semi-analytic 2-layer model. Using this simplified model, we demonstrate that the multi-layer device allows radiative losses into the substrate to be reduced, but that no equivalent improvement can be obtained when there is a back reflector. We consider Configurations B and F in Table (1) mp J in , and we call the operating voltage V mp , which would give no change in the efficiency (in the absence of series resistance). For Configuration B in Fig. There is no analytic solution to V oc . We choose configurations with Lambertian surfaces in order to express the emission and absorption flux using the same angle-averaged absorbance. For the same reason, we assume that there is a filter between two layers that randomizes the the angle of the transmitted light. We work in the radiative limit and consider n = 1, so there is no reflection at cell-air or cell-substrate interfaces. We assume that absorption coefficient is 0 for energy lower than the band gap, and constant α for energy above the band gap. For simplicity, we work in the Boltzmann approximation, in which the "-1 ' in the denominator of Eq. 18 is neglected, which is valid when the internal cell voltages do not get within a few kT of E g . The detailed-balance condition, Eq. 39, for each layer is then where A is the angle-averaged one-pass absorbance: and J 0 is short-circuit radiative recombination current in one of the up or down direction: The top layer absorbs the incident radiation, A 2 J in , in one-pass, and 2 A 2 J in , in the second pass, where R b L is the back reflectivity. The top layer radiates both out the top surface and to the bottom layer (J 0 e V2 A 2 ). The top layer has luminescent coupling from the bottom layer (proportional to J 0 e V1 A 1 ) as well as photon recycling due to the back reflector. The bottom layer receives the filtered incident radiation (1-A 2 )A 1 J in in one pass, R b L (1 -A 2 )(1 -A 1 )A 1 J in in the second pass, luminescent coupling in two passes from the top layer (proportional to J 0 e V2 A 2 ), and also has radiative emission to the top layer and the substrate. We can recover a 1-layer detailed balance model by setting either A 1 or A 2 to be zero. For simplicity of notation, we delete the subscript when referring to the 1-layer quantities. Using Eq. 43, we study the cases of R b L = 0, absorbing substrate, and R b L = 1, ideal back reflector. Starting with a 1-layer device, we solve for V oc and J sc in Eq. 43 in each of the two cases: where J = J in J0 and Jsc = Jsc J0 . In For a two-layer device at short-circuit: (1) J sc = J 1 = J 2 , and (2) V 1 + V 2 = 0. Solving Eq. 43 with these constraints, we obtain the short-circuit current. Due to the length of the general solution, here we present only the solution evaluated at A 1 = 1 and A 2 = 1/2, which we consider further below: To understand the origin of the efficiency improvement with m, we compare the value of V (m) oc /m and J (m) sc m, as well as the product of the two quantities. Since, 0 ≤ A i ≤ 1, with a substrate we always have V oc with substrate can be larger or smaller than V oc , depending on the values of A 1 and A 2 . We consider absorption-matched devices with infinite thickness for m = 1, 2. In this case, A = 1 for the 1-layer case, and A 1 = 1 and A 2 = 1/2 with 2 layers. Here, both the single-and 2-layer devices absorb all incident photons. In the case of an absorbing substrate, the per-layer V oc of the 2-layer device is strictly larger than that of the 1-layer device. Specifically, for J = 10, the average 2-layer V oc is 6.3% higher than the 1-layer V oc . At the same time, mJ (m) sc also increases by 2.4%. We thus see that the efficiency with m = 2 is larger than with m = 1, due to increases in both J sc and V oc , though the V oc increase is more significant. The product, J (m) sc V (m) oc , increases by 8.8%. In the case of a substrate, the voltage difference between the top and bottom layers reduces radiative loss to the substrate. Radiative losses from the top surface are inevitable, as the device must be able to admit incident radiation. Radiative losses out the rear of the device, however, are pure losses. In a single-layer device, those losses are unavoidable at any voltage. The multi-layer device is able to reduce the impact of those losses by decreasing the internal voltage of the bottom layer, which reduces the radiation into the substrate, while allowing the upper layer to maintain a larger internal voltage. Reduced radiative loss out the bottom layer also increases the collected current mJ sc , but this effect is smaller. Interestingly, at higher incident flux density, both V oc and J sc effects are weaker. The power density used in Section V corresponds to J ≈ 9 × 10 16 . With this value, in the toy model V (m) oc /m increases by 0.26%, while mJ (m) sc stays the same within machine precision. In the full model of Section III with n = 1 and η int = 1, the im-provement of maximum power on moving from m = 1 to m = 2 for Configuration B is 0.22%, in good agreement with the simpler model. With GaAs refractive index, n = 3.64, the improvement is 2.0%, similar to that shown in Fig. In contrast, for the case with a back reflector, the voltage of each layer in a 2-layer device is analytically equal to the voltage of the single-layer device in all A 1 and A 2 values. And 2J (2) sc , evaluated at the absorption matched case of A 1 = 1 and A 2 = 1/2, is also analytically equal to J (1) sc at A = 1. This matches our observation in the full model that efficiency does not increase with number of layers in Configuration F. The highly nonradiative case, η int 1, is also amenable to analytic treatment and shows a similar increase of efficiency with m. We have generalized monochromatic detailed balance models 