We present here a small-scale liquid Helium (LHe) immersion cryostat with an innovative optical setup suitable to work in long wavelength radiation ranges and under applied magnetic field. The cryostat is a multi stage device with several shielding in addition to several optical stages. The system has been designed with an external liquid Nitrogen boiler to reduce the liquid bubbling. The optical and mechanical properties of the optical elements were calculated and optimized for the designed configuration while the optical layout has been simulated and optimized among different configurations based on the geometry of the device. The final design has been optimized for low noise radiation measurements of proximity junction arrays under applied magnetic field in the wavelength range λ=250-2500 μm. Cryogenic temperatures are required in many researches such as superconductivity and superfluidity, surface and interface, advanced spectroscopies and in the R&D of low-noise detectors. As an example, superconducting radiation detectors integrated into surface Paul traps for scalable quantum information processing require operation at cryogenic temperatures In the recent years, the investigation of semiconducting and superconducting behavior of many materials and the modulation of the electronic properties of systems with low dimensionality have been investigated Within the framework of the project TERA A schematic view of the immersion cryostat is shown in Fig. The copper cooling jacket extends down the sides as well as below the window assembly to improve cooling and to speed up the initial cooling process. The external container is equipped with four vacuum-tight optical windows. All inner metal-metal connections, except the copper shield and the cryostat cover part that is connected by bolts, have been connected either by soldering or brazing. Inside upper part of the liquid Helim container are housed two concentric copper disks acting as thermal shields and connected to the sample holder support with two Rexilon rods (10 mm diameter), useful to minimize the thermal conduction between the immersed components and the thermal shields. The sample holder support consists of a PEEK holder support housing two superconducting NbN coils attached with concentric tubes with 21 mm apertures pointing to the sample set in the center. Considering the aperture dimension of the magnetic coils the maximum sample size can be 20× 20 mm and can be replace by simply opening the cryosts top flange (top dark part of figure1b), since the sample holder and the magnetic coils are connected to the copper disks shields and connected to this flange. The coils generate a magnetic field normal to the sample surface plane (see Fig. The detailed cryogenic optical arrangement is described in figure The optimal thickness of all windows, being the minimum thickness capable of withstanding the pressure difference insuring its high transmittance, was calculated considering the materials tensile strengths as where, d is the slab thickness, R is the unsupported area, P is the pressure difference, S the safety factor and η is the modulus of the rupture. The relative thickness behavior vs. differential pressure of the crystal quartz with η = 9427 psi with a maximum 3 mm unsupported area is shown in figure In order to evaluate the effective transmission and the efficiency of the optical layout, the optical response of the Zeonex windows were measured in the spectral region of interest. The optical response of the polymeric Zeonex material, was investigated with terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS), described in detail in Refs The output signal from the THz-detector, filtered by a lock-in amplifier, was acquired and digitized and then transferred to the PC. The optical system provides a spectral bandwidth ranging from 0.1 to 2.5 THz, with a spectral resolution of 50 GHz. This spectral resolution is sufficient to characterize the response of the non-resonant and transparent window set. We recorded 5 THz electric field profiles with 5 scans. The THz electric fields for the free space (without sample) and for the Zeonex window with thickness 2 mm are shown in figure The results indicate a transmission of about 80% in the range below 1 THz, which is slightly higher than that of crystal quartz All layouts have been numerically simulated by means of a commercial software based on the finite element method in the frequency domain Furthermore, to implement the tuning of the lens depth of field (DoF), defined as the distance along the optical axis in which the power does not decrease below the 80% of the maximum, a second lens with a focal length of 30 mm alternative to the lens (L1) of the Layout (3) was numerically simulated. The modulation of the DoF facilitates the compensation of the photon intensity attenuation due to sample positioning misalignments. The plano-convex lens with a focal length of 30 mm has a diameter of 20 mm, a radius of curvature R = 15.9 mm, and a maximum thickness of 6.5 mm. Simulations of this lens in layout (3) are reported in Fig. Finally, the total transmission and efficiency of the optical configuration was measured at the optical exit using a continuous diode THz emitter at 270 GHz (Virginiadiode). The total transmission of the optical line was measured using a calibrated pyroelectric detector with the voltage sensitivity of η=8000 V/W, positioned at the sample position in the center of the magnetic coil aperture. The incident beam was chopped at 16 Hz and sent through the optical line of the cryostat (see figure We presented here the characteristics of a compact liquid Helium immersion cryostat designed and built with an optical setup optimized for experiments using radiation at long wavelengths. The system has been specifically designed to characterize novel proximity junction array detectors and other 2D imaging detectors working at LHe temperature. The cryostat allows to maintain the sample at the temperature of 4.2 K for six hours, while it may reach the lowest temperature of 2 K upon LHe bath pumping. A liquid Nitrogen boiling chamber is used to reduce bubbling inside the cryotube. The optical configuration of the device is made by three stages of optical elements: a Zeonex window, a crystal quartz window and a Zeonex focusing lens, out of which the latter two are immersed in liquid Helium. All materials of the optical windows were selected on the base of accurate simulations and have a thickness of about 2 mm, i.e., 2 mm for Zeonex and 2.2 mm for crystal quartz, considering both materials tensile stress and the differential pressure they are withstanding inside the cryostat as well as their optical parameters. The transmission of the Zeonex windows were measured using a two stage photo-diode configurations and for a thickness of 2 mm are characterized by a transmission of 80% at 1 THz. Based on the optical layout, different configurations were simulated with a spatial resolution ranging from 0.48 to 1 mm and the configuration with the highest estimated resolution was realized. Furthermore, several other configurations were simulated and compared to verify the tunability of the DoF in the range 2.3 mm to 8 mm in order to compensate sample positioning misalignments. The total transmission of the optical configuration exhibits a maximum value of 42% while a DoF deviation of 24% was measured by changing the lens focal distance. These results measured in cryogenic conditions are in good agreement with theoretical estimations. Summarizing, this original cryogenic systems matches the demanding requests of the investigation of samples and devices to be probed at low temperature, long wavelengths and when external electric and magnetic fields have to be applied. This project has been supported within the framework of the TERA project of the V th Committee of the INFN. We like to thank S. Cibella and P. Carelli for their support in the assembly of the apparatus for pyroelectric measurements and A. Grilli and A. Raco for their valuable support in the construction of the apparatus. We acknowledge the financial support of the Bilateral Cooperation Agreement between Italy and Japan of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and of the International Cooperation (MAECI) in the framework of the project of major relevance N. PGR0072.