High-temperature superconductors (HTS) are important for potential applications and for understanding the origin of strong correlations. Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ (BSCCO), a van der Waals material, offers a platform to probe the physics down to a unit-cell. Guiding the flow of electrons by patterning 2DEGS and oxide heterostructures has brought new functionality and access to new science. Similarly, modifying superconductivity in HTS locally, on a small length scale, will be of immense interest for superconducting electronics. Here we report transport studies on few unit-cell thick BSCCO and modify its superconductivity locally by depositing metal on the surface. Deposition of chromium (Cr) on the surface over a selected area of BSCCO results in insulating behavior of the patterned region. Cr locally depletes oxygen in CuO2 planes and disrupts the superconductivity in the layers below. Our technique of modifying superconductivity is suitable for making sub-micron superconducting wires and more complex superconducting electronic devices. High-temperature superconductors (HTS) are rich systems to explore correlation physics although the complete microscopic description of its superconductivity is still missing Studies on 2D materials For studying and modulating electronic properties, it is desirable to pattern the system to guide the flow of * deshmukh@tifr.res.in electrons spatially. Semiconductor heterostructure based two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) systems are one of the most celebrated examples where the electron gas can be controlled by patterning with electrostatic gates. For the case of oxide nanoelectronics In this letter, we report a study where we alter superconductivity locally on ∼ 1 μm length scale in few unit-cell thick BSCCO by exploiting van der Waals nature of the system. Deposition of a thin pattern of Cr, and Ti, on top of few unit cell thick BSCCO flake, modifies the superconductivity of BSCCO underneath -to an insulator, or to a superconductor with lower T c respectively. We attribute this alteration of superconductivity in BSCCO to the depletion of oxygen stoichiometry by surface deposition of reactive metals. As a control, we perform similar experiments replacing chromium pattern with that of gold, and find superconductivity to be unaltered supporting our conclusion. We also provide direct evidence using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) of Cr altering the structure of CuO 2 planes which are responsible for superconductivity in cuprate superconductors. We further demonstrate the potential of this technique by realizing a device of narrow BSCCO wire geometry. We exfoliate thin flakes of BSCCO from bulk crystals by anodic bonding method To understand the physical response, we use a series resistor model as a function of temperature for the region, including the Cr covered BSCCO. The model consists of three resistors -two pristine BSCCO segments, that form the "wings", and the BSCCO underneath Cr, which forms the central part of the device response as schematically shown in the inset of Fig. An additional way to characterize the superconductivity is the unique current-voltage (I-V ) response. Fig. There can be several possible explanations for our main observation that Cr deposited on the top disrupts the superconductivity in BSCCO below it. One such possible mechanism that could result in this response is the physical damage to BSCCO underneath due to the deposition of energetic atomic clusters during evaporation. If physical damage is the primary mechanism for disrupting BSCCO superconductivity, then it is likely to be independent of the material we deposit by evaporation. To test this hypothesis, we deposit Au instead of Cr. Fig. To better understand chemical bonding changes in BSCCO due to Cr deposition, we have used X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) following past studies that probed the consequence of adatoms on the surface of 3D superconductor CuO 2 planes being responsible for superconductivity in BSCCO, we focus here mainly on evolution of corelevel electronic spectra for Cu and O with deposition of Cr. As seen from Fig. Fig. To demonstrate the potential of our technique for patterning 2D BSCCO superconducting devices, we apply our method to realize a narrow channel of BSCCO (for more applications, see Supplementary Section 4). We deposit two lines of Cr separated by a gap which effectively defines a narrow path for supercurrent to flow. The in- Realizing a narrow BSCCO wire by patterning superconductivity in BSCCO with Cr. R vs. T curve for a device with ∼ 700 nm wide patterned BSCCO wire having ∼ 30 μm length shows a distinct insulating dR dT < 0 while BSCCO part on the same flake shows metal like response prior to the superconducting transition. The critical temperature for the narrow BSCCO wire is reduced to ≈ 57 K. set of Fig. We have developed a technique to tune superconductivity locally in few unit-cell thick 2D superconductor BSCCO. Upon depositing metal, BSCCO underneath can be turned into an insulator, or a superconductor, with a lower T c using Cr and Ti respectively. We have shown the potential device applications of this technique that are currently limited in the smallest dimension by the SiN shadow mask technique Few unit-cell thick BSCCO is exfoliated from bulk crystal by anodic bonding method We use bulk crystals of BSCCO for studying XPS instead of the actual device as the minimum spot size of our X-ray beam is 0.5 mm. Photoemission measurements were carried out using a Phoibos150 analyzer and monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source at a base pressure of 8 ×10 -11 torr on an in-situ cleaved BSCCO surface. We then investigate evolution of the core level electronic spectra of the composing elements by in-situ deposition of Cr on freshly cleaved BSCCO surface. Different thicknesses of Cr (1 nm and 3 nm) were deposited by e-beam evaporation with a evaporation rate of 1 Å/min, keeping the sample at room temperature. . Evolution of core-level electronic spectra of Bi 4f. We see that with the deposition of Cr, additional peak at higher binding energy appears for both Bi 4f 5/2 and Bi 4f 7/2 along with the low intensity original peaks. Fig. (1-T /Tc) , we intentionally use a temperature close to T c for this demonstration. The yield of fabricating these kind of superconducting interference devices is small (because of small coherence length). This can be improved by reducing minimum feature size of the patterns by h-BN shadow mask. 