Resistive switching memories allow electrical control of the conductivity of a material, by inducing a high resistance (OFF) or a low resistance (ON) state, using electrochemical and ion transport processes. As alternative to high temperature and vacuum-based physical sulphurization methods of silver (Ag), here we propose, as resistive switching medium, a layer built from colloidal Ag2-xS nanocrystals -compatible with solution-processed approaches. The effect of the electrode size (from macro-to micro-scale), composition (Ag, Ti and Pt) and geometry on the device performance together with the electrochemical mechanisms involved are evaluated. We achieved an optimized Ag/Ti bowtie proof-of-concept configuration by e-beam lithography, which fulfils the general requirements for ReRAM devices in terms of low power consumption and reliable ION/IOFF ratio. This configuration demonstrates reproducible switching between ON and OFF states with data endurance of at least 20 cycles; and an ION/IOFF ratio up to 10 3 at low power consumption (0.1V readout), which outperforms previous results in literature for devices with resistive layers fabricated from silver chalcogenide nanoparticles. Resistive switching random access memories (ReRAMs) are promising nonvolatile memory devices due to their scalability, fast operation response and low power consumption, with applications in information storage technology, or in the development of neuronal networks and logical devices. Among the Ag chalcogenides (S, Se and Te), Ag2S stands out due to its higher ion In this study, the ion-electron conducting layer is a compact Ag2-xS NCs film prepared by spin coating. The Ag2-xS NCs are prepared by colloidal synthesis from AgNO3 and sulfur powder at 115 o C, which can be performed at lower temperature, and does not require high vacuum conditions, as is the case for the established Ag sulphurization physical methods As starting point for the understanding of As starting point for the understanding of and display the working mechanism, we considered an Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag device in lateral configuration. The hysteresis behaviour in electrical conductivity reported in Fig. Here one cycle consists of a read pulse of 0.2V, followed by a set pulse of -2V, another read pulse of 0.2V, and a reset pulse of 2V. Fig. In the initial cycles, the conductivity of the HRS increase (IOFF), while the LRS (ION) is constant. This leads to a decrease in the ION/IOFF ratio, from about 2 to a stable value of 1.6±0.1 after 8 cycles (a lower value of 1±0.1 was observed for Vread = 0.1 and 0.4V). To shorten the number of cycles to reach a stable performance, a pre-activation process of the device can be applied, usually called 'initial forming operation', which should promote an initialization of the Ag + ion migration across the Ag2-xS film To improve the device performance, we explored asymmetric device configurations consisting of one active (Ag) and one inert (Ti or Pt) electrode: Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag and Pt/Ag2-xS/Ag. Here the Ti electrode was coated with a thin Au layer (10nm) to prevent its oxidation. In this case, the metal deposition, via e-beam evaporation through a shadow mask, was carried out in two consecutive steps. While Pt is commonly used as inert electrode, Ti can be a much more cost efficient alternative material, if it does not take part in the switching mechanism and keeps the performance. When using one inert electrode, initially the formation of metallic Ag occurs at the anode. This is again reflected by the formation of the macroscopic dendrites growing from the Ti or Pt electrode as evidenced in Fig. The performance of these devices was evaluated with set/reset cycles using the 'multi-read' procedure, Fig. In conclusion, we explored Ag2-xS colloidal NC films for resistive switching devices, studied the electric field induced transformations, and characterised their performance in different device configurations. At the macroscale, we demonstrated the functionality of resistive switching and highlighted the mechanisms involved. Therefore, in this way the best performance is an ION/IOFF ratio of 15 obtained with the asymmetric Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag design, which was already one order of magnitude larger than that of the symmetric Ag/Ag2-xS/Ag device. The devices displayed reproducible resistive switching between the ON and OFF states and read-out for at least 100 cycles. This is improved in microscale devices with a gap of around 20 μm, keeping the Ti/Ag2-xS/Ag configuration, where the electrodes in a tip-tip (bowtie) geometry enabled an ION/IOFF ratio enhancement of up to 2 orders of magnitude, with an ION/IOFF ratio of about 10 3 during at least 20 cycles at 0.1V read voltage. These results satisfy the basic requirements for reliable devices and show improved performance in comparison with other Ag chalcogenide NC memristors Materials. AgNO3 (99.8%), oleic acid (OA, 90%, degassed at 100 °C for 2h), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%, degassed at 150 °C for 3h), sulfur powder (99.98%), toluene (anhydrous, ≥99.8%), tetrachloroethylene (TCE, anhydrous, ≥99%), acetone (≥99.5%), ethanol (99.8%), methanol (anhydrous, 99.8%), 2-propanol (≥99.8%), tetramethylammonium iodine (TMAI, 99%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and oleylamine (OlAm, C18-content 80-90%, degassed) from Acros Organics. The water used in the ICP-OES sample preparation was obtained from a MilliQ® system and the HCl (≥ 37%, TraceSELECT ® Fluka) and HNO3 (≥69%, TraceSELECT ® Fluka) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Glass slides and p-doped silicon wafers (boron doping, 90 nm thermal SiO2, 1-10 Ωcm, University wafer ® ). Resist (2:1) polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA A4) and anisole (A thinner) supplied by MicroChem ® . Ag (99.999%), Ti (99.995%), Pt (99.99%), Cu (99.999%) and Au (99.999%) pellets were purchased from Kurt J. Lesker ® . Ag2-xS nanocrystal synthesis. The synthesis of colloidal Ag2-xS NCs with photoluminescence emission around 1200 nm (see ESI, Fig. For the macroscale devices, we used a shadow mask to deposit the metals on 1x1 mm 2 areas, separated by gaps of ca. 100 μm. In the case of asymmetric electrodes, two consecutive evaporations were performed exposing half of the device each time. The metals were evaporated in a Kenosistec ® e-beam evaporator (deposition rate of 0.3 Å.s -1 and base pressure of about 1.0 10 - 6 mbar) with thickness of 50 nm (Ag, Ti and Pt); for Ag and Ti an additional layer of 10 nm Au was evaporated to prevent oxidation. Microscale devices were fabricated, on Si substrates with a 90 nm SiO2 top layer, by e-beam lithography (EBL), using spin-coated PMMA as resist (baked at 170 o C on a hot plate). The metal deposition for the electrodes was performed as for the macroscale devices, followed by lift-off in acetone and rising in isopropanol. Reproducibility was tested by fabricating devices with 3 different Ag2-xS NC synthesis batches, used for both macro-and microscale devices. For macroscale devices, at least 5 devices were tested in every configuration. For microscale devices (EBL fabrication), chips with 20-30 devices of each kind were fabricated; at least 10 were tested. The results are comparable between the different sets. SEM/EDX characterisation. We performed SEM/EDX measurements on the devices using a Helios Nanolab 600 (FEI Company) combined with an X-Max detector and INCA ® system (Oxford Instruments) for the EDX spectra acquisition and analysis. SEM measurements were performed at 10-20 kV and 0.2 nA, while EDX measurement conditions were set at 10kV and 0.8nA. The SEM measurements were carried out with voltage ≤20 kV and current ≤0.8nA, since in previous studies overnight in two different acid media: (i) in 2.5 mL of aqua regia (HCl:HNO3, 3:1vol) for standard analysis, and (ii) in HNO3 for an improved Ag detection. Prior to the measurements, the samples were diluted to a total volume of 25 mL with Millipore water, and stirred with a vortex mixer for 10 s at 2400 rpm. Then, the sample was filtered using a PTFE membrane (0.45μm pore size, Sartorius ® ). Measurements were carried out with a ThermoFisher ICAP 6000 Duo inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer. Three measurements were performed on each sample to obtain an averaged value, and three different synthesis batches were measured to yield an average Ag:S stoichiometry of (1.4 ± 0.1) : (1). Being substoichiometric, the Ag2-xS crystal favours memory effects by increasing the electron conductivity. 3 X-Ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed with a PANanalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer equipped with a 1.8 kW CuKα ceramic X-ray tube, PIXcel 3D 2x2 area detector and operating at 45 kV and 40 mA. Samples for the XRD measurements were prepared in a glove box by drop casting a concentrated Ag2-xS NC dispersion onto a miscut silicon wafer. The diffraction patterns were collected using a Parallel-Beam (PB) geometry and symmetric reflection mode. According to the XRD data, the crystal structure of the colloidal Ag2-xS NCs corresponds to the acanthite (α-Ag2S) phase together with some cubic metallic Ag inclusions (Fig. As mentioned in the main text, to stabilize the first set/read/reset cycles reading, we established a pre-activation protocol. In Fig. 