The self-organised conical needles produced by plasma etching of silicon (Si), known as black silicon (b-Si), create a formbirefringent surface texture when etching of Si orientated at angles of θ i < 50 -70 • (angle between the Si surface and vertical plasma E-field). The height of the needles in the form-birefringent region following 15 min etching was d ∼ 200 nm and had a 100 μm width of the optical retardance/birefringence, characterised using polariscopy. The height of the b-Si needles corresponds closely to the skin-depth of Si ∼ λ /4 for the visible spectral range. Reflection-type polariscope with a voltagecontrolled liquid-crystal retarder is proposed to directly measure the retardance ∆n × d/λ ≈ 0.15 of the region with tilted b-Si needles. The quantified form birefringence of ∆n = -0.45 over λ = 400 -700 nm spectral window was obtained. Such high values of ∆n at visible wavelengths can only be observed in the most birefringence calcite or barium borate as well as in liquid crystals. The replication of b-Si into Ni-shim with high fidelity was also demonstrated and can be used for imprinting of the b-Si nanopattern into other materials. Nanotextured silicon (Si) surfaces -in particular, black-Si (b-Si) -have a range of useful properties for widespread applications including MEMS, energy storage and biotechnology: it is anti-reflective over the visible-infrared (VIS-IR) spectral range The refractive index n of Si is 3.58 to 3.69 within the visible spectral window of λ = 400 nm to 800 nm, which is useful for the phase control of light in transmission/reflection modes or geometrical (in-plane) phase modulation using azimuthally patterned refractive index Here, we demonstrate a large phase change (∼ π/4) of the reflected light from b-Si surface with tilted needles d ≈ 200 nm in height. Plasma etching of Si at large angles creates the generation of nano-needles at an angle i.e. tilted b-Si. The properties of such surfaces were investigated in the visible-IR spectral ranges and showed low reflectivity R = 2 -4%. A birefringence corresponding to ∆n > 10 -2 was estimated by cross-polarised imaging with λ = 530 nm plate retarder placed at a 45 • -angle to introduce a color scale (the Michel-Levy birefringence color chart). Quantitative birefringence measurements showed the largest change of the birefringence corresponding to ∆n ≈ 0.45 over a ∼ 50 μm wide region of b-Si where sparse tilted nano-needles formed a dense homogeneous pattern of tilted b-Si. High-fidelity replication of nano-textured b-Si with feature sizes 20 -200 nm into a mechanically flexible Ni shim is also demonstrated for 3-inch Si wafers. Ni-shims can be used for transferring nano-textured surfaces into other materials including polymers. The b-Si was fabricated by plasma etching of clean 3" (inch) 100 p-type (Boron doped) silicon wafers (University wafers, Ltd.) using a Samco RIE101iPH inductively coupled plasma (ICP) assisted reactive ion etching (RIE) tool. Silicon surfaces were initially cleaned with isopropanol and then dried under nitrogen gas flow to remove contaminants. The etchant gases were SF 6 /O 2 with respective flow rates of 35/45 sccm. Process pressure was 1 Pa, ICP power of 150 W, bias power of 15 W 6 and etching time was 15-30 min. During the etch process, the spontaneous passivation mask formed on the surface as an etching by-product which provokes the formation of b-Si was removed by sonication in 10 wt% sulphuric acid solution for 10 min A reflection-type polarisation microscope with a LC-retarder was assembled onto a Nikon Optiphot-pol microscope by adding a compartment for the LC-retarder (see Appendix for details; Fig. The replication of b-Si into a Nickel (Ni) shim was performed with an initial magnetron sputtered deposition of a Ni seed layer on the b-Si. In order to ensure a continuous coating on the b-Si, a 5 nm of Cr layer was evaporated at a normal incidence and then a further 5 nm at 25 • from normal incidence as an adhesion layer and then (∼ 200 nm) of Ni was sputtered at 0 • . The b-Si samples were then mounted onto an acrylic sample holder using copper tape and attached electrically to a 200 mm diameter sample stage. Nickel plating was carried out in a nickel sulfamate based electrolyte (pH 4) in constant current mode at 9 A with voltage between 3-3.5 V. Plating was run for 6 hours, growing a ∼ 200 μm thick Ni shim, similar to the thickness reported previously for replication of laser ablated surfaces The b-Si was separated from the sample holder then cut out of the Ni sheet by mechanical large-radius bending of the entire shim. The shims were then immersed in 30% KOH solution at 80 • C for ∼ 4 hrs to remove the remaining Si. The resulting Ni-shim was a negative copy of the original 3-inch b-Si wafer. Figure To measure birefringence of the tilted b-Si, a polarisation microscope was assembled for the reflection mode (Fig. To quantify the retardance (hence, birefringence), a liquid crystal (LC) retarder was introduced in front of the CCD (Fig. An orientation of the sample was set with projection of tilted needles perpendicular to the slow-axis of LC retarder. The voltage of LC-retarder was changed in small steps for N = 700 frames taken by CCD; an initial calibration was made to prevent saturation of the CCD and to use entire dynamic range of the 8-bit camera. Figures Cross sections normal to the interface between sparse tilted Si needles and dense b-Si were extracted from the retardance maps (Fig. To analyse the region of strong retardance dependence and its cross over into positive values, we applied a refractive index analysis by plotting the retardance ∝ f (1/λ ) at the location close to the maximum values (along A-A' cross section Fig. A nanotextured surface of b-Si has number of applications and development of nano-texture transfer into other materials, e.g., to create biocidal plastics with needle separation ∼ 100 nm or fabrication of nano-textured (black) photo-catalytic surfaces for water splitting The demonstrated retardance change was observed for a reflected beam and is due to a delicate change of the refractive index in a transitional manner. The observation were made with a new polariscopy setup with an integrated LC-retarder. The gradient pattern of the transitional region from pristine Si to b-Si is favorable to observe the location where the change of effective refractive index is taking place and to determine its value. Also, Si solar cells which usually have an antireflective coating might benefit from engineering surface pattern which controls the phase of the reflected beam and facilitates stronger absorption at the pre-surface regions. Interestingly, the fabricated tilted nano-needle patterns are chiral and can have applications in Raman scattering/spectroscopy. Figure It is demonstrated that the d = 200 nm thick nanotextured Si surface is effectively a birefringent reflecting surface with a ∆n ≈ 0.4 at the visible spectral range. Effectively, a λ /4 (π/2 phase) change can be achieved with the nanotextured Si having a tilted feature pattern. Such pattern is produced using a simple plasma etching at an oblique angle approach. This negates the need for more complex multi-step lithography methods used for fabricating metamaterials for phase and amplitude control. The suggested technique could be appealing for a number of applications in sensing and harvesting of solar energy. Future efforts are needed to establish etching parameter (chemistry, etching angle and time) range for birefringence control. For the naturally birefringent materials, e.g., calcite, quartz, the proposed method of tilted etching can enhance that property creating meta-birefringent materials. where n 1 and n 2 are the indices of the air and tilted b-Si needles, respectively, w is width of one region (air) and Λw is the part occupied by Si needles (Λ is the period of the structure). Figure To estimate the anisotropy -a dependence of the refraction index and absorption on polarisation direction -for the tilted b-Si structure, we adapt the Bruggeman Efficient Media Theory (EMT) theory here k is the above estimated anisotropy factor, ε 1 = 1 stands for air, and ε 2 = 15.7 + 0.16i for silicon. The Bruggeman EMT provides the complex refraction indices for polarisations along the anisotropy axes (considering given k ) and perpendicularly to axis (considering 1/k instead of k). For isotropic composites in 2D case k = 1, for maximally anisotropic structure (the stripes), k = 0 and k -→ ∞ for both polarisations, respectively. In our case, the anisotropy is partial and estimates in this particular case are k = 3 and k = 1/3. The complex refraction indices ñ = n + iκ = √ ε are: ñ = 2.92 + i × 0.014 for k = 3 (ordinary beam) and ñ = 1.89 + i × 2.89 × 10 -3 for k = 1/3 (extraordinary beam), when f = 0.62 (Si fraction). Hence, the birefringence |∆n| ≡ |n en o | = 1.03 and dichroism ∆κ = 0.011 is estimated for the k = 3 vs. 1/3 anisotropy (ordinary vs. extraordinary polarisation components). The dichroism has a smaller effect compared to the birefringence. The estimate of birefringence is approximately twice larger as the experimentally determined value, however, is smaller as compared with the estimate for the grating Eqn. 1 shown in Fig. 