Solar driven photoelectrochemical water splitting (PEC-WS) using semiconductor photoelectrodes represents a promising approach for a sustainable and environmentally friendly production of renewable energy vectors and fuel sources, such as dihydrogen (H2). In this context, titanium dioxide (TiO2) and iron oxide (hematite, α-Fe2O3) are among the most investigated candidates as photoanode materials, mainly owing to their resistance to photocorrosion, non-toxicity, natural abundance, and low production cost. Major drawbacks are, however, an inherently low electrical conductivity and a limited hole diffusion length that significantly affect the performance of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 in PEC devices. To this regard, onedimensional (1D) nanostructuring is typically applied as it provides several superior features such as a significant enlargement of the material surface area, extended contact between the semiconductor and the electrolyte and, most remarkably, preferential electrical transport that overall suppress charge carrier recombination and improve TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 photoelectrocatalytic properties. The present review describes various synthetic methods, properties and PEC applications of 1D-photoanodes (nanotubes, nanorods, nanofibers, nanowires) based on titania, hematite, and on α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures. Various routes towards modification and enhancement of PEC activity of 1D photoanodes are also discussed including doping, decoration with co-catalysts and heterojunction engineering. Finally, the challenges related to the optimization of charge transfer kinetics in both oxides are highlighted. The fulfilment of global energy demand still mainly relies on supply and use of fossil fuels such as coal, crude oil, natural gas, etc. The energy content of fossil fuels is typically released upon their combustion, which in turn generates significant emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere and ultimately promotes global warming and climate change. In 2013 the global primary energy consumption amounted to ca. 17 TW (90% of which was generated from fossil fuel). Taking into account the pace at which the world economy grows, a consequent drastic increase of the global energy consumption is predicted to take place in the near future. Although industrial mass scale production of dihydrogen is still based on fossil fuel combustion (i.e., the most common method for extracting H2 is still the steam-reforming of methane), 4 green alternatives that utilize only water (H2O) as primary H2 source are currently under development. One of the most promising solutions is represented by the use of photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) for light-driven water splitting. In these devices, semiconductor materials are used as photoelectrodes that under illumination and an applied electric bias can split H2O into H2 and O2. Ideally, the goal of this technology is to convert sunlight into clean energy available on demand. After the pioneering work in 1972 by PEC-WS consists in the reduction of water into hydrogen (cathodic reaction) accompanied by the anodic reaction of oxygen generation. Different configurations apply to PEC devices: in a so-called tandem cell configuration, both the electrodes are semiconductive materials, while in a Schottky type cell one of the two is a metal electrode. Regardless of the configuration, n-type semiconductors are used as photoanodes while p-type semiconductors as photocathodethis is related to the electronic properties of these materials and the type of majority carriers, i.e., electrons (e -) or holes (h + ) produced by photoexcitation. Overall, the PEC-WS reaction consists of four main sequential steps (Fig. The overall reaction (4) is endoenergetic, with a Gibbs free energy ΔrG 0 = 273.2 kJ/mol (according to the Nernst equation, ΔE = 1.23 V). Therefore, the semiconductor used as photoelectrode must absorb light with photon energy greater than 1.23 eV (that is, the semiconductor should exhibit an absorption edge at λ < ca. 1100 nm). However, due to the intrinsic kinetic limitations of reactions (2) and (3) and the resulting overpotential needed for oxygen and hydrogen production, ΔG > ~ 2.0 eV (corresponding to a limiting absorption edge λ of ca. 610 nm) is frequently reported as the threshold energy required to achieve a water splitting reaction at a reasonable rate. Band edges and band gap energies of semiconductors typically explored for photoelectrochemical H2O splitting are reported in Fig. Despite large efforts and hundreds of semiconductors explored, the thermodynamic and kinetic requirements for an efficient PEC-WS reaction have not yet been satisfied by a single semiconductor candidate. For instance, Si, Ge or III -V compounds suffer from severe photocorrosion and instability in water solutions, while transition metal oxides rarely meet the criteria of (i) a band-gap width suitable for sunlight activation, or of (ii) adequate band-edges to spontaneously promote OER and HER. Nevertheless, metal oxides still represent one of the most viable options for PEC water splitting application, particularly owing to their low processing cost and high stability against photocorrosion even in harsh environments. The engineering of metal oxide semiconductor photoelectrodes that exhibit long-term stability and a high photoefficiency could be realized using different strategies (applied individually or in combination). A first approach can be based on theoretical prediction and synthesis of new materials that could intrinsically satisfy the aforementioned criteria. Finally, another viable strategy is the nanostructuring of photoelectrode material into nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanoplatelets, etc. This is an efficient approach in the context of heterogeneous (i.e., solid-liquid and solid-gas) reactions since it typically leads to large surface-to-volume ratio for the semiconductor (large surface area) that facilitates charge transfer at the SCLJ. Also, e.g., for one-dimensional nanostructures (discussed below), their geometry is crucial for achieving high PEC-WS efficiency owing to the control over light absorption and orthogonal charge separation, as well as for establishing preferential percolation pathways. To promote the advancement of PEC-WS technologies, the discovery and development of new materials are of primary importance. However, also the identification of protocols and standard parameters to cross-compare the materials (in terms of properties and efficiency) is highly necessaryreliable and reproducible protocols may accelerate knowledge transfer and process development. Therefore, we discuss the most important parameters, that is we provide a description of the most useful figures of merit (see below) typically reported to characterize the performance of a photoelectrochemical device in terms of light to energy conversion efficiency and indicate the limits within which each of these benchmarks may be applied. The photoconversion efficiency (η) depends on many factors such as the spectrum of the incident radiation, the band-gap of the semiconductor, the reflection of light, and the transport of e -/h + through the semiconductor. The comparison of photoconversion efficiencies obtained for different semiconductor materials requires that these efficiencies are presented for a standard solar spectrum, usually the Air Mass AM 1.5 global solar spectrum at a given power density (100 mW cm -2 ). Most measurements of the photoconversion efficiency are performed under illumination by artificial light sources. This is convenient mainly because artificial sources are stationary and their intensity is essentially constant with time (although the lamp spectrum varies in intensity with the lamp lifetime), while spectrum and intensity of solar radiation reaching the ground depend on the time of day and on the atmospheric conditions. A most suitable artificial light for this purpose is a Xe lamp which, adequately filtered and compared to other artificial lights, best replicates the solar spectrum. Several measures are commonly used to determine the efficiency of materials for PEC-WS: • solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency, STH • applied bias photon-to-current efficiency, ABPE • incident photon-to-current efficiency, IPCE • absorbed photon-to-current efficiency, APCE. STH describes the overall efficiency of a PEC-WS device exposed to a broadband solar AM 1.5G illumination, under zero bias conditions. where r H 2 is the rate of hydrogen production (mmolH2 s -1 ) measured with a gas chromatograph or mass spectrometer, ∆G is the change in Gibbs free energy per mole of H2 produced (237 kJ/mol), Pin is the incident illumination power density (mW cm -2 ) and A is the illuminated electrode area (cm 2 ). STH can also be calculated as a function of the short-circuit photocurrent density, j SC (6): 13 where 1.23 V is the thermodynamic water splitting potential and ηF the Faradaic efficiency for H2 generation. It should be emphasized that ( A loss of faradaic efficiency for H2 or O2 evolution is observed not only when a sacrificial agent such as methanol, ethanol, etc., is added to the electrolyte (this limits the O2 evolution), but also when dissolved O2 (from air) is present on the cathodic side of the PEC cell. That is, O2 reduction to O2 -• competes with the H2 evolution reaction. O2 -• radicals further react with water and form H2O2 which is a typical by-product detected in the cathodic compartment when the electrolyte is not purged with an inert gas prior to PEC-WS experiment, or if the anode material/electrolyte combination favors H2O2 production over O2 production. Therefore, a reliable evaluation of STH should imply (i) standard experimental conditions (such as purging the electrolyte to remove O2, absence of sacrificial agents, checking for H2O2 in the cathodic compartment), and (ii) a comparison between the STH determined from measured j SC (6) and that calculated from the actual amount of evolved gases (5)this is crucial to avoid an overestimation of the STH. ABPE, IPCE and APCE are measured under applied bias in a 3-electrode PEC configuration. Under electrical bias applied between working and counter electrodes, the current extracted from the device is higher compared to the bias-free condition of STH; therefore, it does not accurately reflect a solar-to-hydrogen conversion process but the so-called applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) is determined (7): where j ph is the photocurrent density under the bias voltage V b . Noteworthy, V b is applied across the working and counter electrodes, that is, the two electrodes across which the photocurrent j ph flows. The product (j ph × V b ) represents the electrical power loss that has to be subtracted in calculating the efficiency of the cell. By contrast, using the potential applied between working and reference electrodes (V W-R ) in place of V b typically leads to an overestimation of the cell efficiency (because V W-R < V b ). 11 One of the most adopted tools for the estimation of PEC properties of a semiconducting material is represented by IPCE. IPCE provides a measure of the efficiency of conversion of incident monochromatic photons to photocurrent flowing between WE and CE. IPCE takes into account all the three fundamental steps of a light-driven process: (i) photon absorption (the absorption of one photon generates an e -/h + pair); (ii) efficiency of h + transport to the solid-liquid interface and collection of e -at the back contact; (iii) efficiency of h + transfer at the semiconductor-electrolyte interface. It is expressed as: where j ph (λ) is the photocurrent measured at the specific wavelength λ, I(λ) is the incident photon flux, and e is the electronic charge. Due to photon losses associated with the reflection of light or imperfect absorption, and due to the recombination of photogenerated e where E S is the incident irradiance that describes the spectrum of a light source. Murphy et al. showed that his approach leads to efficiency results that are well in line with those measured under direct solar light irradiation, thus avoiding an under-or overestimation ascribed to spectral variations between different artificial sources. 11 Finally, to understand the intrinsic PEC performance of a material, APCE is particularly useful to describe the collected current per incident photon absorbed. APCE takes into account also losses caused by reflection and/or transmission of photons. APCE can be obtained by combining ( Then, (10) can be combined with the Lambert-Beer's law (A = -log(I/I 0 )): APCE describes the collected current as a function of absorbed photons: Therefore, ( However, regardless of the figure used to express the PEC efficiency of a certain device, an additional problem often encountered when cross-comparing the performances of different photoelectrodes is that PEC devices may also be operated under different electrochemical conditions such as applied potential, electrolyte composition, and reference electrode. The lack of uniformity of electrochemical parameters can, in principle, be addressed by referring the applied bias to the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE) according to the Nernst equation: where E ref is the measured potential referred to the used reference electrode (e.g., Ag/AgCl, Saturated Calomel Electrode SCE, Hg/HgO, etc.), E ref 0 is the potential of E ref with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE) at 25 °C, and the pH is that of the electrolyte solution. This approach, when comparing different pHs, however implies that no significant changes in the water splitting mechanism occur with pH. Additionally, the Nernst equation assumes the linear dependence of E RHE on the electrolyte pH. However, these assumptions are not always valid and, therefore, many material specific data are truly comparable only when different materials are tested in view of their PEC performance in the same electrolyte and at the same pH. Among all the investigated metal oxide semiconductors, α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 have stimulated an immense research interest due to their natural abundance, chemical stability in liquid solutions, non-toxicity, high resistance to photocorrosion, and low production costs. However, a severe limitation of TiO2 is represented by its optical band gap (i.e., 3.2 and 3.0 for anatase and rutile polymorphs, respectively). This means that only UV light (λ < 380 -400 nm) is absorbed and thus only ca. 4% of the solar spectrum can promote charge carrier generation in the material, and the consequent photoelectrochemical reactions. By contrast, α-Fe2O3 absorbs light in the visible range up to λ ~ 600 nm owing to its optical bandgap (Eg = 2.0 -2.2 eV). This corresponds to a light absorption of ca. 40% of the solar spectrum. Moreover, we describe most recent results relative to α-Fe2O3-TiO2 heterojunction-based materials or combination compounds (e.g., Fe2TiO5) that were shown to outreach the PEC-WS performance of the single counterparts. For these materials, modification and exploitation of the (as such detrimental) conduction band offset between α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 has led to various new designs that combine (i) the efficient charge carrier separation, provided by TiO2 that suppresses electron back injection in hematite, with (ii) the strong visible light absorption promoted by an α-Fe2O3 thin layer. A comprehensive description of this approach will be presented in the final section, along with studies on the charge carrier dynamic observed for these composites and useful tools for the rational design of potentially new platforms for efficient solar-driven water splitting. Why micro-and nanostructuring? One of the reasons is that the properties of materials can be significantly different from the quantum-, to nano-and to bulk scale. Another reason is that defined structuring of electrode/electrolyte systems allows a much better control over light guiding, reactant diffusion, and electron pathways. In regard to the first reason, nanostructured materials (NMs) can provide significantly modified physical, chemical, and biological properties and thus can exhibit unique functionalities. Moreover, compared to bulk materials, NMs exhibit remarkable size effects owing to the high surface-to-volume ratio. In particular, a larger specific surface area represents a great advantage when a material is intended for catalytic applications: a higher number of active surface sites facilitates the adsorption of reactants, offers extended contact with solutions, etc., and typically leads to higher reaction rates. Size effects imply that the nanomaterial dimensions (< 100 nm) are comparable to the critical length scale of physical phenomena, e.g., charge transport distances and light absorption depth, the mean free path of electrons and phonons, or (typically for particles < 10 nm) the Bohr exciton radius. On the one hand, this can be exploited for a more efficient charge carrier separation in the lattice of a nanomaterial in order to improve its PEC-WS performance. In other words, charge (e.g., h + ) diffusion towards the environment occurs over minimized distances since the size of the semiconductor is within the length scale of solid state charge diffusion. On the other hand, quantum size electronic effects, such as ballistic electron transport or optical gap widening, can occur due to quantum confinement. This was experimentally demonstrated, e.g. in the case of TiO2, for nanoparticle suspensions, Such size effects were already widely described in the 1960s, 41 but the first classification attempts in materials science dates back to 2000, 42 and only more recent reports consider also more complex architectures such as mesoscale assemblies particularly as nanocones, nanohorns, nanoegg-yolk, and nanoflowers (lilies, roses, tulips, etc.). Zero-dimensional nanostructures feature all the three dimensions in the nanoscale regime (i.e., no dimension is larger than 100 nm). Typical examples are nanoparticles (NPs), such as nanospheres, quantum dots (QDs), core-shell structures, hollow spheres, etc. An attractive feature is that 0D-NMs typically smaller than 5 -10 nm (the Bohr exciton radius) show tunable band-gap. The smaller the size of a crystal the more affected its electronic structure: when a crystal is composed of a limited number of atoms, bulk electronic bands are discretized to distinct energy levels with a widening of the gap for smaller dot sizes. Subtraction or addition of just a few atoms alters the energy level distribution and thus leads to bandgap shifts in the QDs. However, films composed of stacked NPs often suffer from carrier recombination at grain boundaries (owing to the presence of trapping states) and long carrier diffusion paths (random walk) through the NP network (Fig. In terms of charge collection and transfer efficiencies, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures exhibit superior performances in a wide range of applications (e.g., nanoelectronics, nanodevices, energy-related fields) with respect to the other nanoarchitecture arrangements. In many cases, the size effects of a 0D material can be maintained but harvesting of charge carriers is facilitated. Two-dimensional nanostructures have only one dimension in the nanoscale. Typical examples of 2D-NMs are nanoflakes, nanoplatelets, etc. (Fig. Hierarchical nanostructures (HNs) are considered 3D-NMs and, owing to their intrinsic properties, are gaining increasingly wider attention as scaffolds suitable for PEC-WS devices. In general, a hierarchical nanostructure is composed of a distinct backbone (typically with a 1D-arrangement) onto which nanodimensional building blocks are grownthese usually include nanoparticles (0D), nanowires/rods/tubes (1D) and nanosheets (2D). Therefore, HNs often resemble nanotrees that simultaneously combine the properties of the one-dimensional backbone (e.g., enhanced carrier separation and directional charge transport) with a significantly increased surface area and a much higher amount of active sites, owing to the highly porous arrangement provided by the branches. In the first case, a hierarchical arrangement is mainly exploited in view of its significantly higher surface area and a major application is often as photoanode in a dye-sensitized solar cell (Fig. properties and band structures. This in turns can either be exploited to enhance electron collection from the branched-material to the back-bone nanostructure (i.e., host-guest approach) and/or to extend the light absorption (and, hence, its conversion) over a broader wavelength range. The so-called "host-guest approach" typically provides a support material (the "host") for majority carrier conduction, into which a photoactive "guest" material can inject photogenerated electrons while, at the same time, providing proximity to the semiconductor/liquid junction (Fig. SnO2-TiO2, 75 and SnO2-Fe2O3 combinations. In the following sections we will deal with the different one-dimensional arrangements of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 typically used for photoelectrochemical water splitting experiments. We will mainly report on 1D-nanostructures such as nanorods (NRs), nanowires (NWs), and nanotubes (NTs). In particular, we will show how the use of 1D-morphology is strategic to realize efficient electron transport and charge carrier separation and to overcome the short diffusion length of holes in both TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. We will mainly focus on 1D-nanotubes, fabricated by various techniques such as hydrothermal methods and self-organizing electrochemical anodization. Emphasis will be then on a number of modification strategies that (coupled to 1Dnanostructuring) have been adopted to address other critical aspects of hematite-and titaniabased photoelectrodes, e.g., the sluggish kinetic of hole injection into the electrolyte (that mainly affect α-Fe2O3) and a limited use of solar light irradiation for promoting the PEC-WS reaction (for TiO2). On the other hand, top-down strategies (e.g., (photo)lithography and focused-ion beam methods), in spite of a better control on the nanostructure morphology, are typically complex and expensive. Here, we will give a larger attention to the most versatile methods (in our view), i.e., hydrothermal synthesis and self-organizing electrochemical anodization. A remarkable aspect is the possibility of combining, e.g. hydrothermal and self-organizing anodization methods to other synthesis procedures (such as solution-based and/or sputtering techniques) to grow hierarchical composite nanomaterials. Sol-gel methods certainly represent the most widely used approach for the synthesis of nanoparticles. It is based on the slow hydrolysis and polymerization reaction of a colloidal suspension of the metal oxide precursor (i.e., alkoxide, halide, nitrate salt, etc.) that, at controlled rate and under specific conditions, evolves toward the formation of a solid gel phase. Inorganic precursors, such as iron nitrate, are commonly used for α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. In a typical synthesis procedure, Fe(NO3)3 is dispersed in an aqueous solution also containing EDTA as capping agent. Upon the formation of a solid gel, the evaporation of the liquid phase leads to iron oxide/oxy-hydroxide nanopowders. Annealing at 450-900 °C is typically reported to crystallize the amorphous powders into single phase hematite nanoparticles. However, as mentioned before, the use of nanoparticle water dispersion is not possible in view of photoelectrochemical applications, and immobilization of NPs on a conductive substrate in the form of assemblies or thin films has several drawbacks (e.g., long (random) carrier diffusion pathways, enhanced carrier recombination at grain boundaries, lower surface area compared to NP suspensions, etc.). Thus, a most elegant approach is one-dimensional nanostructuring of photoanode materials. Hydrothermal synthesis certainly belongs to the most commonly used methods for the synthesis of nanorods/wires/tubes of various metal oxides. As for sol-gel methods, titanium isopropoxide, 91 tetrabutyl titanate, 92 or titanium isobutoxide are typically used as TiO2 precursors, More recently also alternative reactants have been proposed (e.g., [Fe(CN)6] 4-precursor in H2O2 based solution) that significantly lowered both the temperature and the reaction time needed (160 °C for < 2h). 104 Regardless of the used precursors (and hence conditions), α-Fe2O3 tubes are singlecrystalline (i.e., hematite is the only crystalline phase) and are typically 200 nm -1 μm long, with a diameter in the 100-150 nm range and a wall thickness of 25-30 nm. Most interesting feature of TiO2 hydrothermal tubes is their multi-walled morphology, featuring inter-wall distance of ~ 0.7 nm 107 and (in contrast to α-Fe2O3 tubes) a wall thickness in the range of atomic sheets. Another remarkable aspect of hydrothermal methods is the possibility of growing 1Dnanostructures such as NRs and NWs anchored on a conductive substrate (usually a FTO layer immersed in the reaction vessel), for a direct use as photoelectrodethis, in contrast to nanotubes that grow in bundles/agglomerates, dispersed in a reaction media. and FeOOH), which form on the glass side due to gravimetric precipitation from the precursor solution, can be easily washed away. However, a major limitation of Cl -ions is their blocking effect towards the TiO2 surface sites that are active for the water splitting reaction. In particular, FeCl3 is usually dissolved in a NaNO3 based solution, also containing HCl to establish an acidic environment. We mentioned that hydrothermal approaches for nanotube fabrication results in single tubes or loose agglomerates of tubes dispersed in a solution and that non-homogeneous tube lengths are typically obtained. Most critical aspect to a use of these structures in electrically contacted devices (e.g., photoelectrochemical cell) is that tubes need to be compacted to layers (similar to powders) on an electrode surface. This leads to an arbitrary orientation of the nanotubes on the electrode and, in turn, eliminates many advantages of their one-dimensional nature (e.g., providing a 1D direct electron path to the electrode). 48 However, using aligned templates (or self-organizing electrochemical anodization, see below) not only leads to an array of oxide nanotubes oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface, but also tubes in the template can relatively easily be contacted by metal deposition (before removal of the template by selective dissolution). Numerous different nanotube morphologies can be obtained by simply tuning the morphology of the template. ALD techniques offer an even larger control on tube morphology as conformal coating of the template with one atomic layer after the other can be achieved, also by alternating different titania precursors. Hydrolysis reaction of the metal oxide precursor to TiOx (or FeOOH) on the individual ZnO nanorods results in the formation of TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) based nanotubes with the simultaneous dissolution of the ZnO template in the acidic environment. Electrochemical anodization is often considered a most straightforward synthesis path to fabricate one-dimensional vertically oriented layers for photoelectrochemical applications since it is scalable (it allows one to coat virtually any shape of various metal surfaces), offers an extended control over nanoscale geometry, produces directly back-contacted photoanodes, and is a versatile approach as it can be used to grow nanostructures of various metal oxides (Fig. In this configuration, with M as working electrode (anode) and platinum or carbon as counter electrode (cathode), oxidation of the metal substrate occurs and leads to the formation of a metal oxide (MOz/2). Oxide growth is sustained by field-assisted ion-migration. Briefly, as long as high field conditions hold, metal cations are subjected to outward migration from the metal substrate towards the electrolyte, while at the same time O 2-ions migrate (from water) towards the anode (Fig. This process is self-limited since the formed oxide is stable in the anodizing electrolyte: with increasing the oxide thickness (d), the electric field (i.e., ΔE = ΔU/d) gradually drops and so does the inward/outward ion migration. This results in the formation of an oxide layer with a finite thickness. Such an oxide film is compact or, more generally, does not exhibit specific morphological features. However, when using a suitable electrolyte and under specific electrochemical conditions (that largely depend on the metal of interest), a steady-state equilibrium can be established between the electrochemical oxide formation and its dissolution (Fig. In particular, electrochemical parameters can be adjusted to establish controlled oxide growth and etching to form porous oxide layers or, even more, to enable the growth of onedimensional self-organized metal oxide structures. Typically, the use of electrolytes containing ClO4 -, NO3 -or F -ions under self-organizing electrochemical conditions is key for the anodic growth of Ti and Fe oxide layers in the form of arrays of nanopores or nanotubes. As the effects of such parameters on the growth of α-Fe2O3 tubes are qualitatively comparable to what is observed for anodic TiO2 NTs, general guidelines can be summarized as follows: -electrolyte composition: tube growth in H2O-based electrolytes is limited to a maximum length of ~ 2 -3 μm. For TiO2, significantly thicker NT layers (up to some hundreds nanometers) can be grown in organic-based electrolytes (ethylene glycol, glycerol, etc.). Also the fluoride concentration and the H2O content play a crucial role, that is, the growth of thicker layers requires higher F -concentration 130,132 while limited H2O contents lead to highly ordered tubes. Long tubes are also grown by extended anodization time. A range of other approaches to form α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 nanotubes/nanofibers have been reported. Moreover, if combined to other techniques, in particular sol-gel methods and annealing, electrospinning can be used to fabricate a large number of inorganic nanomaterials with controlled morphologies and properties. TiO2 nanotubes are fabricated, for example, by using titanate as well as Ti-alkoxide (Ti(IV) iso-propoxide) precursors, Experimental conditions and parameters for the modification of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 may be significantly different. However, for both oxides two main strategies can be distinguished, namely methods that modify the intrinsic electronic properties of the oxide (charge mobility, donor density, bandgap, etc.), and methods that provide a co-catalytic effect for chemical reactions (e.g., deposition of co-catalyst to improve the kinetic of water oxidation). In addition, also other methods are reported that enable for instance visible light PEC-WS and/or generate suitable surface states for enhanced charge transport/transfer properties (e.g., surface decoration with plasmonic metals and quantum dots, or the formation of a heterojunction). Semiconductors for practical applications are often modified (doped) by introducing a secondary active species into the lattice. In particular, doping is carried out to (i) improve the material electronic properties, by adjusting a desired conductivity (typically, at low dopant concentrations), or to (ii) adjust (that is, in the case of TiO2, to narrow) its bandgap and extend the light absorption properties (usually at high dopant concentrations). The incorporation of dopants into TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 can be achieved through a range of different methods, e.g., hydrothermal procedures, thermal diffusion of ions from the substrate (FTO), drop casting, wet chemical treatments, thermal treatments under controlled atmospheres (containing the dopant), high-energy ion implantation. Since the report by Asahi on N-doped TiO2 and the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue and acetaldehyde under visible light, 145 there have been (and still there are) a large number of attempts to produce differently doped TiO2. This is typically achieved by introducing a non-metal element into its lattice, such as C, N, S, P, etc. However, more recently, some studies underlined the difficulty in definitively assigning a photoresponse under visible light to the influence of anion dopants. In some cases, the anion dopant may be confined to the surface and promote the formation of surface trap states that typically lead to detrimental charge recombination, which in turn limits the photoactivity of the material. should be anyway considered valid only if IPCE spectra that demonstrate this ability are provided. Even more, a most reliable estimation of photoresponse is provided if photocurrent spectra are associated to photocurrent transients measured under monochromatic λ. Finally, it is well established that, regardless of their non-metallic/metallic nature, some dopants such as F and Nb also inhibit the transition from anatase to rutile when annealing TiO2 at relatively high temperature (> 400 °C)rutile is detrimental in photoelectrochemical applications due to its poor electronic properties compared with anatase. This is commonly achieved by substitutional doping using dopants with oxidation state +4 to +6, such as Ti 4+ , Sn 4+ , Zr 4+ , Nb 5+ . In general, titanium is less effective compared to other +4 ions as it may form Tisurf sites that may also act as electron-hole recombination centers. However, it has also been recently reported that Ti 4+ surface species might effectively capture and store photogenerated holes and facilitate their transfer to the electrolyte for O2 evolution by water oxidation. 166 Zr 4+ doped into α-Fe2O3 single crystals led to one order of magnitude higher donor densities (in the order of 10 19 cm -3 ), and increased conductivity and electron mobility compared to undoped hematite. The recombination of photopromoted charge carriers in solid-state semiconductors typically takes place within μs, while the time for electrons and holes to react with acceptor and donor species, respectively, is in the ns-μs. The time scale for charge transfer to a donor or acceptor molecule depends very much on its specific nature, in particular, on its red-ox potential and chemical adsorption to the surface. It is, therefore, apparent that charge recombination and charge transfer to the electrolyte are competing processes. Heterojunctions are typically designed to combine the functionality of the two (or more) constituent phases, with the aim of addressing (at least one of) the primary requirements for an efficient PEC-WS using solar energy: visible light activity, chemical stability, appropriate band-edge characteristics, and potential for low-cost fabrication. Enhancement of charge separation can be achieved through various mechanisms that mainly depend on the electronic properties of the partner materials: (i) via the formation of an internal electric field at the heterojunction interface, in S-S type heterostructure. Upon favorable band bending, e -will tend to move from the higher to the lower lying CB, while h + will follow the opposite direction (i.e., from the lower to the higher lying VB). (ii) driven by the Schottky barrier that typically forms when interfacing a semiconductor with a metal (in S-M type heterojunction). This promotes electron flow from the material with the higher Fermi level to that with a lower Fermi level, until steady-state equilibrium is reached. In details, different configurations may apply to the S-S type heterojunction: both semiconductors are photoactive, that is, they generate e -/h + pairs (e.g., Fe2O3-WO3, TiO2-WO3, TiO2-BiVO4, Fe2O3-SrTiO3, TiO2-ZnO, etc.) A detailed description of heterojunction formation and working principles is out of the scope of this review and additional information can be found elsewhere. A widely investigated strategy towards higher PEC ability is the surface decoration of photoanodes with an oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC) and/or the decoration of cathodes with a hydrogen evolution catalyst (HER, such as MoS2 and WS2 As discussed in section 1.1, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics are sluggish: this reaction requires a four-electron oxidation of two water molecules (that is, the concerted transfer of four holes from the photoanode surface to the electrolyte) coupled to the removal of four protons to form a relatively weak oxygen-oxygen bond. If O2 evolution from water splitting represents only a minor challenge for TiO2-based photoelectrode, the poor match between the orbitals of hematite valence band (that partially exhibits Fe 3d character) and those of H2O (that is, O 2p statessee section 3.3 for discussion) significantly limits the efficiency of hematite in water photooxidation. To overcome the limitation of poor OER kinetics, various catalysts have been coupled to hematite photoanodes to assist hole transport from the hematite surface to the electrolyte. Typical OEC are noble metals such as IrO2 and RuO2. Though efficient and stable under working conditions, Ir and Ru based catalysts are however preferentially replaced with cheap and earth-abundant elements for a significant reduction of the costs. In Aside from doping and surface-decoration with a co-catalyst, a number of various other approaches have been developed to improve the photoelectrochemical response of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2. Some of these methods are here described, but a more complete overview can be found in 3.3.3 and in 3.4.3 for hematite and titania, respectively. In view of the "too" large optical bandgap of TiO2 for efficient sunlight absorption, the recent finding of "black" TiO2 by Chen and Mao 186 is often mentioned as a promising approach to (partially) address this issue. In particular, Chen and Mao reported that compared to conventional "white" TiO2, black TiO2 loaded with a Pt co-catalyst could reach a significantly higher open-circuit watersplitting activity, with the photoactivity enhancement ascribed to a thin amorphous TiO2 hydrogenated layer encapsulating the TiO2 anatase core. However, the findings of Mao and many of the follow-up studies seem to limit the outstanding properties of black TiO2 to its visible-light extended photoabsorption. Only more recently, a unique co-catalytic effect towards efficient water splitting could be observed for "black" TiO2 anatase nanoparticles and nanotubes treated with H2 under high pressure Therefore, "black" titania not only should be regarded as a tool to extend the absorption properties of TiO2 into the visible light region, but hydrogenation should also be considered a powerful tool for the engineering of suitable structural defects that can activate TiO2 for noble metal-free photocatalytic water splitting. Thermal reducing treatments have also been explored for hematite. However, the reduction of α-Fe2O3 crystals is typically reported to generate a Fe3O4 surface layer which typically acts as a recombination center. More recent studies suggested that a low amount of oxygen vacancies in α-Fe2O3 may be beneficial for solar water splitting, as long as no lattice distortions are formed and no incorporation of Fe3O4 inclusions occurs. Since the resonance frequency of plasmonic metals depends (primarily) on the nature of the metal and can be tuned from visible to near infra-red wavelengths by adjusting the nanostructure shape and size, LSPR can be envisaged as a strategy for the sensitization of semiconductors below their bandgap and/or to increase the range of solar light absorption. In particular, more recently, plasmonic-metal/semiconductor arrangements other than the more conventional "plasmonic-nanostructure on metal oxide-array" have been developed, e.g., by using a thin Ag mirror underneath a α-Fe2O3 film, the photocurrent of hematite could be significantly enhanced due to the metallic film promoting photon re-trapping schemes that increase resonant light trapping into the oxide film. Besides sensitization by plasmonic resonance, also quantum dots of semiconductors such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, PbSe, InAs, MoS2, etc. can be used as light harvesting functionalities and combined to a semiconductor photoelectrode for solar water splitting. Quantum dots (QDs) are semiconductor nanoparticles (with d ~ 5-10 nm) subjected to quantum-confinement effect, i.e., their dimension is smaller than the exciton Bohr radius. Above mentioned semiconductor QDs can absorb visible light (Eg ~ 2.2-2.4 eV) and generate photoexcited states (electron-hole pairs) that once separated can be used to enable redox processes with suitable acceptor and donor species. In our context, the electron acceptor is the conduction band of a (large) bandgap semiconductor (e.g., TiO2)clearly, for an efficient charge injection, a suitable alignment of the CB of the QD semiconductor with that of e.g. TiO2 is a prerequisite. Recently, carbon quantum dots (CDs) have been introduced and regarded as promising materials due to their lower toxicity and eco-friendly properties compared with traditional metal sulphide and selenide-based QDs. first, the electrons in the excited energetic level of CDs can be efficiently injected into the conduction band of e.g. TiO2 and α-Fe2O3, and also the holes left in the ground state have a redox potential to oxidize a suitable donor species in the environment. Thus, a co-catalytic effect towards the oxygen evolution reaction can be exploited. Also, the relatively weak intensity of fluorescence from "naked" carbon nanoparticles can be easily addressed by surface passivation with organic molecules or polymeric speciesin this case, a main concern remains however the photostability of the surface ligands. 216,217 In its fully oxidized form, Fe2O3 exists as crystalline as well as amorphous material. In particular, crystalline Fe2O3 may assume one of the four α, β, γ, ε possible forms. α-Fe2O3 (hematite) is the most thermodynamically stable polymorph of iron oxide under ambient conditions. It crystallizes in a rhombohedral lattice system, with lattice parameters a = 5.0356 Å and c = 13.7489 Å, and exhibits the same crystal structure as corundum (Al2O3). That is, O 2-atoms arrange in a hexagonally close-packed lattice along the [001] direction and Fe 3+ atoms occupy octahedral interstices in the (001) basal planes. In particular, the electronic nature of the bandgap in hematite is of great interest to understand its performance as a material for solar energy conversion, and Tauc analysis of the bandgap absorption onset has shown an indirect (phonon-assisted) bandgap nature of the material. SCE in a KCl-based electrolyte. α-Fe2O3 single crystals with a quantum efficiency for water splitting as high as ca. 40% at 370 nm at +0.5 V vs. SCE. Poor OER kinetics, which translates into a relatively high overpotential for the anodic reaction, is related to two different factors: One of the most commonly adopted strategies to overcome surface crystalline disorder is the decoration of α-Fe2O3 with thin surface passivation layers that reduce (h + trapping) surface defects and limit hole back injection (see below). More recent efforts have been devoted to optimizing the hematite-based electrode morphology by nanostructuring to address the intrinsic low absorption coefficient and short hole diffusion length of α-Fe2O3. However, as described in the next paragraphs, a combination of all mentioned strategies (i.e., doping, surface decoration and nanostructuring) is key to an ideal hematite photoanode that features an optimal material composition/structural configuration and therefore a maximized PEC ability. In the next sections we will primarily focus on one-dimensional hematite-based nanostructures for improved PEC performance, along with examples of the most promising and rationally designed architectures obtained by a tailored combination of above mentioned strategies. Table As briefly outlined in previous sections, α-Fe2O3 suffers from a very low electrical conductivity (~ 10 -14 ohm -1 ), low carrier density (10 18 cm 3 ), and limited electron mobility (10 - Concerning conductivity, empirical data well match the theoretical predictions of a conduction mechanism based on small polarons' hopping for both electron and hole transports (Fig. Doping hematite with a metallic element, either n-type doping (i.e., with ions with a net charge higher then 3+) or p-type doping (i.e., with elements in their I or II oxidation state), is a practical solution to these limitations. For α-Fe2O3, for instance, an excess amount of Ta has been reported to negatively affect nanorod growth along the [110] direction, with a consequent drop of the material overall PEC performance 246remarkably, the (110) plane of hematite with its surface termination dominated by Fe(III) ions features high conductivity. A significant lattice cell reduction, which in turn promotes larger probability for localized charge carrier (polaron) hopping and thus increases the conductivity, has been calculated for Mn-doped α-Fe2O3 (Fig. Also Pt and Ru have been considered as suitable TM dopants for α-Fe2O3. A most straightforward strategy for doping α-Fe2O3 nanostructures grown on FTO glass is the thermally-induced diffusion of Sn from the substrate, while annealing at temperatures above 750 °C. Among the first reports on "unintentional" Sn-doping of hematite layer on FTO is the study of A similar strategy was applied by From these early studies it is apparent that to achieve a desired functionality associated to Sn-doping, high temperature annealing is required; however, annealing FTO at 800 °C also leads to a significant change in the material stoichiometry, already after 20 min, and typically doubles the tin oxide resistivitya 10 min annealing was reported to be optimal to establish a trade-off between a desired increase in conductivity and the drawbacks related with treatment at high T (Fig. Therefore, different techniques including e.g. solution-based approaches, microwave hybrid annealing or chemical encapsulation have also been reported that overcome the requirement of a high temperature annealing. In situ doping of α-Fe2O3 nanotube layers was investigated by In particular, hematite layer with 5 at.% Si exhibited a 5-fold increase in the photocurrent, along with a negative shift of the onset potential compared to the undoped sample. This has been e.g., reported in the case of Sn 4+ and Be 2+ co-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods. Sn 4+ alone, despite providing an enhanced charge conductivity, (i) introduces shallow ntype defect states beneath the conduction band minimum of hematite, thus leading to an undesired band edge shift, and (ii) increases micro-strain in the α-Fe2O3 lattice, decreasing the Fe-O bond ordering. Nevertheless, the co-presence of Be 2+ ions attenuates these negative effects, by recovering α-Fe2O3 CBM and reducing lattice distortion in hematiteremarkably, the sequence in which the co-doping is carried out was also found to be very crucial. For the optimized Sn(4%)-Be(6%) containing α-Fe2O3 NR array, a maximum photocurrent density of 1.7 mA cm -2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE has been reported. A most effective approach to accelerate the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetic in α-Fe2O3 by increasing h + transfer rate to the electrolyte is the modification of hematite with an oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC). In particular, Co-Pi on 1D α-Fe2O3 nanostructures improves the overall photoanode current density and shifts the current onset potential to more cathodic values, due to the bridging effect of phosphate ions that facilitate hole injection from α-Fe2O3 to Co ions. As previously mentioned (section 3.2.4), strategies that can be used to improve the PEC performance of 1D hematite photoanodes also include the formation of heterostructures, sensitization by quantum dots and plasmonic metal nanoparticles, the use of graphene derivatives for enhancing the photogenerated charge dynamics, etc. Moreover, very often co-catalytic systems consisting of multiple components with different functions are coupled to enable a maximized PEC performance. In the context of C-based co-catalytic materials, a multi-heterojunction assembly consisting of α-Fe2O3 (core)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO, interlayer)/BiV1-xMoxO4 (shell) has been investigated by Hou et al. as photoanode material for PEC water splitting. A synergistic co-catalytic effect has been also described for carbon nanodots (CDots) and a Co3O4 layer, both deposited on α-Fe2O3. Clearly, for both Au-and Pt-supported heterostructures, a crucial contribution to such a high PEC performance is given by the high conductivity of the noble metals, although also their contribution towards an increased light absorption cannot be excluded. Similar to the more commonly reported black TiO2, also reduced α-Fe2O3 has been prepared by hydrogen plasma treatment of an α-Fe2O3 layer under ultra-pure hydrogen plasma. 276 "Black-like" hematite consists of mixed Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases, with the mixed layer Fe:O stoichiometry (due to the valence switching between Fe 3+ and Fe 2+ ) being crucial to increase the hematite donor density. This aspect, in combination with a reduced bandgap led to a considerable increase of photocurrent density and the most significant cathodic shift in photocurrent onset potentials (from 1.68 to 1.28 V vs. RHE upon hydrogen plasma treatment). Finally, an example of a sequential-multifold approach applied to α-Fe2O3 nanorods to simultaneously reduce electron-hole recombination in the bulk oxide, promote electron transport to the back-contact, while simultaneously enabling fast hole injection into the electrolyte has been provided by Cho et al (Fig. 3.5). 277 A flame-treatment in the presence of a Ti precursor can be used to produce Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods, with reduced bulk and surface charge recombination, without affecting the morphology of the hematite NRs. The addition of a dense-layer between the hematite array and the fluorine-doped SnO2 substrate effectively reduced the interfacial recombination by suppressing electron back-injection. Finally, the deposition of a FeOOH on the surface of Tidoped α-Fe2O3 nanorods passivated hematite surface states and provided a highly active interface for hole injection into the electrolyte. These sequential treatments led to an overall significant decrease of the photocurrent onset potential (ca. 400 mV). Titanium dioxide crystallizes in three major different polymorphs, namely anatase (A), brookite (B), and rutile (R). In particular, anatase and rutile TiO2 represent the crystalline forms more widely investigated for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications. Therefore, splitting of water into H2 and O2 is in principle thermodynamically possible (that is, spontaneous) without external bias on anatase only. However, due to the slow kinetics of the cathodic HER, also a TiO2 anatase-based photoanode is often assisted by an applied voltage that, inducing favorable band bending, increases charge separation. The first study on the use of TiO2 as electrode material in a photoelectrochemical arrangement dates back to 1968; 289 rutile (single crystal) reduced in H2 atmosphere was shown to evolve O2 from a phosphate buffered aqueous solution, under chopped UV illumination from a mercury arc lamp and 0-50 V vs. SCE applied bias. Only the anodic reaction was considered and tunneling of electrons from occupied levels at the surface directly into the empty conduction band was suggested to produce upward band bending near the surface, at the TiO2 electrode. However, only after the ground-breaking work of Fujishima and Honda in 1972 on the "complete" photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction (i.e., into H2 and O2), TiO2 has been regarded as the key semiconductor material for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications. This not only because of its intrinsic electronic and optical properties, but also because it is abundant, cheap, non-toxic and stable against (photo)corrosionall relevant aspects when targeting the production of e.g. large-scale devices for energy conversion. A large number of studies have been promoted to address one of the (still) biggest limitations of TiO2, that is, its relatively wide bandgap (as mentioned, 3.0-3.2 eV) that rules out any possible use of λ > 400 nm for light-promoted reactions. After various early findings As discussed in the previous section (3.2.1), doping of TiO2 is achieved by replacing the metal (titanium) or the nonmetal (oxygen) component with a nonmetal or a transition metal cation (i.e., substitutional doping), or by filling in interstitial lattice spaces (i.e., interstitial doping). Typical nonmetal dopants for TiO2 nanomaterials are B, C, N, F, P, S, Cl, and Br; In the following sections we will deal with one-dimensional TiO2-based nanostructures, that exhibit improved PEC-WS ability and that were obtained by a rational design of complementary strategies (doping, co-catalytic effects, and other (more recent) strategies) to tackle the specific (mentioned) limitations of the material -Table The beneficial characteristics of one-dimensional nanoarrays (e.g., enhanced charge carrier separation, improved e -transport, large carrier collection efficiency, etc.see Section 2.1) combined with the intrinsic electronic and optical properties of TiO2 (see above) contributed to the development of 1D-TiO2 based nanostructures for a large variety of (but not limited to) light-related applications: for photoelectrochemistry and photocatalysis, in Grätzel-type solar cells, for photovoltaic and electrochromic devices, etc. However, it has been observed that for nanoparticle and nanotube layers with the same thickness, although the effective surface area of the particles is higher than that of the nanotubes, the quantum efficiency for the nanotubes is higher (Fig. Moreover, the photoelectrochemical performance of one-dimensional nanostructures is largely influenced by the geometrical aspect of the arrays, that is, it varies with the thickness and/or diameter of the nanostructures; overall, the different carrier mobility (in different structures and morphologies) seems to dominate the efficiency. For TiO2 nanotube arrays, the work of Lynch et al. outlined how the morphology of nanotubes affects their photoelectrochemical properties also in comparison to other TiO2 nanostructures. Other morphological features were also shown to be crucial to enhance the PEC-WS ability of TiO2 NTs, such as the smoothness of the tube walls, 300 and the geometry of the tube top. Nevertheless, also TiO2-based nanomaterials with a rutile crystal structure are reported for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting. This is particularly relevant for single-crystalline TiO2 NRs grown on FTO glass by hydrothermal methods. Such nanorods exhibit a rutile crystal structure due to the significantly low lattice mismatch (~ 2%) 309 between tetragonal FTO (a = b = 0.4687 nm) 310 and rutile TiO2 (a = b = 0.4594 nm), 190 and typically grow vertically oriented from the FTO substrate, along the (110) crystal plane with a preferred (001) orientation. Although in view of single crystal materials, rutile crystals are much easier to synthesize, produce defined surfaces, and are much better characterized on an atomic level, also the fabrication of single crystal anatase TiO2 1D nanostructures has been recently developed for light-induced applications. In this case, the use of an alkaline reaction media and, particularly, the presence of a seed layer on the FTO substrate are essential prerequisites (see Section 3.1). Due to the higher electron mobility that characterizes anatase with respect to rutile TiO2, To consider TiO2 for solar PEC water splitting, rational design strategies are needed that address its intrinsic limitations, namely (i) a bandgap too large for an efficient use of solar light and (ii) a conduction band minimum (more appropriately, a Fermi level EF) only slightly negative on an electrochemical potential scale to the hydrogen evolution potential (see section 3.2.1). For instance, the highest PEC-WS current density reported for anodic TiO2 tubes is under most optimized conditions 0.25-0.3 mA cm -2 measured in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5 G illumination. In general, since the valence band minimum of TiO2 is much lower than the H2O/O2 redox potential, bandgap reduction should be approached by shifting the VBM upwards, i.e., without affecting the more "critical" position of the conduction band. This is typically accomplished by introducing a high density of states (or a band) above the original valence band of TiO2, that is, by incorporating into the TiO2 lattice anions with p orbitals that are more energetic than those of O 2p. To this regard, most appropriate dopants are substitutional nitrogen and carbon that, beside introducing suitable acceptor levels, also exhibit ionic radii similar to those of oxygen; hence, their incorporation causes minimal distortion in the oxide lattice. For instance, nitrogen-doping and visible light driven PEC water splitting have been reported upon annealing single-crystal rutile TiO2 NWs in NH3 atmosphere under optimized conditions (i.e., annealing temperature, time, and NH3 pressure). )) has been proposed as key for spectrum extension and visible light photoactivity. Visible light photocurrent response and IPCE spectra of TiO2 anodic layers modified with urea, In the case of carbon-doped TiO2, reported findings are to a certain extent ambiguous and particularly limited amount of IPCE data on C-doped TiO2 questions the actual role of Cdoping on the visible light PEC-WS ability of these materials. Finally, although theoretical calculations do not consider F as a suitable substitutional dopant for TiO2 because it is in principle a donor at O sites, In the case of self-organized NTs, a most unique approach to X-doped TiO2 is offered by the possibility of anodizing Ti-X alloys (with e.g., X = Ru, Ta, W, Nb, Cr). In this case, simple tailoring of the anodization parameters is sufficient to fabricate highly aligned and variously doped TiO2-based nanotube arrays. In optimally doped and annealed TiO2 tubes, both Nb and Ta act as electron donors and increase the electron conductivity of the NT layers. This was observed for nanotube arrays doped with small amounts (up to 0.1 at.%) of Nb For instance, Xu et al. reported on the preparation and PEC activity of Sn-doped singlecrystalline rutile TiO2 nanowires. For low Sn doping levels (up to Sn/TiO2 ~ 12%), a photocurrent increased under simulated sunlight illumination was observed compared to pure TiO2 NWs. In particular, photocurrent spectra revealed that this effect is mainly ascribed to the enhancement of photoactivity in the UV region, while electrochemical impedance measurement confirmed the higher density of ntype charge carriers within the NWs produced by Sn doping. Interestingly for some TM-doped TiO2 combinations, beside the effect on charge carrier transport, also a light edge absorption shift from UV to visible has been reported and, correspondingly, a visible-light activated photocurrent has been observed. For instance, TiO2 NRs doped with Fe, Mn or Co and synthesized through a hydrothermal method (Fig. For single crystal rutile TiO2 nanowires doped with V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Nb, Mo, and Rh by means of a molten-salt synthesis, a dual effect due to TM doping was reported: 296 not only the doped layers exhibited optical absorption extended to the visible light (though not supported by the corresponding photocurrent spectra), but most interestingly a decrease in the overpotential for the OER was measured with respect to pure TiO2 layers (Fig. Crystal defect engineering can be instead achieved by reduction of TiO2 to black titania, typically carried out by thermal treatment in a H2-containing atmospheremore recently also alternative methods such as high-energy proton implantation have been investigated. As anticipated in 3.2.4, beside the extension of the absorption properties of TiO2 to visible light wavelengths, hydrogenation introduces voids and defects in the material (mainly in the outer shell) that exhibit a co-catalytic effect towards a stable and noble metal-free photocatalytic H2 generation. Decoration of TiO2 with metals, semiconductors, and polymers is frequently used to influence the electronic and physicochemical properties of the oxide and achieve a desired increment in PEC activity. In particular, metal nanoparticles can introduce local variations in the band bending of the adjacent semiconductor (i.e., pinning of the Fermi level of an energy that depends on the work function of the metal), inducing an effect similar to that observed by applying an external bias 336remarkably, a great advantage is that such a Fermi level pinning is obtained under "open circuit conditions", and thus this approach is often preferred for open circuit photocatalytic applications. As for hematite, also the surface properties of TiO2 can significantly limit the overall PEC reaction due to a limited kinetics of water oxidation as well as the charge recombination loss at the electrode surface. Photogenerated holes can be trapped by surface states and recombine with electrons before they can diffuse to the TiO2/electrolyte interface for interfacial charge transfer and water oxidation. A combination of photoelectrochemical and photovoltage measurements and impedance spectroscopy demonstrated that the presence of a thin TiO2 (anatase or rutile) shell passivates the surface trap states and significantly increases the PEC activity, compared to the naked TiO2 arrays, by promoting interfacial charge transfer at the TiO2/electrolyte interface as well as a better carrier utilization (Fig. Overall, this mechanism is particularly effective as the photogenerated holes remain on the surface of the photoanode, overcoming the relatively short exciton diffusion length of h + , while electrons percolate through the one-dimensional array to the back-contact. A range of different methods is available for the decoration of TiO2 surfaces with plasmonic metals: (i) photoreduction of the precursor (e.g., HAuCl4 to Au NPs), 338 (ii) anodization of noble metal alloys of Ti such as Au-Ti (or Pt-Ti); in contrast to previous examples on Ti-X alloy (with X being a non-noble metalsection 3.4.2), this approach leads to noble metal nanoparticle-decorated tubes as the noble metals are not oxidized during the anodization process (Fig. Visible light sensitization due to charge (electron) injection into TiO2 is instead achieved by decoration with semiconductive quantum dots (CdS, CdSe, ZnS, etc.see Fig. Sun et al. reported that the synergy between the unique morphology of nanotubes and the visible light sensitization promoted by surface deposited QDs led to a 35-time higher photocurrent with respect to that of plain TiO2 nanotubes. The CBD method is based on repetitive cycles of immersion/rinsing of the oxide array into the quantum dot precursor solution. QDs form according to a deposition/aggregation process and uniformly cover the surface of the TiO2 nanoarrays (Fig. The adsorption of pre-synthesized QDs certainly offers a higher control on particle aggregation; in particular, the solvent used to disperse the QDs plays a critical role as the establishment of a favorable interaction of the QDs with both the solvent and oxide surface leads to a high degree of coverage with a low degree of aggregation. 349 However, the adsorption of pre-synthesized colloidal QDs often leads to a low surface coverage (i.e., ∼14%) 349 that limits the efficiency of the QDs/TiO2 assemblies compared to the CBD method. 347 Also, a direct contact between the oxide matrix and the sensitizers is beneficial for a higher PEC efficiencythat is, QDs deposition by direct adsorption is preferred over the linker-assisted method. In line with this, a maximized photoelectrochemical performance was therefore observed for CdS/CdSe co-sensitized TiO2 nanorod arrays that could exploit the advantages of both single cadmium-based materials. One of the most followed up schemes is the combination of TiO2 with a p-type material (e.g., Cu2O or NiO) to establishing useful p-n heterojunctions. This configuration enables solar light water splitting by combining a narrow bandgap semiconductor (p-type) to a larger bandgap semiconductor (n-type TiO2) and utilizes both electron and hole majority charge carriers (from the n-type and p-type counterparts, respectively) for the PEC-WS reaction. More complex systems such as hierarchical CuInS2/TiO2 356,357 and TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2 358 core-shell structures and "umbrella" hybrid (Bi2S3/rGO)5/TiO2 NR heterostructure 359 have been recently introduced (Fig. Common to all these hierarchical assemblies is a beneficial band misalignment that enables charge carrier separation, with the preferential collection of electrons in TiO2 (and, thus, to the back-contact) through a cascade down-hill process, with holes accumulating in the shell material (i.e., in the valence band with the least positive redox potentialsee Fig. This clearly suppresses charge carrier recombination and overall contributes to the enhancement of the multi-junction electrode PEC performance. We have already pointed out that the relative misalignment of Fe2O3 and TiO2 band edges can be exploited to design a suitable heterojunction for enhanced charge carrier separation, that is, holes generated in TiO2 will be transferred to Fe2O3 with electrons preferentially accumulating in TiO2 at the same time. Typically, iron titanates are formed via solid-state reaction between TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. Due to the similar ion sizes of Ti and Fe, thermal annealing of the two oxides generates the compositethe various stoichiometric forms of titanates are given by the different valence configurations of the metal ions (such as Fe 2+ Ti 4+ , Fe 3+ Ti 3+ , etc.). Among all the possible titanates, Fe2TiO5 has been recently the most widely explored Fe-Ti combination compound as photoanode material. Key to efficient Fe2TiO5 for PEC-WS is a layer thickness of only a few nm and a use of Fe2TiO5 in combination with TiO2 or α-Fe2O3. In fact, early studies on iron titanates based photoanodes for direct solar water oxidation, 367 showed that for a "pure" Fe2TiO5 layer (not supported on TiO2 or α-Fe2O3) an applied bias higher than that required for α-Fe2O3 is needed to promote efficient PEC water splitting, and that composites such as FeTiO3 and Fe2TiO4 suffer from significant photocorrosion. Typically two different approaches are reported that instead lead to improved PEC efficiency in the presence of Fe2TiO5: (i) a use of nanostructured TiO2 array as core material, where a thin α-Fe2O3 overlayer is deposited, or (ii) nanotubes/nanorods of α-Fe2O3 on FTO as supporting scaffold modified with a thin TiO2 layer. In both cases, thermal annealing at 500-700 °C in air converts the thin overlayers into Fe2TiO5. Although, in principle, the CBs of TiO2 and Fe2TiO5 are not suitably located to promote e - transfer from Fe2TiO5 into TiO2see Fig. To overcome this issue and further promote carrier utilization, Liu et al. reported on the use of a Co-based layer as a (more) efficient co-catalyst for the anodic reaction. 363 A current density of 4.1 mA cm -2 at 1.23 V versus RHE was measured along with a lower photocurrent onset potential (i.e., 0.18 V versus RHE) with respect to pure TiO2. The authors proposed that the natural band bending at the interface between the three oxides (Fe2TiO5, TiO2, and CoOx) enables holes produced in Fe2TiO5 to accumulate in CoOx, while electrons from Fe2TiO5 are transferred to TiO2 (Fig. For the second core/shell configuration, that is, Fe2TiO5(shell)/Fe2O3(core) composite, enhanced PEC efficiency is mainly attributed to the beneficial role of Fe2TiO5 in passivating hematite surface trapping states. This clearly reduces surface e -/h + recombination. Moreover, due to the favorable band offset between the two oxides, e -photopromoted in Fe2TiO5 are injected into the CB of α-Fe2O3 that supplies a direct transport path to the back-contact; similarly to the previous case, holes migrate to the Fe2TiO5/electrolyte interface and the increased charge separation results in an overall increase of the photoefficiency. Therefore, the pseudobrookite/hematite heterojunction generates a large amount of longlived surface holes and, at the same time, acts as a block layer for the photogenerated electrons transferred to α-Fe2O3. By preventing e -back injection (and therefore e -/h + recombination), Fe2TiO5 leads to the overall increase of the photoanode efficiency. Two possible approaches have been proposed to grow a Fe2TiO5 ultra-thin film over vertically aligned hematite α-Fe2O3 nanorods. In the first case, a FeOOH photoanode is immersed in a HF solution containing the Ti precursor; the second procedure is based on the evaporation of TiCl4 on the surface of FeOOH. In both cases, adequate thermal treatment produced a Fe2TiO5 film. 366 Fe2TiO5 was identified by synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 4 .4(a,b)) and TEM mapping (Fig. As for the Fe2TiO5/TiO2 composite system, also Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 exhibits enhanced solar water oxidation activity, also supported by IPCE spectra; particularly, the HF-assisted synthesis of Fe2TiO5/Fe2O3 resulted in a photocurrent density of 2.0 mA cm -2 at 1.23 V versus RHE that was significantly higher than that measured with pure hematite nanorods, and that could be further improved by coupling with Co-Pi catalyst (Fig. The beneficial effect of an oxygen evolution co-catalyst on the overall PEC activity of Fe2TiO5/TiO2 assemblies has been also pointed out with the use of less "conventional" materials (other than Co-Pi 366 and Co-based 369 co-catalysts). Passivation of surface states, reduction of electron-hole recombination, and, therefore, a photocurrent improvement have been reported by decorating Fe2TiO5/TiO2 photoanodes with an SnOx 370,371 (Fig. Decades of experimental research on TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 have pointed out that the two semiconductor metal oxides are promising candidates as anodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The reason for this is that, compared to other efficient materials such as CdS, CdSe, GaAs, etc., TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 are chemically stable against (photo)corrosion in a wide range of (electro)chemical conditions. Additionally, they are cheap, abundant and nontoxic. In spite of these positive features, still some specific limitations hamper the development of highly efficient PEC devices based on the use of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 that could meet the requirements for high-scale applications. A main issue is certainly represented by the limited charge transfer kinetics intrinsic to both oxides. In this review, we have shown that key to overcoming such a limitation in PEC arrangement is the use of one-dimensional oxide nanostructures (i.e., nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires). To this regard, we provided a range of available techniques and illustrate their possibilities and potentials. Particularly, we focused on the most promising routes that, in our view, are electrochemical anodization and hydrothermal methods: by adjusting simple experimental parameters, they offer a fine morphology control over the fabricated materials. In this context, we outlined how the resulting 1D geometry of the oxides is crucial towards a photoelectrochemical enhancement. Besides, these structures represent suitable platforms for further modifications, namely to induce doping effects or by the deposition of co-catalysts, light absorbers, charge transfer mediators, etc. In addition to the (surface or bulk) modification of these two oxides, we illustrated Selected examples of 1D α-Fe2O3 based photoanodes and their PEC performance. under irradiation of a common Xe lamp combined with a monochromator. A most reliable estimation of the semiconductor PEC efficiency can then be obtained simply by integrating the IPCE spectrum (measured at the cell bias voltage of maximum efficiency) over the AM 1.5 global solar spectrum (9): Tilley et al. demonstrated that IrO2 nanoparticles (ca. 2 nm diameter) on hematite nanostructure photoanodes lead to a 200 mV cathodic shift in the onset potential and increase the photocurrent and 4.56 mA cm -2 at 1.23 V and 1.6 V vs. RHE, respectively) was attributed to the