The puzzling situation where some thermodynamic quantities require a single-gap description, while others need a more complex gap scenario, is discussed. Our approach reveals that in some cases, the conclusions based on measurements of only one thermodynamic quantity may lead to conflicting results. As an example, temperature evolutions of the electronic specific heat [Ce(T )] and the thermodynamic critical field [Bc(T )] of BeAu superconductor were reconsidered within the framework of the single-gap and the two-gap scenarios. The analysis shows that the single-gap approach describes the temperature dependencies of Ce(T ) and the superfluid density ρs(T ) satisfactorily. However it fails in the case of Bc(T ). The self-consistent two-gap model, in contrast, is able to describe all of the mentioned thermodynamic quantities by using a similar set of parameters. Our results reveal that a proper description of the thermodynamic quantities, related to the superconducting pairing mechanism, requires the use of similar model containing the same set of parameters. Measurements of temperature dependencies of thermodynamic quantities such as, the superfluid density (ρ s ), the electronic specific heat (C e ), and the thermodynamic critical field (B c ) are among the primary ways used to test pairing mechanisms of new superconductors. The aim of the present paper is to resolve the above contradiction in interpreting the C e (T ) and B c (T ) data of BeAu. In order to solve this dilemma both, C e (T ) and B c (T ), were simultaneously analysed by means of the single-gap and the two-gap models. Our result confirms that the two-gap approach allows to describe both thermodynamic quantities with the same set of parameters. Moreover, the fact that C e (T ) could be interpreted within the single gap scenario becomes an interesting feature of BeAu superconductor. In BeAu, two contributions to the electronic specific heat, by being summed together, result in a behavior, which is indistinguishable from expectations of the single-gap scenario. The simulations show that this is also the case for the temperature evolution of the superfluid density. Our results imply, therefore, that in some particular cases, as e.g., in the case of BeAu studied here, measurement of one single thermodynamic quantity may not be enough in order to speculate about the mechanism of superconductivity. The validity of the model used to describe the experimental data for one particular thermodynamic quantity needs to be cross checked by analysing the other quantities as well. The correct interpretation requires that various thermodynamic quantities need to be satisfactorily described within framework of the similar model with the same set of the parameters. The paper is organized as follows: Section I describes the single-gap and two-gap approaches in describing temperature dependencies of the specific heat, the supefluid density, and the thermodynamic critical field. The singlegap α-model (Section I A) and the self-consistent twogap model (Section I B) are considered. Section II details the analysis of C e (T ) and B c (T ) of BeAu within the single-gap and two-gap scenarios. In Section III, the specific heat and the superfluid density data, simulated by means of two-gap model, are compared with the one-gap model fits. Conclusions follow in Section IV. This section describes the single-gap and the two-gap models, which are traditionally used to analyze temperature dependencies of the electronic specific heat C e , the superfluid density ρ s , and the thermodynamic critical field B c . The single-gap approach is based on the model first introduced by Padamsee et al., and Here is the Fermi function and γ n is the normal state electronic specific heat coefficient (Sommerfeld constant). F n and F s are the normal and superconducting state free energies given by: 34,49 and Note that the Eqs. 1, 3, 4, and 5 are expressed in cgs units. Normalized BCS energy gap δBCS(T /Tc) = ∆BCS(T /Tc)/∆BCS(0), obtained by solving the self-consistent single-gap equation Eq. 8 (red curve) and the approximated gap calculated by means of Eq. 9 (blue curve). The inset shows the difference δBCS(T /Tc) -δappr(T /Tc) between the BCS and the approximated solutions. Originally, the α-model was adapted from the singleband Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity in order to explain deviations of the temperature behavior of the electronic specific heat and the thermodynamic critical field from the weak-coupled BCS prediction. [∆(0) is the zero-temperature value of the gap] is the same as for BCS theory. is further introduced in order to account for deviation from the weak-coupled BCS prediction α BCS 1.764. The BCS temperature dependence of the gap is obtained by solving the self-consistent gap equation: 3,34 Here ω D is the Debye frequency, N is the normal-state electronic density of states at the Fermi level, and V is the electron-phonon interacting potential. The temperature dependence of the normalized BCS gap is normally approximated by: 8,51,52 which results in less than 1% deviation from the exact solution of Eq. 8. Figure B. Two-gap approach 1. Ce, ρs, and Bc within the two-gap model Following Refs.7-9,11-14,40,43,49, the temperature evolutions of C e , ρ s , and B c within the two-gap approach could be obtained as: and Here 1 and 2 are gap indices. w Ce , w ρ , and w Fs are the contributions of the first gap to the resulting electronic specific heat, the superfluid density and the superconducting free energy, respectively. γ n = γ n1 + γ n2 . Note that in accordance with Eqs. 10 and 12 The analytical equation for w ρ was calculated by Kogan et al., The self-consistent two-gap model was introduced shortly after formulation of the BCS theory by Suhl et al., Following Refs. 42-44,49,56,57, within the two-gap approach, the coupled s-wave gap equations are described as: Here N i is the partial density of states for i-th band at the Fermi level (N 1 + N 2 = 1); V ii and V ij =i are the intraband and the interband interaction potentials, respectively. For simplicity, one normally assumes that the Debye frequency ω D is the same for both bands (ω D1 = ω D2 = ω D ). S e l f -c o n s i s t e n t t w o -g a p m o d e l ( c ) In this section, the comparison of the single-gap and the two-gap approaches in analyzing the temperature evolution of the specific heat C e (T ) and the thermodynamic critical field B c (T ) of BeAu superconductor is discussed. The C e (T ) and B c (T ) data sets were taken from Refs. 46 and 49, respectively. Note that currently three sets of C e (T ) data and one set of B c (T ) data for BeAu are available in the literature. Figure A. Ce(T ) and Bc(T ) of BeAu: single-gap scenario Within the single-gap scenario, Eqs. 1 and 3 were fitted to the C e (T ) and B c (T ) data sets, respectively. The temperature dependence of the superconducting energy gap was assumed to be the same and was described within the α-model (Section I A 2) by using The It is worth to note here that the single gap α-model could be well fit to the specific heat data itself. The fit yields α = 1.734, which is only slightly smaller than the weak-coupled BCS value α BCS = 1.764. This agrees with the previous observations suggesting the presence of a single isotropic energy gap in BeAu. The two-gap analysis followed the procedure described in Section I B. Eqs. 10 and 12 were fit simultaneously to the C e (T ) and B c (T ) experimental data. The individual components of these equations were described by Eqs. 1, 4, and 5, respectively. The temperature dependencies of the big [∆ 1 (T )] and the small [∆ 2 (T )] superconducting energy gaps were obtained by solving the system of coupled nonlinear equations (Eq. 14). At a first glance, the number of the fit parameters is quite high, so the fitting procedure might be unstable and good fits are expected to be found for various combinations of the parameters. The number of the fit parameters are: 7 for Eq. 14 (N 1 , N 2 , V 11 , V 12 , V 21 , V 22 , and ω D ), 4 for Eq. 10 (T c , γ n , γ n1 , and γ n2 ), and 5 for Eq. 3 [T c , B c (0), γ n , γ n1 , and γ n2 ]. This results in total of 16 fit parameters. In reality, the number of the fit parameters could be reduced substantially, since some of them are related to the each other, while the others could be determined in an independent set of experiments. Indeed: (i) Within the free electron approximation, the product γ ni /γ n (i = 1, 2) from Eqs. 10 and 12 is equal to the corresponding partial density of states N i in Eq. 14, so that γ n1 /γ n ≡ N 1 and γ n2 /γ n ≡ N 2 . (ii) The value of the Debye frequency could be independently derived from the specific heat measurements. Amon et al. Temperature evolution of the big (∆1, red line) and the small (∆2, blue line) superconducting energy gaps, obtained within the framework of the self-consistent two-gap model. The dashed lines are the weak-coupled BCS prediction. The analysis of C e (T ) and B c (T ) data within the twogap scenario was performed in a few steps. First, by solving two nonlinear coupled gap equations (Eq. 14), the temperature dependencies of the big and small superconducing gaps were calculated. Note that the combination of the coupling strengths and the Debye frequency determines uniquely the value of T c . By substituting ∆ 1 (T ) and ∆ 2 (T ) into Eqs. 10 and 12 the corresponding C e (T ) and B c (T ) were derived. The difference between the experimental data and the theory was minimized by adjusting T Ce c , T Bc c , B c (0), and w Ce ≡ w Fs . In the next step, the coupling strengths parameters were readjusted and the calculations of C e (T ) and B c (T ) were repeated. After about 10 to 15 such iterations the fit converges. The results of the self-consistent two-gap analysis are presented in Figs. The obvious question arises: why the previous analysis of the specific heat data of BeAu superconductor was found to be consistent with the presence of a single isotropic energy gap. The temperature evolution of the electronic specific heat [C e (T )] and the thermodynamic critical field [B c (T )] of BeAu superconductor were analyzed by means of the single-gap α-model and the self-consistent two-gap model. Our results confirm that the two-gap approach allows to describe both thermodynamic quantities with the same set of parameters. The fact that C e (T ) could be interpreted within the single-gap scenario is unique for BeAu superconductor. In this particular case, the big and the small gap contributions to the electronic specific heat result in behavior which is hardly distinguishable from the single-gap approach. A similar situation was obtined for the temperature dependence of the superfluid density ρ s (T )/ρ s (0). Our results imply that in some particular cases, as for example, is the case for BeAu studied here, the measurement of one single thermodynamic quantity may not be enough in order to establish the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. A successful gap analysis requires that various thermodynamic quantities be described using the same set of parameters.