We show that the resistivity in each phase of the High-Tc cuprates is a special case of a general expression derived from the Kubo formula. We obtain, in particular, the T-linear behavior in the strange metal (SM) and upper pseudogap (PG) phases, the pure T 2 , Fermi liquid (FL) behavior observed in the strongly overdoped regime as well as the T 1+δ behavior that interpolates both in the crossover. We calculate the coefficients: a) of T in the linear regime and show that it is proportional to the PG temperature T * (x); b) of the T 2 -term in the FL regime, without adjusting any parameter; and c) of the T 1.6 term in the crossover regime, all in excellent agreement with the experimental data. From our model, we are able to infer that the resistivity in cuprates is caused by the scattering of holes by excitons, which naturally form as holes are doped into the electron background. Introduction High-T c superconductivity in the cuprates Among the fundamental unanswered questions related to the cuprates, there are some that concern the normal state of these materials. A particularly intriguing one is: how to explain the perfectly linear dependence of the resistivity with the temperature Nevertheless, as discussed in Ref. The QCP supposedly responsible for this universal quantum critical behavior has been associated to a metalinsulator quantum phase transition shown to exist at a doping value x p located inside the SC dome of these materials under the effect of strong magnetic fields that would destroy the SC state In a recent publication, we proposed a model which provides a general and accurate description of the high-Tc superconductivity in cuprates. This model allowed for the obtainment of analytical expressions for the SC and PG temperatures: T c (x) and T * (x), showing excellent agreement with the experimental data for different compounds The model we propose for understanding the cuprates In the present study, we shall insert the current correlators derived from our model into the Kubo formula at a finite temperature, in order to obtain a general expression for the resistivity, which reduces to the ones occurring in the different normal states of the High-Tc cuprates. The Model and Resistivity We take the model derived in Ref. where ψ aσ represents a hole on the oxygen sublattices a = A, B with spin σ =↑, ↓. g S is the SC pairing coupling parameter while g P is the coupling responsible for the PG phase transition. In the above expression ǫ(k) is the usual tight-binding kinetic energy of the free-holes on a square lattice. Notice that the PG field χ acts as a scattering potential for the holes, being therefore responsible for their resistivity, whereas the SC field Φ is related to the formation of Cooper pairs. Integrating on the fermionic (holes) degrees of freedom, we arrive at an effective thermodynamic potential that depends on the SC and PG order parameters, respectively, ∆ = Φ and M = χ , as well as on the chemical potential μ: Ω(∆, M, μ, T ) (See Supplemental Material). Using that potential, we could explain the SC phase diagram of different cuprate compounds, obtaining in particular, the left and right limiting points of the SC dome, namely x - SC and x + SC ≡ x0 The average electric current and its correlation functions are, then, obtained from the expressions: We, then use the Kubo formula at a finite temperature or where V = da 2 is the volume of the primitive unit cell, per CuO 2 plane, h/e 2 ≈ 25812.807Ω is the resistance quantum, d is the distance between planes, a is the lattice parameter and v is the characteristic velocity of the holes, such that ( v/a) ≈ 2.9 × 10 -2 eV for d in Å -units, and G(K 1 , K 2 ), the scaling function of the critical variables K 1 = M kB T and K 2 = μ kB T , given by This general form of the resistivity holds in all phases of the phase diagram of cuprates, except the SC one. The peculiar form of the resistivity in each of the different phases will be determined by the specific form of the function G (K 1 , K 2 ) in each phase. The Cuprates Phase Diagram As discussed thoroughly in We can classify the normal state phase diagram in terms of the variables K 1 and K 2 . Resistivity in the PG Phase In this phase, both K 1 and K 2 are different from zero. We subdivide the Cuprates. The solid lines are our theoretical expressions of T * (x) and Tc(x) derived in Ref. PG phase in three regions according to the values of x, namely: a) strongly underdoped, for x < x - SC ; b) underdoped, for x - SC < x x 0 , where x 0 is the optimal doping; c) overdoped, for x 0 x < x + SC . Resistivity in the PG Phase: High Temperature Regime In the three subregions, we first consider the temperature range close to T * (x), where M → 0, implying K 1 → 0. Then (see Supplemental Material) Inserting this in (3) we obtain for the resistivity Resistivity in the PG Phase: Low Temperature Regime In all subregions, except for the strongly underdoped region, the low-temperature regime is dominated by the SC phase, where the resistivity vanishes. In order to explore the resistivity in the strongly underdoped re-gion, we take the low-temperature limit of ( which makes that the resistivity in this limit to be given by such that it presents an insulating behavior with an activation temperature T 0 given by μ(T,x)-M(T,x) kB . Resistivity on the SM Phase In the SM phase, M = 0 and K 1 = 0 for all temperatures, so that the function G is given by The SM phase corresponds to the quantum critical region associated to the QCP located at the right end of the Sc dome, namely x + SC ≡ x0 . It follows that, in that region, all quantities with dimension of energy should scale with T where D is a constant where C = cosh 2 D 2 . This immediately yields the celebrated linear resistivity which ranges from the upper PG phase all the way into the SM phase. For regions of the SM phase where Resistivity in the FL Phase In the FL phase, which corresponds to the strongly overdoped regime, x > x + SC ≡ x0 , at low temperatures, both K 1 and K 2 are equal to zero. Consequently (see Supplemental Material) and then, in this phase, the resistivity is given by the quadratic behavior, typical of a Fermi liquid: SC ): for low enough temperatures, the resistivity has the quadratic behavior typical of the FL phase with the coefficient given by Eq. ( with the coefficient B given by Crossover The transition between FL and the SM phases is not really, a phase transition, but rather a crossover with an intermediate power-law behavior ρ ∼ T 1+δ , 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1, that interpolates the resistivity behaviors, namely, linear and quadratic, of the SM and FL phases which is obtained from the previous one ( for δ ∈ [0, 1]. Notice that the values δ = 0 and δ = 1, respectively, correspond to the SM and FL phases, which are, thereby interpolated by the above expression. Observe, also, that the specific function interpolating the resistivity expressions in the SM and FL phases could be continuously deformed, but keeping its form at the limiting values of δ similarly to what happens to the members of the same homotopy class. The crossover behavior oc-curs in the region of the phase diagram located between T ′ * (x) and the temperature T cross ≡ C 0 T ′ * (x). We have successfully applied the above theoretical framework in the description of the resistivity of cuprates. Our results accurately explain the experimental data of several compounds, namely: LSCO In order to determine the value of C we must consider the ratio A 1 (x)/ [B(d)T * (x)], for different values of the doping parameter x. As it turns out, as we increase x thus moving towards the quantum critical point, this stabilizes at a constant value C 0 . For LSCO, this occurs for 0.10 x. The constant behavior of C implies that in the quantum critical region, the x-dependence of the resistivity slope comes through the dependence of T * on x. In other words, A 1 scales with the PG temperature T * (x). A similar behavior of A 1 has been reported in the , Bi2201 literature in Ref. Two important results obtained in this work are the theoretical calculation of the coefficients of the T 2 and T 1.6 expressions for the resistivity, respectively in the FL phase, using Eq. ( Indeed, in the FL case if we insert the value d = 6.61 Å for LSCO, taken from Ref. The linear coefficient A 1 is directly proportional to B, namely, A 1 = BCT * , we can also compare how the values of B obtained through the coefficient A 1 , with the theoretical expression of Eq. ( The LSCO resistivity in the crossover regime, conversely, has been experimentally shown to follow the power-law B C T 1.6 . Within our theoretical approach, the crossover resistivity coefficient, B C , according to Using the value of C 0 given in Table Conclusions Starting from the model introduced in Ref. Based on this model, we may conclude that the main cause of resistivity in cuprates is the scattering of the charged holes by excitons, which are associated with a scalar field. The presence of excitons should be expected in a system containing electrons and holes. Being confined to the CuO 2 planes, they should present similar properties as, for instance, the exciton states observed in transition metal dichalcogenides by photoluminescence techniques, namely, high binding energy and very short lifetimes Our expression for the resistivity in cuprates involves a two-variable scaling function. The SM phase, where the linear resistivity is seen, appears as a quantum critical region associated to a quantum critical point located at the right extremity of the SC dome, precisely where the T c , T * , T ′ * and T cross lines meet. Quantum criticality results from the loss of the energy scale M , related to the exciton scattering as M goes to zero when we approach the transition line T * (x) separating the PG from the SM phase. The scaling of every energy with T in the quantum critical phase, makes the resistivity to become linear. The possibility of expressing the resistivity in the SM Ref. phase in terms of a scaling function was already pointed out in the literature The scaling allows us to predict that the slope of the linear resistivity is proportional to the PG temperature T * (x), where the excitons condense. We, thereby, can infer the connection between the resistivity and the scattering by excitons. A natural extension of this work would be to consider the inclusion of a third scaling variable, representing the effect of external agents such as pressure or magnetic field on the resistivity of cuprates. That would add a third dimension to the phase diagram of Fig. We use here the same Hamiltonian introduced in in the above expression, R denotes the sites of a square sublattice (A) and d i , i = 1, ..., 4, its nearest neighbors, belonging to square sublattice (B). ψ † A,Bσ is the creation operator of a hole, or, equivalently, the destruction operator of an electron, with spin σ =↑, ↓ in sublattice A, B. Such sublattices are formed as follows: each oxygen ion possesses a p x and a p y orbital but only one of them, either p x or p y , alternatively, hybridizes with the copper 3d orbitals . Two inequivalent oxygen sublattices are thereby formed, one having hybridized p x orbitals and the other having p y . t is the usual hopping parameter, g S is the coupling parameter of the hole-attractive interaction term and g P , coupling parameter of the hole-repulsive interaction term . Through a Hubbard Stratonovitch (HS) transformation we can express this Hamiltonian in terms of the scalar HS fields Φ(k) and χ(k), which upon integration, generate the quartic attractive and repulsive terms, respectively responsible for the formation of Cooper pair and exciton bound states. The ground-state expectation values of the HS fields, namely, ∆ = Φ and M = χ are the order parameters for the superconducting (SC) and pseudogap (PG) phases which is implemented by integrating over the Lagrange multiplier field λ, whose vacuum expectation value is the chemical potential: λ = μ. Here d (x) is a function of the stoichiometric doping parameter, which turns out to be d (x) = 2 (x 0x) /x 0 and N is the number of CuO 2 planes intercepting the material primitive unit cell. as with the matrix H -μN By integrating on the fermion fields, we obtain the grand-partition functional as well as the grand-canonical potential Ω[∆, M, μ]: Minimizing the grand-canonical potential Ω, respectively, with respect to ∆, M, μ, we obtain the equations that determine the behavior of ∆, M and μ in the thermodynamic equilibrium state with the critical coupling g c = 0.30 eV and F being, close to the critical curves, given by In the superconducting phase, ∆ = 0 and M = 0 so that Eq. ( where γ being a parameter to be determined for each compound. T max = Λ 2 ln 2 η (N g S ), Λ = 0.018 eV is an energy cut-off and η (N g S ) = 1 -gc N gS . Notice that for LSCO we use a symmetrized version of the equations to comply with the experimental observation of a symmetrical SC dome. For the pseudogap phase, ∆ = 0 and M = 0 so that now Eq. (S7) is trivially satisfied and Eqs. (S8) and (S9) imply for the pseudogap transition temperature T * (x): with η (g P N ) = 1 -gc N gP , x0 = x + SC (see Main Text) and γ is determined for each compound. Using a systematic procedure, discussed extensively in Ref. which yields the grand-canonical potential in the presence of an applied electromagnetic vector potential A, namely, Ω[A]. The DC conductivity, at a finite temperature, according to the Kubo formula The average electric current and its two-point correlator are obtained from: where Ω[A] is the grand-canonical potential in the presence of an applied electromagnetic vector potential A. This relates to the grand-partition functional Z[A] as The grand-partition functional, is given by where μ is the chemical potential, N is the number operator and the electromagnetic field A is introduced through the usual minimal coupling prescription where ǫ(k) = 2t[cos k x a + cos k y a] is the usual tight-binding energy for a square lattice. We can write the eigenvalues of H -μN , in terms of the stationary values ∆ 0 ; M 0 ; μ as The grand-partition functional Z[A] follows from (S17) and Eq.(S18), namely, where Using (S15), (S18) and (S22), we obtain the average current: In order to obtain the conductivity matrix, σ ij we must take the derivative of j i with respect to A j , at A = k = 0. Considering that, in this case we have Under the latter conditions, only the diagonal (δ ij ) terms survive, namely In order to obtain the DC conductivity per CuO 2 plane, we just divide by N . The corresponding DC resistivity per CuO 2 plane, then, will be given by where V = da 2 is the primitive unit cell volume per CuO 2 plane, that is introduced through the Fourier transform. Then, considering that sign(x) tanh |x| = tanh(x), we find that the resistivity for ∆ = 0 is given by This can be rewritten as that is precisely Eq. ( Particular Forms of G(K1, K2) in All Phases As discussed in the main text, the different behavior of the resistivity, observed in each phase can be understood as different particular cases of the scaling function in the different phases. Here we derive the particular expressions of G in the different regions. Pseudogap Phase, T → 0 As M and μ are finite for zero temperature in this phase we can approximate such that where we define the temperature scale T 0 ≡ μ-M kB . Pseudogap Phase, T → T * For T → T * , M → 0. We can separate inspect the limit of two separate parts of F in this limit. First, the sum of cosh, lim then the fraction lim such that Strange Metal Phase In this phase, M → 0 for any temperature. This imply that F will have the same behavior of the previous phase, but with a different dependence of the cosh where T * comes from the condition of the continuity of ρ at T = T * and C 0 is the value of cosh 2 μ 2kB T in the strange metal phase as discussed in the main text. Fermi Liquid Phase For the Fermi Liquid phase, the limit M → 0 is taken without the constraint imposed by the continuity of ρ at T * . On the other hand, for ∆ = M = 0, equations (S7) and (S8) are trivially satisfied, and Eq. (S9) implies where μ(x) = 2γ(x 0x). Observe that, consequently, for x → x0 , we have the solution of the above equation: μ F L (x) = 0. Now, for x > x0 , we see that μ(x) becomes negative, hence the only solution of (S36) is μ F L (x) = 0 as well. Hence, in the FL phase, we have DATA ANALYSIS For compounds other than LSCO, the actual in-plane doping level is not directly related to the stoichiometric doping, due to the absence of a one-to-one relation between the amount of doped atomic species and the number of holes actually introduced into the planes. This creates a problem, since the chemical potential depends on the latter while measured physical quantities, are expressed in terms on the former. In Ref. 