The FAMU (Fisica degli Atomi Muonici) experiment at the RIKEN RAL pulsed muon facility will measure the proton Zemach radius with high precision, thus contributing to the solution of the so-called "proton radius puzzle". The situation is now confused and new measurements will help reduce the discrepancy as measured with electrons or muons. To this aim, FAMU will make use of a high-intensity pulsed muon beam at RIKEN-RAL impinging on a cryogenic hydrogen target and a tunable Mid-infrared (MIR) laser emitting at ~6.78 μm, to measure the hyperfine (HFS) splitting of the 1S state of muonic hydrogen. The injection of light into the cryogenic target and its monitoring via dedicated MIR sensors is an asset for the experiment. A possible solution is via specialty MIR fibres based on hollow core waveguides or polycrystalline fibres. Two dedicated setups based on pulsed QCL lasers, from Alpes Laser, emitting around 6.78 μm have been used to study the fibre attenuation while the high energy laser developed at Elettra Sincrotrone in Trieste has been used to study the damage threshold at high energies. The alignment of MIR laser radiation into an optical cavity presents criticalities due to geometrical constraints. Its control requires the use of small and sensitive detectors. The results obtained with a quantum IR sensor with an integrated circuit for signal processing are reported. The recent Lamb shift experiment at PSI and the controversy about the proton size Mid-Infrared (MIR) radiation around 6-7 μm has also important applications for biomedical diagnostics, environmental monitoring, isotope analysis. It is known, for example, that any disease process is preceded by changes in the metabolism of the affected cells or organs. Thus, new technologies such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) has emerged as a valuable alternative to detect bio-molecular changes in the fields of biology and medicine yielding information on a biologic state in early medical diagnosis The performance of an optical fibre for the transport of a specific radiation is determined evaluating the attenuation, A, or the attenuation coefficient, α, that is the attenuation per unit length expressed in dB: where Pref is a reference power such as the input power into the fibre, Pout is the output power from the fibre and z is the fibre length. In the literature  Hollow Fibre HF500MWLW-SMA-1m ID = 500 μm; MWLW Silver Iodide coating for λ = 5 -12 μm; SMA connectors, from Opto-Knowledge Systems  RF-Se-300 multimode LW mid-infrared Chalcogenide glass fibre for λ =1.5 -9.7 μm, ID =300 μm, FC connectors, from IRFLEX  PIR AgCl:AgBr Polycrystalline fibre, cores of 410 μm and 860 μm, from ArtPhotonics Two are the main requirements the selected optical fibres have to meet in order to be implemented in the laser transport line: 1. Present a low attenuation coefficient in the wavelength range 6.78-6.80 μm, 2. Have a damage threshold capable to withstand the high energy laser at around 6.80 μm (energy of about 1 mJ with pulse duration of 10 ns). For this purpose, different measurement campaigns have been performed to address this issue. In particular, two QCL lasers have been used to investigate the fibres attenuation with different operative and injection conditions, whereas a Difference Frequency Generation (DFG) based high energy laser beam has been used to study the damage threshold of the different fibre materials. The layout of the measurement system is shown in Fig. The laser used in this second set of measurements is a Pulsed Pigtailed HHL-696 Alpes Laser QCL with a Thermo-Electric Cooler (TEC) system in order to reach -40°C. The temperature control allowed to scan the laser emission between 6780 to 6816 nm by changing the operative temperature from +20 C to -40 C. The emission power is almost constant over the range of wavelength with an average power at the maximum supplied current (1.35 A) of around 3.5 mW. The employed laser has the following features: -Pulse duration of 20 ns and repetition rate of 1MHz. -Single mode with line width <1.3 nm. A CaF lens with 20 mm focal length is directly mounted on the laser base together with a SMA fibre holder adapter as it can be seen in Fig. 1. A 50 cm long fibre is connected directly to the power meter and a first power measurement is taken (Pref). 2. Afterword, we changed the fibre with a 1 m long fibre and a second measurement is taken (Pout). The attenuation coefficient in then calculated by Eq. ( 1. The emitted power from the laser is taken after the lens/SMA adapter (Pref) 2. Afterword, we connect a 50 cm long fibre and a second measurement is taken (Pout). The total losses are then calculated by Eq. (2). The laser, developed in collaboration with the Elettra Sincrotrone Labs in Trieste, has to satisfy strict requirements to be of interest for the FAMU experiment in order to excite an efficient spin flip transition of the muonic hydrogen. The laser system is divided into two main units. 1. The Cr:Fo master-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA) 2. The second subsystem is a Nd:YAG, laser with 18 ns pulse duration, jitter 0.5 ns, 25 Hz repetition rate, and a maximum energy output < 300 mJ. This laser is seeded with a highly stable fibre laser at 1064 nm. These two laser wavelengths are combined in a LiInS2 crystal (NLC) with dimensions 7 x 7 x 20 mm 3 , to perform DFG. The DFG process gives access to a broad MIR region 6445 -6935 nm with an efficiency of 1.4% with respect to the energy of the Nd:YAG pump (560 μJ with 39 mJ from the Nd:YAG). In our case, we have been able to produce up to 140 μJ in single pass and 560 μJ in double pass configuration. The scheme of the laser system for DFG is shown in Fig. In this section, we present the results obtained using the three lasers described in Sect. 2.1, 2.2, 2.3. In Fig. Figure As a comparison, we report in Fig. It is known that for an ideal surface, the optical damage threshold at the surface is close to that of the bulk medium. In practice, the damage threshold at the surface can be much lower than that of the bulk because of the presence of defects and contaminations. For example, it has been shown that the optical damage threshold at 1064 nm is close to 480 GW/cm 2 in bulk silica due to electron avalanche and independent of pulse width for pulse durations above 100 ps The use of optical fibres to convey the MIR laser beam at 6785 nm has been addressed in this paper. Three different fibres have been investigated: a hollow fibre and two polycrystalline glass fibres. The results showed that Silver Halide glass fibres perform better than the other two fibres and that increasing the core diameter the attenuation is reduced. In particular, we found that the Silver Halide glass fibre with a core diameter of 800 μm provided an attenuation coefficient <1 dB/m and total losses (accounting for the attenuation and injection losses) for a 50 cm long fibre of about 1.5 dB. No damage threshold is present up to about 200 μJ. Further tests are necessary to extent the range of the threshold to energies > 1-2 mJ. These results make the Silver Halide glass fibres promising for their implementation in the FAMU experiment, thus significantly reducing the criticalities associated with the "direct injection". The alignment of MIR laser radiation in the FAMU experiment is not an easy task due to the specific laser light wavelength and the geometrical constraints which demand for small and sensitive detectors. The results obtained for a quantum IR sensor with an integrated circuit for signal processing revealed that the sensor response is linear within 24 and 218 μJ with a R-Square of 0.97 and therefore suitable for the FAMU alignment process.