In this work, we investigate the use of pre-twisted metallic ribbons as building blocks for shape-changing structures. We manufacture these elements by twisting initially flat ribbons about their (lengthwise) centroidal axis into a helicoidal geometry, then thermoforming them to make this configuration a stress-free reference state. The helicoidal shape allows the ribbons to have preferred bending directions that vary throughout their length. These bending directions serve as compliant joints and enable several deployed and stowed configurations that are unachievable without pre-twist, provided that compaction does not induce material failure. We fabricate these ribbons using a bulk metallic glass (BMG), for its exceptional elasticity and thermoforming attributes. Combining numerical simulations, an analytical model based on a geometrically nonlinear plate theory and torsional experiments, we analyze the finite-twisting mechanics of various ribbon geometries. We find that, in ribbons with undulated edges, the twisting deformations can be better localized onto desired regions prior to thermoforming. Finally, we join multiple ribbons to create deployable systems with complex morphing attributes enabled by the intrinsic chirality of our twisted structural elements. Our work proposes a framework for creating fully metallic, yet compliant structures that may find application as elements for space structures and compliant robots. Shape-changing structures are mechanical systems designed to undergo predictable changes of shape when subjected to external or internal stimuli. Typically, such structures are made of separate elements that can move relative to each other and are connected via kinematic joints, and the acts of deployment and retraction do not require the various elements to be dismounted In compliant structures, high stresses are typically concentrated at the creases/flexures. This makes it challenging to design low-part-count systems that possess complex and reversible morphing attributes and are simultaneously made of materials that provide the load-bearing capacity or durability required by certain structural applications. An attempt in this direction is the relization of additively manufactured, metallic origami To create compliant morphing structures made of materials relevant to structural engineering, systems that feature extremely compliant, yet robust and manufacturable hinges are needed. In recent years, ribbons (slender structural elements where length width thickness) have emerged as building blocks for morphing structures, as they can be bent and buckled In this work, we propose the combination of a design framework and a material choice to create ribbon-based compliant morphing structures. Our fundamental structural element is a pre-twisted bulk metallic glass (BMG) ribbon. Applying finite twists to the ribbon sketched in Fig. In Section 2, we illustrate the fundamental design parameters of our undulated ribbons and we provide an experimental characterization of the mechanical properties of BMG. In Section 3, we provide background information and results on the twisting mechanics of ribbons. We use FE simulations to understand the influence of the various design parameters and compare it to twisting experiments we conducted on BMG ribbons. We then adapt an analytical model introduced by Mockensturm to our case of undulated ribbons, and use it to analyze the influence of the design parameters on their elastic response. In Section 4, we describe our thermoforming setup and show that it enables the fabrication of pre-twisted ribbons that are subsequently spot-welded into structures that display extreme morphing capacity. Conclusions and future outlook are reported in Section 5. One of the ribbon geometries used in our work is shown in Fig. All ribbons in our work are manufactured from a melt-spun roll of the Zr 65 Cu 17.5 Ni 10 Al 7.5 alloy. The roll and a micrographic image showing the melt-spinning-induced irregularities of the cross-section are shown in Fig. Torsion Test System, with a 25 kN axial load cell), equipped with grippers for tension tests. Our setup also features a high-definition camera (Edmund Optics EO-5023M) to record photographs that are analyzed via 2D digital image correlation (DIC). First, we perform a tensile test to understand the behavior of the material and to identify the limits of the linear elastic regime (see Appendix A). We realize that the material behaves linear-elastically up until the breaking point, which occurs at a breaking strain ε b ≈ 1.7% and at a stress σ b ≈ 1.2 GPa. In light of this, we test three specimens of equal dimensions following the load path illustrated in Fig. This Section is dedicated to the analysis of the twisting mechanics of undulated ribbons, with the goal of understanding what geometries yield BMG ribbons that can be twisted into desired shapes, where the bending axes of adjacent faces are perpendicular to each other as sketched in Fig. For some boundary conditions, it is observed that twisting a ribbon leads to mechanical instabilities that result in the appearance of wrinkle-like patterns. This behavior was first observed by A. E. Green in 1936 In our work, we are interested in avoiding these instabilities. In fact, for our ribbons to morph into structural elements with multiple preferred bending axes, we need to avoid any localization of curvature that would compromise their deployability and their post-twisting response. However, special considerations need to be made since our ribbons feature non-straight edges-a scenario that is seldom considered in the existing literature Our numerical, finite element (FE) simulations are conducted using the commercial software Abaqus. The ribbon configurations we consider have the dimensions reported in Section 2, and varying numbers of necks n and undulation amplitudes A. We consider four-node reduced-integration shell elements (of the S4R type) with 7 through-thethickness integration points. These elements are suitable for geometrically-nonlinear analyses. The material response is considered to be linear over finite strains, an assumption that is acceptable for a material like BMG (see Appendix A). Each ribbon is clamped at the bottom edge, while all nodes of the top edge are fixed to a fictitious reference point where we apply the load. The solution is carried out in two separate steps. First, we use an implicit/static analysis to model the axial pre-stretching step necessary to avoid longitudinal instabilities. This is enforced by applying an initial displacement of 0.1 mm between clamped boundaries. Then, we use an explicit/dynamic analysis to model the twisting process. This is done in order to speed up the computation time with respect to the standard implicit solver. We use a mass-scaling approach to accelerate computations, where the density of the material is artificially scaled to increase the stable time increment. To ensure that the model reflects the quasi-static nature of the twisting process, we monitor the total kinetic energy of our system and make sure it remains below 5% of the total energy in each simulation. First, we analyze the response of a straight ribbon; this is summarized in Fig. Now that we have illustrated the benefits of the undulated edge geometry, we use our numerical model to analyze the effects of the number of necks n on the twisting response. A more detailed parametric analysis is then carried out analytically in Section 3.3. In Fig. To experimentally validate our numerical predictions, we perform torsional tests on ribbons of various geometries. These tests are carried out using the same apparatus we used for the axial experiments described in Section 2, using grippers designed for torsion. The comparison between experimental and numerical results for three ribbon geometries is shown in Fig. These experiments serve as a partial validation of our numerical model. They provide insight into the axial response of the ribbons, but offer no information on the lateral stresses that arise during twisting. Since twisting induces out of plane deformations, we cannot reliably use 2D DIC; moreover, 3D DIC would only be useful for small twists. For these reasons, we develop an analytical model to verify the numerical prediction that ribbons with undulated edge geometries experience considerably smaller compressive stresses in the lateral direction, thus delaying the onset of buckling due to twist. The model we employ to analyze the state of strain in the ribbons prior to thermoforming is heavily based on a fully nonlinear, geometrically exact description of rectangular ribbons that was developed by Mockensturm A ribbon's material particle positions in an untwisted reference configuration are X = x α e α + x 3 e 3 . Throughout this text, the indices α and β pertain to the mid-surface of the ribbon, the index '3' corresponds to the direction normal to the surface, and we use the Einstein summation convention for repeated indices. The coordinates x i are convected and material, and 0 for a ribbon of uniform length L and thickness H, and varying width W(x 1 ). Our fixed coordinate frame {e i } is orthonormal. The mapping χ * (x i ) = χ(x α ) + x 3 v3 describes these particles in the twisted configuration, where χ(x α ) is the deformation mapping of the midplane of the ribbon, and v3 is the outward unit normal to the surface S defined by χ(x α ). It is assumed that unit normals to the surface x α e α are mapped to unit normals of S, with vanishing transverse strains. This is an assumption that is valid within the thin plate approximation framework and is called the Love-Kirchhoff hypothesis. After the ribbon is subjected to a pre-stretch and torsion, its mid-surface assumes a helicoidal geometry, where the expression for χ(x α ) is shown in Eq. 1 below. For a cross-section located at x 1 , f (x 1 , x 2 ) is the mapping of the particles in the lateral direction x 2 , λ 1 (x 1 ) is the local axial pre-stretch, and θ(x 1 ) is the local twist angle relative to the supported edge at x 1 = 0. Throughout this text, when the material coordinate is not specified, we are evaluating the twist angle function at the end of the ribbon. Namely, θ ≡ θ(L). The expression above is slightly different from what is used by Mockensturm, as it accounts for variations in λ 1 , f , and θ as a function of axial position x 1 . These functions are calculated in the following subsection. Static equilibrium implies that the total axial force F acting on each cross-section is independent of position x 1 . Therefore, the local linear axial strain du 1 /dx 1 due to pre-stretch can be written as: . The total stretch λ tot of the ribbon is obtained by integration: This total pre-stretch is prescribed in our experiments, and therefore we know the total force F that is being exerted at all ribbon cross-sections: Knowing F, the local axial pre-stretch λ 1 (x 1 ) of an infinitesimally long cross-section at x 1 is obtained from the previously calculated quantities: Recalling the assumption that unit normals to the reference surface are mapped to unit normals of the deformed surface and that transverse strains vanish, we calculate the twist of the ribbon as a function of x 1 . We note that the shear modulus G is a constant and that the torque T is the same at all ribbon cross-sections, so the twist rate of a ribbon is given by: . The polar moment of inertia for a slender rectangular cross section (W H) is J = WH 3 /3. Since we prescribe the total twist of the ribbon's supported edges θ(L), we can calculate the ratio T/G (for brevity, we omit the algebraic steps that are similar to the calculation of F above) and thus know the twist rate as a function of axial position x 1 : We integrate this expression to find that the twist of the ribbon at x 1 relative to the fixed support at x 1 = 0 is: Now that expressions for λ 1 (x 1 ) and θ(x 1 ) are given in Eqs. 5 and 8, we must calculate f (x 1 , x 2 ) to complete our description of the deformed surface χ, represented by Eq. 1. Here, we follow Mockensturm's calculations closely but, unlike in his work, we account for the non-constant nature of λ 1 and θ . Each term that appears in the final elastic equilibrium equation is a function of the covariant and/or contravariant basis vectors of the ribbon's deformed configuration. The covariant basis on S is given by v α = ∂χ/∂x α , and the reciprocal, contravariant basis v α to S is constructed such that v3 Here, δ i j is the Kronecker delta. To simplify our calculations, we note that ∂ f (x 1 , x 2 )/∂x 1 is very small compared to f (x 1 , x 2 ) and ∂ f (x 1 , x 2 )/∂x 2 everywhere in the ribbon (this is supported by shear being negligible in our numerical simulations). We also can calculate that x 1 λ 1 (x 1 ) λ 1 (x 1 ) everywhere in the ribbon and that x 1 θ (x 1 ) θ (x 1 ) in the regions surrounding the narrowest and widest cross-sections of the ribbon. In particular, λ 1 (x 1 ) = θ (x 1 ) = ∂ f (x 1 , x 2 )/∂x 1 = 0 where W (x 1 ) = 0 (the width extrema). Note that the numerical results tell us that stresses are global minima or maxima at these exact cross-sections. In the following, we keep our derivation general to a small region surrounding these width extrema, and we ignore these small terms in the expressions for the basis vectors v i and v i . Note that, given the above simplifications, we denote f (x 1 , x 2 ) ≡ ∂ f (x 1 , x 2 )/∂x 2 for the purpose of concise notation. Our covariant basis vectors v i are: We then calculate the contravariant basis vectors: . The first and second fundamental forms a αβ and b αβ , respectively, and the Christoffel symbols of the second kind Γ k i j are used to provide local descriptions of S, and are given by: In the definitions shown above (and throughout the remainder of the text), the underscore comma designates partial differentiation with respect to the corresponding coordinate component (v ,i ≡ ∂v/∂x i ). We note that our tensors b αβ and b β α have identical matrix components. See When the ribbons are mapped into the deformed configuration, the first fundamental form a αβ characterizes the inplane stretches and the second fundamental form b αβ describes the inner products between the partial derivatives of the covariant basis vectors and the unit normal, thus capturing out-of-plane bending. The mixed component form b β α defined in Eq. 12 has the same matrix components as b αβ in our case and captures the inner products between the partial derivatives of the local unit normal and the contravariant basis vectors, essentially describing the rotation of the unit normal as we move along the surface. The connection between these forms and the tensors for in-plane strain C and bending Λ commonly used in plate and shell mechanics is described more precisely below (13) Mockensturm's usage of a Saint-Venant-Kirchhoff material model is also appropriate for our ribbons due to the large regime of elastic linearity displayed by the BMG. This model uses the following strain energy function: where K = EH/(1 -ν 2 ), E is Young's modulus, and ν is Poisson's ratio. The in-plane and bending stress resultants are: In matrix form, these resultants are: We must now enforce our assumptions that transverse strains vanish and that unit normals to the reference configuration remain unit normals after deformation. The following constraint stress tensor is used to this purpose in this restricted kinematics plate theory and is calculated through the equilibrium equations in the next section: The two equations describing equilibrium are derived fully in Mockensturm's doctoral dissertation [ By resolving Eq. 19 onto v β and v 3 we obtain, respectively: By inserting Q into Eq. 18, resolving the PDEs onto the contravariant basis v i and eliminating the zero-valued terms, we obtain the following statement of equilibrium: The difference between our result at this point and what is shown in Mockensturm's work is the inclusion of terms where there are partial derivatives of the stress tensors in the x 1 direction due to the non-constant functions λ 1 (x 1 ) and θ (x 1 ). We proceed by stating that for this analytical model to be accurate, the amplitude of the edge undulations must be much smaller than the wavelength. This holds for most of our ribbons and we discuss the limitations of the model in Section 3.3.8. In light of this consideration, we make a few simplifications driven by W (x 1 ) being small everywhere. We now focus our analysis at the width extrema (where W (x 1 ) = 0). At these specific cross-sections, N 11 ,1 = M 12 ,1 = M 12 ,12 = b 2 1,1 = Γ 1 12,1 = 0 and the equilibrium statement given by Eq. 21 becomes: This is the same as what Mockensturm obtained for rectangular, homogeneous ribbons. By also noting that W (x 1 ) is small, the boundary conditions on the traction free lateral edges in regions where W (x 1 ) = 0 are: Inserting the expressions for fundamental forms, Christoffel symbols and stress resultants calculated in previous sections (see Eqs. 12 and 16), we obtain a single nonlinear ODE for the lateral stretch of the ribbons. (We assume the dependence of all variables on x 1 to be fixed and remove the dependence of the variables on this coordinate in our notation for simplicity.) The boundary condition N 22 -2b 2 1 M 12 = 0 at the lateral edges becomes: We set changes of variables e ≡ (λ 2 1 -1)/2, η = H/W, and define a non-dimensional parameter T p = Wθ . To proceed with the solution of this differential equation, we note that T p is small and e and η are on the order of T 2 p . This determination of order stems from the pre-stretch being very small and from the ribbons having very slender cross-sections, and has been validated numerically for the ribbon geometries we study. We then use a perturbation ) which has a slightly different form compared to what Mockensturm proposed. Inserting this into Eqs. 24 and 25 gives us an ODE for each order of the lateral stretches f (2I) (x 2 ): Zeroth order : Second order : Fourth order : Now that we have calculated f to fourth order, we can insert the function into the expressions for strains (Eq. 13) and stresses (Eq. 16) in order to compare predictions from this analytical model to those from the numerical simulations. We first compare the strains predicted by numerical simulations and by this analysis for the case of ribbons with straight edges in Fig. Having shown a consistency between the two methods of analysis, we can now use our analytical results to study the stress evolution within the most vulnerable (narrowest) cross-section. Fig. We now leverage our analytical model to perform a broader parametric analysis than the one reported in Section 3.1. The results of this analysis are reported in Fig. In Fig. We now have the theoretical and numerical tools to choose geometrical configurations that yield desired shapes upon twisting. Based on previous considerations, we choose ribbons where n = 3 and A = w/6. In this section, we describe the thermoforming process and the setup we designed for twisted ribbon fabrication. We also investigate the potential of single twisted ribbons and assemblies of them as deployable mechanical systems. We do so by analyzing the bending behavior of pre-twisted ribbons and by illustrating prototypes of deployable mechanical systems capable of reversible compaction and deployment cycles. The steps required to thermoform an initially-flat ribbon into a twisted configuration are illustrated in Fig. To allow for repeated stowage and deployment of our structures, it is important that bending the necks about e 3 and the wide faces about e 2 does not produce strains that exceed the breaking strain of the material. To verify that this is the case, we perform bending simulations on the pre-twisted ribbons, using the same FE model discussed in Section 3.1. To speed up computations, we only consider portions of the selected ribbon geometry. A segment of the pre-twisted stress-free ribbon that includes a single neck and terminates at the midpoints of two consecutive wide faces (thus having length L/3 = 60 mm) is illustrated at the top of Fig. We also simulate bending of the wide faces about e 2 , as illustrated in Fig. Now that we verified that pre-twisted ribbons can bend without breaking, we investigate several deploymentstowage scenarios for single twisted ribbons and assemblies of them. First, we consider a single ribbon, shown in Fig. The full potential of these systems as deployable structures can be achieved by combining multiple twisted ribbons in order to create two-and three-dimensional systems. A reliable way of joining multiple ribbons is via spot-welding. By joining four ribbons featuring the same chirality, we obtain the ring shown in Fig. This work represents a first attempt at utilizing thin structural elements made of bulk metallic glass to create compliant deployable structures. We do this by taking initially-flat ribbons and twisting them into structural elements that feature regions that behave as compliant hinges with different preferred bending axes, and assembling these ribbons into more complex three-dimensional structures. Along the way, we use numerical and analytical models to understand the mechanics of twisting and to design ribbons that can be twisted and thermoformed into desired configurations. We also use simulations to verify that pre-twisted ribbons do not fail when they are bent and used as deployable structural systems. Here, we only consider twisted ribbons as building blocks for our structures. However, it could be possible to include ribbons with different deployability attributes, e.g., axial extension, to create structures featuring more complex deformation patterns.