Chiral superconductors exhibit novel transport properties that depend on the topology of the order parameter, topology of the Fermi surface, the spectrum of bulk and edge Fermionic excitations, and the structure of the impurity potential. In the case of electronic heat transport, impurities induce an anomalous (zero-field) thermal Hall conductivity that is easily orders of magnitude larger than the quantized edge contribution. The effect originates from branch-conversion scattering of Bogoliubov quasiparticles by the chiral order parameter, induced by potential scattering. The former transfers angular momentum between the condensate and the excitations that transport heat. The anomalous thermal Hall conductivity is shown to depend to the structure of the electronimpurity potential, as well as the winding number, ν, of the chiral order parameter, ∆(p) = |∆(p)| e iνφ p . The results provide quantitative formulae for interpreting heat transport experiments seeking to identify broken T and P symmetries, as well as the topology of the order parameter for chiral superconductors. Introduction -Chiral superconductivity occurs when bound pairs of Fermions condense into a macroscopically occupied two-particle state, ψ(r) ∼ (x + iy) ν ∼ e iνφ , corresponding to Cooper pairs circulating about a unique chiral axis, , with angular momentum ν h. Mirror symmetry (P), with respect to a plane containing the chiral axis , is spontaneously broken in combination with time-reversal (T) symmetry. Thus, left-and right-handed Cooper pairs form time-reversed ground-states with counter-circulating currents. 1 Superfluid 3 He-A is currently the only BCS condensate that is firmly established to exhibit chiral pairing. The identification of broken P and T symmetries was made by the observation of anomalous Hall transport of electrons moving through Chiral superconductors are also topological phases characterized by a Chern number equal to the winding number, ν, of the phase of the Cooper pairs. The non-trivial topology manifests as |ν| branches of chiral Fermions confined near a boundary at which the topology changes discontinuously. The effects of impurity scattering on the chiral ground state, the appearance of a sub-gap quasiparticle spectrum, and the non-equilibrium response to a temperature gradient, are encoded in our theory via the impurity averaging technique, and the resulting quasiparticle-impurity t-matrix. The latter is a functional of the quasiclassical propagator and self energies, all of which are calculated self-consistently, including the impurity-scattering vertex corrections. To highlight the effects of chirality on heat transport, we focus on fully gapped 2D chiral superconducting ground states defined on a cylindrically symmetric Fermi surface, ∆( p) = ∆ e iνφ p , where φ p is the azimuthal angle of relative momentum, p, of the Cooper pair and ν is the winding number of the order parameter around the Fermi surface. where ξ p is the normal-state dispersion and τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 denote the Pauli matrices in particle-hole space. which define the corresponding quasiparticle and Cooper pair propagators, g R,A and f R,A , as ]. Note that εR,A and ∆R,A are the renormalized excitation energy and order parameter, εR,A = ε ± i0 + -Σ R,A and ∆R,A = ∆ + Λ R,A . We consider only renormalization by impurity scattering since this is the dominant scattering process in the low-temperature limit. The structure of the impurity self energy in Nambu space takes the form, 31 The mean-field order parameter, ∆, satisfies the weakcoupling gap equation, , where the integration is over the pairing bandwidth, (-ε c , +ε c ), and V is the strength of the pairing interaction, V ( p, p ) = 2V cos[ν(φ p -φ p )] for the ν th irreducible representation of SO(2) symmetry of the Fermi surface. For a homogeneous, random distribution of impurities the self-energy, Σ imp ( p; ε) = n imp t( p, p; ε), is propor-tional to the mean impurity density, n imp , and the forwardscattering limit of the the single-impurity t-matrix, the latter of which satisfies, We omit the superscripts unless needed, N f denotes the single-spin normal-state density of states at the Fermi energy and g R,A N = ∓iπ τ 3 is the normal-state propagator. The normal-state t-matrix is parametrized in terms of quasiparticle-impurity scattering phase shifts, δ m , for each angular momentum channel, m, For the equilibrium propagator (Eq. 2), we obtain the t-matrix from (4), and the corresponding impurity selfenergy terms, For a single impurity, multiple scattering results in sub-gap quasiparticle bound states, ε b,m = ±|∆| cos(δ m -δ m+ν ), which appear as isolated poles of the t-matrix amplitude A m (ε). These states broaden into sub-gap bands for finite impurity density. The off-diagonal self-energy, Λ, is generated by Andreev scattering, a branch-conversion scattering process in which a particle turns into a hole, or vice versa. The angular momentum associated with each partial wave of the incoming and outgoing states must differ by an integer equal to the Cooper pair angular momentum quantum number ν, i.e., both δ m and δ m+ν must be finite for a given value of m. Thus, point-like impurities, which scatter only in the s-wave channel, do not generate branch-conversion processes in chiral superconductors, and so do not couple to Cooper pair angular momentum. Heat current in response to an imposed temperature gradient is obtained from the non-equilibrium response of the Keldysh propagator, δ g K , where v p = v f p is the Fermi velocity. It is convenient to introduce the anomalous propagator, g a , and anomalous self-energy, Σ a , defined in terms of the corresponding Keldysh (K), retarded (R) and advanced (A) functions, , where x ∈ { g, Σ}. The first-order corrections to the retarded and advanced propagators and self-energies vanish to linear order in v p • ∇Φ (cf. Ref. 32). Thus, the linear response contribution to the anomalous propagator reduces to the Keldysh propagator, where ∇Φ = ∇ tanh[ε/2T (r)] is the gradient of the local equilibrium distribution function, C a + = 2Re ∆2 -ε2 and D a -= 2i ImD(ε + i0 + ). The non-equilibrium response of the self-energy is obtained from the anomalous t-matrix, which in linear response reduces to These are the "vertex corrections" in diagrammatic quantum field theories. They describe the dynamical screening of perturbations by long-wavelength collective excitations. Impurity Scattering Model -To quantify the effects of finite-size impurities, we consider hard-disc scattering characterized by the scattering phase shifts, tan where R is the hard-disc radius, and J m (z) (N m (z)) are Bessel functions of the first (second) kind. , where Ψ(x) is the digamma function, , for a chiral order parameter with a winding number ν. The pair-breaking cross-section vanishes for s-wave superconductors (ν = 0), yielding T c = T c 0 as expected. The quasiparticle density of states, N(ε) = N f Img R (ε +i0 + ), also depends on the chiral winding number. Figure The normal-state thermal conductivity, κ N = (π 2 /3)N f (v f T )L N , is limited by the transport mean free path, L N = 1/(σ tr n imp ), where the transport cross section is defined by σ tr = (2/k f ) ∑ m sin 2 (δ m -δ m+1 ). In the superconducting state, axial symmetry is broken by the chiral order parameter. The corresponding thermal conductivity tensor, κ i j , acquires off-diagonal terms, κ xy = -κ yx , in addition to the diagonal components, κ xx = κ yy . Thus, there is a transverse (Hall) component of heat current. The longitudinal and transverse conductivities, κ xx and κ xy , are obtained by computing the heat current induced by a temperature gradient using Eqs. 10-12. Figure 