Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) have attracted extensive research interest as a promising candidate for efficient and inexpensive solar cells. Transmission electron microscopy characterizations that can benefit the fundamental understanding and the degradation mechanism are widely used for these materials. However, their sensitivity to the electron beam illumination and hence structural instabilities usually prevent us from obtaining the intrinsic information or even lead to significant artifacts. Here, we systematacially investigate the structural degradation behaviors under different experimental factors to reveal the optimized conditions for TEM characterizations of OIHPs by using low-dose electron diffraction and imaging techniques. We find that a low temperature (-180 °C) does not slow down the beam damage but instead induces a rapid amorphization for OIHPs. Moreover, a less severe damage is observed at a higher accelerating voltage. The beam-sensitivity is found to be facet-dependent that a (100) exposed MAPbI3 surface is more stable than (001) surface. With these guidance, we successfully acquire the atomic structure of pristine MAPbI3 and identify the characterization window that is very narrow. These findings are helpful to guide future electron microscopy characterization of these beam-sensitive materials, which are also useful for finding strategies to improve the stability and the performance of the perovskite solar cells. Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) have achieved impressive improvements as a promising photovoltaic material, whose power conversion efficiency rapidly increases from initial 3.8% The situation for in situ TEM studies on OIHPs is even worse since under common high resolution TEM (HRTEM) (Dose rate: thousands of e Å -2 s -1 ) or high-angle annular dark field scanning TEM (STEM) (Dose rate: hundreds or thousands of e Å -2 s -1 ) imaging modes, the total doses within several seconds are large enough to induce damage or full decomposition, likely leading to inaccurate or even incorrect conclusions (See supporting information Table In this work, we study the external factors (temperature, accelerating voltage) and internal factors (exposed facets) on the structural instabilities of OIHPs under electron beam irradiation. It is found that a low temperature (-180 °C) causes a rapaid crystal-amorphous transition within low doses (129 to 150 e Å -2 ), suggesting that low temperature is not helpful in preventing the electron beam damage while a high temperature (90 °C) does not change the degradation pathway observed at room temperature. The beam damage mechanism is identified to be radiolysis since a high voltage is beneficial to reduce the damage. Besides we reveal that the beam-sensitivity is facet-dependent, with a (100) exposed MAPbI3 surface more stable than the (001) surface. We also acquire the atomic structure of MAPbI3 at an extremely low dose. Our findings can guide future electron microscopy characterization of these beam-sensitive materials and also lay a foundation for the in-depth decomposition study under various stimuli by electron microscopy. PbI2 and CH3NH3I (molar ratio 1:1) were dissolved in γ-butyrolactone (GBL) with the concentration of 1.3 mol L -1 , prior to stirring in 12 hours at the 70 o C. The CH3NH3PbI3 precursor solution was obtained and filtered using polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter with 0.22 μm pore size. The Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2 substrates PbBr2 and CH3NH3Br were dissolved in N,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF) and stirred at 30 o C for 12 hours to obtain 1 mol L -1 MAPbBr3 precursor solution. The MAPbBr3 precursor solution was purified by polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter with 0.22 μm pore size, and then heated to 95 o C in a 10 ml container in dark environment. The container can be taken out by daylight at 30-50 % humidity until the MAPbBr3 single crystals were grown after one night. To avoid side reactions, all TEM samples were prepared in an argon-filled glovebox. We firstly scratched samples from substrate and dispersed them into anhydrous ether. Then, the clear suspensions were deposited on holey carbon copper girds. We sealed the carbon copper girds with a plastic bag full of argon before transformed into the TEM column. The water concentration inside the plastic bag is below 0.1 ppm. The perovskite powders were exposed inside the plastic bag for about 5 minutes during the transport of perovskite sample. Powder XRD patterns were obtained on D8 Advance diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV and 40 mA) with a scanning rate of 4° min -1 for wide-angle test increment. The HRTEM and the SAED patterns were conducted at an aberration corrected FEI (Titan Cubed Themis G2) operated at 80 kV and 300 kV. The EDS was carried out at 300 kV, 10-20 pA, 0.5-1 kcps for 120 s. The cooling and heating experiments were performed at FEI Tecnai F20 at 200 kV by a liquid nitrogen side-entry specimen holder (Gatan 636). The temperature is stable at the expected value for 1 hours before turning on the illumination to record data. As for all SAED images, it takes about 30 s to get the SAED patterns since the sample comes into sight. The HRTEM image of the MAPbI3 is acquired at a magnification of 71 k by Gatan K2 direct-detection camera in the electron-counting mode with the dose fractionation function. The simulated ED patterns were obtained by the Single Crystalmaker software. To study the effects of temperature on the beam sensitivity, we first examine the phase of MAPbI3 at different temperature, which is reported to be orthorhombic phase below -111±2 °C, tetragonal phase between -111±2 °C and 58±5 °C and cubic phase over 58±5 °C [100] direction of the tetragonal phase (Figure Then we further invetigate the degradation pathway at -180 °C, 25 °C and 90 °C to reveal the effect of temperature on the beam sensitivity as shown in Figure To comfirm the generalizaiton of such crystal-amorphous transtion at -180 °C, we also investigate the structure evolution of cubic MAPbBr3 (Figure We have carried out the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) experiment to determine the composition of MAPbBr3 at -180 °C as shown in Figure Besides temperature, accelerating voltage is another important factor concerning about beam sensitivity during TEM characterization. The total doses (Dt) before the superstructure spots appear is used as a reference to determine the beam sensitivity. We acquire the Dt at 80 kV and 300 kV from samples on the same one TEM grid. As shown in Figure We also find a facet-dependent electron beam sensitivity for MAPbI3. Specifically, as shown in Figure We further study the effect of anion and compare the beam sensitivity of tetragonal MAPbI3 and cubic MAPbBr3. The Dt for MAPbI3 ranges from 30 to 41 e Å -2 (Figure OIHPs are extremely sensitive to electron beam and it is always difficult to acqiure the atomic stucture. Our findings suggest TEM characterizations shall be carried out at 300 kV and RT rather than a low voltage and a low temperature. With these guidance, we have also acquired the structure of MAPbI3 at 300 kV and 25 °C, as shown in Figure Recently, the cryo-EM is widely believed to mitigate the electron beam damage, especially for organic materials, by lessening mass loss and the heating damage to a certain degree In summary, by using low-dose electron diffraction imaging techniques, we have investigated the optimized condition for TEM charactrization of OIHPs. We have also quantified the threshold electron dose to acquire the pristine SAED as well as the highresolution TEM image of MAPbI3. These findings are helpful to guide the furture TEM charactrization. On the other hand, our work provides some valuble insights into understanding the degradation mechanism of OIHPs and can also be useful for improving the performance of PSCs. 