In this work we probe the possibility of high-temperature conventional superconductivity in the boron-carbon system, using ab-initio screening. A database of 320 metastable structures with fixed composition (50%/50%) is generated with the Minima-Hopping method, and characterized with electronic and vibrational descriptors. Full electron-phonon calculations on sixteen representative structures allow to identify general trends in Tc across and within the four families in the energy landscape, and to construct an approximate Tc predictor, based on transparently interpretable and easily computable electronic and vibrational descriptors. Based on these, we estimate that around 10% of all metallic structures should exhibit Tc 's above 30 K. This work is a first step towards ab-initio design of new high-Tc superconductors. For more than one century, the discovery of a room temperature superconductor has been considered one of the "holy grails" of condensed matter physics. Already at the end of the 60's, N.W. Ashcroft and V.Ginzburg 1 predicted that under sufficiently high pressures hydrogen may be turned into an atomic metallic phase, Only recently, the wide-spread use of modern methods for crystal structure prediction (CSP) has permitted to address the crucial aspect of thermodynamics in material design. Combined with methods for high-throughput (HT) database screening and machine learning (ML), CSP methods are an unprecedentedly powerful tool driving a sudden acceleration in material discoveries in the last few years First, we generate a large database of 320 distinct metastable boron/carbon structures with the minima hopping method (MH) The BC system is an ideal choice for a first blind study of superconductivity, because both boron and carbon are light elements which tend to form stiff, directional bonds, favorable for HCTS; furthermore, both elements exhibit a strong tendency to polymorphism The boron-carbon phase diagram is extremely complex; hexagonal and tetrahedral motifs, characteristic of C sp 2 /sp 3 bonds, dominate the energy landscape up to ∼ 1/3 : 2/3 C : B compositions, while more complex motifs develop for higher B concentrations, due to an increasing role of electron-deficient boron. This paper is organized as follows. In section II we discuss the general features of the whole pool of 320 structures, their classification into different families and their salient qualities. We also describe briefly how the sixteen representative structures are selected for our subsequent superconductivity studies. In section III we discuss the trends in T c amongst different structures, and how they are correlated with electronic structure quantities. In section IV we discuss in greater detail the electronic, vibrational and superconducting properties of the structures. In section V we show that a simple analytical expression interpolates the T c of the representative structures, and may be used as a predictor for superconductivity. Finally in section VI we summarize the main conclusions of our work. Appendix A contains plots of the electronic and phononic DOS, and Migdal-Eliashberg spectral functions for the sixteen representative structures, while the methodology used for this study is discussed in greater detail in the Appendix B. In addition convex hull has also been provided in Appendix B. All structures considered in this work have a 50%/50% B/C stoichiometry, and can be described with an 8-atoms unit cell (B 4 C 4 ). This choice leaves out some interesting structural prototypes, such as nanotubes and fullerenes, but is a reasonable compromise between computational efficiency and structural flexibility. Our initial MH runs produced around ∼ 630 such structures. Through post-relaxation of this initial pool with tighter settings and removal of duplicates, we ended up with a final tally of 320 unique structures. The Energy vs Volume plot of these structures is shown in the upper panel of Fig. The colors and symbols in Fig. The combined variation of bonding fraction and the spatial arrangement of the tetrahedra and triangles formed by sp 3 or sp 2 bonds make some of the BC structures different from diamond or graphite. Their motifs are similar to those which have already been reported in pure carbon structures The characteristic features of the four different families are summarized below: • Diamond [ grey circles, Fig. • Graphite [ blue triangle, Fig. • Slab [ inverted green triangles, Fig. A slab structure is geometrically similar to a graphite structure. However, at variance with graphite, formed by equispaced single layers, a slab structure is formed by slabs of multiple atomic layers, separated by void. As shown in Fig. • Tubulane [ red circles, Fig. Superconductivity calculations are around two orders of magnitude more expensive than the total energy and structural relaxation runs used to construct our initial database of structures. In order to narrow down our pool of potential superconductors, we first pruned out those structures, which have too high formation energies to be synthesizable, are dynamically unstable or exhibit poor metallic character and lack the stiff bonds, which are essential prerequisites for conventional HTS. This was done by computing the value of electronic density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level N(E F ) and the vibrational frequencies at the zone center (ω i ) for all structure in the database(DB). These quantities, together with the formation energy ∆E, were used to perform a preliminary screening, which left us with 116 potential candidates for HTS. As this number was still an order of magnitude too large to afford full T c calculations, we manually hand-picked sixteen representative candidates for accurate superconductivity calculations, shown as dark colored symbols in Fig. The sixteen representative structures have been further relaxed with a Perdew-Wang-1992-LDA Grouped by family, the structures are shown in Figs. The first column in Table Column six and seven list the (ω max ) (meV) and the average (ω avg )(meV) Γ-point vibrational frequency, evaluated on a 8 atoms unit-cell for all structures. The quantities ∆E, N(E F ) and ω avg have been used for a pre-screening of structures as discussed in Appendix B. Quantities associated with superconducting properties listed in Table with a standard value μ * =0.10 for the Coulomb pseudopotential. The structures listed in Table The sixteen structures listed in Table I represent a diverse sample of possible structural motifs and properties. Before analyzing their electronic structure in detail, some general trends across and within families can already be discussed on the basis of the data in table I. In general, three observations are in place: 1. In all families except graphite, we found structures with rather high values of the DOS at the Fermi level N(E F ), and moderate to high-T c 's. We also observe that these structures with higher DOS and T c tend to have quite high formation energies ∆E, of the order of 200-400 meV, which is close to the synthetizability threshold. In this section, we present a detailed comparison of the electronic structure of the representative structures, to gain a microscopic insight of their superconducting properties, discussed only in general terms so far. The electronic DOS's, Phonon and electron-phonon spectra (Eliashberg functions) for our sixteen representative structures, divided by families, are reported in Appendix B, Figs. 8-19; in the electronic (Figs. 8-11) and phonon (Figs. 12-15) DOS plots, we report in red and blue the partial carbon and boron contributions as well as the total DOS in black. The top panels of all figures show reference spectra, calculated for a pure carbon structure. The electronic DOS plots show an almost perfect hybridization between B and C states in all structures, with the two partial DOS's closely following each other. In addition, the variation of the spectral distribution of the electronic states in different BC structures, compared to the reference pure carbon structures, is a good indicator of the changes in electronic structure due to rearrangement of bonds. In this respect, it is quite interesting to compare the behavior of structures in the diamond and graphite families, where it is straightforward to define a reference template for the pure structure. In both cases, in a simple rigid-band (RB) model the Fermi level, shown by the dashed line in the upper panels of Figs. For slabs and tubulanes, due to the large variety of moieties and motifs, it is less straightforward to define a reference structure. We chose T06 and S02 as structural template for the C reference structure for tubulane and slab respectively. Also in these cases, a pronounced shift of spectral weight away from the Fermi level is observed, which is reduced for higher-energy structures. The DOS of low-energy tubulanes, which are more open, resemble quite closely those of graphite structures, while highenergy ones tend to mimic those of diamond. The same tendency can be observed in slab structures. Phonon DOS's are shown in Figs. 12-15, again with the same color-code and definition of reference structures. As observed for electronic DOS's, due to the similar B and C mass, the spectra have in general a fairly mixed character. However, the phonon DOS's of structures which contain B-B or C-C bonds tend to exhibit sharp peaks of pure B-or C-character, corresponding to localized vibrations. Many of these peaks are found at high energies. In addition, a progressive reduction of the highest phonon frequency with increasing formation energy is also evident in all families. The effect is particularly spectacular in DO5, where the reduction of the highest frequency is ∼ 35%. Figs. 16-19 show for each family the Migdal-Eliashberg(ME) ep spectral function: 53 where N(E F ) is the electronic DOS at the Fermi level, and the two δ functions restrict the sum to electronic states at the Fermi level with momenta k and k+q. The ω q,ν is the vibrational frequency of mode ν and wavevector q and g k,k+q,ν is the corresponding electron-phonon matrix element. On the same plots, with orange dashedlines we show the frequency-depent ep constant λ(ω) and report the average phonon frequency ω log , given by: which measure respectively the average energy of the phonons which couple mostly to electrons, and of the intensity of the ep coupling. In most compounds, the Eliashberg function is almost proportional to the phonon DOS, reflecting a uniform spread of the ep coupling on the phonon spectrum. A notable exception is the slab structure S02, where there is a substantial enhancement of coupling to phonons in the low-energy region. While the values of ω log are quite spread out, without any clear trend for low-or highenergy structures, the values of the total ep coupling constant λ, obtained from Eq. 3 with ω = ∞, tend to be larger for higher-energy structures, and range from 0.4 in graphite structures G01, G02 and G03 to 2.3 in diamond D05. The main factor behind the large variation in λ amongst structures is the variation of the electronic DOS at the Fermi level N(E F ). This can be appreciated recalling that λ can be rewritten using the so-called Hopfield expression: where I 2 is the ep coupling matrix element averaged over Fermi surface, M is the average atomic mass and ω2 is the square of an average vibrational frequency. As reported in Table In summary, the analysis of the electronic structure shows that most structural templates exhibit a similar tendency to superconductivity: the ep coupling is spread out over several phonon modes, and the value of the ep coupling constant λ, and hence T c , is mostly determined by the value of N(E F ), since the ratio V = λ/N (E F ), is essentially constant across and within families. In most low-energy structures T c is suppressed by the formation of B-B and C-C bonds, which shifts electronic spectral weight away from the Fermi level, lowering the band energy, but also N(E F ). The presence of B-B and C-C bonds is also visible in the phonon spectra, where it leads to the formation of sharp peaks at high energies. The diamond structure D05, where, due to the alternating arrangement of B-C atoms, the original symmetry of pure diamond is retained, and electronic states at the Fermi level have a pure σ (sp 3 ) character, is a clear outlier of the database. Here, the DOS follows a perfect rigid-band behavior compared to pure diamond, while the phonon spectrum is strongly renormalized, due to coupling between bond-stretching phonons and σ states. As a result, V = λ/N (E F ) is around 50 % larger than in all other representative structures, and the predicted superconducting T c is also exceptional (79 K), in line with the highest values calculated in Ref. These observations imply that general arguments based on the rigid-band analysis of fixed structural templates must be taken with care in BC, 37 because structural distortions and bond rearrangements can have a dramatic effect on T c . The values of T c , λ and ω log for all sixteen representative structures, collected in Table I, were computed using the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formula, Eq. 1, which requires a full calculation of the electron-phonon (Eliashberg) spectral function -Eq. 2. For an 8-atoms unit cell with no symmetry, a calculation of α 2 F (ω) with a reasonably-dense sampling of reciprocal space for electronic and phononic momenta requires around 3000 CPU hours on a computer cluster. This type of calculations are clearly unfeasible for largescale high-throughput material screening, which was our primary motivation to pre-select only a few representative structures from our initial pool. With the T c data at hand, it is interesting to see whether any trends in T c could have been foreseen on the basis of the simple electronic structure quantities that we had used to pre-screen our structural database, which require a much less intense computational effort. The three upper panels of Fig. Although extremely simple, this formula seems to interpolate nicely the T c from different templates, and has a transparent physical interpretation. That T c should positively correlate with N(E F ) can be easily understood from the Hopfield's expression for λ -Eq. 5. On the other hand, the correlation of T c with ω max is less straightforward to understand. One aspect is probably phonon softening: in an interacting system of phonons and electrons, the same coupling which leads to superconductivity also leads to the renormalization of phonon frequencies, with respect to a bare, non-interacting value. In a simple model where a single phonon mode with frequency ω couples to a single electronic band, ω is reduced with respect to its bare value Ω as: ω 2 = Ω 2 (1 -2λ). However, while the model of a single phonon mode may be safely applied to hole-doped diamond and graphite, where superconductivity is dominated by the zone-center bond-stretching optical phonon and σ holes, However, we can use our simple predictor for T c to estimate the tendency of BC structures to HTCS across the whole energy landscape. In Fig. In this work, we probed the possibility of realizing HTCS in the boron-carbon system, using an ab-initio screening approach. First, we generated a large (320) database of metastable BC structures, with 50%/50% boron/carbon composition and 8-atoms unit cells, and showed that these can be grouped into four main families of characteristic motifs for pure carbon: diamond, graphite, slab and tubulane. From a first highthroughput screening based on the values of the electronic DOS at the Fermi level, zone-center vibrational frequencies, and formation energies, we estimated that around half of the generated structures are promising HCTS. From these, we selected sixteen representative structures, spanning a variety of motifs and structural templates, for which we performed full electronphonon calculations. We identified several general trends amongst them: (i) In all families, except graphite, we could find superconductors with T c 's 40 K, comparable to the best-known ambient-pressure superconductors; (ii) Within one family, the value of T c is essentially determined by N(E F ); (iii) T c correlates inversely with the highest phonon frequecty at the zone-center, ω max . (iv) A geometric analysis of the selected structures shows that the highest T c 's within a given family is usually found in structures where the fraction of B-C bonds is dominant with respect to other types of bonds, and particularly if these have sp 3 character. Structures where bonds centered around B atoms are neither sp 2 nor sp 3 tend to exhibit a low T c , because the clustering of atoms around B tends to reduce the symmetry, depress the value of N(E F ), and hence T c . The empirical observations (i)-(iii) can be distilled into a single analytical formula for T c , which can be used as a predictor for HTCS. On the basis of this formula, we estimate that around ∼10% structures have T c larger than 30 K, which makes them interesting candidates for HTCS. Most of these structures have formation energies between 300 and 400 meV, and may be synthesized using an appropriate carbon precursor. The diamond structure D05, which only has B-C bonds in sp 3 tetrahedral arrangement, sets an upper limit for T c ∼ 80 K for the BC system at 50%-50% composition. Given that T c is so strongly dominated by N (E F ), it is however conceivable that T c may be improved by doping. This work is a first step in the identification of HTCS at ambient pressure in light-element covalent metals using ab-initio screening techniques. The minima hopping (MH) method The post-relaxation, energy evaluation and calculation of the electronic DOS of all structures were performed using VASP with same set of PAW potentials and PBE functional as used in the MH runs, but including vander-Waals D3 dispersion corrections with Becke-Jonson damping The phonon calculations at the Γ-point on the postrelaxed structures and the complete phonon calculations of phonon spectra and ep matrix elements were carried out within Density Functional Perturbation Theory(DFPT), as implemented in the plane-wave pseudopotential code Quantum Espresso-6.4.1 In this work, we have developed a three-stage protocol to identify superconductivity candidates from an initial pool of 320 metastable MH structures. In the first step, we wanted to prune out structures which had no potential for superconductivity. We thus needed to identify structure which should be: (i) plausible to be realized in experimental conditions 39 , (ii) metallic (iii) dynamically stable and (iv) exhibit stiff directional bonds, which ensure large phonon frequencies and ep matrix elements. Each of the these qualitative features can be estimated by the energy of formation ∆E (i), electronic DOS at the Fermi level N(E F ) (ii), and the phonon spectrum (iii), respectively. The energy of formation and the electronic DOS were already calculated for all the 320 structures after the post-relaxation step. For the dynamical stability, a full calculation of the phonon spectrum is too expensive to be feasible, whereas calculating the phonon frequencies ω i only at the Γ-point is relatively inexpensive. Hence, we calculated the ω i 's only at the Γ-point. This approach is not sufficient to assess the dynamical stability of the structure but it allowed us to reduce the pool of candidates, removing structures with imaginary ω i 's. From the ω i 's, we further constructed a single-number descriptor ω avg , which is an average of all optical phonon frequencies at the Γ-point. With these three quantities, i.e. ∆E, N(E F ) and ω avg , in hand, we then developed and used the following threesteps screening process: • Step 1: Structures with ∆E 0.5 eV/atom w.r.t Graphite and α-Rhombohedral-B 12 are retained. Structures with N(E F ) 0.1 states/eV/atom are retained. • Step 3: Structures with N(E F ) × ω avg 0.02 states/atom are retained. These requirements are still broad enough that the initial subset was reduced to 116 candidates, which still constitute a too large pool for a complete calculation of superconducting properties. To reduce the total pool to a manageable number, we hand-picked a few structures (5-6) for each family (D, G, S and T) from the final set of screened candidates. While selecting the structures, care was taken that they represent different values of N(E F ) and ω avg values. For these structures, we performed full calculations of the phonon and ep coupling spectra over the full BZ. If any of the initally-selected structures was thus found to be dynamically unstable, it was replaced with another candidate with similar values of N(E F ) and ω avg . The positions of the selected structures in the energy vs volume plot in Fig. . Summary of calculated properties of representative BC structures belonging to different families i.e. diamond (D), graphite