Synthesis, crystal and electronic structure, and physical properties of the Mo6Ga31 endohedral cluster superconductor are reported. The compound has two crystallographic modifications, monoclinic and triclinic, in which the same {Mo12Ga62} building units are perpendicular or codirectional to each other, respectively. Monoclinic and triclinic structures of Mo6Ga31 possess qualitatively the same electronic density of states showing a high peak at the Fermi level. Both modifications are inherently present in the bulk specimen. Due to the proximity effect, bulk Mo6Ga31 exhibits single superconducting transition at the critical temperature of 8.2 K in zero magnetic field. The upper critical field, which is 7.8 T at zero temperature, shows clear enhancement with respect to the Werthamer-Helfand-Honenberg prediction. Accordingly, heat capacity measurements indicate strong electronphonon coupling in the superconducting state with the large ratio of 2∆(0)/(kBTc) = 4.5, where 2∆(0) is the full superconducting gap at zero temperature. Recently, the transition metal-embedded Ga clusters were proposed as a structural motif favorable for superconductivity. For Mo 8 Ga 41 , measurements of heat capacity indicate strong coupling superconductivity with the full superconducting gap of 2∆(0)/(k B T c ) = 4.4 exceeding significantly the weak-coupling BCS limit. Here, we report on the synthesis, physical properties, and electronic structure of the Mo 6 Ga 31 endohedral cluster superconductor, a compound, which is closely related to the Mo 8 Ga 41 and Mo 4 Ga 21-x-δ Sn x superconductors in the strong coupling regime. Mo 8 Ga 41 , Mo 6 Ga 31 , and Mo 4 Ga 21-x-δ Sn x build up structural series with the general formula of Mo n Ga 5n+1 , where n corresponds to the number of Mo@Ga 10 polyhedra (Mo@Ga 9 Sn in the case of Mo 4 Ga 21-x-δ Sn x ) condensed on one Ga@Ga 12 cuboctahedron in the main building unit. In this study, we investigate the superconducting state of Mo 6 Ga 31 in order to measure the electron-phonon coupling and analyze how it correlates with the critical temperature, density of states at the Fermi level, valence electron count and other crucial parameters in the Mo n Ga 5n+1 series of superconductors. Mo 6 Ga 31 was synthesized using the standard ampule technique. The stoichiometric mixture of Mo (4N , powder) and Ga (5N , pieces) was placed inside a quartz ampule, which was evacuated to the residual pressure of 5 × 10 -3 mbar and flame-sealed. To obtain a polycrystalline specimen of Mo 6 Ga 31 , the ampule was annealed in a programmable furnace at 700 • C for 14 days with one intermediate grinding. The resulting black powder, which contains Mo 6 Ga 31 with no admixture of other compounds, was used for thermodynamic and electrical transport measurements. Single crystals of Mo 6 Ga 31 suitable for structural studies were selected from the specimens prepared under different synthetic conditions employing crystal growth from the high-temperature melt (see Section III.A for details). High-resolution powder X-ray diffraction (HRPXRD) measurements were performed at the ID22 beam line (λ = 0.35451(1) Å, 2θ max = 28 • ) of the European Syn-chrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF, Grenoble, France). Measurements were conducted at room temperature and at elevated temperatures using a hot-air blower on a sample enclosed in a fused silica capillary with a diameter of 0.3 mm. Le Bail fittings of the HRPXRD data were performed using the Jana2006 program. 12 HRPXRD patterns collected at elevated temperatures are presented in the Supporting Information. Polycrystalline specimen of Mo 6 Ga 31 was studied by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a STA 409 PC Luxx thermal analyzer (Netzsch). Measurements were performed in high-purity Ar atmosphere at temperatures between 30 • C and 600 • C with the heating/cooling rate of 10 • C/min, and the results are presented in the Supporting Information. Three-dimensional electron diffraction (3D ED) patterns were collected on a Themis Z transmission electron microscope operated at 300 kV employing the InsteaD-Matic script Single-crystal X-ray diffraction experiments were perfomed on a Bruker D8 Venture diffractometer (Mo Xray source, graphite monochromator, λ = 0.71073 Å, T = 100 K) equipped with a Photon 100 CMOS detector. For the absorption correction, the multi-scan routine was employed. The crystal structures were determined by the charge-flipping algorithm using the Superflip program, Electronic structure calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory using the full-potential local-orbital minimum-basis bandstructure code FPLO (version 14.00-47). Electrical resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe technique using the AC transport option of a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) at temperatures between 2 K and 300 K in magnetic fields from 0 T to 10 T. For measurements, a rectangular-shaped pellet with typical dimensions of 8×3×1 mm 3 was prepared by pressing the polycrystalline specimen at the external pressure of 4 kbar at room temperature. Cu wires with the diameter of 100 μm were attached to the pellet using silver-containing epoxy resin. Magnetization measurements were conducted on a Magnetic Properties Measurement System (MPMS 3 SQUID, Quantum Design) in the zero-field-cooling (zfc) and fieldcooling (fc) conditions in the temperature range of 1.8-15 K in the magnetic field of 5 Oe. Also, magnetization was measured in the zfc conditions at various fixed temperatures between 2 K and 8 K by sweeping magnetic field from 0 T to 14 T using the VSM option of PPMS. Heat capacity was measured using a relaxation-type calorimeter (HC option of PPMS, Quantum Design) at temperatures between 1.8 K and 20 K in magnetic fields from 0 T to 10 T. Although two crystallographic modifications of Mo 6 Ga 31 were reported, it is unclear, at which experimental conditions they can be obtained separately. Information on synthesis of the monoclinic Mo 6 Ga 31 is missing in the original study, 10 while single crystals of the triclinic Mo 6 Ga 31 were obtained from the MoGa 9 Si sample, where the Mo 6 Ga 31 phase was a side product. Single crystals selected from the specimens were studied by single-crystal X-ray diffraction. Tables S1-S3 of the Supporting Information summarize the results, which are in good agreement with the previous reports, Using the structural parameters obtained from the single-crystal XRD data, we calculated electronic structure of Mo 6 Ga 31 . The triclinic and monoclinic modifications possess qualitatively the same density of states (DOS), which is shown in Figure Electrical resistivity of Mo 6 Ga 31 follows metallic behavior at elevated temperatures. However, the ρ(T ) dependence is extremely flat between 10 K and 300 K, and shows the saturation behavior with increasing temperature. The small residual-resistance-ratio of 1.2 can be paralleled to the peak broadening observed in HRPXRD and caused by the coexisting domains of the monoclinic and triclinic phases. At low temperatures, superconducting transition is observed with the low-temperature drop of resistivity occuring between the onset temperature of 8.2 K and the final temperature of 7.8 K in zero magnetic field. The increase of magnetic field shifts the transition to lower temperatures, and finally, no indications of superconductivity are observed at temperatures above 1.8 K in the magnetic field of μ 0 H = 10 T. The bulk nature of superconductivity is confirmed by thermodynamic measurements (Fig. The specific heat of Mo 6 Ga 31 exhibits the superconducting anomaly located at T c = 8.2 K in zero magnetic field in good agreement with the resistivity and magnetization measurements. The increase of the magnetic field shifts the transition to lower temperatures, which simultaneously becomes smoothed (Fig. , where Φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum. At temperatures above 6 K, μ 0 H c2 (T ) is linear with the slope of ω = -1.2 T K -1 . According to the Werthamer-Helfand-Honenberg (WHH) model, the upper critical field can be calculated as μ 0 H c2 (0) = -0.693ωT c = 6.8 T, which is smaller than the extrapolated value of μ 0 H c2 (0) = 7.8 T. This enhancement of the upper critical field may be due to strong electron-phonon coupling. To gain insight into the electron-phonon coupling in the superconducting state of Mo 6 Ga 31 , the specific heat data were analyzed. Figure In the paper, synthesis, structural characteristics, computational electronic structure, and physical properties of the Mo 6 Ga 31 superconductor are reported. The bulk type-II superconductivity is observed below the critical temperature of 8.2 K in zero magnetic field, and below the upper critical field of 7.8 T extrapolated to zero temperature. Remarkably, the superconducting state is in the strong-coupling regime with the large ratio of 2∆/(k B T c ) = 4.5. This places Mo 6 Ga 31 in line with the Mo 8 Ga 41 and Mo 4 Ga 21-x-δ Sn x superconductors, for which the strong electron-phonon coupling was also reported. Interestingly, the critical temperture correlates with the composition in the Mo 8 Ga 41 (T c = 9.8 K), Mo 6 Ga 31 (8.2 K), and Mo 4 Ga 21-x-δ Sn x (5.85 K) series, namely, with the number of Mo atoms per formula unit, and with the density of states at the Fermi level. In the listed superconductors, Mo is placed inside the Mo@Ga 10 endohedral clusters, where strong mixing of the Mo 4d states and Ga 4p states yields peculiar electronic structure in the vicinity of the Fermi energy. The high density of states is observed at E = E F , which may be favorable for superconductivty. Moreover, the framework composed of Mo@Ga 10 clusters exhibits specific phonon properties that give rise to the strong electron-phonon coupling. Thus, Mo 6 Ga 31 expands the family of Mobased strongly-coupled superconductors.