In this work, we derive a set of compact analytical formulas expressing the threedimensional acoustic radiation torque (ART) exerted on a particle of arbitrary shape embedded in a fluid and insonified by an arbitrary acoustic field. This formulation enables direct computation of the ART from the angular spectrum based beam shape coefficients introduced by Sapozhnikov & Bailey [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 133, 661-676 (2013)] and the partial wave coefficients. It is particularly well suited to determine the ART exerted on a particle when the acoustic field is known in a source plane. The acoustic radiation torque (ART) exerted by an arbitrary acoustic field on a particle can in general be decomposed into three contributions 1 : one resulting from the incident wave scattering by the particle, one induced by absorption of the acoustic field by the particle Based on this idea, Zhang & Marston In 2012, Silva et al. But one major difficulty with the MEM is to calculate the BSC for an arbitrary field and an arbitrary located sphere. Baresch et al. Nevertheless, all these methods are difficult to set into practice when analytical expressions of the incident beam are not known. Recently Zhao et al. Finally the third method is based on the decomposition of the incident field into a sum of plane waves using the angular spectrum method (ASM) introduced by Sapozhnikov & Bailey In this paper, we derive compact analytical formula expressing the torque applied by an arbitrary field on an arbitrary located particle of arbitrary shape and size as a function of the ASM-based beam shape coefficients. The formula are validated through comparison with previous results obtained by Gong et al. Finally, the potential of this approach is illustrated by calculating the Torque applied on a 5 μm particle insonified by a one-sided focused vortex beam produced by a plane active holographic transducer similar to the one used by Baudoin et al. to trap microparticles 26 and cells In this section, we give a brief overview of the main steps leading to the derivation of the angular spectrum based ART formulas (with the same notations as in Ref. where L = 1/2 u • u) -p 2 /(2ρ 0 c 2 0 ) is the time-averaged acoustic Lagrangian, r is the field point, p is the total acoustic pressure field (incident + scattered), u is the total acoustic velocity vector, ρ 0 is the fluid density at rest, c 0 is the fluid sound speed, and dS = n • r 2 sin θdθdφ is the differential surface in the far field with n the outward unit normal vector. If S 0 is a sphere whose center coincide with the referential center, then r×n = rn×n = 0 and the first term in Eq. ( with i is the imaginary unit and ω the angular frequency. Hence, the ART expression in Eq. (1) can be written in terms of the incident (Φ i ) and scattered (Φ s ) velocity potentials as where "Im" designates the imaginary part, the star superscript the complex conjugate and L = -i(r × ∇) is the angular momentum operator, with its components in the three directions and their recursion relations with normalized spherical harmonics given in detail in Appendix. Now, assuming that the incident pressure field is known in a plane defined as z = 0, p i | z=0 = p i (x, y, 0), the angular spectrum S(k x , k y ) of the acoustic field (that is nothing but the 2D spatial Fourier transform of the complex temporal harmonic amplitude of the field in this plane) reads: with x and y the cartesian coordinates in the plane, k x and k y the wavenumber components in x and y directions. Then, the field at any point can be calculated by propagating each plane wave composing the source plane up to the target point (x, y, z): where k = ω/c 0 is the wave number in fluid. In this way, the acoustic field is decomposed into an infinite sum of plane waves and the angular spectrum S(k x , k y ) characterizes the relative magnitude of each plane wave. The next step is to solve the scattering problem. For this purpose, this plane wave decomposition must be turned into a spherical wave decomposition, more suitable to solve the scattering problem (see Sapozhnikov & Bailey 22 ): where Y nm (θ, φ) are the spherical harmonics and the H nm represent the respective weight of each spherical wave and hence are nothing but ASM-based beam shape coefficients: with cos . This expression results from the known decomposition of a plane wave into a sum of spherical waves. Analytical solutions of the scattering problem for spheres embedded in a fluid are known in many cases including rigid with A nm the partial wave coefficients which only depend on the index n for a spherical shape, having A n = (s n -1)/2 with s n the scattering coefficients, and depend on both n and m for non-spherical shapes 2 . Now the incident and scattered pressure fields are given in terms of the BSC H nm based on the angular spectrum method The final compact expression of the three-dimensional ART in terms of the H nm coefficients can be derived by using the recursion and orthogonality relations of the normalized spherical harmonics (see details in Appendix B): Note that the prior ART formulas by Silva et al BEAM. To validate the ART expressions obtained with the angular spectrum method (ASM) in the previous section, the torque exerted on an off-axis viscoelastic sphere insonified in an inviscid fluid by a cylindrical Bessel vortex is calculated with Eqs. (10 -12) and compared with the results obtained with the multipole expansion method (MEM) Note that for a sphere in a vortex beam, there are two forms of rotations when the sphere is off the beam axis: (i) the orbital rotation of the sphere around the beam axis induced by the azimuthal force, and (ii) the spin rotation of the sphere around its own mass center by the torque. For a non-absorbing sphere located on the axis of the vortex, there is no axial torque following the theory proposed by Zhang & Marston In this configuration, analytical expression of the H nm coefficients is given by (see detailed analytical derivation with ASM in Appendix C 2): where , M is the topological charge of the Bessel beam, β is the cone angle, k ⊥ = k sin β, R 0 = x 2 0 + y 2 0 , and x 0 , y 0 and z 0 are the offset along the x, y and z directions, respectively. The axial component of the wave number is k z = k cos β, and the original azimuthal angle is φ 0 = tan -1 (y 0 /x 0 ). Note also that Eq. ( For brevity, the acoustic parameters of the viscoelastic polyethylene (PE) sphere immersed in water are same as those used in Ref. To illustrate the potential of the present approach, we now apply our method to a case which cannot be treated analytically: the torque exerted on a 5 μm viscoelastic polystyrene fluid by plane active spiraling transducers (Fig. The acoustic pressure in the source plane p i (x, y, 0) is approximated as having the same geometrical distribution as the active spiral electrodes as shown in Fig. The rest of the domain has a pressure equal to p i (x, y, 0) = 0. In the following computations, we take the physical domain as 3R t ×3R t in (x, y) plane and the fine mesh number 3000 with the physical space interval R t /1000 to assure the convergence. Based on the two-dimensional fast Fourier transform, the angular spectrum is directly computed with the wave number interval 2π/(3R t ) and the range 2000π/R t × 2000π/R t in (k x , k y ) plane. The torque is computed with the formula provided in this paper while the force is computed using formulas by Sapozhnikov & Bailey In summary, some compact angular spectrum based three-dimensional ART formulas are derived for a single particle immersed in an ideal fluid with no limitation to the particle size, particle shape and beam shape structure. The arbitrary acoustic field is taken as the superposition of plane waves, hence can be expanded based on the angular spectrum method In addition, the formulas can be used for multiple objects By Combining with the three-dimensional acoustic radiation forces Substitute Eqs. (A3a) and (A3b) into (B1) with the relation Using the orthogonality relationship in Eq. (A4), the expression of T x is Here, we use a re-index for the second part of Eq. (B3) by using a variable substitution which is Eq. (10) in Sec. II. Note that Re{X} = Re{X * } with X an arbitrary complex number. The expression of y-component of ART is As similar as the derivation for T x , the final expression of T y in terms of H nm can be obtained by using Eqs. (A3a) and (A3b) into (B5) and as given in Eq. ( The expression of z-component of ART is Inserting Eq. (A3c) into (B6) and using the orthogonality relation in Eq. (A4), the final expression of T z in terms of H nm can be derived as which is Eq. ( , and the position vector r = R e r (φ) + z e z . Inserting the expression of the CBB (C1) in equation (C3) and considering the angular spectrum in the plane z = 0 gives: From the integral definition of a cylindrical Bessel function: -π e i(ατ -x sin τ ) dτ and the variable substitution π/2 -φ = φ k -φ (so that dφ = dφ and cos(π/2 -φ) = sin φ), the integral of the expotential function over dφ becomes: which is Eq.(62) in Ref. ) degenerates into the integral over a circle corresponding to k R = k ⊥ , which in cylindrical coordinates becomes: (n-m)! (n+m)! P m n (cos θ k ) the conjugates of the spherical harmonics and 2π 0 e i(M -m)φ k dφ k = 2πδ M m . This formula agrees with the expression given in Ref. Note that in Fourier space, we have dk x dk y = Rdk R dφ k , and cos The on-axis value of the angular spectrum S was calculated in the previous section (equation (C6)), leading to: We can now proceed very similarly to the on-axis case to compute the H nm coefficients and turn the integral over a disk into an integral over the circle k R = k ⊥ : =2πi -M p 0 e -ik z 0 (2n + 1) 4π (C12) turns out to be: H nm = 2π 3/2 i -m p 0 e -ik z 0 (2n + 1)(n -m)! (n + m)! P m n (cos β)e i(M -m)φ 0 J m-M (k ⊥ R 0 ) (C13) with cos θ k = cos β, and J M -m (k ⊥ R 0 ) = (-1) m-M J m-M (k ⊥ R 0 ) for an integer (M -m) ∈ Z. When the particle is located on the axis of a CBB [i.e., (x 0 , y 0 , z 0 ) = (0, 0, 0) so that (R 0 , φ 0 , z 0 ) = (0, 0, 0)], Eq. (C13) degenerates into (C7). Note that J m-M (0) = δ mM . For the CBB used in Sec. III, the field is defined by the acoustic potential (with time harmonics omitted) as Note that the relation between acoustic potential and pressure is p = iωρ 0 Φ, so that there is a coefficient difference i M +1 between Eq. ( longitudinal (γ p ) and shear (γ s ) absorption coefficients are normalized by the corresponding wave number (k p,s ) which are calculated by the longitudinal (c p ) and shear (c s ) velocities with ω = k p,s c p,s . Material Density(kg/m 3 ) c p (m/s) c s (m/s) γ