In this work we develop and study single-photon sources based on InGaAs quantum dots (QDs) emitting in the telecom O-band. The quantum devices are fabricated using in-situ electron beam lithography in combination with the thermocompression bonding to realize a backside gold mirror. Our structures are based on InGaAs/GaAs heterostructures, where the QD emission is redshifted towards the telecom O-band at 1.3 μm via a strain reducing layer. QDs pre-selected by cathodoluminescence mapping are embedded into mesa structures with a back-side gold mirror for enhanced photon-extraction efficiency. Photon-autocorrelation measurements under pulsed non-resonant wetting-layer excitation are performed at temperatures up to 40 K showing pure single-photon emission which makes the devices compatible with stand-alone operation using Stirling cryocoolers. Using pulsed p-shell excitation we realize single-photon emission with high multi-photon suppression of g (2) (0) = 0.027 ± 0.005, post-selected two-photon interference of about (96 ± 10) % and an associated coherence time of (212 ± 25) ps. Moreover, the structures show an extraction efficiency of ~5 %, which compares well with values expected from numeric simulations of this photonic structure. Further improvements on our devices will enable implementations of quantum communication via optical fibers. Single photons, often referred to as flying qubits, are key resource in the field of photonic quantum technology and enable for instance the distribution of quantum information over large distances. In this work, we address the above-mentioned requirements within a deterministic device technology. We transfer and optimize technology concepts, which allowed for highquality emission from semiconductor QDs in the spectral range below 1 μm, to deterministically realize bright QD single-photon sources (SPSs) emitting in the telecom O-band. The sources are based on self-assembled InGaAs/GaAs QDs grown by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), where a strain-reducing layer (SRL) is applied to shift the emission wavelength to the telecom O-band. We developed an advanced flip-chip based processing concept for telecom SPSs in which the single-QD device is fabricated within three main processing steps. First, a GaAs semiconductor heterostructure is grown by MOCVD including a single layer of self-assembled InGaAs QDs. Then, a thin membrane of this structure is transferred on a gold mirror by thermocompression bonding and wet-chemical etching, before single QDs inside this membrane are deterministically integrated into mesa structures by means of in-situ EBL. The epitaxial growth starts with a 200 nm thick GaAs buffer on top of an n-doped GaAs (100) substrate to enable a high-quality epitaxial surface. Then, two Al0.90Ga0.10As layers of 1 μm and 100 nm thickness are deposited. These two layers are separated by a 2 μm-thick GaAs spacer layer which allows for a well-controlled two-step wet-chemical etching procedure to remove the initial substrate. All of these layers act as etch-stop and sacrificial layers and will be removed during the flip-chip post-growth processing. To enable thermocompression gold bonding a 250 nm thick gold layer is deposited on the as-grown heterostructure sample as well as on a bare piece of GaAs (100) substrate acting as host substrate. The sample is bonded to the host substrate (gold facing gold) by applying a pressure of 6 MPa and a temperature of approximately 600 K for four hours. The subsequent wet-chemical etching is performed in two steps. First, the 300 μm thick GaAs substrate is lifted off with a fast etching solution (H2O2/NH3, 10:1), where the etching stops at the first Al0.97Ga0.03As layer. After an HCl dip removing this etch-stop layer, the following GaAs layer is removed by a different etchant (citric acid/H2O2, 4:1). Here, the less aggressive etchant was chosen in favor of an improved surface roughness over a high etch rate. A final HCL dip leaves only a thin GaAs membrane of 885 nm, including the active QD layer, being gold bonded to the host GaAs substrate. On the cleaned sample 250 nm of AR-P 6200 electron-beam resist are spin coated in preparation for the lithography step. In the subsequent main processing step, single pre-selected QDs are integrated deterministically into micromesas to enhance their photon extraction efficiency. The optical and quantum optical characterization of the QD mesas is performed by means of micro-photoluminescence (μPL), μPL-excitation (μPLE) and photon-correlation spectroscopy, respectively. The sample is mounted in a He-flow cryostat with temperature control in the range of 10 K to 40 K. Excitation is provided by a CW laser and tunable pulsed lasers focused on the sample by a microscope objective (numerical aperture (NA) = 0.4): A continuous-wave diode laser (785 nm) and a tunable laser providing ps-pulses at a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The photoluminescence signal is collected with the same objective, spectrally resolved in a grating spectrometer (spectral resolution ~ 0.05 nm) and either detected with a liquid nitrogen cooled InGaAs-array detector or coupled into a fiber-based Hanbury-Brown and Twiss (HBT) or a Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) setup. For HBT and HOM measurements the photons are detected by two superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs), each with a temporal resolution of ~50 ps and a detection efficiency of about 80% at 1310 nm. First, temperature-dependent μPL spectra and photon autocorrelation histograms were recorded for the selected deterministic photonic microstructure marked in Fig. Corresponding μPL spectra are presented in Fig. Noteworthy, the lifetime of the CX state varies in the investigated temperature range between ~1.6 ns and ~1.9 ns with no clear trend, although state refilling processes from higher levels Next, we examined the source brightness in terms of the photon-extraction efficiency η ext . The QD was excited by pulsed non-resonant (~860 nm) excitation at saturation of the CX intensity. Under those conditions, we estimate a lower bound of η ext assuming that the internal QD efficiency is close to one (i.e. non-radiative rate is negligible). The emitted photons were detected by SNSPDs with an overall setup efficiency of η setup ~ 5.4%. For the given laser pulse repetition rate of 80 MHz we obtained 172.000 counts per seconds (cps) for the sum of X and CX emission yielding an extraction efficiency of η ext = cps f η setup = 5.0%. This lower bound value compares well with the expected extraction efficiency of 9.3% deduced from finiteelement method simulations for this particular mesa (see supplementary material). SPSs in quantum technology. The TPI effect is measured for photons emitted by the QDmicromesa under study using a fiber-based HOM setup consisting of an unbalanced Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) on the detection side and a complementary MZI on the excitation side. Here, the 4 ns relative optical path delay of the MZI in the detection path is compensated by the temporal separation of excitation pulses induced by the MZI on the excitation path. Before performing HOM experiments we established pulsed quasi-resonant p-shell excitation for the QD-micromesa under study to reduce charge noise and detrimental dephasing processes related to carrier relaxation from higher levels, presumably taking place mainly in the SRL. The s-p energy splitting is determined via μPLE experiments. As observed in Fig. Moreover, by using the post-selected V as an input parameter for a description based on monoexponential decay functions Combining these requirements, especially for the emission in the O-band, is a significant step towards versatile high-performance single-photon sources. See the supplementary material for information on the identification of excitonic complexes in quantum dots, the mission dynamics and spontaneous emission lifetime of quantum dots, microphotoluminescence excitation spectroscopy, and on optical studies under quasi-resonant p-shell excitation. Moreover, the supplementary material includes details on the numerical optimization of QD-micromesas and the evaluation of Hong-Ou-Mandel experiments. The red circle marks the QD-micromesa investigated in the following. the experimental data is shown and in (c) the summary of the results both for g A micro-PL excitation (μPLE) experiment is performed to determine the energy difference between the QD's electronic s-shell ground state and the p-shell excited state, which might be excited by the detuned laser excitation. In Fig. We performed power dependent μPL measurements under p-shell excitation (exc. energy 1.0225 eV) on the QD-micromesa under investigation. The spectra are shown in Fig. First, we determine the saturation of the emission intensity of the CX line and, second, we observe a red-shift of the emission with increasing excitation power. This spectral shift is most probably due to local heating of the sample, as the band-gap energy decreases with the temperature increase. A summary of the analysis is shown in Fig. We performed a FEM based numerical analysis of the dipole emission from the photonic mesa structure with the commercially available software package JCMsuite from JCMwave 2 . The explicit mesa geometry is obtained by SEM imagining and is used as the numerical simulation input of a rotation symmetric device. The mesa with a height of 885 nm is trapezoidal with a base diameter of 1474 nm and tapers towards the top to 1220 nm in diameter. Fig. The extraction efficiency η ext is then determined by considering the calculated far-field. It is defined as , where P dip,NA is the power of the field emitted by the dipole towards normal direction within the selected numerical aperture (NA), and P dip is the total dipole power. Within the analysis of the photon extraction efficiency of the mesa, we calculated that for NA = 0.4 and our structure's theoretical upper limit of the extraction efficiency is 9.3% (for NA = 0.6: 24.3% and for NA = 0.8: 42.8%), as visualized in Fig. Where y 0 is the backgound level, A 0-4 and A′ 0-4 is the peak amplitude, w 0-4 is the width and x 0-4 is the peak position. Indices '0-4' are used to label peaks at delay of 0, ±4, ±8, ±12.5, ±16.5 ns, respectively. In addition A 00 and w 00 in f ∥ (x) defines the amplitude and width of the HOM dip at τ = 0 ns, and we expect for indistinguishable photons that A 00 < 0 and w 00 << w 0,1,2,3,4 in order to minimize fit residuals. The fit is presented in Fig. The uncertainity here is evaluated by using a standard deviation. The post selected visibility can be calculated according to fitting functions f(x) as f ⊥ (0)-f ∥ (0) f ⊥ (0) × 100% = 96 ± 10%. The width of the HOM dip is characterized by a coherence time τ c , while the overlapping central peak typical for distinguishable photons defined by A 0 and w 0 is characterized by radiative spontaneous emission lifetime τ 1 . In the ideal case, where all dephasing processes are neglegted, we expect , so the remaining fit parameters are y 0 , τ deph . In this case, we obtain best fit for τ deph = (224 ± 20) ps and y 0 ≪ 0.01, which gives τ c = (212 ± 25) ps. The fit is shown in Fig. It is worth noting here, that due to a slow decay of the side peak with its amplitude of Ł. Dusanowski, M. Syperek, W. Rudno-Rudziński, P. Mrowiński, G. Sk, J. Misiewicz, A.