The nonlinear interaction of a time-harmonic acoustic wave with an anisotropic particle gives rise to the radiation force and torque effects. These phenomena are at the heart of the acoustofluidics technology, where microparticles such as cells and microorganisms are acoustically manipulated. We present a theoretical model considering a generic acoustic beam interacting with a subwavelength spheroidal particle in a nonviscous fluid. Concise analytical expressions of the radiation force and torque are obtained in the scattering dipole approximation. The radiation force is given in terms of a gradient and scattering force; while the radiation torque has two fundamental contributions, namely, the momentum arm and acoustic spin (spin-torque effect). As a practical example, we use the theory to describe the interaction of two crossed plane waves and a prolate spheroidal particle. The results reveal the particle is transversely trapped in a pressure node and is axially pushed by the radiation force. Also, the momentum arm aligns the particle in the axial direction. At certain specific positions, only the spin-torque occurs. Our findings are remarkably consistent with finite-element simulations. The success of our model enables its use as an investigation tool for the manipulation of anisotropic microparticles in acoustofluidics. The behavior of microparticles under an ultrasonic acoustic wave has been extensively analyzed in microacoustofluidic devices The acoustic radiation forces and torques are commonly investigated considering isotropic particles, i.e., with a spherical shape. In reality, the morphology of most cells and other microorganisms have a degree of asymmetry. Prominent examples of acoustofluidic systems for manipulation of asymmetric particles include glass fibers At first glance, the available alternative to model the wave interaction with anisotropic particles is the use of numerical techniques, such as the finite Early studies involving anisotropic particles dealt with the radiation torque problem on circular disks The purpose of this article is to model the radiation force and torque imparted on a subwavelength spheroid by an arbitrary acoustic beam. Our approach is based on the general expressions of the radiation force Our model is used for the analysis of a spheroidal particle interacting with two crossed plane waves at right angle. This structured beam forms a transverse standing wave and an axial (perpendicular) traveling wave. The model predicts the radiation force pushes the particle to a transverse pressure node or antinode. The radiation torque aligns the particle at a node in broadside orientation. In contrast, the orientation in an antinode is along the axis of the standing wave. Additionally, the axial radiation force pushes the particle in the direction parallel to the pressure node. Lastly, the model predictions are verified against finite-element (FE) simulations. We find an excellent agreement between the theoretical and numerical results. Consider a fluid of infinite extension characterized by an ambient density ρ 0 , adiabatic speed of sound c 0 , and compressibility β 0 = 1/ρ 0 c 2 0 . Our analysis is restricted to acoustic fields of time harmonic dependence e -iωt , with ω = 2πf and f being the angular and linear frequencies, respectively. The corresponding wavenumber is k = ω/c 0 = 2π/λ, where λ is the acoustic wavelength. The acoustic pressure and fluid velocity are expressed using the complex-phase representation, p(r, t) = p(r)e -iωt and v(r, t) = v(r)e -iωt , respectively. In Cartesian coordinates, the position vector and fluid velocity are r i e i (with i = x, y, z) and v = v i e i , where the e i is the Cartesian unit vector. The summation over repeated indexes is automatically assumed hereafter. We also adopt the notation (r x , r y , r z ) = (x, y, z). In the inviscid limit, the wave dynamics is modeled by The acoustic wave scattering by the spheroidal particle in a fluid medium. The particle has a major and minor semiaxis denoted by a and b. The arbitrary incoming beam is depicted as a red sinusoidal line. The scattered waves are represented by red arrows. The geometric center of the spheroid defines the particle frame of reference, r = (x, y, z). The laboratory frame of reference is the primed Cartesian axes. the well-known linear acoustic equations The time-dependent term e -iωt is omitted for simplicity. Equation (1c) is obtained by taking the rotational of Eq. (1a). In the presence of an inclusion, such as a particle, an incident wave is scattered by the inclusion. The boundary condition for the scattered pressure p sc at the farfield is the Sommerfeld radiation condition. In spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ), this means lim r→∞ r (∂ r -ik) p sc = 0. ( The radiation condition singles out only the solution which represents "outgoing" waves. Another boundary condition comes from considering the particle as a rigid body. In this case, the normal component of the total velocity of the fluid, i.e. incident plus scattering contributions, should vanish on the particle surface S 0 , Here n is the outward normal unit-vector on S 0 . A prolate spheroidal particle with a major and minor axis denoted by 2a and 2b, is placed in the wave path of an arbitrary incoming beam as depicted in Fig. where ξ ≥ 1 is the spheroidal radial coordinate, -1 ≤ η ≤ 1, and 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π is azimuth angle, with the interfocal distance being The particle surface is given by where ξ 0 is regarded as the geometric parameter of the particle. The particle orientation follows the z-direction, d = d e z . Note that we recover a sphere of radius r 0 by setting The particle dynamics is better analyzed in a fixed laboratory system (x , y , z ). In this reference frame, the particle orientation angle α is expressed by d • e z = d cos α. The incoming and scattered pressure can be expressed by the partial wave expansion in spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ), in which p 0 is the peak pressure, j n is the nth-order spherical Bessel function, h n is the spherical Hankel function of the first-type, and Y m n is the spherical harmonics of nthorder and mth-degree. The quantity a nm is known as the beam-shape coefficient. The scattering coefficients s nm can be obtained from the boundary condition in Eq. ( As we advance to consider a particle much smaller than the wavelength, i.e., the so-called long-wavelength limit, only the monopole (n = 0) and dipole (n = 1) modes of the multipole expansion in (8b) suffice to describe the acoustic scattering We shall use as the expansion parameter in the longwavelength approximation. Using the partial wave expansion in spheroidal coordinates (ξ, η, φ), one can show that the monopole and dipole scattering coefficients of a rigid spheroid are given by with i being the imaginary unit. The dipole coefficients of the modes perpendicular to the axial direction (s 1,-1 and s 11 ) are degenerated due to the axial symmetry of the particle. The scattering factors f 00 , f 10 , and f 11 of Ref. These functions depend solely on the geometric factor ξ 0 . To recover the scattering coefficients of a spherical particle, we take the limit ξ 0 → ∞ in It immediately follows from The beam-shape coefficients of an incident beam is obtained as follows. Multiplying Eq. (8a) by Y m * n , integrating the result over the unit-sphere, and using the orthogonal relation of the spherical harmonics (θ, φ) sin θ dθ dφ = δ nn δ mm (with δ nm being the Kronecker delta function), we find where asterisk denotes complex conjugation. The beamshape coefficient can be calculated for any radial distance kr. In particular, one can relate them with the acoustic pressure evaluated in the origin of the particle frame, r = 0. We anticipate here that the acoustic radiation force depends on the beam-shape coefficients to the quadrupole approximation with i, j = x, y, z. Before proceeding, we need the asymptotic expansion of the spherical Bessel function for r → 0, in which Γ(n) is the gamma function. Replacing Eqs. ( In this derivation, we assumed the fluid flow is irrotational-see Eq. (1c). We remark the acoustic fields of ( As the linear momentum flux carried by a wave is exchanged with the particle, the radiation force (a timeaverage quantity over the wave period 2π/ω) appears on the particle where S 1 is a spherical surface that encloses the particle, I is the unit tensor given in Eq. (C2), and dS is the area element. The combination of two vectors as vv forms a dyad, i.e., a second-rank tensor-see details in Appendix C. The total pressure and fluid velocity are p = p in + p sc and v = v in + v sc , respectively. In the long-wavelength limit 1, the Cartesian components of the acoustic radiation force exerted on a spheroidal particle are expressed by where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation, and E 0 = β 0 p 2 0 /2 is the characteristic energy density of the incident wave. To obtain the radiation force as a function of the incoming acoustic fields, we replace the beam-shape coef-ficients from ( Details on the derivation can be seen in Appendix A. Accordingly, the radiation force is given by The scattering force results from the self-interaction of the scattering wave, whereas the gradient force comes from the incoming and scattering wave interaction. Furthermore, the scattering force is much weaker than the gradient one by a factor of 3 . The monopole tensors (Q grad and Q sca ) and dipole vectors (D grad and D sca ) are expressed by Note that e i e j is a dyad, which forms the Cartesian basis of a second-rank tensor. It is straightforward to show from (20) that the gradient force is expressed by Considering an standing wave, the corresponding amplitude p in is a real-valued function. Consequently, ∇p in and Q * sca are also real-valued quantities. We thus conclude that Re[iQ * sca • ∇p in ] = 0 and Re[iD * sca • ∇v in ] = 0, so only the gradient force remains. On the contrary, for traveling waves, which possess complex amplitude, say, a plane wave e ik•r , the gradient operator becomes ∇ → ik, then F grad = 0. The acoustic radiation torque exerted on the particle is given by The Cartesian components of the radiation torque on a prolate spheroidal particle are given by We shall obtain the radiation torque in terms of the momentum flux tensor and the acoustic spin density The acoustic spin is an intrisic property of a wave. It gives a measure of the fluid velocity rotation, which is independent of the reference frame. To obtain the acoustic radiation torque, we substitute the scattering coefficients of (10) into where χ = f 11 -2f 10 is the dipole-difference factor and S ⊥ = S x e x + S y e y is the transverse spin density. It is worth noticing that (P ]. The first term of Eq. ( According to Now we applied the developed theory to study the interaction of a subwavelength spheroid with two crossed plane waves at right angle. This acoustic beam was chosen because it has acoustic spin (-e x + e z ) . Hence, the corresponding pressure field is We see that the wave interference sets in a standing wave along the transverse direction (x axis). The offset vector h = he x gives the position of the nearest pressure antinode regarding the particle center in the transverse direction. To calculate the wave vectors in the particle system, we introduce the (clockwise) rotation matrix around the y axis, From Also, the offset parameter becomes h = h(cos α e x + sin α e z ). We thus obtain the incident pressure in the particle frame, The related fluid velocity is readily calculated by inserting this equation into Eq. (1a), The linear momentum flux of the incoming beam is derived by replacing Eq. ( But k 1 -k 2 = √ 2k (cos α e x + sin α e z ), then (34) The acoustic spin density is obtained by substituting Eq. ( Here we have utilized the relation k 2 × k 1 = k 2 e y . The radiation torque in the laboratory frame is derived by substituting Eqs. ( When the particle is trapped in a pressure node (h = π/k √ 2) or antinode (h = 0), the radiation torque becomes These torques are caused exclusively by the momentum arm effect. At the end, the particle will be aligned to broadside orientation (α = 0) in a pressure node, and parallel to the standing wave axis (α = π/2) in a pressure antinode. Another interesting field position is h = h ± = ± √ 2π/4k. In this case, only the spin-induced torque arises, This torque sets the particle to rotate around the minor axis. The particle spins in clockwise direction at h = h + (spin up), and in counterclockwise manner at h = h - (spin down). The incoming beam alongside the particle orientations in a node and antinode are illustrated in Fig. In the particle frame, the gradient force is derived by substituting Eqs. ( Inserting Eq. ( The sign of the acoustophoretic factor Φ ac determines whether the particle will be trapped in a pressure node (Φ ac > 0) or antinode (Φ ac < 0). Moreover, the radiation force varies linearly with frequency, ∼ ω. We will analyze to the axial radiation force later. We plot the acoustophoretic factor Φ ac versus ξ 0 in Fig. Applying the rotation operator R y (-α) on ( The quantity Q rad is referred to as the dimensionless radiation force efficiency. We remark the scattering force is related to the linear momentum flux carried away by the scattered waves. This connection can be understood from the radiation force relationship with the scattering cross-section as discussed in Refs. An important aspect of Eq. (43a) is the possibility to recover the axial radiation force imparted to a rigid spherical particle as obtained in Ref. We performed FE simulations of the wave-particle interaction in water. A set of full 3D simulations were devised in Comsol Multiphysics (Comsol, Inc., USA). The FE model used in our simulations is outlined as follows. A spherical region of radius R is defined as the simulation domain. The particle is placed at the center of this region. We set a spherical surface S 1 as the integration surface to compute the radiation force and torque as prescribed in Eqs. To verify the correctness of the numerical solutions, we performed some convergence tests by varying some parameter such as the domain radius, mesh density, and PML depth. The parameter variation is set up to the point the solution does not change with any further modification. More details on convergence analysis to radiation force problems can be found in To compare the obtained numerical results with theory, we use the normalized root-mean-square error (NRMSE), Importantly, both the theoretical and numerical models consider the inviscid approximation. Although, actual fluids may support shear stress within the particle boundary layer, which may cause viscous torques In Fig. The axial radiation force (F sca z ) in a pressure node versus particle orientation is depicted in Fig. In Fig. wave axis. Again, we find an excellent agreement between the theory and numerical results, provided that NRMSE = 0.57%. The amplitude of the spin-torque is shown in Fig. The acoustic radiation force and torque are the byproducts of the nonlinear interaction of an incoming wave with a spheroidal particle. We develop a theory to de-FIG. Our theory is successfully employed to analyze the interaction between a rigid spheroidal particle and two plane waves crossing at right angle. This composed beam is one of the simplest waves to possess acoustic spin The next level to be considered in our model is to bring in the elastic properties of particles. These features will convey the theory closer to acoustofluidic experiments with cells and other microorganisms. Moreover, energy absorption by the particle can be as well considered through complex wave numbers. The absorption is known to enhance the acoustic radiation force With these extensions, it will be possible to predict the conditions to trap particles in either a pressure node or antinode. Besides, devising a coated layer on spheroidal particles may render them unresponsive to the radiation force Our predictions can be tested with experiments of either acoustofluidics or acoustic levitation technology. The radiation force and torque derived expressions are valid for any structured wave that is commonly employed in these techniques. Experimental confirmation of our results may unlock new methods for acoustic manipulation of particles. The theoretical model of the nonlinear interaction between acoustic waves and anisotropic particles is a timely research contribution. It has a great potential within both acoustic manipulation of particles and the investigation of fundamental aspects of acoustic waves. Eq. (B2) can be written as 