The breaking of Lorentz reciprocity law is a non-trivial task, since it usually requires bulky magnets or complicated time-modulation dynamic techniques to be accomplished. In this work, we present a simple and compact design of a nonlinear bifacial dielectric metasurface to achieve strong self-induced passive nonreciprocal transmission without the use of external biases. The proposed design is ideal for free space optics applications, can operate under both incident polarizations, and require very low input excitation power to reach the nonreciprocal regime. It is composed of two passive silicon-based metasurfaces exhibiting Fano and Lorentzian resonances embedded in an ultrathin glass substrate. Highly asymmetric field enhancement is achieved with the proposed design that leads to strong nonreciprocity at low excitation intensities due to the large Kerr nonlinearity of silicon. Moreover, cascade designs are presented to further improve the insertion loss, broaden the nonreciprocal intensity range, and increase the isolation ratio by enhancing the transmission contrast. Finally, it is demonstrated that the proposed nonlinear metasurface is robust to fabrication imperfections and can achieve large isolation for a relative broad input power range even in the case of two incident waves impinging at the same time from both directions. The current work is expected to lead to new compact nonreciprocal nanophotonic devices, such as all-optical diodes, isolators, circulators, and ultrathin protective layers for sensitive optical components. Nonreciprocal transmission is the fundamental operation mechanism behind all-optical isolators, circulators, and diodes Silicon is an ideal nonlinear material with strong third order Kerr nonlinearity In this work, we propose a simple passive nonreciprocal device of a bifacial dielectric metasurface made of silicon spheres embedded in a glass substrate. The two metasurfaces have different geometries and function as coupled resonators, one of which has a Fano and the other a Lorentzian resonant response. The total system has a high-Q resonant response, which is ideal to achieve nonlinearity-triggered nonreciprocal response. The design is found to be robust against fabrication imperfections and disorder. Note that similar nonreciprocal performance can be obtained if the spherical silicon resonators are replaced by cylinders or other comparable geometries. Large nonreciprocal transmission at the technologically interesting telecommunication near-infrared (IR) wavelength range is realized when the input radiation is launched from opposite directions. Silicon is used in the presented design due to its large refractive index and strong nonlinear Kerr coefficient. The boosted field enhancement at the resonance of the proposed structure leads to very low required input intensity values to obtain significant nonreciprocal transmission on the order of few MW/cm 2 . These low values will not cause saturation or other damage-leading detrimental effects, since the structure is all-dielectric with minimum optical loss and, as a result, extremely low induced ohmic heating. To further improve the nonreciprocal performance of the proposed design, including insertion loss, nonreciprocal intensity range, isolation ratio, and flatness of nonreciprocal transmittance over a broader input intensity range, we increase the geometrical asymmetry of the existing structure by adding more metasurfaces in the presented composite nanosystem. Thus, the proposed two-layer bifacial metasurface is extended to four metasurface layers, always embedded inside a glass substrate. Two kinds of four-layer composite metasurfaces are investigated: a) cascaded pair of two coupled Fano-Lorentz bifacial metasurfaces, b) a pair of Lorentz metasurfaces followed by another pair of Fano metasurfaces. It is demonstrated that several limitations of nonreciprocal systems based on single nonlinear resonators can be overcome by these more elongated, but still ultrathin and compact, configurations Finally, due to the 'dynamic' reciprocity inherent problem of nonlinear nonreciprocal systems The geometry of the proposed bifacial metasurface is shown in Fig. The bottom metasurface is made of periodically distributed silicon spheres with radii 3 290 R = nm. Due to the uniform periodic formation of silicon spheres, the bottom metasurface functions as a typical Lorentz resonator characterized by a magnetic resonance During our three dimensional (3D) simulations, we modeled one unit cell of the proposed bilayer metamaterial and use periodic boundary conditions for all the lateral boundaries More details about the linear simulations can be found in The computed linear transmittance spectra of the top Fano and bottom Lorentz metasurfaces, when the glass substrate has a thickness of / 2 d , are shown in Fig. As the input intensity 0 I is increased, the Kerr nonlinear effect is expected to be triggered and alter the material properties. More precisely, it will introduce a nonlinear polarizability term given by , where 0 ε is the permittivity of free space and (3) χ is the third-order nonlinear susceptibility of the material , where L ε is the linear permittivity. Silicon has strong nonlinearity at near-IR range with (3) 18 2.8 10 which is four orders of magnitude larger compared to glass The transmittance from both sides becomes dependent on the input intensity due to the introduction of the Kerr effect, as shown in Fig. . On the contrary, the bifacial multilayer metasurface composed of two pairs of Fano and Lorentz metasurfaces shown in Fig. . This is due to the fact that the composite metasurface of Fig. In the results presented in Fig. The Fano resonance shown in Fig. To mimic a more complex geometrical disorder in the metasurface geometry, Fig. , since this metasurface is easier to be fabricated and, as a result, is expected to be less affected by geometrical imperfections It can be seen in Fig. or for marginally increased input intensity values. Therefore, the strong self-induced nonreciprocal transmission is expected to be verified by potential experimental efforts based on the concept presented in this paper. To conclude, an all-dielectric low-loss nonlinear bifacial metasurface is proposed that is able to achieve passive and bias-free strong nonreciprocity in transmission. The presented realistic metasurface design is made of a Lorentz and Fano resonator embedded inside a glass substrate. The highly structural asymmetry of the proposed metasurface combined with the strong field enhancement at the resonance cause strong nonreciprocal transmission due to the enhanced nonlinear Kerr effect. The required input intensities to achieve this effect are relative low, on the order of few MW/cm 2 , an intriguing property that can lead to single-or few-photon quantum optical nonreciprocal devices The mesh is chosen to be extremely fine in the silicon nanospheres, with a minimum size of 10 nm. Silicon is the only nonlinear material in the simulated system. The extremely fine mesh can improve the convergence in the nonlinear simulations and the computational accuracy of the computed results. On the other hand, the mesh size in the glass substrate is chosen to be coarser, in order to accelerate the computation time, and becomes even coarser in the up and down free space domains as the distance from the bifacial metasurface is increased. The reflectance R and transmittance T of the proposed bifacial metasurface is computed by the S-parameters by using the formulas: When the input intensity is low, the proposed bifacial metasurface works in the linear regime. The linear transmittance spectra of the Fano, Lorentz, and composite metasurface are shown in Fig. The nonreciprocal transmission in any nonlinear system is mainly due to the asymmetric field distribution. Since the nonlinear permittivity change induced by the Kerr effect is proportional to the local optical intensity, the asymmetric electric field distribution ensures the difference in the nonlinear effective permittivity when the input is injected from opposite sides. The field distribution in the Fano metasurface shows substantial difference in both the maximum field enhancement and the field pattern for opposite illumination directions, as was shown in the inset of Fig. 