We report on a direct measurement of sizable interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (iDMI) at the interface of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide (2D-TMD), MoS 2 and Ni 80 Fe 20 (Py) using Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy. A clear asymmetry in spin-wave dispersion is measured in MoS 2 /Py/Ta, while no such asymmetry is detected in the reference Py/Ta system. A linear scaling of the DMI constant with the inverse of Py thickness indicates the interfacial origin of the observed DMI. We further observe an enhancement of DMI constant in three to four layer MoS 2 /Py system (by 56%) as compared to 2 layer MoS 2 /Py which is caused by a higher density of MoO 3 defect species in the case of three to four layer MoS 2 . The results open possibilities of spin-orbitronic applications utilizing the 2D-TMD based heterostructures. Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) 1,2 favors perpendicular alignment of neighboring spins in a ferromagnetic material. In competition with Heisenberg exchange interaction, the DMI can lead to the formation of stable chiral spin textures such as Néel type domain walls or skyrmions, We use large-area 2L and 3-4L MoS 2 grown on Si/SiO 2 substrates by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique. The substrates are cleaned with standard chemical cleaning procedures followed by annealing at 700 • C in a vacuum chamber for out-gassing of all impurities before deposition of MoS 2 thin-films. The MoS 2 thin films are then deposited using a 248 nm KrF excimer laser source at 5 Hz repetition frequency, 20 ns pulse width and 0.5 μJ/m 2 energy density. The base pressure of 6 × 10 -6 Torr is maintained throughout the deposition process. The thickness of MoS 2 was varied by the number of laser shots. The laser shots of 40 and 60 are optimized for 2L (layer) and 3-4L MoS 2 growth, respectively. More details of MoS 2 growth along with the characterization of bare MoS 2 can be found in Ref 35. The Py and the Ta layers were grown in a separate DC magnetron sputtering chamber with a base vacuum of 2 × 10 -6 Torr after cleaning MoS 2 samples with acetone and isopropyl alcohol. The Py thickness (t Py ) was varied from 3 -20 nm while the Ta capping layer thickness was fixed at 2 nm. The bilayer metallic films are deposited at room temperature with a working pressure of 1 × 10 -3 Torr. A set of reference samples i.e., Py (t Py )/Ta (2 nm) were also prepared simultaneously for comparison. The growth rate of Py and Ta thin-films were maintained at 1.43 Å/s and 1.83 Å/s, respectively. The BLS measurements have been carried out in Damon-Eshbach (DE) geometry using a Sandercock type 3+3 pass Tandem Fabry-Pérot interferometer. Conventional 180 • back scattered protocol along with the tool for wave vector selectivity was followed. As BLS relies on the inelastic light scattering process where total momentum is conserved in the plane of the thin film, Stokes (anti-Stokes) peaks are observed in the BLS spectra which correspond to the creation (annihilation) of magnons with momentum k=(4π/λ)sinθ, where λ= 532 nm in our case and θ is the angle of incidence of the laser beam. A well defined BLS spectrum was obtained after counting photons for several hours. Figure (1) where, M z is magnetization in the direction of applied magnetic field. The strength of DMI constant (D) can be calculated using: where, γ (=1.85×10 2 GHz/T) is the gyromagnetic ra-tio for Py thin-films. M S is the saturation magnetization, which was determined from thickness dependent ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) data and magnetometry measurements. As the right hand side in Eq. ( Here, D S is the strength of the surface DMI parameter, which is independent of FM thickness. It is found that the D S = (-0.39 ± 0.03) pJ/m for 2L MoS 2 /Py and (-0.61 ± 0.04) pJ/m for 3-4L MoS 2 /Py. The observed values are larger than the previously reported results on monolayer Graphene (D S =0.19 pJ/m) We also measure spatial variation of DMI in our 2L and 3-4L MoS 2 /Py bilayers, since we use large area MoS 2 . Inset of Fig. We found a larger D S for both 2L and 3-4L MoS 2 /Py samples compared to Graphene/Py, In conclusion, we have shown a direct measurement of sizable DMI constant for 2L and 3-4L MoS 2 /Py system using BLS measurements. The FM thickness dependence of DMI reveals the dominating interfacial origin of DMI in the studied system. We have observed a larger interfacial DMI in 3-4L MoS 2 /Py system as compared to 2L MoS 2 /Py, which can be correlated with the higher density of MoO 3 defect species at the interface for 3-4L MoS 2 /Py. The maximum value of DMI constant obtained is comparable to that of previously reported values for Pt-based FM/HM heterostructures for the similar thickness of the FM layer. Hence, these results show the possibility of stabilizing chiral spin textures and their manipulation using already emerging unconventional spinorbit torques in the 2D materials/FM system. Further, the iDMI at MoS 2 /Py interface can be controlled by engineering defects, which opens another pathway for the development of spintronic devices using 2D-TMDs. The data that supports the findings of this study are available within the article.