Self-complementary metasurfaces have gained significant attention due to their unique frequencyindependent transmission and reflection properties and the possibility of the polarization transformation of plane waves. In this paper, we focus on the near-field spectrum to investigate both theoretically and experimentally the properties of surface waves supported by anisotropic selfcomplementary metasurfaces. We show that as a consequence of the electromagnetic Babinet's duality, such structure is hyperbolic for any frequency. We reveal the polarization degree of freedom inherent to plane waves by demonstrating the broadband TE-TM polarization degeneracy of the surface waves along two principal directions. We demonstrate the possibility of switching the canalization direction of 90 • by a very small frequency shift paving a way to the extreme tunability and surface wave routing. The results obtained open a plethora of opportunities for practical applications, including flat polarization devices, optical data processing systems and antennas. I. Metasurfaces have gained significant attention due to their ability to control the phase, amplitude and polarization of the incident electromagnetic (EM) waves in transmission and reflection Particular interest is addressed to hyperbolic plasmons * These authors contributed equally to this work † s.glybovski@metalab.ifmo.ru -surface waves localized at hyperbolic metasurfaces Canalization The surface waves at anisotropic metasurfaces possess hybrid TE-TM polarization In this work, we show that canalization and broadband polarization degeneracy can be achieved with resonant and anisotropic self-complementary metasurfaces. In particular, it is shown that both TE and TM surface waves have the same dispersion and can be canalized as schematically depicted in Fig. Anisotropic self-complementary metasurfaces are single-layer metal patterns that remain the same after Babinet inversion except for some translation or rotation. They were shown to operate as frequencyselective filters We consider a single-layer resonant anisotropic metasurface floating in free space constituted by alternance of infinitely thin complementary inductive and capacitive strips with narrow width in terms of the operating wavelength (Fig. In ( It is worth noting that the above structure respects the Babinet's duality principle if the strips are mutually complementary. This can be obtained by realizing geometrical complementary slots and dipoles along the strips still maintaining them compact in terms of a wavelength. If two half-spaces above and below are filled with different permittivities, the structure, strictly speaking, does not respect the duality. Nevertheless, the physical mechanism we are going to describe will be the same. First, we analyze an ideally dual case, while in the experiment we Geometry of the problem constituted by a collections of co-planar inductive and capacitive parallel strips of a width small in terms of a wavelength immersed in free space. The polarization of TE and TM surface wave modes with propagation direction both parallel and orthogonal to the strips is also depicted. implement a metasurface as a self-complementary copper pattern on a thin dielectric substrate. As it will be shown, in the considered practical metasurface realization, the Babinet's duality principle is fulfilled still well. The anisotropic metasurfaces as well as other ultrathin subwavelength systems (graphene, van der Waals materials, 2D electron gas, etc.) can be reasonably described in terms of the effective surface admittance (conductivity) approach. We assume a metasurface creates no crosspolarization when the incident plane wave has only xor y-directed tangential electric field. This means, in these coordinates the tensor can be diagonalized along the principal axes as follows The resonant response of a metasurface can be expressed by a Lorentzian form of one of the admittance tensor components (for example, here we have chosen Y y component): Here, j denotes the resonance number, Y 0 = 1/Z 0 , Z 0 is the free space wave impedance, N j is a non-dimensional normalization factor, Ω j is the resonance angular frequency, γ j is the resonance bandwidth. According to the Babinet's duality relation the surface admittance tensor components obey the relation So, the opposite admittance tensor component Y x can be strictly determined by the relation ( In order to find the expression of the admittance in an arbitrary reference system, it is useful to introduce a wavevector-fixed coordinate system constituted by unit vectors parallel and orthogonal to the direction of propagation. Assuming that the wave vector forms an angle α with respect to the x-axis, in this reference system, the admittance tensor may be written as where When α is zero, ( The dispersion equation of surface waves at an anisotropic metasurface described with the effective local surface admittance tensor can be found analytically Here, 0 is a penetration depth, k is the surface wave propagation constant, ε 1 and ε 2 are the dielectric constants for z positive and negative, respectively. In One can notice that first and second factors in the left side of Eq. ( The dispersion equation ( where square root is defined with positive real part and the upper (lower) sign corresponds to TM (TE) mode. In absence of losses, the term under square root becomes real and positive with ζ = ε + 1. In free space we can express the dispersion of the in-plane complex wavevector component of the surface waves localized at self-complementary metasurface by applying the Babinet's duality relation (4) as follows: This equation is specialized for the propagation direction along the strips (α = 0 • ), orthogonal to the strips (α = y α = 45o d) Im (Yy) < 0 Im (Yx) < 0 quasi-TE quasi-TM It is important to point out that, strictly speaking, any substrate with permittivity different from the permittivity of free space violates the Babinet's duality relation (4). Nevertheless, the dispersion equation ( One of the powerful tools to analyze the wave propagation features is the isofrequency contours (IFCs). The possible isofrequency contours for the selfcomplementary metasurface described by the surface admittance tensor, shown in Fig. The unit-cell design of the considered metasurface is based on a meandered dipole and a complementary meandered slot (Fig. The experimental sample was produced using a printed circuit board method on substrate FR-4 with the relative permittivity ε = 3.9 and loss tangent tan(δ) = 0.02. The full-size sample has dimensions 69 × 55 unit-cells or 483 × 385 mm 2 . The manufactured sample was fixed using a foam substrate and was placed between a source antenna and a probe for near-field measurements in an anechoic chamber (Figs. Two complex field maps have been obtained by two independent measurements for quasi-TE and quasi-TM surface waves, respectively. For the measurement of the quasi-TM surface wave, electric monopoles made of an open-ended coaxial cables (Fig. The measured and simulated distributions of the normal component of the magnetic field excited by a magnetic loop source (quasi-TE mode) and the reconstructed isofrequency contours are shown in Fig. The intriguing consequence of Eq. ( In a contrast to the conventional relatively narrowband hyperbolic operational regime of two-dimensional systems caused by the resonances splitting, the broadband hyperbolicity of a self-complementary metasurface arising from Eq. ( Usually, hyperbolic metasurfaces strongly depend on the geometrical arrangement of the material constituents. The slight scaling of the unit cell sizes shifts the resonances and, as a consequence, the frequency range between the resonances corresponding to the hyperbolic regime. It means that even minor modifications, deformations and external effects can destroy the hyperbolic regime of a metasurface at a given frequency. This sharp dependence of the hyperbolic properties on the metaatoms scaling and deformation can be denoted as extrinsic hyperbolicity. The opposite situation takes place for the natural 2D materials such as black phosphorus, hexagonal boron nitride, van der Waals materials, because their hyperbolic properties do not depend on the structure size. In this sense, natural 2D materials possess intrinsic hyperbolicity. The resonant self-complementary metasurface exhibits both kinds of hyperbolicity. First of all, it is still an artificial structure, so the scaling shifts the resonances. At the same time, the moderate resonances shifting for a self-complementary metasurface does not break the hyperbolic regime and, for instance, hyperbolic plasmons are still existing in contrast to the purely extrinsic hyperbolicity case. Therefore, we conclude that hyperbolicity of a resonant selfcomplementary metasurface can be classified as a quasiintrinsic being an intermediate platform between conventional hyperbolic metasurfaces and natural hyperbolic materials. Nevertheless, one should take into account that the hyperbolic-like dispersion of surface waves for real implementation can be significantly modified and even removed owing to the non-local contribution We will denote canalization of surface waves as their collinear propagation and ultrafocused energy transport like those in Fig. The analogous effect has been previously observed for waves propagating in a double mutually-orthogonal wire medium It is important to note that for the conventional anisotropic structure, the pole (|Im(Y y )| 1) or zero (|Im(Y y )| 1) of one eigenvalue (for instance, Y y ) is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the canalization. While for the self-complementary metasurface, the pole or zero behaviour of Y y automatically results in the opposite behaviour of Y x according to the Babinet's duality relation The promising feature of the resonant selfcomplementary metasurface (even not perfectly self-complementary metasurface due to the presence of the dielectric substrate) is the possibility to switch between two orthogonal canalization directions by a small frequency shift. This effect is possible due to the existence of at least two consequent resonances of the metasurface. One of the eigenvalues has a zero at a characteristic frequency and a pole at a nearby frequency. The Babinet's principle guarantees that the reverse situation occurs for other eigenvalue. We demonstrate both numerically and experimentally the sharp switching between two orthogonal plasmon canalization directions in a narrow operational frequency range: (i) along the strips at 3.5 GHz (Fig. According to Eq. ( Furthermore, the numerical results, shown in Figs. 5h-5k, confirm the polarization degeneracy for the sample, shown in Fig. The demonstrated effect of broadband polarization degeneracy of surface waves was especially pronounced in the experiment for the canalization regimes. The frequencies corresponding to the canalization regime for quasi-TE (Figs. 7l, 7n, 7o) and quasi-TM (Fig. To conclude, we have studied both theoretically and experimentally the surface waves localized at a resonant self-complementary metasurface at microwaves. We have developed a consistent analytical model based on the effective surface admittance tensor approach. We have theoretically, numerically and experimentally demonstrated the wideband intrinsic hyperbolicity, canalization in frequency-switchable direction and broadband TE-TM polarization degeneracy of surface waves localized at a self-complementary metasurface. Importantly, we have shown the simultaneous canalization and TE-TM degeneracy of surface waves in the vicinity of the selfcomplementary metasurface resonances. It means that emitter energy can be transferred by virtue of surface waves highly directive and keeping the same polarization. The results obtained reveal that the self-complementary metasurfaces provide the platform for a number of applications including the polarization control and routing over optical and radiofrequency signal, on-chip devices, planar networks, photonic components, antennas and sensors.