The emergence of data-driven science has opened up new avenues for understanding the thermophysical properties of materials. For decades, alloys are known to possess very low thermal conductivity, but the extreme thermal conductivity can be achieved by alloying has never been identified. In this work, we combine the Bayesian optimization with a high throughput thermal conductivity calculation to search for the lowest thermal conductivity atomic configuration of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy. It is found layered structures are most beneficial for reducing the thermal conductivity among all atomic configurations, which is attributed to the strong branch-folding effect. Furthermore, the roles of interface roughness and layer thicknesses in producing the lowest thermal conductivity are investigated. Through another comprehensive search using Bayesian optimization, the layered structure with smooth interfaces and optimized layer thickness arrangement is identified as the optimal structure with the lowest thermal conductivity. In the field of thermal science and material science, machine learning has been regarded as the "fourth paradigm", which provides new approaches to develop understandings in thermophysical characteristics of materials Lattice thermal conductivity is one of the most important material thermophysical properties For a certain composition, the thermal conductivity of disordered alloy is often considered as the lower bound of thermal conductivity of any material, which is called the alloy limit Numerical simulations can be applied to investigate the thermal transport problems, including molecular dynamics and first-principles-based approaches. Due to the relatively large computational cost We search for the optimal atomic configuration of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy with the Bayesian optimization-based framework. The optimization unit cell is composed of half Si atoms (yellow spheres) and half Ge atoms (red spheres), as shown in Fig. Bayesian optimization is a machine-learning-based optimization method, which is well suited for the optimization of "black-box" objective functions that have no explicit expressions and are computationally expensive to evaluate For all the configurations, the lattice thermal conductivities are along the x-direction, which are obtained by first-principle based calculations (see more details in Supporting Information). Bayesian optimization, the optimal configuration can be selected after a few iterations. We start with the searching of low thermal conductivity atomic configurations in unit cells of size 2×1×1, 2×2×1, and 2×2×2. For 2×1×1 unit cell. Since the whole set of candidates only consist of 652 configurations, we simply compute the thermal conductivities of all candidates without further optimization. The structure with the lowest thermal conductivity is shown in Fig. Note that the computational cost sharply increases with increasing unit cell size ( With the full calculation of all the candidates of three different unit cell sizes, we find that layered structures have lower thermal conductivities. To confirm this, the alloy system with a large unit cell of size 6×1×1 is studied. Since the number of candidates is huge (about 1014), the computations of all the candidates are not feasible. Therefore, Bayesian optimization is performed to search for the optimal configurations (the workflow is shown in Fig. After balancing those factors, the thickness of the scanning box is set to three monatomic layers. Three independent optimizations with different initial candidate datasets are carried out. The evolutions of thermal conductivities and the number of layers of optimized configurations are shown in Fig. Overall, the numbers of layers increase as the optimizations progress, indicating that the optimized configuration with lower thermal conductivity gradually approaches to layered structures. The configurations with the lowest and highest conductivity among the searched candidates are shown in Fig. It is noted that the same type of atoms in the lowest and highest thermal conductivity cases are aggregated (as shown in Fig. where P denotes the probability of finding the atom A at nearest neighbor positions of the atom B, and MA is the atom fraction of A atoms (equal to 0.5 in this work). The atomic configurations with aggregated and dispersed atoms of the same kind are clustering and short range order structures, and the corresponding values of SROC are positive and negative, respectively. Other atomic configurations with SROC equal to zero are classified as disordered crystals. We take the configurations of the 2×1×1 unit cell as an illustration. All the 652 configurations are divided into clustering structures, short range order structures and disordered crystals according to the SROC coefficients. The distribution of thermal conductivities of these configurations is shown in Fig. Usually, the aggregation state of atoms can affect the number of atoms in the primitive unit cell, which is strongly correlated with the lattice thermal conductivity Another is the formation of the transport path for coherent phonons constructed by the layers paralleling to the direction of thermal conductivities . Spectrum analyses of thermal transport properties are performed, including dispersion curve, group velocity v, relaxation time τ, the density of state (DOS) and the DOS weighted thermal conductivity ( ) w . For simplicity, the implementation of spectrum analysis is not included here, and more details can be found in references The DOS weighted thermal conductivities ( ) w of the layered structure, disordered crystal, and alternating monolayers structure are shown in Fig. The dispersion curves of the layered structure and disordered crystal within the frequency range of 0-5 THz are shown in Fig. The DOS of three configurations and Si, Ge are depicted in Fig. The high thermal conductivity of alternating monolayers can also be deduced from the spectrum analyses. The dispersion curves of the alternating monolayers structure and disordered crystal are shown in Fig. From the investigations above, the atomic configuration with low thermal conductivity is identified as the layered structure. Previous studies have shown that the interface roughness First, the optimization of interface roughness for configurations of 4 × 2 × 1 unit cells is carried out. Two unit cells along the z-direction are set to provide a large design degree of freedom for optimization the interface. For simplicity, we set the Si/Ge layers with the same thickness. The schematic of the optimization system is shown in Fig. Interface II is then constructed by exchanging Si and Ge atoms corresponding to the interface I to maintain the composition. There are 928 candidates in total, and Bayesian optimization is performed to search for the optimal configuration. The evolution of optimized thermal conductivities is similar to Fig. In this scenario, after seven drops of the searched lowest thermal conductivity, the converged solution is obtained. All the calculated configurations can be divided into 8 groups according to the evolution of the optimization process. The highest and lowest thermal conductivity configurations exist in group 1 and 8, respectively. In order to investigate the characteristics of the optimized interfaces, three sets of configurations from groups 1, 4 and 8 are taken as representatives, of which the schematics are shown in Fig. Previous studies have reported that the acoustic mismatch between Si/Ge layers can impede the phonon transport The disorder arrangement of layer thickness can induce destructive interferences, which effectively weakens the heat conduction Based on the optimization of interface roughness and layer thickness arrangement separately, it is found that the layered structure with unmixed interface roughness and particular layer thickness arrangement can have low thermal conductivity. We further identify the specific atomic configuration with the lowest thermal conductivity considering both two factors. We first optimize the interface roughness based on obtained SIOL structure. The SIOL structures with l ̅ of 16 and 24 are considered. In order to generate candidate configurations, the atoms in the outer monolayers are randomly assigned as Si or Ge while maintaining the composition. With Bayesian optimization, it is found the thermal conductivity is not further reduced and the optimal configuration still is the original SIOL structure. We compare the detailed atomic configurations of the calculated candidates and the original SIOL structure. The deviations are quantified by the number of atoms that are different at the same lattice sites. The deviations for l ̅ being 16 and 24 are shown in Fig. Adding interface roughness may destroy the destructive phonon interference, leading to the enhancement of thermal conductivity In this study, we search for the lowest thermal conductivity atomic configuration of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy system with first-principles calculations and Bayesian optimization. The optimizations of the atomic configuration of different unit cell sizes are carried out and the layered structures are found to possess lower thermal conductivities. The flattening of the phonon dispersion curve and the filtering effect of alternate Si/Ge layers of the layered structure are responsible for the low thermal conductivity. Furthermore, the layer thickness arrangement and interface roughness of the layered structure are optimized. Through a comprehensive search, we unambiguously proved that the optimal configuration of the alloy system with the lowest thermal conductivity is the layered structure with smooth interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement. This study also demonstrates the effectiveness of Bayesian optimization for material design at the atomic scale.