Converting earth-abundant dinitrogen into value-added chemical ammonia is a significant yet challenging topic. Electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), compared with conventional Haber-Bosch process, is an energy-saving and environmentally friendly approach. The major task of electrocatalytic NRR is to find electrocatalysts which can activate dinitrogen effectively and exhibit high selectivity and stability. Single atom catalysts can act as a good solution. In this work, by means of first-principles density functional theory, molecular dynamics calculations, and a two-step screening process, we confirm that single Sc and Ti atom supported on tetracyanoquinodimethane monolayers (Sc/Ti-TCNQ) are excellent candidates for NRR electrocatalysts. N2 adsorption and activation are effective due to the 'acceptance-donation' mechanism and outstanding electronic structure of TM-TCNQ, and Gibbs free energy diagram shows that Sc-TCNQ and Ti-TCNQ exhibit low NRR overpotential of 0.33 and 0.22 V through enzymatic-consecutive mixed pathway, respectively. In addition, selectivity over HER and stability of Sc/Ti-TCNQ monolayers are also validated. This work opens a new avenue for designing novel single atom catalysts for NRR as well as other catalytic applications. Table S2. Adsorption energies Ead (eV) of N2 onto the TM-TCNQ (TM=Sc-Zn, Mo, Ru-Pd, Ag, Pt, Au) with both end-on and side-on configurations. Catalysts with favorable Ead value for NRR are marked in red. System End-on Side-on System End-on Side-on Sc-TCNQ -0.63 -0.33 Zn-TCNQ -0.11 -0.05 Ti-TCNQ -0.97 -0.56 Mo-TCNQ -0.06 -0.06 V-TCNQ -1.16 -0.50 Ru-TCNQ -0.03 -0.07 Cr-TCNQ -1.20 -0.09 Rh-TCNQ -0.03 -0.07 Mn-TCNQ -0.96 -0.04 Pd-TCNQ -0.05 -0.07 Fe-TCNQ -0.45 -0.08 Ag-TCNQ -0.01 -0.01 Co-TCNQ 0.08 0.04 Pt-TCNQ -0.05 -0.07 Ni-TCNQ 0.05 0.02 Au-TCNQ -0.27 -0.28 Cu-TCNQ -0.05 -0.06 S4 Table S3. DFT-calculated total energy EDFT, zero point energy EZPE, and entropic contribution term TS for NRR and HER intermediates on Sc- Ammonia (NH3) is an indispensable chemical in industry and agriculture because it not only can serve as a precursor to the production of many kinds of fertilizers, chemicals for daily use, and pharmaceuticals, but also is a clean, carbon-free energy carrier whose combustion products (dinitrogen and water) are all environmentally benign. Recently, another group of catalysts-single-atom catalysts (SACs), have appeared in the vision of researchers. SACs, which are defined as isolated atoms anchored on the substrates, exhibit remarkable catalytic performance and relatively lower cost because of the full utilization of active metal atoms, high selectivity, and stability. SACs due to tunable geometric structure and large surface area. Based on the information given above, in this work, we use DFT calculations to search for the potential candidates as electrocatalysts for NRR in TM-TCNQ monolayers by screening 17 TM elements which are common on the earth (Sc-Zn, Mo, Ru-Pd, Ag, Pt, Au). Gibbs free energy calculations are conducted to evaluate the NRR performance of the selected samples, and stability and NRR selectivity of these SACs are further checked. All spin-polarized DFT and AIMD calculations were performed by employing the projector-augmented wave method implemented in the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). Grid-based Bader charge analysis NRR was considered as a six net coupled proton and electron transfer (CPET) process and one coupled proton and electron was transferred from the solution to the surface of electrocatalyst for each step. The Gibbs free energy was calculated using the following formula: where ΔEDFT, ΔEZPE, TΔS, and ΔGpH represent the difference of DFT-calculated adsorption energy, zero point energy (ZPE), entropic contribution, and free energy correction of pH in each reaction step. Conventional hydrogen electrode (CHE) model to calculate the Gibbs free energy of (H + +e -): where kB and R represent Boltzmann constant and gas constant, respectively. The structures of TM-TCNQ are modelled by 2×2 supercell with twelve carbon atoms, four nitrogen atoms, four hydrogen atoms, and one TM atom. A prototypical DFT-optimized structure of TM-TCNQ-Sc-TCNQ is shown in Fig. From Bader charge analysis, in Sc-TCNQ, Ti-TCNQ, and V-TCNQ, TM atom transfers 1.87 e -, 1.80 e -, and 1.46 e -to the TCNQ substrate, indicating that TCNQ can accept electrons from TM atoms. We further calculate the electron localized function (ELF) and show the contour plot in Fig. To gain a deeper view of the most probable NRR mechanisms, we perform calculations of Gibbs free energy for each intermediate in each step (Table Potential-limiting step (PLS) is defined as the reaction step with the highest Gibbs free energy increase and PLS determines the performance of the electrocatalysts. From Fig. is PLS (0.58 eV). With a limiting potential U=-0.58, -0.47, and -0.81 V for Sc, Ti, and V-TCNQ, respectively, all reaction pathways can be exothermic (Fig. Uequilibrium is calculated to be -0.25 V in this work (Gibbs free energy change for the total reaction). Therefore, η values for Sc-TCNQ, Ti-TCNQ, and V-TCNQ are 0.33 V, 0.22 V, and 0.56 V, respectively. The overpotential values for Sc and Ti-TCNQ are much lower than the majority of reported NRR SACs, such as Mo on nitrogen doped graphene (N3-G) (0.34 V) To further understanding the NRR catalytic activity of TM-TCNQ, we perform Bader charge analysis along the most favorable reaction pathway, and each intermediate is divided into three moieties: the TCNQ nanosheet (denoted as moiety 1), single TM atom (denoted as moiety 2), and the adsorbed NxHy (moiety 3). Results for Sc and Ti-TCNQ are plotted in Fig. In the final part, we test the stability of Sc and Ti-TCNQ, which are all good candidates for NRR electrocatalysts. First, to confirm that single metal aggregation will not occur on the surface of TCNQ, we compare the binding energy (Eb) of the single atom and the cohesive energy (Ec) for metal aggregation, which are defined as Eb=ETM-TNCQ-ETNCQ-ETM and Ec=(ETM-bulk-nETM)/n, respectively, where ETM and ETM-bulk represent the energy of single transition metal atom and total energy of transition metal in crystal, while n denotes the metal atoms in the unit cell of the crystal. Eb values are calculated to be -9.29 and -9.98 eV for Sc and Ti on TCNQ, while the Ec values are -4.59 and -6.76 eV, indicating that binding to the substrate is more energetically favorable than aggregating into clusters for both Sc and Ti and the single atoms can be stably deposited onto the substrate as active sites. To ensure the thermal stability of the SACs, we further perform AIMD simulations at 500 K and plot the total energy as a function of simulation time for Sc and Ti-TCNQ. Results in Fig. These evidences clearly demonstrate that Sc and Ti-TCNQ are thermally stable with the temperature up to 500 K. In this work, by means of first-principles calculations, we systematically study the potential application of TM-TCNQ, a group of novel single-atom catalysts, on electrocatalytic NRR. From a two-step screening process, we identify three systems-Sc, Ti, and V-TCNQ with side-on N2 adsorption pattern-from 34 structures. N2 adsorption and activation are ensured by the unique electronic properties of TM-TCNQ and the 'acceptance-donation' mechanism. Gibbs free energy calculations prove that NRR Sc and Ti-TCNQ is thermodynamically favorable with low overpotential values of 0.33 and 0.22 V through the enzymatic-consecutive mixed pathway. In addition, NRR selectivity and stability of the catalysts are also confirmed. Overall, our work provides evidence that Sc and Ti-TCNQ can be promising NRR electrocatalysts. The findings and methodology in this work may be extended to the design of other single-atom catalysts. 