Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a mature technology, which allows performing contactless data readout via wireless communication links. While communication protocols in this field are subject to regulations, there is a room of opportunities to improve the hardware realization of antennas devices, which support the technology. In particular, readout range extension and miniaturization of passive RFID tags is an important objective with far going impact on retail, security, IoT, and many others. Here we introduce a new concept of highpermittivity ceramic tag, which relies on different physical principles. Instead of using conduction currents in metallic wires to drive electronic chips and radiate electromagnetic waves, high permittivity components rely on an efficient excitation of displacement currents. Those are efficiently converted to conduction currents, powering a memory chip. The practical aspect of this approach is improved robustness to environmental fluctuations, footprint reduction, and readout range extension. In particular, our high permittivity ceramic (ε ~ 100) elements have demonstrated a 25% reading range improvement in respect to commercial tags. In case, when state of the art readers and RFID chips are used, the readout distances of the developed ceramic tags are approaching 23 m and could be further extended with improved matching circuits. Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a widely used technique for noncontact data readout via a wireless communication channel Typical architectures of RFID tags are based on folded metal strips with a chip, plugged in a gap. The operation of metallic resonators is based on phase retardation effects and, hence, those structures cannot be significantly smaller than a fraction of a wavelength. While quite a few techniques on size reduction do exist, antenna footprints cannot go significantly below the wavelength without a major bandwidth reduction. In theory, the overall radar cross-section (RCS) of a subwavelength structure does not depend on its overall size, if a proper resonant load is chosen. In practice, however, lumped element losses lead to significant performance degradations, making this approach to be less attractive in applications, where operation at moderately low signal-to-noise ratios is required. Extensive folding of metal strips can replace lumped elements and it is quite an attractive strategy for reducing internal losses. For example, meandered dipole antennas Another promising strategy in antenna size reduction is based on employing high-index materials, since the free space wavelength shrinks by the refractive index in all three dimensions. Dielectric resonant antennas (DRAs) Here we investigate capabilities of miniature high permittivity dielectric resonators as RFID antenna elements. The general concept of the ceramic-based RFID tag appears in Fig. Dmitry Dobrykh, Ildar Yusupov, Sergey Krasikov, Anna Mikhailovskaya, Diana Shakirova, Andrey Bogdanov, Alexey Slobozhanyuk, and Dmitry Filonov, and Pavel Ginzburg Long-range miniature ceramic RFID tags The report is organized as follows: theoretical and numerical analysis for finding bounds of ceramic tags' miniaturization are discussed first. It is then followed by the experimental comparison of scattering efficiencies of new ceramic and commercially available metallic tags. Investigation of environmental fluctuation effects on tags' performances comes before experimental studies, where readout distances, achievable for different tags, are evaluated. Long-range operation with the recent state of the art equipment is evaluated by extrapolating link budget equations. Size reduction of a resonator implies the decrease of the scattering cross section bandwidth according to the Chu-Harrington limit where k is the free space wavenumber and a is the minimal radius of an imaginary sphere, inclosing the geometry. Operation with narrow bandwidth resonators can significantly reduce the capacity of a wireless communications channel. EPCGEN2 RFID standard, being the subject to standardization, requires establishing a reliable communication in 860-960 MHz frequency range, depending on a specific country. Those parameters suggest operating at Q-factors less then several thousands, which makes impossible to implement tags with sizes significantly smaller than λ/100 in a free space. Operation outside the scattering peak results in a drop of the reading distance, nevertheless a tag still can be read out. In order to estimate the impact of the ceramic resonator miniaturization on the bandwidth, a qualitative analysis will be performed first and then followed by a more accurate theoretical investigation. The miniaturization strategy is based on a compensation of size reduction by increasing the permittivity. The resonant frequency of the fundamental magnetic TE010 mode in the closed cylindrical resonator is given by where a is the radius, d its height, q is the axial order of the mode, x np ′ it is the p-th roots of the Bessel function derivative J n ′ (x np ′ ) = 0, ε and μ are the permittivity and permeability of the cylinder, respectively. We focus at the fundamental magnetic dipole mode of the resonator, thus, q = 0, n = 0 and p = 1, and x 01 ′ =3.83. Equation (2) assumes PEC boundaries, which is quite an accurate approximation in the case of high-permittivity material, filling the interior of the resonator. Equation While the beforehand qualitative analysis predicts the general behavior of the system's parameters, it does not provide any quantitative measure. In order to accomplish this task, electromagnetic fields, leaking from the resonator, should be calculated. While the problem of electromagnetic scattering on a finite size cylindrical resonator does not have a closed-form expression, the scenario can be well approximated with an equivalent sphere, for which Mie solutions are well known Resonances of cylinders can be found numerically by either considering the resonant structure of scattering spectra or by employing an eigenmode solver. A typical example, demonstrating the excitation of the fundamental TE010 mode in the resonator with height h = 17 mm, radius R = 20 mm and dielectric constant ε = 100 appears in the inset in Fig. The resonant frequency of the entire structure including the cylinder, metal ring, and shorten circuit was found to be f = 900 MHz (in fact, the parameters were chosen to hit this frequency, which falls at the middle of EPCGEN2 band). An equivalent sphere, resembling these properties, is constructed as follows: the same permittivity ε is used, while the radius of the sphere is varied to match the resonant frequency of the fundamental magnetic dipolar mode. The expression for the resonant condition has a closed-form analytical form, based on Mie series. Once the equivalent radius is found, the fields outside the sphere can be calculated as: E 0 [ib n N ⃗ ⃗ o1n (3) + a n M ⃗⃗ e1n (3) ], where N ⃗ ⃗ o1n (3) and M ⃗⃗ e1n (3) are the vector spherical harmonics, E 0 the amplitude of an incident plane wave The fundamental magnetic mode corresponds to a single nonvanishing coefficient in the series, namely b 1 . The total magnetic flux through the ring is calculated by integrating the total field. The nontrivial part of the magnetic flux, corresponding to the scattered field, is calculated by integrating (3): where a is the sphere radius, k 0 is the wave number, Z 0 is the impedance of free space, h 1 (1) (k 0 a) is the spherical Hankel function of the first kind and α = arctan(r/a). Then current in the ring is calculated as: where R Ω is resistance and L is inductance of the ring. In our case L = 4.38 • 10 -8 H, which is several orders higher than R Ω /ω and hence resistance can be neglected. It is worth noting that the selfinductance of the ring can be introduced self-consistently in the model, but this complication does not provide any significant advantage to the basic understanding of the process. Equation ( At the next step, theoretical predictions are assessed versus fullwave numerical analysis. For this purpose, several cylindrical resonators are studied and the impact of miniaturization on bandwidth and current are investigated. The largest considered structure has the following parameters: R = 19 mm, h = 22 mm, ε = 80, and the resonant frequency is 900 MHz -the last parameter is kept constant through all the designs. The size of this initial resonator is then reduced by a multiplicative scaling factor. In order to keep the resonant frequency constant, the value of ε was adjusted with the help of the numerical routine. Figure Numerical and theoretical models predict that the resonator's size reduction causes the drop in the bandwidth (in accordance with the Chu-Harrington limit), while the current grows with the increase of the quality factor, as it was also predicted by the qualitative analysis. It is quite remarkable that the theoretical approximation ( While near-field coupling governs the performance of the RFID readout in standard applications, an increase of the interrogation distance forces the system to operate at far-field conditions. Hereinafter the readout range will be above several meters, prevailing Fraunhofer distances by an order of magnitude and, hence, ensuring far-field conditions. The parameters of the fabricated ceramic resonators are shown in Table Another important requirement for a proper RFID operation is the tolerance to environmental fluctuations. Those might include extreme temperature, moisture, chemical ambient, and any other hash condition. Ceramic composites have significant advantages with respect to metal structures in this context. Here we will check the influence of the temperature change on tag's operation, which might be quite substantial in the case when resonant structures are in use. While there is no data on temperature-dependent permittivity for specific ceramics, which is in use here, related structures have been investigated The results suggest in Fig. It worth briefly noting that our architecture still contains unshielded metal elements (the ring and the chip). However, those parts can be embedded in the interior of the ceramic resonator, which will shield them from an environment to a certain extent. In order to assess the performances of new tags, a comparative experiment has been performed. Two ceramic resonators and three commercial UHF metallic tags [thin electric dipoles, see inset in Fig. In order to underline the main mechanism for the readout distance improvement, the link budget of the system has been evaluated. There are two major parameters, related to the hardware implementation, have to be verified. The first factor is the chip activation threshold. RFID tag has a rectifier, which powers the IC. A certain threshold intensity should be obtained on the tag's antenna port to power the electronics. The second factor is a reader's sensitivity. The intensity of the backscattered signal should be within the dynamical range of the receiver. The beforehand mentioned factors should be assessed simultaneously, since the weakest part of the system will limit the range. The maximal reading distance is given by the Friis' uplink model where the parameters are given in Table The sensitivity of the basic low-cost IC (Impinj Monza 4) is -17 dBm, which corresponds to the activation range L=5.3 m (Eq. 6). The improved version (Impinj Monza 6 generation) already has the sensitivity of -22 dBm, which will allow the activation at a distance L=9 m. Using new generation of sensitive electronic components allows improving the reading distances quite significantly. The second factor, which might limit the range, is the reader sensitivity. In this case the tag is assumed to be activated, and the differential RCS plays the key role. In this case, the modulation efficiency (ME) parameter is defined. Taking into account the readers minimal received power (P r ), the monostatic radar equation reads as In practice, ME ranges in 0 ≤ ME ≤ 4 or ME ≤ 6 dB Reader device with a moderately low dynamic range can activate a tag at a distance but cannot process the received signal. In this case, the sensitivity is the bottleneck. In our investigation we employed a relatively cheap device, which cannot read signals below -50 dBm (also can be seen in Fig. The new type of RFID tags, based on ceramic resonators, has been investigated and aimed at achieving miniaturization and extension of readout distances. Apart from the applied aspect of the investigation, a new physical concept in the field has been introduced. In particular, it has been shown that displacement currents, resonantly exited within the resonator's volume, are efficiently coupled to conduction current in a small loop, functionalized with an RFID chip. This approach allows for designing robust and environmentally sable ceramic components, which drive the entire process. From the applied standpoint, this new architecture provides new routes for achieving small footprint RFID tags, which support long reading range, which is valuable in numerous applications, such as retail, security, IoT, and many others.