The Drude model describes the free-electron conduction in simple metals, governed by the freedom that the mobile electrons have within the material. In strongly correlated systems, however, a significant deviation of the optical conductivity from the simple metallic Drude behavior is observed. Here, we investigate the optical conductivity of the heavy-fermion system CeCu6-xAux, using timeresolved, phase-sensitive terahertz spectroscopy. The terahertz electric field creates two types of excitations in heavy-fermion materials: First, the intraband excitations that leave the heavy quasiparticles intact. Second, the resonant interband transitions between the heavy and light parts of the hybridized conduction band that break the Kondo singlet. We find that the Kondo-singlet-breaking interband transitions do not create a Drude peak, while the Kondo-retaining intraband excitations yield the expected Drude response. This makes it possible to separate these two fundamentally different correlated contributions to the optical conductivity. The electronic ground state of a strongly correlated system has remained a subject of great interest over decades. Heavy-fermion systems The above-mentioned hybridization between the localized rare-earth 4f electrons and the itinerant conduction electrons control the electronic properties, such as conductivity, in a profound way. At elevated temperatures, the electrons move in a broad conduction band, and infrared optical experiments on the low-energy electrodynamics of heavy-fermion compounds reveal Drude-like behavior in the optical conductivity, indicating light Fermi-liquid nature Recently, time-resolved terahertz (THz) spectroscopy has proven to be a powerful tool to coherently probe collective excitations in solids, in particular the correlation dynamics in heavy-fermion systems. We have shown that upon excitation with low-energy THz radiation, part of the correlated Kondo state can be extinguished and resurges back with a distinct temporal separation from the instantaneous conduction-electron response In this Report, we address these questions by unravelling the temperature dependence of the dynamical conductivity obtained from the instantaneous response and the correlated delayed response at THz frequencies. We use the canonical CeCu 6-x Au x system The CeCu 6-x Au x samples used in this work are cut from single crystals of orthorhombic crystal structure, and faces perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis were polished using colloidal silica. In order to prevent oxidation, all samples were stored in an inert nitrogen atmosphere. The sample surface is always freshly polished before measurements, and care is taken to ensure that the surface damages due to polishing are within the submicron range (i.e., λ THz ). The samples are then mounted in a temperature-controlled Janis SVT-400 helium reservoir cryostat. The experiments are performed in a reflection geometry where linearly polarized THz radiation with a spectral range of 0.1 -3 THz is used at an incident angle of 45 • . The THz electric field is oriented perpendicular to the crystallographic a-axis. Single-cycle terahertz pulses are generated by optical rectification in a 0.5 mm ZnTe(110)-oriented single crystal, using 90% of a Ti:Sapphire laser output (wavelength 800 nm, pulse duration 120 fs, pulse repetition rate 1 kHz, pulse energy 2 mJ). The remaining 10% of the fundamental pulse is used as a probe (or gating) pulse for the free-space electrooptic sampling of the reflected THz wave. The THz and the gating beams are collinearly focused onto a ZnTe(110)oriented detection crystal. The THz-induced ellipticity of the probe light is measured using a quarter-wave plate, a Wollaston polarizer and a balanced photodiode. The signal from the photodiode is then analyzed with a lock-in amplifier. In order to increase the accessible time delay between the THz and the probe pulses, Fabry-Pérot resonances from the faces of the 0.5 mm ZnTe(110)-oriented crystal are suppressed by extending the detection crystal with a 2 mm THz-inactive ZnTe(100)-oriented crystal that is optically bonded to the back of the detection crystal. We first identify the trivial THz reflexes generated by the optical components in order not to confuse them with the THz signal generated from the CeCu 6-x Au x samples. A measurement of all these THz reflexes is provided elsewhere To obtain the dynamical conductivity from the two response windows, the THz time traces are first Fouriertransformed (FT) to obtain the complex THz spectra. , where σ R is the real part of the conductivity, σ DC is the DC conductivity, ω = 2πν is the angular frequency and 1/τ tr is the transport relaxation rate. The Drude fit is carried out only for the range from 0.2 to 0.75 THz, with σ DC and τ tr being the only fitting parameters. The fit was pinned to the data at the highest frequency, ignoring all spectral features between 1.0 to 1.8 THz, to illustrate the physically meaningful situation that develops at low frequencies, i.e., ν ≤ 0.75 THz. The DC value of the optical conductivity is obtained from the extrapolation of the finite frequency results to zero frequency In Fig. In contrast, the optical conductivity obtained from the delayed pulse around 6 ps shows a distinct response A complete temperature evolution of the THz conductivity obtained from the instantaneous signal of the heavyfermion compound, CeCu 6 , is shown in Figs. that at very high temperatures, the real part of the THz conductivity is dominated by the Drude-like free-electron response, as mentioned earlier. This behavior, however, develops slowly into a heavy-Fermi-liquid Drude response as the temperature is lowered below 10 K, characterized by the reduced scattering rate and increased effective mass, with a T 2 dependence of resistivity featuring the Fermiliquid intraband quasiparticle-quasiparticle scattering [see red-dashed line in Fig. The temperature evolution of the conductivity obtained from the delayed response [Fig. , where A(T ) is the temperature-dependent spectral weight, ν 0 represents the low-frequency Kondo resonance and Γ should correspond to the Kondo energy scale, see discussion above. The temperature dependence of the fitted Lorentz functions is separately plotted in Fig. In the case of the quantum-critical sample, CeCu 5.9 Au 0.1 , the optical conductivity obtained from the instantaneous response [see Fig. Near a Kondo-breakdown QCP, when the low-energy Fermi liquid scale T * vanishes, dynamical response quantities should obey ω/T scaling of the form σ(ω, T ) ∝ T -α f (hω/k B T ) with a universal scaling function f (x). This was theoretically expected Figure . 6(a) shows the temperature evolution of the optical conductivity for the antiferromagnetic compound, CeCu 5 Au 1 , obtained from the instantaneous response. Remarkably, the antiferromagnetic compound does not show a delayed correlated response at any temperatures We have explored the temperature dependence of the dynamical conductivity at THz frequencies for the canonical CeCu 6-x Au x system. Terahertz excitation creates both intraband excitations as well as resonant interband transitions between the hybridized heavy and light parts of the conduction band. In the heavy-Fermi-liquid phase, CeCu 6 , the intraband excitations lead to Drude response embedded within the instantaneous response. The interband transitions create a time-delayed response, featuring Kondo correlations. We have systematically separated the conductivity responses of the instantaneous signal from the delayed correlated signal. The instantaneous response of the heavyfermion sample and the quantum-critical sample have a simple metallic Drude low-frequency behavior at high temperatures that develops into heavy-Fermi-liquid Drude and non-Fermi-liquid behavior, respectively, below the Kondo lattice temperature. In contrast, the optical conductivities obtained from the correlated, delayed response do not show Drude-like behavior at any temperatures, neither for CeCu 6 nor CeCu 5.9 Au 0.1 . We have observed a smooth transfer of the conductivity spectral weight from the CEF resonance at high temperature to the Kondo resonance at low temperature. By contrast, in CeCu 5.9 Au 0.1 the spectral weight of the Kondo resonance continuously vanishes below T * K , implying that the sample undergoes a Kondo breakdown as we approach the QCP, and reconciling with our previous analysis in the time-domain where n 1 and n 2 are the refractive indices of air and the sample, respectively. θ 1 and θ 2 are the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction, respectively. In our experimental setup, the incidence angle θ 1 is 45 • and the refractive index of air is n 1 = 1. Using Snell's law (n 1 sinθ 1 = n 2 sinθ 2 ), Eq.(A2) can be expressed as This further simplifies to where the refractive index of the sample, n 2 (ω) = n (ω) + i n (ω) is the only variable. It is to be noted that n 2 is a complex, frequency-dependent number. The complex refractive index can then be obtained from the experimentallly determined R(ω) at various temperatures. Using the Drude-Lorentz model, we then obtain the complex THz optical conductivity. To extract out the conductivity response from the delayed pulse, we cut the original data in two parts, namely the instantaneous and the delayed responses. The choice of the position that separates the instantaneous response and the delayed response is purely based on the envelope function used to model the delayed response see supplemental material of Ref. For the scaling analysis of the real part, we convert the THz frequencies ν = ω/2π to the dimensionless parameter x = hω/k B T and plot, for all frequencies ν ranging from (ω)] T α , where α is still a free parameter of order 1. We then fit a power law, y f it (x) = A * x s , to all the data points y data (x), with fit parameters s and A. We repeat this procedure for different values of α and compute each time the relative standard deviation of the fit, For a scaling analysis of the imaginary part of the optical conductivity, we find that background subtraction would be needed, since the imaginary part of a Drude background has strong frequency dependence with a sign change at ω = 0, according to the Kramers-Kronig relation. We, therefore, did not perform a scaling analysis of the imaginary part, as this is not the focus of the present paper.