The parkerite-type ternary chalcogenide Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 was discovered to be a charge density wave (CDW) superconductor. However, there was a debate on whether the observed phase transition at 240 K could be attributed to the formation of CDW order. To address the issue, we performed optical spectroscopy and ultrafast pump-probe measurements on single crystal samples of Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 . Our optical conductivity measurement reveals clearly the formation of an energy gap with associated spectral change only at low energies, yielding strong evidence for a CDW phase transition at 240 K. Time resolved pump-probe measurement provides further support for the CDW phase transition. The amplitude and relaxation time of quasiparticles extracted from the photoinduced reflectivity show strong enhancement near transition temperature, yielding further evidence for the CDW energy gap formation. Additionally, a collective mode is identified from the oscillations in the pump-probe time delay at low temperature. This mode, whose frequency decreases gradually at elevated temperature, could be naturally attributed to the amplitude mode of CDW state. Charge-density wave (CDW) and superconductivity are two important and closely linked broken symmetry states in solids. There has been tremendous interest in the interplay between these two states in condensed matter physics. The topic has motivated extensive exploration of new materials showing coexistence or competition between the two different instabilities. The discovery of a coexistence of superconductivity and a structural phase transition in Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 represents a new progress Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 belongs to a quasi-two dimensional parkeritetype ternary chalcogenides A 2 M 3 X 2 (A = Sn, Pb, In, Tl, and Bi; M = Co, Ni, Rh, and Pd; X = S and Se) composed of sheets containing one-dimensional M-M chains It is crucial to understand the nature of the phase transition in those compounds because it is an essential step towards understanding the properties of compounds and the possible connection to the superconductivity. Up to now, there is no spectroscopic experiment on those compounds. It is well known that most of the CDW states are driven by the nesting topology of Fermi surfaces, i.e. the matching of sections of FS to others by a wave vector q = 2k F , where the electronic susceptibility has a divergence. A single-particle energy gap opens in the nested regions of the Fermi surfaces at the transition, which leads to the lowering of the electronic energies of the system. Simultaneously, the phonon mode of acoustic branch becomes softened to zero frequency at q = 2k F as a result of electron-phonon interaction, leading to structural distortion In this work, we performed optical spectroscopy and ultrafast pump-probe measurements on single crystal samples of Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 . Our measurement reveals clearly the formation of an energy gap with associated spectral change only at low energy, yielding strong evidence for a CDW phase transition at 240 K. The opening of the energy gap removes most of the free carrier spectral weight and causes a dramatic reduction in the carrier scattering rate. Ultrafast pump-probe measurement reveals a significant change of the photoinduced reflectivity near the phase transition temperature. A strong enhancement of the amplitude and relaxation time of photoinduced carriers is extracted at the phase transition temperature, also yielding evidence for the CDW energy gap opening. Moreover, the time resolved measurement demonstrates presence of a strong oscillation at low temperature, which becomes damped gradually at elevated temperature. The temperature dependence of the oscillation suggests that it comes from the amplitude mode of CDW collective excitations. The single crystal samples of Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 were synthesized by self flux method. High-purity Bi, Rh, and Se elements with a molar ratio of Bi:Rh:Se=2:3:2 were mixed, placed in an alumina crucible, and sealed in a silica ampule filled with argon gas. The sealed ampule was heated to 1050 0 C and held for 5 h, then slowly cooled with the rate of 2 0 C/h to 750 0 C. At the final temperature, the mixture was decanted using a centrifuge. The temperature dependent resistivity was measured by a standard four-probe method. The specific heat was measured by using the relaxation method. Both were performed in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). Figure The in-plane reflectivity R(ω) was measured by the Fourier transform infrared spectrometer Bruker 80V in the frequency range from 40 to 25 000 cm -1 . The room temperature R(ω) over a broad frequency range is displayed in the inset of Fig. The real part of optical conductivity σ 1 (ω) was derived from R(ω) through Kramers-Kronig transformation, as shown in Fig. The Drude term describes the response of itinerant carriers, while the Lorentz terms stand for interband transitions and excitations across energy gaps. Here, for simplicity, we use only one Drude component to estimate the spectral weight of itinerant carriers. Figure It is worthy noting that a sharp and narrow Drude peak remains in the low temperature state, which agrees well with the high reflectivity near zero frequency, indicating that the Fermi surfaces are partially gapped by the CDW phase transition. The number of lost free carriers could be estimated by the variation of plasma frequency ω p ∼ √ n/m * , where n and m * represent the number and effective mass of free carriers respectively. From the above decomposition, we find that the plasma frequency ω p varies roughly from 2.8×10 4 cm -1 at room temperature to 8×10 3 cm -1 at 10 K, which indicates that over 90 % of free carriers are removed by the opening of CDW energy gap. Meanwhile, the scattering rate Γ D decreases violently from 2540 cm -1 to 93 cm -1 , as been evidenced by the narrowing of Drude peak, which makes the compound to have even lower dc resistivity at low temperature despite of the substantial carrier density loss. Actually, the plasma frequency associated with the Drude component spectral weight could also be estimated by ω 2 p = 8 ω c 0 σ 1 (ω)dω, where ω c is the cut-off frequency of the Drude component. Taking the location of the conductivity minimum as the cutoff frequency, being about 4800 cm -1 for 300 K and 290 cm -1 for 10 K, where the balance between the tails of Drude and Lorentz components are roughly taken into account, we obtained the same values of plasma frequencies as that from the above decomposition of the spectral weight. Further support for the formation of CDW order can be obtained from our ultrafast pump probe measurement, which has been proven to be particularly useful in detecting both of the single particle excitations across small energy gaps The photoinduced reflectivity change ∆R/R as a function of time delay at different temperatures are displayed in Fig. where A i (i=1,2,3) represents the amplitude of the photoinduced reflectivity change and τ i stands for the relaxation time of the decay channel. As an example, we show the fitting curve for the data at 200 K (the bottom curve in Fig. The substantial change of ∆R/R below 230∼240 K reflects the phase transition. From the fitting of equation ( It is well known that the energy gap formation has a significant effect on the decay dynamics the photoexcited quasiparticles, which was described by the phenomenological Rothwarf-Taylor (R-T) model where Φ is the pump fluence and γ is a fitting parameter. The equation describes an increase in the photoexcited quasiparticle density due to the decreasing gap value and corresponding enhanced phonon emission during the relaxation. As the gap closes at transition temperature, more and more lowenergy phonons become available for reabsorption, a quasidivergence in the relaxation time is resulted where g is a fitting parameter. Indeed, the sudden change of A 1 and τ 1 near the phase transition temperature could be captured by equations ( There exists some deviation at lower temperatures. It might be linked to the simultaneous change in A 2 , τ 2 and A 3 and τ 3 , which was ignored in the above analysis. Additionally, we expect that the R-T model, which is appropriate near the phase transition, would become less applicable at temperature far below the phase transition. Nevertheless, the sudden increase in A 1 and quasi-divergence in τ 1 illustrate unambiguously the appearance of an energy gap, yielding further evidence for the CDW phase transition. On the other hand, CDW also has collective excitations, being referred to as amplitude mode and phase mode. The amplitude mode involves the ionic displacement and has a finite energy even at q=0 limit, usually at the energy level of terahertz frequency, which could be identified by the ultrafast pump-probe experiment Unusual CDW mode frequency was observed only for certain compound with peculiar CDW wave vector q = 2k F , for example, in LaAgSb 2 with extremely small CDW wave vector 2k F or unusual long lattice modulation period in real space To summarize, we have utilized infrared spectroscopy and ultrafast pump-probe measurement to investigate the charge and coherent dynamics of the Bi 2 Rh 3 Se 2 single crystals, in an effort to address whether the phase transition at 240 K is a CDW order or a purely structural transition. Our optical spectroscopy measurement reveals clearly the formation of an energy gap with associated spectral change only at low energies, yielding strong evidence for a CDW phase transition at 240 K. The formation of the energy gap removes most part of the free carrier spectral weight. Time resolved pump-probe measurement provides further support for the CDW phase transition. The amplitude and relaxation time of quasiparticles extracted from the photoinduced reflectivity show strong enhancement near transition temperature, yielding further evidence for the CDW energy gap formation. Additionally, a collective mode is identified from the oscillations in the pump-probe time delay at low temperature. This mode, whose frequency decreases gradually at elevated temperature, is suggested to be the amplitude mode of CDW condensate state.