The self-energy of a moving vortex is shown do decrease with increasing velocity. The interaction energy of two parallel slowly moving vortices differs from the static case by a small term ∝ v 2 ; the "slow" motion is defined as having the velocity v < vc = c 2 /4πσλ, where σ(T ) is conductivity of the normal excitations and λ(T ) is London penetration depth. For higher velocities, v > vc(T ), the interaction energy of two vortices situated along the velocity direction is enhanced and along the perpendicular direction is suppressed compared to the static case. Recent experiments have tracked Abrikosov vortices moving with extremely high velocities well exceeding the speed of sound A much simpler linear London approach had been successfully employed through the years to describe static or nearly static vortex systems. The London equations express the basic Meissner effect and can be used at any temperature for problem where vortex cores are irrelevant. The magnetic structure of moving vortices was commonly considered the same as that of a static vortex displaced as a whole. It has been shown recently, however, that this is not the case within the Time Dependent London theory (TDL) which takes into account normal currents, a necessary consequence of moving magnetic structure of a vortex In time dependent situations, the current consists, in general, of normal and superconducting parts: * kogan@ameslab.gov † prozorov@ameslab.gov where E is the electric field and Ψ is the order parameter. The conductivity σ approaches the normal state value σ n when the temperature T approaches T c in fully gapped s-wave superconductors; it vanishes fast with decreasing temperature along with the density of normal excitations. This is, however, not the case for strong pair-breaking when superconductivity becomes gapless while the density of states approaches the normal state value at all temperatures. Within the London approach |Ψ| is a constant Ψ 0 and Eq. ( where λ 2 = mc 2 /8πe 2 |Ψ 0 | 2 is the London penetration depth. Acting on this by curl one obtains: where r ν (t) is the position of the ν-th vortex, z is the direction of vortices that coincides with that of H for isotropic infinite type-II superconductors. Equation (3) can be considered as a general form of the time dependent London equation. This form differs from that provided by F. London where contribution of normal quasiparticles to the current was not included As with the static London approach, the time dependent version (3) has the shortcoming of being valid only outside vortex cores. As such it may produce useful results for materials with large GL parameter κ in fields away of the upper critical field H c2 . On the other hand, Eq. ( For a straight vortex along z moving with a constant velocity v in the xy plane Eq. (3) reads: where H is the z component of the magnetic field and is the "current relaxation time", the term used in literature on time-dependent GL models. Clearly, the field distribution described by Eq. ( Equation ( which yields To find the field distribution in real space for the stationary case of a constant velocity one may consider t = 0. This was done in Ref. Physically, the distortion of the field distribution is due to contribution of the out-of-core normal excitations to vortex currents. At small velocities, the distortion can be disregarded. At low temperatures, the quasiparticles are nearly absent (for the s-wave symmetry) and σ ≈ 0, whereas λ is finite, therefore the vortex field distortion is weak. Hence, the distortion may have an effect at high T s where the conductivity is close to that of the normal phase. Gapless superconductors are an exception to this rule, since the normal excitations density of states is close to the normal even at low T s. Given the field distribution of a moving vortex, one readily evaluates the London line energy of a vortex where the Fourier transform H k is given in Eq. ( Here, the dimensionless q = λk is introduced and the normalized velocity u = v/v c , v c = c 2 /4πσλ (this v c is by a factor of 2 smaller than v c used in Ref. 4). After integration over the angle φ (q x = q cos φ) one obtains the last integral in the form κ 0 2π q(1 + q 2 ) dq where the logarithmically divergent integral is truncated at q = λ/ξ = κ. The reduced line energy f = F 1 /(φ 2 0 /32π 2 λ 2 ) for κ = 10 is shown in Fig. i.e., the line energy is slowly decreases with increasing velocity. For two parallel vortices moving with the same velocity, one at the origin at t = 0 and the other at R = (x, y), the field at R is given by the Fourier transform: Using Eqs. For u = 0 this yields the static interaction energy Commonly, this energy is written as , where H 12 (R) is the field generated by the first vortex at the location of the second. The double integral (14) can be evaluated numerically. The integral over q, however, diverges logarithmically. One can isolate effects of motion by subtracting and adding the result (15) for the interaction of vortices at rest: where the reduced interaction f int = (16π 3 λ 2 /φ 2 0 )F int . Another benefit of this step is that the logarithmic divergence is now incorporated in the exact first term, while the integral here is convergent. To exclude large |k| > 1/ξ (ξ is the vortex core size), we introduce a factor e -k 2 ξ 2 = e -q 2 /κ 2 in the integrand of Eq. ( It is worth noting that the field distribution of the first vortex is asymmetric with respect to x → -x, so that the interaction energy is not proportional to the field of the first vortex at the location of the other. Having the magnetic field (8) of a moving vortex, one gets for two vortices of our interest: The moving nonuniform distribution of the vortex magnetic field causes an electric field E out of the vortex core, which in turn causes the normal currents σE and the dissipation σE 2 . Usually this dissipation is small relative to Bardeen-Stephen core dissipation The field E is expressed in terms of known H with the help of the Maxwell equations i(k For the stationary motion, one can consider the dissipation at t = 0. The dissipation power per unit length is: Treating this integral numerically in the same way as was done for the energy integral in Eq. ( An interesting feature of this result is that the dissipation w(x, y) develops a shallow ditch along the x axis. An example of this ditch is better seen if we plot a cross section w(2, y) as shown in Fig. The time-dependent London equations, formulated to include normal currents around a moving vortex, show that the vortex field distribution differs from a static distribution displaced as a whole Moreover, the interaction energy of two vortices, moving with the same velocity, one at the origin at t = 0 another at R = (x, y), is symmetric relative to x → -x (x is along the velocity) notwithstanding the asymmetric field distribution of the first. In other words, the common rule stating that the interaction energy of two vortices is proportional to the field of the first vortex at the location of the other holds only for the vortices at rest. As in any London based approach, our results are applicable only out of the vortex cores. The only relevant parameter of the theory, in addition to penetration depth λ, is the reduced vortex velocity u = v/v c with v c = c 2 /4πσλ; u is usually small away of T c since the conductivity σ of the normal quasiparticles disappears along with the density of normal excitations. In other words, at low temperatures v c is large, u is small, and effects we discuss here are weak. This is not the case near T c where v c → 0. Also in the presence of pair breaking, the density of states might be close to that of the normal state at all temperatures under T c (gapless case), and the reduced velocity u can be large even for actual velocities v being relatively moderate. In experiments In this paper we consider a less ambitious and sim-ple model of Abrikosov vortices moving with a constant velocity within time-dependent linear London theory. Whereas distances ∼ ξ are unaccessible within this approach, the interaction of vortices at distances of the order of λ ξ are well described by the London -type