The multi-scale nature of architectured materials raises the need for advanced experimental methods suitable for the identification of their effective properties, especially when their size is finite and they undergo extreme deformations. The present work demonstrates that state-of-the art image processing methods combined with numerical and analytical models provide a comprehensive quantitative description of these solids and their global behaviour, including the influence of the boundary conditions, of the manufacturing process, and of geometric and constitutive non-linearities. To this end, an adapted multi-scale digital image correlation analysis is used to track both elongations and rotations of particular features of the unit cell at the local and global (homogenized) scale of the material. This permits to observe with unprecedented clarity the strains for various unit cells in the structure and to detect global deformation patterns and heterogeneities of the homogenized strain distribution. This method is here demonstrated on elastic sheets undergoing extreme longitudinal and shear deformations. These experimental results are compared to non-linear finite element simulations, which are also used to evaluate the effects of manufacturing imperfections on the response. A skeletal representation of the architectured solid is then extracted from the experiments and used to create a purely-kinematic truss-hinge model that can accurately capture its behaviour. The analysis proposed in this work can be extended to guide the design of two-dimensional architectured solids featuring other regular, quasi-regular or graded patterns, and subjected to other types of loads. Architectured sheets are a particular class of twodimensional solids whose patterned designs are tailored to achieve a variety of exceptional mechanical behaviours, including extreme extensibility, auxeticity and morphing capabilities The present work aims to demonstrate that various state-ofthe art methods in image processing can be combined to provide comprehensive data on the multi-scale response of architectured sheets. Our procedure, applicable to any two-dimensional architectured solids, is here applied to investigate the deformation mechanisms of a soft auxetic sheet under extreme longitudinal and shear loading. The acquired images of the structure are first used to identify its exact geometry, which may differ from the designed one due imperfections in the fabrication process. Meshes are built directly from the identified shape and used both for the measurement of the full kinematic field (via Digital Image Correlation) as for the numerical computations (via the Finite Element Method). It is shown that doing so significantly improves the match between measurements and numerical predictions with respect to models that rely on the as-designed specimen geometry. This highlights the high sensitivity of the mechanical response of the specimen to geometrical imperfections. Then, we provide a twoscale analysis of the measured kinematic field: (i) at the continuum material level (microscopic scale) and (ii) at the unit cell level (macroscopic scale). This leads to the quantification of the macroscopic strain heterogeneities and the characteristic deformation patterns, which are influenced by the boundary conditions as well as the inherent Poisson's ratio of the micro-structure. The kinematic analysis is complemented by a procedure aiming at extracting the "skeleton" of the specimen from the experimentally-recorded images. This experimentally-extracted skeleton, whose shape changes during the deformation process, is then used to identify the parameters for an accurate reduced-order model of the architectured solid. The study is organized as follows: Section 2 provides details on fabrication, experimental setups, testing methods, material models and modelling strategy. The results are reported in Section 3, and include the material constitutive law calibration, the multi-scale experimental analysis and the numerical simulations. The skeletal representation of the architectured sheet geometry is discussed in the same Section. A short summary in Section 4 concludes the paper. To demonstrate our approach, we choose to analyse the periodic auxetic design recently proposed in Mechanically, this architectured material carries an effective orthotropic behaviour (provided that the base material is isotropic We fabricated three sorts of specimens consisting of periodic assemblages of the unit cell: two specimens designed for uniaxial tension along directions e 1 and e 2 , hereafter referred to as specimens T 1 and T 2 respectively, and one specimen designed for a simple shear test, hereafter referred to as specimen S . The periodic array for each sample is set at: • 8 × 5 unit cells for the tensile specimen T 2 , • a sequence of two lattices of 8×5 unit cells for the shear specimen S (see Figure For all specimens, the size of the square unit cell was set at 10 mm × 10 mm, yielding a 50 mm × 80 mm lattice. The generated pattern is then completed by 50 mm × 10 mm rectangular solid tabs that permits the clamping to the uniaxial testing machine. The specimens are laser cut from a 1.5 mm-thick natural rubber sheet with a Universal ILS9 120 W laser cutter (single cut at 35% power and 5% speed). To avoid burning the rubber, the machine blows compressed air onto the part being cut. Prior to applying the speckle pattern on the specimens, these are thoroughly washed with standard dish-washing soap. To provide a complete characterization of this geometry, the evolving pattern transformations are investigated through uniaxial tensile and simple shear tests, as shown in Figure All the results shown in this work make use of the the Digital Image Correlation technique (DIC) to extract the structure motion from acquired images during the test. DIC procedures are based on the comparison of subsequent pictures of the structure: given a reference image I r and a current image I i , the problem consists in finding the displacement field u(x) which minimizes the differences between the two images over a subdomain Ω: Given a parametrization of the the trial displacement field ξ(x), this problem is usually solved using a Newton-Raphson procedure. The choice of this parametrization and the sub-domain Ω are the main elements that distinguish: (i) the local approach, where Ω is restricted to a small image sub-domain over which the displacement is assumed to be homogeneous u(x) = a (thus sampling a uniform translation of Ω) and (ii) the global approach where the displacement is defined over a finite-elements mesh covering the full domain of interest Ω (i.e u(x) = N(x) • a with N(x) containing the finite element shape functions). While the comparison between both approaches in terms of efficiency and accuracy is still a hot topic in the community All DIC results presented in this paper are obtained from an in-house academic code written by means of MATLAB scripts. For the global approach, simplex P1 triangular elements are used. The meshes are generated using the DistMesh procedure proposed by Persson Finite element method implementation. Finite element computations are undertaken under the assumption of large strains plane stress using the finite element solver Cast3M 2020 (www-cast3m.cea.fr). In the simulations, the conditions of the mechanical tests are exactly reproduced, e.g. the sample is loaded in with a prescribed displacement at the two ends. In both cases, the specimen is meshed with P2 triangle elements. The geometry of the specimen used for the computations is obtained following two strategies: • from the theoretical level set function φ, using image processing to detect and extract the 0-level contour image of the level set function. Hereafter this mesh is referred as to M φ = 0 i (i denotes the specimen name). For all specimens, the total numbers of elements and nodes are 80,000 and 171,534, respectively. M φ = 0 is perfectly periodic, i.e. it does not embed any geometrical defects; • from the experimental mesh M DIC i (used for the global DIC presented in section 2.3). The total numbers of elements and nodes for the FE model are 78,380 and 166,982, respectively. By comparison to the theoretical mesh M φ = 0 i , M DIC i captures several geometrical imperfections induced by the fabrication process and by the positioning of the specimen in the tensile machine. Rubber material models. The constitutive behaviour of natural rubber is modelled as an incompressible hyperelastic material. Let F = ∂x ∂X denote the deformation gradient mapping a material point from the reference position X to its current location x. We adopt the Mooney-Rivlin model where C 10 , C 01 and d are material parameters. For the case of an incompressible Mooney-Rivlin material under uniaxial elongation, λ 1 = λ and λ 2 = λ 3 = 1/ √ λ. Then the true stress (Cauchy stress) differences can be calculated as: In the case of simple tension, σ 22 = σ 33 = 0. Then we can write: and the engineering stress (force per unit reference area) for an incompressible MooneyRivlin material under simple tension can be calculated using σ Calibration of material parameters. The mechanical behaviour of natural rubber is identified from uniaxial tensile tests. Dogbone specimens are fabricated using a cutting die to make specimens for uniaxial tension (the dimensions of test specimens are depicted on Figure Scale of the sheet material continuum. For all the tests, the acquired images of the structure are reported in Figure In all the tests, the distribution of the elongation (Figure Figure Regarding the shear test, the S specimen is mounted horizontally (refer to Figure Scale of the unit cell. Next, we intend to analyse the global kinematics of the material, i.e. the averaged kinematic values over the unit cells. To this end, we perform a local-DIC measurement for all the tests. We measure the macroscopic displacement at each node of the lattice, and derive the strain field, depicted in Figure At finite strains, the mechanical behaviour shifts rapidly, indicating in particular a decrease of the "auxeticity" of the specimen. Beyond 10% effective strain, both effective Poisson's ratios no longer satisfy the small strain prediction of Strain heterogeneity in the specimen. We further explore the strain heterogeneity in the specimen. The question has an importance in itself, as mathematical optimisation methods are generally defined on unit cells with periodic boundary conditions. Indeed, the interest is often on the macroscopic behaviour of the structure, hence considered as a continuum material with homogenized properties. The computation of this macroscopic apparent behaviour from the microscopic unit cell configuration (geometry and material properties) uses the assumption of an homogeneous state of strain in the structure In all the tests, the macroscopic behaviour of the cells can be regrouped in bundles, identified by curves with different colours in Figure Regarding the shear specimen S (see Figure Since the strain distribution of specimen T 2 is localized at the hinges of the structure, we intend to examine whether a simple kinematic model with rigid trusses and rotating hinges (nodes) is sufficient to predict the Poisson's ratio of the structure. To this end, we derive a generic parametrization of the unit cell of Figure • configuration K beams (depicted in blue in Figure • configuration K nodes (depicted in orange in Figure Naturally, the real configuration may stand between K beams and K nodes . This configuration should accurately predict the evolution of the effective transverse strain ε 22 with respect to the effective longitudinal strain ε 11 observed experimentally: • configuration K ls is obtained by finding the angle θ which best fits the experimental experimental curve ε 22 = f (ε 11 ). We use the least square method to find the best angle θ that fits the experimental curve. Given the equivalent truss-hinge model, we understand the whole unit cell kinematics are merely driven by the only variable angle θ, therefore strain components can be expressed as: where L is the characteristic length of the unit cell and θ 0 denotes the initial value of θ (when the structure has not been stretched yet). Starting from the images of specimen T 2 recorded during the tensile test, we compute the morphological skeleton of the central unit cell and inferred a measure of the angle θ for both K beams and K nodes . The evolution of θ measured during the experiments is compared to the rigid trusses rotating hinges model in Figure In this work, we have introduced a multi-scale experimental analysis designed to completely characterize the behaviour of architectured sheets undergoing extreme deformation. Our techniques have been applied to the analysis of a soft, auxetic sheet subjected to large tensile and shear loads (up to 0.5 effective strain). Based on this analysis, we are able to: • gain insight on the strain distribution of the specimen and identify the zones that have uniform strain field. This identification is particularly simple in our study, owing to our reconstruction of the macroscopic strain (the averaged kinematic values over each unit cell); • determine that strain heterogeneities dominate the response of finite-size specimens and that, to accurately capture the tensile response of an infinite sheet, the number of unit cells should be greater than four in both horizontal and transverse directions; • use the wealth of information obtained from the experiments to create a reduced order model (featuring rigid trusses and flexible hinges) that accurately describes the kinematic behaviour under tensile loads; • determine that, despite the strong heterogeneity displayed by the shear test results, it is possible to identify zones in the center of the specimen where the shear state is proportional to the applied engineering shear strain. The tools presented in this study can be readily adapted to any two-dimensional architectured solid undergoing small or large deformations. In turn, the results that can be obtained by using these methods can potentially be leveraged to create tunable and stretchable mechanical devices Orthotropic symmetry with 2-d linear elasticity. Let us denote by Y the unit cell depicted in Figure C H is the homogenised stiffness tensor (A.1) In two-dimensional elasticity, the components of C H in matrix notation and in Cartesian coordinates read: where E i denote the homogenized Young moduli, ν i j denote the Poisson's ratios and G denotes the homogenized shear modulus. Let us further remark, that by symmetry of the elastic compliance matrix, the following ratios have to be equal: The elastic moduli, C H i jkl , can equally be expressed in terms of the compliance moduli, i.e. Moreover, the homogenized Poisson's ratio ν i j are equally denoted effective Poisson's ratio to highlight their reference to the homogenized unit cell. For example ν 12 characterizes the contraction of the structure in the direction of Oy axis when the cell stretched in the direction of Ox axis and in general ν 12 ν 21 . Note that if the micro-architecture of the unit cell were to obey "cubic" symmetry, we would have C H 1111 = C H 2222 and we would trivially obtain that E 1 = E 2 = E * and ν 12 = ν 21 = ν * . Experimental identification of the elastic coefficients. Hereafter we provide the complete experimental measurement of the effective elastic stiffness tensor. Let us recall that the effective constitutive law (A.1) or alternatively (A.2) is a linear relation between the components of the effective stress and strain, from which the elastic moduli could be identified by a least square fitting. The main difficulty is that only the effective strain, ε H , can be directly measured from the experiment, see for instance Figure For the computations, the elastic moduli of the base material were fixed according to 