Theoretical research suggests a emergence of the Majorana bound states at the ends of the nanowires. Experimental verifications of said concept has already been executed, e.g., in superconductor/semiconductor nanowire devices where interplay between superconducting gap, spin-orbit coupling and external magnetic field allows for creation of zero-energy bound states. Recent experiments propose a topological phase diagram by local modification of the effective chemical potential. We discuss this possibility, using a model of experimental system in form of semi-infinite S/N junction. We calculate the zero-bias differential conductance G in the case of the homogeneous system, as well as in the presence of the gate voltage. Relation between conductance and the effective gap in the system is investigated. We show that G can reproduce the topological phase diagram in magnetic field vs. gate voltage space of parameters. Proposed by Kitaev in 2001, a creation of the Majorana bound states (MBS) In Kitaev toy model Experimentally, this situation can be performed in the superconductor/semiconductor heterostructures Example of practical assembly of superconductor/semiconductor nanowire devices is presented at Fig. In the superconducting system with spin-orbit coupling, increase of magnetic field leads to the closure of gap and reopening new topological gap. This occurs in some magnetic field where μ is the chemical potential (measured form bottom of the band), while ∆ is a superconducting gap in the absence of the magnetic field. In practice, chemical potential is fixed for given materials, while electron concentration can be changed with gate potential We focus on the single-band one-dimensional approximation, which is valid when the electron occupation is low and the interband spacing is large, compared to other energy scales in the problem In the absence of the gate, described system can be emulated by the effective Bogoliubov-de Gennes tightbinding model where i, j are the nearest-neighbor sites in the lattice, c † iσ (c iσ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator of electron with spin σ in site i. Here, t is the hopping integral, μ = μ -2t is the on-site chemical potential (measured from the bottom of the band), h is the Zeeman magentic field, λ is the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, while σ y is a Pauli matrix. We assume that the gate potential acts on the electron locally, only in some part of NW around the BG. Thus, the gate potential V BG is given in the on-site term form: where we assume V BG (i) ≡ V BG for sites in the BG region, and V BG (i) ≡ 0 otherwise. From this, chemical potential is locally modified by V BG . Therefore, effective chemical potential has form μi → μ -V BG (i). We will calculate the conductance G of system using S matrix method where N is the number of electron channels in the normal lead, R eh is the total probability of reflection from electron to holes in the normal lead, while R ee is the total probability of reflection from electrons to electrons in the normal lead. We performed the calculations in the semiinfinity S/N junction In typical situation G is quantized by G 0 = e 2 /h In our calculations we take ∆/t = 0.3 and μ = 0 in the case of the homogeneous nanowire V BG /t = 0. Calculation was performed for nanowire with length L = 100 and 200, what corresponds to the BG region for i ∈ (50; 80) and (100; 180), respectively. First, we discuss the general properties of the system (Fig. At Fig. From comparison of both results (cf. Fig. The Majorana bound states are characterized by the nearly-zero excitations, which values depends on the length of the nanowire (Fig. Typically, condition for the emergence of the topological phase depends on "internal" parameters of the system, i.e. on the chemical potential μ or superconducting gap ∆. In this study, we show a differential conductance G in the case of the homogeneous system (Fig. otechnol. 9, 2171 (2018), DOI:10.3762/bjnano.9.203.