We report a μSR study on the antiperovskite oxide superconductor Sr3-x SnO. With transversefield μSR, we observed the increase of the muon relaxation rate upon cooling below the superconducting transition temperature Tc = 5.4 K, evidencing bulk superconductivity. The exponential temperature dependence of the relaxation rate σ at low temperatures suggests a fully gapped superconducting state. We evaluated the zero-temperature penetration depth λ(0) ∝ 1/ σ(0) to be around 320-1020 nm. Such a large value is consistent with the picture of a doped Dirac semimetal. Moreover, we revealed that the ratio Tc/λ(0) -2 is larger than those of ordinary superconductors and is comparable to those of unconventional superconductors. The relatively high Tc for small carrier density may hint at an unconventional pairing mechanism beyond the ordinary phonon-mediated pairing. In addition, zero-field μSR did not provide evidence of broken time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state. These features are consistent with the theoretically proposed topological superconducting state in Sr3-x SnO, as well as with s-wave superconductivity. Antiperovskite (inverse perovskite) oxides A 3 BO are the materials crystallizing in the same structure as the ordinary perovskite oxides but with the reversed positions of the metal and oxygen There has been a number of investigations toward clarifying their peculiar electronic band structure Recently, some of the present authors discovered that Sr 3 -x SnO is the first superconductor among antiperovskite oxides For investigations of the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter, the muon spin relaxation/rotation (μSR) technique is a powerful tool. The London penetration depth λ can be evaluated from the muon spin depolarization rate σ, measured in the vortex state of a type-II superconductor. We can deduce the structure of the superconducting gap from the temperature dependence of λ at temperatures much below the superconducting critical temperature T c : In fully gapped superconductors, ∆λ -2 (T ) = λ -2 (0) -λ -2 (T ) exhibits an exponential temperature T dependence; whereas in nodal superconductors, this quantity exhibits a powerlaw temperature dependence at low temperature In this paper, we report μSR results on the antiperovskite oxide superconductor Sr 3 -x SnO. We observe a clear increase of the transverse-field muon spin depolarization rate σ tf below T c , which exhibits exponential behavior at low temperatures, indicating the absence of nodes in the superconducting gap. The deduced London penetration depth for T → 0 is 320-1020 nm and the ratio T c /λ(0) -2 is comparable to those of high-temperature superconductors. This fact possibly indicates an unconventional pairing mechanism. We also performed μSR at zero field and did not detect breaking of the time-reversal symmetry. These results are consistent with the theoretically proposed unconventional superconductivity be-longing to the same symmetry as the Balian-Werthamer (BW) state Polycrystalline samples of Sr 3 -x SnO were prepared from Sr (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%) and SnO (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99%). Three samples were used for the μSR studies: Sample A for the measurements down to 1.5 K and Samples B and C to 0.26 K. They were synthesized in the procedure same as Method B described in Ref. Direct-current (DC) magnetization was measured with a commercial magnetometer using the superconducting quantum interference device (Quantum Design, MPMS-XL). We used powder samples that were sealed in plastic capsules inside an argon-filled glove box. Alternatingcurrent (AC) magnetic susceptibility was measured with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems, SR830) and using an adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator on a commercial apparatus (Quantum Design, PPMS) For μSR, we used pellets with a diameter of 10 mm. Measurements on Sample A were performed at the GPS spectrometer (πM3 beamline) at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) down to 1.5 K. The pellet was sealed in a polyethylene bag with a thickness of 0.1 mm under argon atmosphere in order to avoid direct contact to air. Measurements on Samples B and C were carried out at the Dolly spectrometer (πE1 beamline) at PSI down to For both sets of data, the measurements were performed under an AC field with the amplitude of 16 μT and the frequency of 3011 Hz. Both samples exhibit superconducting transition at Tc 5.3 K and 0.8 K. Sample C exhibits a weaker 5-K transition but a sharper 0.8-K transition than Sample B. 0.26 K. Sample pellets were placed on 25-μm-thick Cu foils with grease (Apiezon, N Grease) to achieve a good thermal contact and sealed with a polyimide film (Du Pont, Kapton) under nitrogen atmosphere. The pellets of Samples B and C were mounted on the cryostat using a portable glovebox with continuous flow of nitrogen. The typical integration time of μSR was 1.5 h for each temperature and field condition. ) 2. Electronic specific heat divided by temperature Ce/T . We observed a clear superconducting transition at 0.85 K with a volume fraction of 23%, evidencing the bulk superconductivity. The solid curve represent the fitting with the BCS theory. First, we show the DC magnetic susceptibility of the Sr 3 -x SnO samples in Fig. Next, we present in Fig. B. μSR at 30 mT the Gaussian distribution for the probability n(B) that a muon stops at a position with a local flux density of B, we fitted the data with the Gaussian cosine function where A(0) and φ are the asymmetry and phase at t = 0, respectively, γ μ is the gyromagnetic ratio of muon, and B 0 is the mean flux density inside the sample. σ changes from 0.084(6) μs -1 at 7 K to 0.160(4) μs -1 at 1.6 K. This change in σ is readily seen in the raw data, namely the faster damping at 1.6 K. The change in the relaxation rate across T c indicates that a large portion of the muons stopped at the superconducting region of the sample. We measured σ as a function of the applied field at 1.5 K and 3.5 K (see Fig. The temperature dependence of σ for Sample C under an applied field of 30 mT is shown in Fig. where σ SC (T ) = σ 2 (T ) -σ 2 N is the increase of the relaxation rate due to superconductivity, σ N is the relaxation rate in the normal state (mostly attributable to the nuclear contribution), and Φ 0 is the flux quantum where is the quasiparticle excitation energy of the superconducting state with the kinetic energy ε relative to the Fermi energy ε F and the superconducting gap ∆ k (T ) = ∆ 0 (T )Y ( k) where ε c is a cutoff energy. The constant value in the right-hand side is numerically obtained by substituting T = T c and ∆ 0 = 0. We simply set the cutoff energy and the Fermi energy as ε c = 100k B T c and ε F = 2000k B T c . These values are compared to the Debye temperature ε D = 35k B T c measured by 119 Sn-Mössbauer spectroscopy x + k2 y for a point-nodal states. While σ saturates at low temperatures for a fully gapped state (the solid curve in Fig. λ -2 is related to the superfluid density n S and effective mass m * through the equation where μ 0 is the magnetic permeability in vacuum, e is the elementary charge, and l denotes the mean free path . Therefore, the effective mass is calculated to be m * = μ 0 n S e 2 λ 2 /(1 + ξ/l) < μ 0 n S e 2 λ 2 in the clean limit. The effective mass normalized by the rest mass of the electron m * /m e for each sample is listed in Table It has been known that T c and λ(0) -2 of various materials exhibit a scaling behavior with the ratio T c /λ(0) -2 depending on the class of superconductors, as summarized in the Uemura plot , whereas elementary superconductors exhibit much smaller T c /λ(0) -2 of less than 0.02 K μm 2 Cu-intercalated Bi 2 Se 3 , for which T c /λ(0) -2 = 10 K μm 2 has been reported We also performed analyses to take into account the volume fraction of the superconductivity. To do this, we fitted the time-dependent asymmetry with two Gaussian cosine functions where σ N and φ are fixed to the values above 6 K and α is fixed to 0.1 for Samples A and B and to 0.04 for Sample C corresponding to the volume fraction of 10 and 4% estimated from the susceptibility measurement in Fig. C. μSR at 5 and 0 mT Figure Finally, we present in Fig. In this paper, we report the first μSR investigation of the antiperovskite oxide superconductor Sr 3 -x SnO. The temperature dependence of the muon spin depolarization rate, measured in the vortex state of Sr 3 -x SnO at low temperatures, suggests a fully gapped superconductivity. The London penetration depth is estimated to be around 320-1020 nm (depending on samples and type of analysis), and the ratio T c /λ(0) -2 is similar to those of high-temperature superconductors or unusual low-carrier superconductors. This fact may hint at unconventional superconducting mechanism in Sr 3 -x SnO. In addition, we did not detect any sign of broken time-reversal symmetry. These features are consistent with the theoretically proposed topological phase, namely superconductivity similar to the B phase of 3 He or with the conventional s-wave superconductivity.