A new record-high room temperature electron Hall mobility (μRT = 194 cm 2 /V•s at n ~ 8×10 15 cm - 3 ) for β-Ga2O3 is demonstrated in the unintentionally doped thin film grown on (010) semiinsulating substrate via metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). A peak electron mobility of ~9500 cm 2 /V•s is achieved at 45 K. Further investigation on the transport properties indicate the existence of sheet charges near the epi-layer/substrate interface. Si is identified as the primary contributor to the background carrier in both the epi-layer and the interface, originated from both surface contamination as well as growth environment. Pre-growth hydrofluoric acid cleaning of the substrate lead to an obvious decrease of Si impurity both at interface and in epilayer. In addition, the effect of MOCVD growth condition, particularly the chamber pressure, on the Si impurity incorporation is studied. A positive correlation between the background charge concentration and the MOCVD growth pressure is confirmed. It is noteworthy that in a β-Ga2O3 film with very low bulk charge concentration, even a reduced sheet charge density can play an important role in the charge transport properties. Keywords: Ultra-wide bandgap, β-Ga2O3 thin films, homoepitaxy, Si impurity, metalorganic chemical vapor deposition Owing to the ultra-wide bandgap energy, Ga2O3 has become the spotlight of semiconductor research for its promising applications in power electronics. Among various polymorphs, β-phase represents the most thermally stable phase with a monoclinic crystal structure and a high breakdown field (~8 MV/cm) projected from its ultra-wide bandgap. In the perspective of β-Ga2O3 epitaxy, the key material properties for high BV devices include a) high carrier mobility to minimize the specific on-resistance (Ron,sp); b) controllable doping at relatively low charge concentration (10 14 ~ 10 15 cm -3 ); c) thick uniform epi-layers for vertical device structure which could best utilize the high critical field of β-Ga2O3. So far, halide vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE) β-Ga2O3 has demonstrated a fast growth rate (~ 10 μm/hr) on (001)-orientated native substrates with measurable room temperature (RT) electron Hall mobility of 150 cm 2 /V•s at 2×10 15 cm -3 . However, typical MOCVD grown β-Ga2O3 exhibited intrinsic n-type background doping. Among the best reported MOCVD β-Ga2O3, the n-type background concentration ranged between 10 15 cm -3 and low-10 16 cm -3 . The UID β-Ga2O3 epitaxy was performed on semi-insulating Fe-doped (010)-orientated native substrates (purchased from Novel Crystal Technology). For the MOCVD growth, Trimethylgallium (TEGa) and O2 were used as precursors, and Ar was used as carrier gas. The group VI/III molar ratio was fixed at 1150 with the growth temperature set at 880 °C. The growth chamber pressure was set at 20, 60, and 100 Torr for the investigation of impurity incorporation. For selected samples, in addition to the regular solvent cleaning (acetone, isopropanol, de-ionized water), the substrates were dipped in HF (5%) for 5 mins, then followed by DI water rinse before loading into the growth chamber. The purpose of this process was to reduce Si contaminants on the substrate surface. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Bruker AXS Dimension Icon) was used to characterize the surface morphologies of the as-grown samples. Hall measurements on the epitaxial thin films utilized RT Hall system (Ecopia HMS 3000) and temperature-dependent Hall measurement (Lake Shore CRX-VF probe station equipped with an M91 FastHall controller) with the van der Pauw set up. In order to properly probe the charge transport at the low-temperature range, samples were fabricated with an n + -Ga2O3 MBE regrowth layer prior to the Ti/Au ohmic contact deposition, Table RT Hall mobility was measured at 194 cm 2 /V•s with a carrier concentration of ~8×10 15 cm -3 . It showed a slight increase of electron Hall mobility as compared to our previously reported value (184 cm 2 /V•s at 2.5×10 16 cm -3 ), However, there existed a significant peak of Si accumulation at the epi-layer/substrate interface, which added complications to the analysis of charge profile and transport characteristics. For the analysis of temperature-dependent charge transport in Sample #1: 1) By fitting the temperature-dependent Hall mobility with scattering mechanisms [Figure The influence from the interface charges was also confirmed from the electrical characterization for samples with thinner epitaxial layers. RT Hall measurements were performed for UID β-Ga2O3 samples with epi-layer of 200 nm and 400 nm grown on Fe-doped (010) substrates. RT Hall mobility of μ = 112 cm 2 /V•s and 122 cm 2 /V•s were measured for these two films with sheet charge density of Ns ~ 2×10 12 cm -2 and 3×10 12 cm -2 , respectively. The reduced RT mobility was due to the non-negligible impact from the interface charge transport. In order to reduce the Si impurity concentration at the epi-layer/substrate interface, HF cleaning process was used to remove the SiOx component on the substrate surface. Sample #2, #3, #4 as listed in Table As shown by the SIMS profiles in Figure MOCVD growth pressure was identified as a critical parameter that affects background Si incorporation. Growth experiments were conducted with chamber pressure at 20, 60, and 100 Torr, respectively. C-V charge profiles in Figure For Sample #2 grown at 20 Torr, the C-V characteristic (Figure Surface morphologies of the as-grown samples were characterized by AFM to evaluate the effects from HF cleaning process as well as MOCVD growth pressure, as shown in Figure In summary, charge transport properties in MOCVD grown (010) β-Ga2O3 films were investigated. Close to theoretical limit RT Hall mobility of 194 cm 2 /V•s was achieved in UID film with intrinsic carrier concentration n ~ 8×10 15 cm -3 . The corresponding peak LT mobility was measured as 9471 cm 2 /V•s at 45K. Si impurity was identified as the primary shallow donor that contributed to the background conductivity in UID films. In addition, Si contamination at the growth interface can play an important role in the charge transport analysis especially for films with low carrier concentrations. Neglecting this factor can lead to the misinterpretation of experimental data obtained from electrical characterization. HF cleaning of the Ga2O3 substrates can effectively reduce Si concentration at the interface. However, it also led to an increase of surface roughness and reduced electron mobility. MOCVD growth pressure was identified as a key parameter that affects the background Si incorporation. Si impurity incorporation decreased as the growth pressure reduced. To accurately probe the epi-films with low background doping potentially achievable by low growth pressure, the elimination of the substrate interface charges is required. Results from this work show promises to achieve controllable n-type doping in MOCVD grown β-Ga2O3 at low 10 15 cm -3 . Table * The epi-layer is mostly semi-insulating as inferred from C-V charge depth profile. Mobility measured from Hall is mostly from the interface charge near the epi-layer/substrate interface. 