After a short introduction of CLIC, the Compact Linear Collider, and its test facility CTF3 (CLIC Test Facility 3), this paper gives an overview and some examples of the diagnostics used at CTF3. After the discovery of the Higgs particle, there is large interest to study its properties in much more detail. A high-energy lepton collider would offer the potential for precision physics due to the 'cleaner' environment in the collisions with much less perturbing background events. The highest energy lepton collider so far was the LEP collider, which was installed in the present LHC tunnel. It accelerated electrons and positrons to a centre-of-mass energy up to slightly above 200 GeV. LEP was being limited in energy by synchrotron radiation, as the RF system had to provide sufficient power to replace the energy loss that amounted 3% per turn at the highest energy. The emitted power scales with the fourth power of the energy and with the inverse of the square of the radius, so a future ring collider will require a much larger radius. A study is ongoing for such a machine, the Future Circular Collider (FCC) Another option is to avoid the bending that leads to the emission of synchrotron radiation and build a linear collider with two opposing linear accelerators for electrons and positrons. Two different projects pursue this approach, the International Linear Collider (ILC) CLIC is a TeV-scale high-luminosity linear e+e-collider under development at CERN. CLIC is foreseen to be built in stages, at centre-of-mass energies of 380 GeV, 1.5 TeV and 3 TeV, respectively, with a site length ranging from 11 km to 50 km, for an optimal exploitation of its physics potential. CLIC relies on a two-beam acceleration scheme, where normal-conducting high-gradient 12 GHz accelerating structures are powered via a high-current drive beam. The accelerating gradient reaches 100 MV/m with an RF frequency of 12 GHz. The layout is shown in Fig. The Drive Beam Generation is an essential part of the CLIC design. It requires the efficient generation of a high-current electron beam with the time structure needed to generate 12 GHz RF power. CLIC relies on a novel scheme of fully loaded acceleration in normal conducting travelling wave structures, followed by beam current and bunch frequency multiplication by funnelling techniques in a series of delay lines and rings, using injection by RF deflectors. All the combination process must be very well controlled in terms of transverse and longitudinal beam parameters in order to obtain the required transverse emittance, bunch length, and bunch distance of the drive beam. The aim of CTF3 CTF3 consisted of a 150 MeV electron linac followed by a 42 m long Delay Loop (DL) and a 84 m Combiner Ring (CR). The beam current was first doubled in the delay loop and then multiplied again by a factor four in the combiner ring by interleaving bunches using transverse deflecting RF cavities. The drive beam could be sent to an experimental area (CLEX) to be used for deceleration and to produce RF power for two-beam experiments. In CLEX, one line (Test Beam Line, TBL) was used to decelerate the drive beam in a string of power generating structures (PETS). The drive beam could alternatively be sent in another beam line (Two-Beam Test Stand, TBTS), where a PETS is used to power one or more structures, used to further accelerate a 200 MeV electron beam provided by a dedicated injector (CALIFES). Table Diagnostics in the CTF3 complex have primarily been designed for CTF3 beam parameters and used to commission and optimize the performance of the CTF3 machine The following devices were installed in CTF3: -Large variety of Beam Position Monitors (BPM) -High resolution cavity BPM -Inductive pick-up -Strip-line BPM -Screens (OTR, fluorescence) for beam imaging -Several technologies of Beam Loss Monitors (BLM) -Longitudinal profile measurement with an RF deflecting cavity, streak camera, and electro-optical monitors -Fast Wall Current Monitors -Segmented dump for time resolved beam energy profile -mm-wave detectors for bunch length/spacing measurements. There were 137 beam position monitors used in the CTF3 complex. The most abundant type, was the inductive pick-up that had been developed especially for CTF3 CTF3 had 21 operational optical transition radiation (OTR) based TV stations, in order to measure the transverse profile of the beam throughout the complex. The imaging system could provide a resolution of up to 20 μm, and could provide time resolved transverse beam profiles when coupled to intensified gated cameras. Some of the OTR based TV stations installed in CTF3 were equipped with two screens for low and high charge operation respectively, a calibration target and a replacement chamber to ensure a continuity of the beam line, when the device was not in use, thus minimising wakefield effects The screens were used in spectrometer lines to measure the average energy spread, and with the "quadrupole scan" technique in regions of minimal dispersion to measure the beam emittance. The current in upstream quadrupoles is varied, which changes the betatron phase advance to the screen, so the betatron phase space projection changes. Using the known transfer matrices for the given quadrupole strength, the initial transverse beam parameters (Twiss parameters β, α, transverse emittance ε) can be extracted from a fit to the data. Fig. In order to optimize the overall efficiency of the drive beam generation, the accelerating structures Longitudinal beam manipulation in the CTF3 and the CLIC drive beam are similar. Bunch length manipulation and bunch frequency multiplication has led to the development of adequate non-intercepting devices based on the detection of optical photons by a streak camera Another technique for longitudinal beam profile measurements, which already demonstrated extremely good time resolution (10 fs) The streak camera was used for bunch length measurements but primarily as an essential instrument to achieve the correct time structure of the combined beam downstream the Delay Loop and the Combiner Ring. The light from several of the OTR screens could be sent to a streak camera. The synchrotron radiation at the end-of-linac chicane, the Delay Loop, and Combiner Ring could also be transported to a streak camera. Wiggler magnets in both Delay Loop and Combiner Ring could tune the path-length in these rings. This allowed the adjustment of the time of flight such that the bunches through the Delay Loop and straight from the linac were precisely interleaved in between each other (see Fig. Similarly in the Combiner Ring, the path-length was tuned by the wiggler to inject the bunches with equidistant spacing. The adjustment range of the wiggler was large enough to operate with combination factors four and five. Fig. The streak camera has also been used in order to study the phase coding of the bunches, which is introduced by a sub-harmonic bunching (SHB) system at the beginning of the linac. The measurements have shown that the phase switch is performed in 6 ns with a presence of 8% satellite bunches at 3 GHz Several single-waveguide pickups were installed along the machine The signal of a button pickup in the Combiner Ring was mixed with a 3 GHz RF reference signal with adjustable phase. The Combiner Ring path-length for a factor 4 combination is (N ± 1/4)λ (with N integer, λ: RF wavelength of the 3 GHz RF deflector), so the phase advance per turn of the bunches with respect to the reference RF is 90 • . For the correct path-length, the reference phase can be adjusted such that the signal will alternate between a maximum and a zero signal for the successive turns, as shown in Fig. Another RF pickup used a different method for the measurement of the bunch-train recombination quality. A monitor signal downstream the Delay Loop was split into several channels with bandpass filters centred at frequencies of 7.5, 9, 10.5, and 12 GHz. Since the initial beam has a 1.5 GHz bunch repetition frequency, all harmonic frequency channels will measure a signal. After the DL recombination, ideally only harmonics of 3 Ghz should show a signal. An error in the path-length shows in the odd 1.5 Ghz harmonics. Fig. A similar setup was installed in the CR with filters of 6, 9, 12, and 15 GHz. For the ideal combination, only the 12 Ghz component should show a signal at the end of the combination. Finally, another installation, a microwave spectrometer, was used for bunch length monitoring The RF deflector for the bunch train combination was also used for a dedicated measurement of the bunch length. This uses the time-varying deflecting field of the cavity near the RF zero-crossing to transform the the time information into a spacial information. The bunch length can be deduced measuring the beam size at a downstream screen with the RF deflector powered and not powered. The measured transverse beam size σ x at the screen is given by where σ x0 is the beam size on the screen without deflection, σ z the bunch length, β c and β s the beta function at the deflector and screen, respectively, V 0 the deflecting voltage, λ rf the RF deflector wavelength, E 0 the beam energy, ∆Ψ x the betatron phase advance between deflector and screen, and φ rf the RF deflector phase. Since the deflecting voltage V 0 was not known precisely, the RF deflection angle was calibrated using a BPM close to the screen and the beam transfer matrix between the cavity and the BPM. Fig. The CLIC Test Facility CTF3 had a lot of interesting diagnostics equipment. A good diagnostic is absolutely essential to optimize the performance, and only the variety of the instruments made it possible to reach the goals of CTF3 and show the feasibility of the CLIC Drive Beam generation. Many other instruments in view of CLIC were tested at CTF3 but it was not possible to cover all this within the lecture. Available online at https://cas.web.cern.ch/previous-schools