We study the pairing symmetry of Sr2RuO4 through the group-theoretical approach. We emphasize the role of pairing interaction between the quasi-one-dimensional(Q1D) d xz/yz and quasitwo-dimensional(Q2D) dxy orbitals. It is found that two degenerate inter-orbital time-reversalinvariant(TRI) p-wave pairings, one is spin-singlet and the other spin-triplet with out-of-plane dvector, could be the most promising candidates. Several important physical quantities are presented, including the near-nodal gap structure, the unchanged out-of-plane Knight shift, and no split transition under strain, which are consistent with the experiments. In addition, these p-wave pairings shed light on resolving the contradiction between the time-reversal breaking and reduced in-plane Knight shift measurements. As the system reaches the Van Hove singularity under applied strain, the pairing symmetry would become a d-wave pairing mainly consisting of inter-orbital components, which could be responsible for the strained 3K phase. Introduction.--Soon after the discovery of superconductivity(T c = 1.5K) in Sr 2 RuO 4 , plenty of experiments have been made to catch its novel physics The puzzles above have triggered huge amount of theoretical works on the pairing mechanism In this letter, we highlight the role of the pairing interaction between the Q1D and Q2D orbitals and then make an analysis on the pairing symmetries in unstrained and strained Sr 2 RuO 4 . We find two degenerate interorbital TRI p-wave pairing states, one is spin-singlet and the other spin-triplet with out-of-plane d-vector. Their physical quantities are consistent with several essential experimental facts: the vertical line nodes (near nodes) in the gap, the unchanged out-of-plane and reduced inplane Knight shift, the Pauli limiting behavior, and the absence of split transition under uniaxial strain. These p-wave pairing states also shed light on explaining the observed time-reversal breaking. Furthermore, it is found that the strained Sr 2 RuO 4 would undergo an odd-toeven OP transition as the system approaches the Van Hove singularity(VHS), suggesting that an inter-orbitaldominant d-wave pairing state could be the possible candidate of the strained 3K phase. Model and Method.--Based on the three orbitals, we construct a 2D tight-binding model to fit the Fermi surface(FS) revealed by the high-resolution photoemission where is the normal states' Matsubara Green functions, ∆(k) the 6 × 6 gap matrix, σ the index combining the three orbitals and two spins. The pairing interaction V (k, k ) could be expanded by the basis gap functions(BGFs) as follows where D Γ,a (k) represents the a-th BGF for the irreducible representation(IR) Γ, with V Γ,a being the corresponding coupling strength. The gap matrix ∆(k) could thus be written as a linear superposition of the BGFs and the coefficients are determined accordingly According to the crystalline symmetry where V 1 (V 1 ) represents the intra(inter)-orbital pairing strength in the Q1D orbitals, V 2 between d xz/yz and d xy , and V 3 that in d xy , respectively. Because pairings within these two Q1D orbitals can never be dominant in our model, we simply set V 1 = V 1 here, similar as employed in the work of Ref. The anisotropic gaps revealed by the experiments support gap minima sitting on the 100 sections Firstly, the specific heat divided by temperature C es /T are shown in Fig. Fig. , and obtain exactly the same results. Notice that even these two degenerate p-wave pairings have different spin angular momentum: one is spin-singlet and the other spin-triplet, their projected d-vectors are exactly the same: both in-plane and have a nodal structure(One can check this through the projection in [54]). Furthermore, our results are in agreement with the calculation of a helical pairing defined on the FS in Ref. Strained Sr 2 RuO 4 .--Now we turn to study the pairing OP of the strained Sr 2 RuO 4 . Stain drives the 1D IRs of C 4v to merge, which will induce additional mixing between the BGFs. For instance, the BGF ψ (xz,xy)ψ (yz,xy) will mix together with small amount of ψ (xz,xy) + ψ (yz,xy) , resulting in a strained p-wave pairing which could be roughly denoted by ∆ 1 ψ (xz,xy) -∆ 2 ψ (yz,xy) with ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 being different amplitudes of these two components. This demonstrates that there's no splitting of the components under strain for our p-wave case, compatible with the observation Discussions.--Lots of puzzles in Sr 2 RuO 4 could be resolved by our inter-orbital pairing model, whereas it seems that the TRI p-wave pairing itself contradicts the TRB experiments Despite our results tend to support an odd-to-even OP transition, there is still a possibility that the pairing symmetry keeps unchanged under strain, as indicated by the resent NMR measurements The FS sheets of Sr 2 RuO 4 are derived from the t 2g orbitals d xz , d yz and d xy of Ru, so we describe the 2D tight-binding Hamiltonian in a three-orbital representation as: where the spinor C s (k) is (c xz,ks , c yz,ks , c xy,k-s ) T , with c l,ks being electron annihilation operator and s = +1, -1 denoting the spin ↑, ↓. The H 0s (k) is given by with where η denotes the SOC strength and λ k the interorbital hopping term. xx/yy represent the in-plane strain of Sr 2 RuO 4 and are related by the Poisson's ratio through yy = -v xy xx , where v xy = 0.39. At zero strain, i.e., xx = 0, parameters are set to fit the high-resolution photoemission :(t, t ⊥ , t , t , t , μ, μ , η) = (1, 0.1, 0.8, 0.3, 0.05, 1.0, 1.0, 0.2). b = 9.1 is chosen to make the first Lifshitz transition happen when xx = V ≈ -0.75%. All the three energy bands α, β and γ are two-fold degenerate due to the cooperation of space inversion and time-reversal symmetries. The BdG Hamiltonian of the superconducting Sr 2 RuO 4 is defined as where ∆(k) is a 6 × 6 matrix. Because Sr 2 RuO 4 is inversion-symmetric, pairings with different parities in momentum space could not mix together. In the basis of If the even-parity ∆(k) are block off-diagonal(diagonal), then the odd-parity ones belonging to the same IR Γ must be block diagonal(off-diagonal). To avoid confusion, we classify the gap functions by "even/odd" in momentum space rather than by "singlet/triplet" in spin space. As we will present, the former is not equivalent to the latter in a multiple-orbital pairing system, which is distinct from the one-band case. Because of the Fermi statistics, the superconducting gap matrix always obeys Denote the 2 × 2 pairing matrix between orbitals m, n as ∆ m,n (k) we have If the parity is even in momentum space, for instance, d m,n (k), ψ m,n (k) ∼ cos k x , then we have the orbital parity else if the parity is odd, the following orbital parity must be satisfied: We present all the nearest-neighbor pairing basis gap functions(BGFs) of the unstrained and strained Sr 2 RuO 4 in Table The total number of the k-dependent BGFs of an Lorbital system can be empirically expressed as N F = n F × L 2 , where n F is the number of the BGFs in the one-band case. Here n F = 8 for both C 4v and C 2v , so there are 72 BGFs in each table. As the unaxial strain is applied, the point-group symmetry is reduced as C 4v → C 2v and the corresponding IRs are transformed as In the matrix form, each BGF D Γ.a (k) is so normalized that: where a labels the BGF in IR Γ and N is the number of unit cells in the system. Table where ∆ is the temperature dependent gap size. All g Γ,a in these tables are real, thus the obtained OPs here are TRI pairings indicating with u T = iσ y being the unitary factor relevant to the time-reversal operator. This relation can also be checked directly from the tables. We now make the following transformation of ∆(k), where , with U s (k) being the unitary 3 × 3 matrix diagonalizing the normal-state Hamiltonian H 0s (k). Here s =⇑, ⇓ denote the up, down pseudo-spin. Then the projected band gaps on the FS will be given by ∆ l,l ss (k), where l = α, β, γ is the band index. The inter-band pairings are neglected due to the large energy separation between these bands. The corresponding pseudo-d-vector or ψ on the band l could also be defined through We now prove that if the original pairing state is TRI, then the projected gaps on the FS will maintain this timereversal symmetry. In the basis of C(k), u T can be reex- The time-reversal invariance of the normal-state Hamiltonian can be written as u T H * (-k)u † T = H(k), from which we get For an arbitrary TRI pairing ∆(k), the relation Combining Eqs. ( In each equation we used twice of the Eq.( where σ is the index combining the three orbitals and two spins, and the interaction terms V (k, k ) could be expanded by all the BGFs as follows: with V Γ,a being the pairing interaction for Γ, a channel. Multiplying by [D * Γ,a (k)] σ1,σ2 the two sides of equation ( where gΓ,a = ∆(T ) × g Γ,a is the temperature dependent gap amplitudes of each BGF defined through equation C. SOC strength η = 0.3t We also present the p-and d-wave gap structures in the unstrained Sr 2 RuO 4 with a relatively larger SOC strength η = 0.3t here, as shown in Fig. As we know, mixing of distinct BGFs could only occur within a definite IR Γ. However, our calculations reveal that the odd pairings belonging to B 1 and B 2 for C 4v are degenerate and thus could mix together. To understand it, one can define a pseudo-spin-rotation operator as e -iθσz/2 e -iθσz/2 = e -iθσz/2 e -iθσz/2 e iθσz/2 For the pairings ∆ (m,n) (k) with m, n = xz, yz, or m = n = xy, by making such a rotation, the gap function ψ and d-vector will transform as indicating a z-axis π/2 rotation of the in-plane d-vector. For instance, the BGF d (xy,xy) ∝ x sin k y + ŷ sin k x of IR B 1 for C 4v would be transformed to d (xy,xy) ∝ -x sin k x + ŷ sin k y of IR B 2 . However, the 'anti-parallelspin' pairings which is singlet, or triplet with out-of-plane d-vector, would be invariant under the rotation. On the other hand, when m = xz, yz and n = xy or m = xy and n = xz, yz, the same rotation will lead to The parallel-spin pairings keep invariant under this ro-tation in this case. For the 'anti-parallel-spin' pairings, this transformation is highly nontrivial since it is between a singlet pairing ψ and triplet pairing d = ẑd z . This realization of transformation for the total spin S of Cooper pairs from 0 to 1 is due to the fact that not spin S z but pseudo-spin S z is conserved. In this sense, the two components of B (sin k x ), respectively. For the same reason, the corresponding odd pairings of A 1 and A 2 for C 4v are degenerate too. Obviously, one can generalize this conclusion to the strained case, where the odd(even) pairings of A 1 (B 1 ) are degenerate with that of A 2 (B 2 ) for C 2v . Despite the degeneracy between the odd pairings of different IRs discussed above, all the even pairings belonging to different 1D IRs for C 4v should be non-degenerate since all these even pairing states are invariant under the rotation. Our detailed calculation of the linearized gap equation has also confirmed this. The 72 NN BGFs for the 2D point group C 4v . The 1st column shows the five IRs. The symbol +/-in the 2nd and 3rd columns denote the sign given by the basis functions under a fourfold rotation and mirror reflection, respectively. The symbol "±" in 2D IR E represents the two degenerate BGFs. The 6 × 6 BGF can be described by a 3 × 3 d-vector or ψ, which obeys d m,n (k) = -d n,m (k), ψ m,n (k) = ψ n,m (k) for the even parity and d m,n (k) = d n,m (k), ψ m,n (k) = -ψ n,m (k) for the odd parity. The red(blue) box denotes the dominant BGFs of the even(odd) pairing in Table a |g Γ,a | 2 = 1. The gap matrix can be expressed as a linear superposition of the BGFs in the IR Γ: ∝ i(cos kx + cos ky) d ∝ cos kx ± cos ky d (xz,xy) y± ∝ i(cos kx ± cos ky) d (yz,xy) x± ∝ i(cos kx ± cos ky) d ∝ sin ky ψ (xz,xy) ∝ i sin kx, d (xz,xy) z ∝ sin ky d (yz,xy) z ∝ sin kx , ψ (yz,xy) ∝ i sin ky