This paper reports the dynamic wetting behavior and heat transfer characteristics for impinging droplets on heated bi-phobic surfaces (superhydrophobic matrix with hydrophobic spots). A non-patterned superhydrophobic and a sticky hydrophobic surface acted as control wettability surfaces. As expected, differences in wetting and heat transfer dynamics were noticeable for all surfaces, with the most pronounced variation during the receding phase. During spreading, inertia from the impact dominated the droplet dynamics and heat transfer was dominated by convection at the contact line and internal flow. As contact line velocities decreased over time, evaporative cooling at the contact line gained importance, especially for the bi-phobic surfaces, where liquid remained trapped on the hydrophobic spots during receding. These satellite droplets increased the contact area and contact line length, and assisted heat transfer and substrate cooling after lift-off of the main droplet. Compared with the hydrophobic surface, the contribution of the contact line heat transfer increased by 17 to 27% on the bi-phobic surfaces, depending on the location of impact relative to the hydrophobic spots. Nonetheless, the bi-phobic surfaces had a lower total thermal energy transfer. However, compared with the plain superhydrophobic surface, heat transfer was enhanced by 33% to 46% by patterning the surface. Depending on the application, a trade-off exists between the different surfaces: the sticky hydrophobic surface provides the best cooling efficiency, yet is prone to flooding, whereas the superhydrophobic surface repels the liquid, but has poor cooling efficiency. The bi-phobic surfaces provide a middle path with reasonable cooling effectiveness and low flooding probability. Water droplet impact dynamics on isothermal superhydrophobic surfaces have been extensively studied over the last decade. In recent years, researchers have studied wettability-patterned surfaces and have demonstrated their great potential for industrial applications, such as directional and passive liquid transport, targeted deposition, and enhanced phase change heat transfer and water harvesting. To overcome the time-constraint for heat transfer on superhydrophobic surfaces, while simultaneously mitigating substrate flooding from droplet deposition, we propose the use of bi-phobic wettability-patterned (super)hydrophobic surfaces. The focus of the present research is to investigate droplet wetting and heat transfer behavior on heated superhydrophobic (SHP), hydrophobic (HP), and biphobic (superhydrophobic matrix with hydrophobic patterns) surfaces for different surface temperatures and impact heights. Using synchronized high-speed optical and infrared (IR) imaging, we are able to correlate droplet dynamics to the spatial distribution of the solid-liquid interfacial temperature, heat flux, and the total heat transfer to the droplet. Furthermore, we elucidate the influence of surface wettability and contact line dynamics on convection and evaporation heat transfer. Findings from this work have the potential to improve the efficiency of spray cooling applications, The fabrication process, the heater design, and the corresponding wettability patterns are shown in Fig. A schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. In order to obtain heat transfer rates from the temperature distribution at the substrate-droplet interface, we followed the same procedure as in our previous work. where q is the heat flux to the top surface (i.e., droplet or air) of each pixel element, q is the heat generated in the Cr thin film heater by Joule heating, A is the effective area of the heater, Q is the thermal energy stored in the pixel element in the time interval Δt between two successive frames, B is the area of a pixel element, q is the heat flow due to conduction to/from the four neighboring pixels, and q is the heat loss to the environment through the bottom of the calcium fluoride window. The individual terms are expressed as: where I is the electrical current, R is the electrical resistance, ρ is the density, C is the specific heat capacity, δ is the layer thickness, k is the thermal conductivity, T is the temperature, and h is the convective heat transfer coefficient. The subscripts are defined as follows: τ is the time step between successive frames, x and y are Cartesian coordinates, Cr represent the chromium layer, BP the black paint, s is the heater surface, CF stands for the calcium fluoride substrate, and air signifies the ambient air. The recorded thermal images were processed using a custom written MATLAB code to obtain temporal heat flux distributions. In order to account for non-ideal substrate properties in the infrared spectrum (e.g., black paint emissivity, calcium fluoride transmissivity, mirror reflectivity, and the thermal resistance of the Glaco coating), all temperatures readings were calibrated using a correction correlation that relates the IR camera readout to an RTD surface measurement (Omega, PT100) at the top side of the sample. To obtain the electrical resistance of the Cr layer for each individual sample, an energy balance was applied prior to droplet impact. The energy balance contains natural convection and thermal radiation exchange at the upper surface of the sample ( q ) (assumption: emissivity Glaco εr = 1) and all other terms discussed in Eq. ( All experiments were repeated at least three times. Figure Figure A similar phenomenon was also observed by Herbert et al., After establishing a framework on the fluid dynamics and heat transfer, we now turn to quantifying the thermal signatures of the different surfaces, as shown in Fig. Compared to the superhydrophobic surface, the satellite droplets increase the overall contact area and contact time, and consequently increase the total energy transfer by 33% (IC) and 46% (ID), respectively. The contribution of the receding phase to the total energy transfer dominates this increase, while the increase in energy transfer during spreading is only approximately 7%. When comparing these observations to Fig. To quantify the influence of an increased surface area, in Fig. Here, C , is the droplet specific heat capacity, M is the droplet mass, and T , and T , are the temperatures of surface and droplet prior to impact, respectively. Guo et al. After that, the cooling effectiveness tended to be constant. We observe a similar trend, as shown in Fig. During the spreading phase, all surfaces had a similar trend of cooling effectiveness, given that their spreading dynamics and heat transfer were similar during this phase. At later times, the cooling effectiveness on the hydrophobic surface continuously increases. Since ε ~ A, and A ≈ const. on the hydrophobic surface, whereas the contact area decreases on the other surfaces, the cooling effectiveness is distinctly higher for the hydrophobic surface for a single droplet. One question that naturally arises is whether the initial droplet size would influence this conclusion. For droplets larger than the ones measured here, the maximum cooling capacity would increase cubically (Q ~M ~D ), whereas the area only scales quadratically with the droplet diameter (A~D ). Hence, for larger droplets the cooling efficiency is expected to decrease. In addition to sensible heat transfer (i.e., the change in droplet or substrate temperature), which correlates to the contact area, we also observe enhanced evaporation, as evidenced by the local maxima in heat fluxes at the TPCL in Figs. In Fig. In this study we have compared the dynamic wetting and heat transfer behavior during droplet impingement onto heated superhydrophobic, hydrophobic, and bi-phobic surfaces. We can draw the following conclusions: 1) As expected, all surfaces show the same hydrodynamic and thermal signatures during droplet spreading, while stark differences appear during receding. Due to pinning on the wettability-patterned surface, small satellite droplets are formed, which effectively increases the contact area and contact line length compared to superhydrophobic surfaces, while decreasing the probability of surface flooding. The existence of satellite droplets increases the contribution of evaporative cooling on the surfaces. 2) The heat transfer performance has been found to be substantially different during the different phases of the droplet impingement process. The maximum heat flux occurs before the droplet reaches its maximum extent, while it is nearly constant during receding. During spreading, the heat flux distribution has two maxima, mapping the hydrodynamic flow inside the droplets. At maximum spreading and during receding, heat transfer at the contact line becomes increasingly important. 3) While on the superhydrophobic surface the majority of heat transfer (≈80%) occurs during spreading, on bi-phobic surfaces spreading and receding contribute equally to the total heat transfer. This can, again, be attributed to the enhanced evaporation at the periphery of the satellite droplets on the hydrophobic spots. Findings from this work have the potential to improve the efficiency of thermal management applications or of micro-reactors in chemical and biomedical engineering. More work is needed to fully understand the influence of the central impact region (bubble or imbibition), as well as to uncover the spatial and temporal limitations. For example, from a thermal perspective, reducing the size and spacing between hydrophobic spots would be beneficial to enhancing heat transfer even more by increasing the contact line length and decreasing the conduction resistance through the small satellite droplets. If small enough, evaporation times of satellite droplets could be of the same order as the time interval between successive impact events, increasing the total cooling effectiveness while mitigating flooding. Preliminary results on multi-droplet impact are presented in section E of the SI. However, hydrodynamically, an infinitely small spacing or very fine patterns would not lead to the rupture of liquid bridges and the formation of satellite droplets. Similarly, there exists a trade-off between droplet size, maximum spreading diameter, and the characteristic dimensions of the biphobic pattern. The findings presented in this work are expected to apply to cases where the maximum spreading diameter is bigger than spot size and spacing. For much smaller droplets, such as during spray cooling, the influence of substrate wettability patterning would need to be re-evaluated. Figure The temporal evolution of the contact line velocity on different surfaces is shown in Fig. In an effort to evaluate the benefit of using wettability-patterned surfaces for heat transfer applications with successive droplet impact events, such as during spray cooling, we studied the average substrate temperature evolution for five droplets with a time delay of approximately 250 ms between impact events. The number of impact events was limited due to experimental constraints, as measurements were only possible for a horizontally mounted substrate. Over time, even on the superhydrophobic surface, bouncing droplets would re-deposit on the surface and eventually lead to flooding. We hypothesized that -while the hydrophobic sample has the highest cooling capacity for a single droplet -the bi-phobic surfaces would have a superior performance for a long-term operation on a tilted surface, as they can mitigate flooding. Unfortunately, five impact events on a horizontal sample were not sufficient to fully confirm this hypothesis, as seen in Fig. 