We report transport and magnetization measurements on graphites that have been hydrogenated by intercalation with an alkane (octane). The temperature-dependent electrical resistivity shows anomalies manifested as reentrant insulator-metal transitions. Below T ∼ 50 K, the magnetoresistance data shows both antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM) behavior as the magnetic field is decrease or increased, respectively. The system is possibly an unconventional magnetic superconductor. The irreversibility observed in the field-cooled vs. the zero-field cooled data for a sufficiently high magnetic field suggests that the system might enter a superconducting state below Tc ∼ 50 K. Energy gap data is obtained from nonlocal electric differential conductance measurements. An excitonic mechanism is likely driving the system to the superconducting state below the same T ∼ 50 K, where the gap is divergent. We find that the hydrogenated carbon fiber is a multiple gap system with critical temperatures estimates above room temperature. The temperature dependence of the superconducting gap follows the flat-band energy relationship, with the flat band gap parameter linearly increasing with the temperature above Tc ∼ 50 K. Thus, we find that either a magnetic or an electric field can drive this hydrogenated graphitic system to superconducting state below Tc ∼ 50 K. In addition, AF spin fluctuations creates pseudogap states above Tc ∼ 50 K. The liquefaction of helium was a major technological achievement that further allowed Kamerlingh Onnes to observe superconductivity (SC) as the nondissipative flow of electricity through mercury below the critical temperature T c = 4.19 K Graphene, perhaps the mostly researched C-based material, is the two-dimensional (2D) parent for the bulk (3D) material graphite. The ideal structure consists of C atoms arranged in a hexagonal, honeycomb pattern with parallel graphene layers at a (lattice constant) c = 3.35 Å distance apart and weakly interacting by Van der Waals forces. In-plane, each C atom is covalently bonded to three other C atoms at a (the other lattice constant) distance ā = 1.42 Å through sp 2 -sp 2 axial hybrid orbital overlap. This layered structure of graphite results in highly anisotropic physical properties. In addition, ion-implantation, heat treatment, hydrogenation, or oxidation result in sp 2 to sp 3 bond conversion. Distorted sp 2 C bonds form grain boundaries The fundamental physical processes leading to the observed temperature(T )-dependent transport properties of disordered systems such as C fibers have been reviewed where T M is the Mott temperature and the power factor d arXiv:2005.05876v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 May 2020 takes integer values 0 to 3 depending on the dimensionality of the electronic transport In this work, we are reporting resistivity, magnetoresistance, nonlocal electric differential conductance, and DC magnetization measurements conducted on octaneintercalated C fibers. In addition, we have included results on octane-intercalated graphite powder as well as a HOPGinsulator(Kapton tape)-HOPG composite sample. Below T ∼ 50 K, the magnetoresistance data shows a transition from AF to FM correlations as the strength of the magnetic field is increased. In addition, the irreversibility observed in the fieldcooled vs. the zero-field cooled data for a sufficiently high magnetic field suggests that the system also enters a SC state below T c ∼ 50 K. These results are also corroborated with the energy gap data obtained from measurements. An excitonic mechanism is likely driving the system to a SC state below the same T ∼ 50 K, where the gap is divergent. The octaneintercalated C fiber is a multiple gap system, thus pseudogapped, with critical temperatures estimates above room temperature. The temperature dependence of the SC gap follows the flat-band energy relationship. We find that the flat band gap parameter linearly increases with the temperature above T c ∼ 50 K. Thus, either a magnetic or an electric field can drive this hydrogenated graphitic system to a SC state below T c ∼ 50 K. We also find evidence of pseudogap states above T c ∼ 50 K, which are likely due to AF spin fluctuations. The C fibers used in this study are the polyacrylonitrile ((CH 2 -CH-CN) n ) or PAN-based of T300 type with a C content ∼ 93%. C fibers are usually subjected to graphitization at T up to 3000 0 C Temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T ) measurements without magnetic field were carried out using a Gifford-McMahon cryocooler and a LakeShore 340 Controller. The electrical current was sourced through a Keithley 2430 1 kW PULSE current-source meter and the electrical potential difference (voltage) along the sample was measured with a Keithley 2183A Nanovoltmeter. The vacuum was controlled by a Laser Analytics TCR compressor and a Pfeiffer turbo pump. The sapphire substrate used had four ∼2 mm wide silver (Ag) strips affixed via C dots. The ratio of the gap between the current leads and the and gap between the voltage leads was close to four, as required by the four-wire Van Der Pauw technique When a few-millimeter long C fiber is sourced by a current in the μA range, ∆T ∼ 10 -2 K. Each measurement was taken with the C fiber T -stabilized by the surrounding cryogenic fluid. Magnetoresistance measurements down to T = 1.9 K were carried out using the 6500 Quantum Design of the Physical Properties Measurement System The T -dependent electrical resistivity ρ(T ) is shown in Fig. FIG. between the cooling and the warming data observed with the octane-intercalated C fiber suggests irreversible behavior. Searching for possible SC-like behavior in C fibers, any drop in ρ provides impetus for further investigation. A significant M-I-M transition occurs at T ∼ 25 K where ρ reaches a maximum. Similar ρ(T ) behavior was found before in PANbased C fibers after significant heat treatment/carbonization where the lnT term (for a clean system) and the quantum correction T -1/2 (for more disordered systems) quantify, respectively, the Kondo effect owning to the presence of localized spins in the heat-treated C fibers Additional features of the electronic transport in octaneintercalated C fibers are observed at larger input current, I = 20 μA (Fig. The effect of a perpendicular magnetic field on the transport properties of the fiber was tested through measurements on the specific resistance also known as magnetoresistance: M R(%) = 100 × [R(B) -R(B = 0)]/R(B = 0). One noticeable feature is the decrease of ρ with increasing the field strength (Fig. These results are not entirely surprising. As known, graphite has AFM correlations between unlike sublattices (ABAB...) and FM correlations between like sublattices (AAA... or BBB...). In graphene Separated in space and bound by the Coulomb (attractive) interaction, the electrons and holes 'crystallize" into electronhole pairs pretty much like electric dipoles. The excitons are observed near M-I transitions. Interestingly, in the superfluid state similar London and Ginzburg-Landau type equations describe both the electric dipole SC and the electric monopole condensate (1.34 + 1.11) eV 2.5 eV. This is 400× the hump width for YBCO. We are dealing with a chiral spin-triplet p-wave with two gap amplitudes: ∆ V <0 1.6 eV located at V -1.34 eV and ∆ V >0 0.6 eV located at V 1.11 eV. For voltages smaller than the SC gap at this temperature (50 K), the transport is dominated by the Andreev reflection, were an incoming electron is converted into a reflected hole. The gap asymmetry is due to the charge imbalance that create different rates at which the electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles are evacuated from the Andreev bound states and/or by the destruction of chirality symmetry by the magnetic exchange field due to the itinerant FM introduced in the system by octane with its freely moving H+ (protons) on the graphites interfaces. We also notice the Fano-line shape of G dif f . The Fano line is a manifestation of coexisting polarons and Fermi particles in a superlattice of quantum wires. In the stripes scenario for HTS, a Fermi liquid coexists with an incommensurate 1D charge density wave (CDW) forming a multi-gap SC near a Lifshitz transition where T c amplification is driven by Fano resonances involving different condensates. Thus, G dif f data shows that SC correlations might be established in the octaneintercalated C fibers below T ∼ 50 K. This value is close to the mean-field T for SC correlations in the metallic-H multilayer graphene or in HOPG, T c ∼ 60 K In order to better understand the nature of SC in the octane-intercalated C fiber samples, we have analyzed the T -dependence of the full gap ∆(T ), more often denoted by 2∆(T ) (inset in Fig. The ∆(T )-dependence was further analyzed within the framework provided by known results obtained from the application of the mean-field theory. One unusual SC behavior is manifested in the flat-band (FB) nature of the excitation spectrum, where the group velocity goes to zero, dω(k)/dk → 0 This ∆(T ) dependence comes from the density functional the- ory approach for SC, where the extended Kohn-Sham equation is written in the form of Bogoliubov-deGennes equation used in the conventional theory for the description of inhomogeneous SC Fitting the gap data to the BCS dependence for different T intervals (Fig. Thus, the ∆(T ) fit to the BCS formula found that the octane-intercalated C fiber is a multiple-gap system. The similar MgB 2 has also a multiple-gap structure The high T c for the octane-intercalated C fibers here as found from the BCS dependence of the gap ∆(T ) are close to the most SC-prone form of graphite, the one having rhombohedral symmetry. In rhombohedral-stacked graphene layers, the in-plane interactions are ferrimagnetic, while the interlayer interactions are AFM While SC is generally perceived as a low-T phenomenon, within the FB energy approach it is shown that room-T SC can be achieved by changing the spectrum and by increasing the DOS close to the Dirac point. In the extreme limit, the energy band is the FB surface in the energy spectrum, where the group velocity tends to zero. As a consequence, T c is a linear function of the coupling strength λ: T c = λΩ F B /π 2 , where Ω F B is the FB energy area 140 eVa 2 , with the Debye temperature T D 2100 K. For graphite, T D 2430 K gives λ c 160 eVa 2 . This large coupling constant, λ > 3, was also observed in the 2D honeycomb nitride SCs under high-pressure conditions where μ * is the product of the DOS at the Fermi level N (0) and the Coulomb pseudopotential. At T = 50 K, a very high value λ 1230 eVa 2 is reached in the octane-intercalated C fiber. The very large coupling constant, λ λ c suggests possible formation of a Bose-Einstein exciton condensate, which is the limiting case for a BCS SC. One possible explanation for such a large value of λ is the topology of graphite that acts as an electro-chemical potential The ∆(0)(T c ) was plotted in Fig. We have also observed gaps in the G dif f data at other nonzero voltages (Fig. We have then replotted both the small and the large gap data (Fig. Additional confirmation for finding SC in the octaneintercalated C fibers was provided by DC magnetization measurements using the PPMS vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) option Fig. We have also found Little-Parks (L-P) oscillations in the octane-intercalated C fiber, proving that the C fiber is, indeed, a topological object (Fig. is the magnetic flux quanta. From here, the fluxon area in this case is A 1.0 × 10 -14 m 2 . Rather than only one fluxon, a more favorable energetic situation is to have N fluxons, each having a radius R/ N and magnetic flux quanta Φ 0 /N Here is a possible scenario for the octaneintercalated C fiber: In the absence of the field, the system is described by the Little model for high-T c organic SC. The spines are in the ab plane (the graphite plane). When a magnetic field (in this case B = 0.2 T) is applied normal to the C fibers axis, the SC condensate is containing a 1/8 fractional fluxon. Others observed L-P oscillations in a chiral SC nanotube Using the T c 440 K value estimated from the BCS fit of the gap data and the temperature dependence ξ(T ) = ξ 0 1 -(T /T c ) 2 , we find for the zero temperature coherence length ξ 0 1.9 μm. Then the electron density parameter is r s = ξ 0 /2a B 18, with a B = 0.529 × 10 -10 m the Bohr (H atom) radius. Interestingly, the product r s m * 40 is the same for BSCCO, where r s 2.5 and m * 16 , where l B = 2πa B is the Bohr circumference in the Wigner localization limit. Not surprisingly, we have recovered the Heisenberg relation with = h/2π the reduced Planck constant. The time lapse for completing the l B track at Fermi velocity v F or the Bohr period is T = l B /v F , from where the angular velocity is ω B = 2πv F /l B . Using the values at T = 300 K and B = 0.2 T, v F 8.0 × 10 4 m/s and l B = 2π × 0.529 × 10 10 m, we find ω B 1.5 × 10 15 Hz, which is close to the angular frequency for the 1.6 eV exciton, ω exciton 2.4 × 10 15 Hz. This result suggests the existence of a SC condensate formed by the partial density of the Fermi liquid close to the shape resonance condition that is coupled with the 1D generalized Wigner polaronic charge density wave (GWP-CDW) like the one found in the BSCCO HTS compound The evidence of L-P oscillations in the octane-intercalated C fiber suggests the existence of a macroscopic quantum SC phase at temperatures at least 300 K. To our knowledge, this is the second time time that the L-P oscillations are reported in a graphitic material , where the Fermi energy E F = k B T F was found from fitting the σ(T ) data (Tab. II) to Eq. 2. The band filling factor ρ [101] was also found. As Fig. We have continued our work on finding SC in C allotropes The unlikely coexistence of SC and FM was observed in bulk insulators like SrTiO 3 We have further corroborated the magnetoresistance results with the energy gap data as obtained from nonlocal G dif f measurements. An excitonic mechanism is likely driving the system to a SC state below the same T ∼ 50 K, where the gap is divergent. The temperature-dependent gap ∆(T ) as obtained from nonlocal G dif f (V ) experimental data for the octane-intercalated C fiber suggest possible transitions to SC, including HTS states occurring in a multiple-gap system with critical temperatures estimates above room temperature. The HTS phases are likely surface SC states formed locally at the grain boundaries of the octane-intercalated fiber, similarly to what has been found at the Cu-CuO interface Perhaps relevant for this work is the prediction that p-doped hydrogenated graphene (or graphane) is an electron-phonon SC with a T c larger than 90 K One important question is the nature of the SC-like behavior in these C fibers. For a BCS-type SC, the T c is given by Eq. 4: With the T D = 2430 K, room-T BCS-like SC in graphite is achieved for N (0)λ ≈ 0.45. A BCS SC like Pb, for which T D = 96 K, has N (0)λ ≈ 0.39 and T c = 7.2 K. The relation between the Fermi temperature T F = E F /k B and the Debye value T D plays a more subtle role. In the theoretical approach for HTS materials, E F is considered a variable. On the contrary, E F is not a variable in the BCS theory due to the assumption that E F k B T D , or T F T D We believe that our results and their interpretation are contributing to the mounting evidence of unconventional SC located at graphite's interfaces, in particular after the samples were brought in contact with alkanes. This work is among the few reporting on HTS-like states in hydrogenated graphites. We are also inquiring on the possible coexistence of surface SC and magnetism We have found evidence of superconductivity in hydrogenated graphenes. Recent studies show the viability of life in H 2 -dominated exoplanet atmospheres 