To develop active materials that can efficiently respond to external stimuli with designed mechanical motions is one of the major obstacles that have hindered the realization of nanomachines and nanorobots. Here, we propose an innovative working mechanism that allows multifold-translational-motion control of semiconductor micro/nanomotors by AC dielectrophoresis with simple visible-light stimulation. We study the dielectrophoresis forces on semiconducting particles of various geometries in aqueous suspension by modeling with the consideration of both the Maxwell-Wagner relaxation and electrical-double-layer-charging effect. With the obtained understanding, we rationally design a manipulation system that can versatilely transport semiconductor micro/nanomotors and orient them towards desired directions at the same time by tuning the light intensity in an electric field. This research may guide the development of a new type of micro/nanomachine platform with high versatility and control. It is relevant to nanorobotics and nanodevice assembly. The future micro/nanorobots require a high degree of freedom in motion control to perform complex tasks by individuals or in a swarm. However, on a miniaturized scale, it is a daunting task to apply established actuation approaches used in macroscale robots to micro/nanorobots. Once the dimension of a system is reduced to micro/nanoscale, the complexity in integrating multiple functional components into one structure, resembling those in bulk machines, increases dramatically. However, the level of required forces to drive a micro/nanorobot is much reduced. The interactions that are insufficient for macro robots can become prominent for micro/nanorobots. Such forces include those generated by external magnetic(1-7), electrical Recently, we reported original working mechanisms that can rapidly switch the motion style and finely modulate the speed of both the mechanical rotation and alignment of a semiconductor micromotor in an AC electric field with simple visible light Previously, the combined electrophoresis (EP) and dielectrophoresis (DEP) have been exploited to compel longitudinal micro/nanoparticles into linear transport with simultaneously controlled alignment In this work, we carry out modeling and simulation to study how light can be utilized to modulate the DEP force applied on silicon micro/nanoparticles of various geometries to realize versatile and individually controlled transportation. We unveil the complex working principle that depends on photoconductivity, AC frequency, as well as the shape and orientation of a particle. With the understanding, a new light-guided manipulation system is proposed that can control the transport direction, speed, and alignment of a particle all at the same time. (Fig. We design concentric circular microelectrodes to generate the required non-uniform electric field for the DEP force. This type of circular electrodes can be utilized for 1D manipulation along the radial direction (Figure When a nanoparticle is subjected to an electric field, an electrical polarization will be induced. The dipole moment is given by p = αE, where α is the polarizability tensor of the particle. If the field is slightly non-uniform where a gradient exists, a force termed as dielectrophoretic force will exert on the particle, given by F DEP (t) = p(t) ⋅ ∇E(t). For an AC electric field with a general expression of E(r, t) = E 0 (r, t) ⋅ exp(iωt), the DEP force is calculated as:(18) where p and E 0 are the phasor of the dipole moment and electric field, respectively. Since the AC electric field period is generally much shorter than the time scale of the particle movement, what can be observed is the time-averaged force (< F DEP (t) >) exerted on a particle as follows: where the asterisk refers to complex conjugation, α is the complex polarizability tensor of the particle, and E rms is the root mean square of the electric field intensity. A positive DEP force, which requires a positive real part of polarizability along the direction of the electrical field gradient, drags the particle towards the high-electric-field region and vice versa. If the particle is non-spherical with anisotropy in the electric polarizability, an alignment torque will be exerted on the particles, which is termed as electro-alignment. For example, if a particle changes its orientation within the x-y plane, the alignment torque can be given by: where θ is the angle between the electric field and the x-axis. When Re(α x ) > Re(α y ), the particle's x-axis will orient towards the direction of the electric field, otherwise, the particle's y-axis will be aligned in the direction of the electric field. Here, we specifically study ellipsoid particles with a, b, c as half the length of the principal axes for two reasons: 1) an analytical solution exists for ellipsoid particles when it is subjected to a uniform electric field along the principal axes. 2) a model of ellipsoid particles can predict the behavior of micro/nanoparticles of interest with shapes ranging from spheres, disks to rods, which are often made and used. In terms of the boundary value problem of an ellipsoid particle suspended in a uniform medium and a uniform electric field, an analytical solution exists. Suppose that the a, b, c axes of the ellipsoid particle are aligned along x, y, z axes of the coordinate system, respectively, the x component of the particle's electric polarization for example, can be expressed as: where ε 1 is the real permittivity of the medium, ε 1 , ε 2 are the complex permittivity of the medium and the particle, respectively, given by ε i = ε i -iσ ω , and L x is the depolarization factor defined by the following elliptical integral: . Similarly, the expression for p y and p z can be obtained by the substitution of L x and E x in Equation ( The frequency-dependent electric polarization of dielectric materials is known as the dispersion. In optical frequencies, the Lorentz model can well explain the dispersion relation of dielectric materials originate from multiple relaxation mechanisms. In most dielectrophoresis experiments, however, the frequency range of the alternating electric field is much lower and falls in the range of kHz to MHz, where the relaxation processes of atomic dipole, ionic polarization and electronic polarization are not observed (5) where τ RC is the time constant for EDL charging and tan δ = -ωτ RC as the dielectric loss tangent. Both the Maxwell-Wagner polarization and the electrical double layer contribute to the total electric dipole moment of the particles. Both the real and imaginary parts of the total dipole moment can be calculated accordingly. In this study, we select silicon as the material of the particle and deionized water as the suspension medium. Silicon is chosen due to the earthly abundance, high photoconductivity, and relevant to various practical applications. To understand the effect of light on the modulation of the DEP forces on Si nanoparticles via the tuning of their electric conductivities, we systematically sweep the electrical conductivity from 0.001 S/m to 1 S/m in the calculation. We first investigate the geometry dependence of the electric polarization. A series of oblate spheroid silicon particles (a = b > c) are calcualted, including one sphere (a = b = c = 5 μm) and another 5 spheroids with monotonically reduced z dimension from c = 4 μm to c = 0.5 μm (a = b = 5 μm) at a low (σ Si = 0.001 S/m) and high (σ Si = 1 S/m) electric conductivity, respectively. The polarizability is calculated by using the model discussed above by considering both Maxwell-Wagner relaxation and the electrical-double-layer effect. As shown in Fig. The above discussion summarizes the systematic study of the dependence of electric polarizabilities of silicon particles on geometry. The obtained understanding is essential to realize the function-oriented design of micro/nanoparticles for efficient light-reconfigurable manipulation and application. The results of the dependence of the electric polarizability of Si microparticles on the geometry, AC frequency and electric conductivity are critical for us to design innovative systems for light-stimulated versatile transport of microparticles with simultaneously controlled alignment. For simplicity, we first consider the scenario that the electric-field gradient is parallel to the electric field direction. Such an electric-field distribution can be implemented by applying an AC voltage onto two concentric circular electrodes as shown in Fig. For the oblate particle #6, there are more possible modes of motion. To depict the general behavior, we first calculate the real-part polarizability along the major axes (a,b-axis) and minor axis (c-axis) as well as the polarizability anisotropy (Re[α a -α c ]) with a series of electric conductivities from 1 S/m to 0.001S/m as shown in Fig. In this work, we propose a new and versatile working mechanism that could be applied for developing an array of semiconductorbased light-guided dielectrophoresis manipulation system. The electrical property of a semiconductor micromotor can be controlled by external light stimuli and is exhibited as tunable mechanical motions in an external AC electric field. Systematic investigation of the polarization behavior of semiconductor particles has been conducted, focusing on the dependence on the geometry, AC frequency, and electric conductivity. The selection and switching of modes of mechanical motion with only light modulated electric conductivity has been demonstrated on spherical, oblate and prolate particles. Although the manipulation is 1D transport in circular microelectrodes, the same working principle could be extended to 2D and 3D manipulations by utilizing strategically designed microelectrodes to generate required field gradient in more dimensions. This work could be particularly interesting for applications related to the translocation of micro/nanomotors (or robots), such as the delivery of cargos to live cells in biological study. It also could be utilized as a general platform that coordinates activities of nanomotor swarms for a collaborative task force. Furthermore, it may be exploited for the rapid assembly of artificial particles with dually controlled alignment and position for various electronic applications.