We report a broadband terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) which enables twenty vibrational modes of adenosine nucleoside to be resolved in a wide frequency range of 1-20 THz. The observed spectroscopic features of adenosine are in good agreement with the published spectra obtained using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) and Raman spectroscopy. This much extended bandwidth leads to enhanced material characterization capability as it provides spectroscopic information on both intra-and inter-molecular vibrations. In addition, we also report a low-cost Frequency Modulation Continuous Wave (FMCW) imaging system which has a fast measurement speed of 40,000 waveforms per second. Cross-sectional imaging capability through cardboard has also been demonstrated using its excellent penetration capability at a frequency range of 76-81 GHz. We anticipate that the integration of these two complementary imaging technologies would be highly desirable for many real-world applications because it provides both spectroscopic discrimination and penetration capabilities in a single instrument. Terahertz (THz) region of the electromagnetic spectrum spans the frequency range between microwave and mid-infrared. It is generally considered to be between 0.1 THz and 10 THz, although sometimes its definition is somewhat arbitrary ranging from 30 GHz to 30 THz overlapping with millimeter-wave (mmWave) and mid-infrared regions. The center portion of the THz region offers a unique combination of many remarkable properties. Firstly, THz radiation gives rise to characteristic spectroscopic 'fingerprints' for many crystalline materials, making THz spectroscopy a useful tool for material characterization. Secondly, THz radiation can penetrate into most polymer and clothing materials, thus THz radiation can be used to image internal structures of a sample. Thirdly, THz radiation is safe to use as its photon energy is millions of times smaller than that of X-rays. These attractive properties and the enormous inherent potential of the THz technology have led to rapid development of THz systems that in turn has opened up many exciting opportunities in academic research and industrial application. International Exchanges Cost Share (IEC\NSFC\181415) † Corresponding author. E-mail: ycshen@liverpool.ac.uk Both pulsed and continuous wave (CW) THz technologies have been investigated where pulsed measurements yield more information whilst CW imaging allows faster measurements. The principle of continuous wave (CW) THz imaging has existed for several decades. Figure Note that most commercial THz-TDS product has a typical bandwidth of about 3-4 THz. This, together with its high price tag, has been a major limiting factor for the wide uptake of THz-TDS technology particularly in industry sectors where the performance-price ratio is of major impact. There has been considerable interest and research work to extend the bandwidth of THz-TDS. One method is the optical excitation of THz radiation using new type of nonlinear crystal materials. In this work, a backward collection configuration (Fig. As shown in Fig. where f0 is the starting frequency,  is the chirp rate which is defined as B/T, B is the bandwidth and T is sweep period (Fig. The transmitted wave, after being reflected by an object, is received by a receiver antenna. Assuming the object is at an initial distance of R away from the transmit antenna and is moving away with a relative velocity of v. The returned signal from the object will have the same form as the transmitted signal, but with some time delay td which can be defined as: ) Considering this time delay, the return signal can be expressed as: ) )) where (0 ) 2 According to the FMCW radar principle, the returned signal is mixed with the transmitted signal. By filtering out the sum signal, we have the final phase difference signal: )) where (0 ) 22 By processing the above signal, one can obtain both the distance and velocity of the object. The distance of the target can be easily found by applying the FFT algorithm over one sweep signal period: where c is the speed of light and fb is the beating frequency obtained from the FFT amplitude spectrum. For THz imaging of a static sample with a single layer of a thickness d, Eq. 3 can be simplified as: [27] 1 2 2 2( ) where n is the refractive index and d is the layer thickness. The range resolution, e.g., the thinnest layer that can be resolved, is determined to be 3.75 cm in air (n = 1) by using the following equation: Figure We reported a pulsed THz time-domain measurement technique capable of obtaining THz spectra in a frequency range of 1-20 THz. Twenty spectral features of adenosine were resolved using such a pulsed THz time-domain spectroscopy. We noted that FTIR could also be used to carry out spectroscopic measurements at the upper end of the THz range. However, FTIR requires detector at cryogenic temperatures whilst THz spectroscopy measurement can be done at room temperature. Furthermore, pulsed THz time-domain measurement method can be applied to measure heated sample because of its time-gated coherent generation and detection scheme whilst FTIR may not be suitable to study heated sample. It is because samples at high temperature will radiate substantial infrared radiation that will lead to large background noise to the measured signal or even saturate the FTIR detector. In addition, Raman spectroscopy method could also be used to obtained spectroscopic information at THz frequencies. However, the optical absorption spectra (THz and infrared) and Raman scattering spectra are in general complementary. Depending on the nature of the vibration, which is determined by the symmetry of the molecule, vibrations may be active or forbidden in the infrared or Raman spectra. Therefore, the ultra-broadband THz spectroscopy reported here provides a unique capability to measure THz spectra at room temperature even for heated samples and this will open up a number of important applications. In this work, we also reported the development of FMCW imaging technique using the commercially available off-the-shelf components developed primarily for the mass automobile market. The research on microwave and mmWave imaging has a long history, and the basic scientific principles have not changed. However, there have been significant development and advances in engineering innovation and technology integration in recent years. From the perspective of practical applications, the performance-price ratio is an important factor. For example, the mmWave imaging technology developed by Zhang's group has been successfully applied for the inspection of space shuttle, which represents a major milestone of the practical applications of mmWave imaging technology. In addition, both mmWave and THz waves are intrinsically harmless to human and both are able to penetrate clothing materials. As demonstrated here, mmWave imaging systems are able to image through clothing materials in real time, whilst broadband THz technology provides unique spectroscopic information for substance discrimination. It is therefore feasible to develop a THz hybrid imaging and sensing system for security screening application by combining the real-time imaging capability of mmWave technology and the spectroscopic discrimination capability of broadband THz technology.