Quasi-1D materials Bi4X4 (X=Br, I) are prototype weak topological insulators (TI) in the β phase. For the α phases, recent high-throughput database screening suggests that Bi4Br4 is a rare higher-order TI (HOTI) whereas Bi4I4 has trivial symmetry indicators. Here we show that in fact the two α phases are both pristine HOTIs yet with distinct termination-dependent hinge state patterns by performing first-principles calculations, analyzing coupled-edge dimerizations, inspecting surface lattice structures, constructing tight-binding models, and establishing boundary topological invariants. We reveal that the location of inversion center dictates Bi4Br4 (Bi4I4) to feature opposite (the same) dimerizations of a surface or intrinsic (bulk or extrinsic) origin at two side cleavage surfaces. We propose a variety of experiments to examine our predictions. Given the superior hinges along atomic chains, the structural transition at room temperature, and the extreme anisotropies in three axes, our results not only imply the possible existence of many topological materials beyond the scope of symmetry indicators but also establish a new TI paradigm and a unique material platform for exploring the interplay of geometry, symmetry, topology, and interaction. Geometry, symmetry, topology, and interaction are fundamental themes in physics. Their interplay governs microscopic laws of individual particles and macroscopic phenomena of many-particle systems. As a paradigm in condensed matter physics, Kane-Mele topological insulators (TI) exist in 2D and 3D but not in 0D and 1D, dictated by the time-reversal (T ) and gauge symmetries in spin-orbit-coupled systems Fascinatingly, higher-order TIs (HOTI) and topological superconductors have emerged recently Following the theory of topological quantum chemistry or symmetry indicators Bi 4 X 4 (X=Br, I) are quasi-1D van der Waals materials, and each can be viewed as a periodic stack of atomic chains. The β phase has been predicted as a prototype weak TI (WTI) Besides demonstrating the existence and superiority of helical hinge states in the two α phases, we reveal that the location of inversion center, overlooked before, plays a critical role in determining the termination-dependent hinge state patterns. The inversion center of Bi 4 Br 4 (Bi 4 I 4 ) lies in its (001) monolayer (bilayer center). As a consequence, Bi 4 Br 4 (Bi 4 I 4 ) is an intrinsic (extrinsic) HOTI, and its two side cleavage surfaces exhibit opposite (the same) dimerizations of a surface (bulk) origin. Compelling evidence for the two novel yet distinct band topologies is provided by our advanced first-principles calculations, coupled-edge layer constructions, surface lattice-structure inspections, effective tight-binding models, and nontrivial surface winding numbers. Never formulated before, our boundary topological invariant not only validates but also distinguishes the two HOTIs. Fitting well with the ab initio results, our model elucidates the intimate relation between 2D TI, WTI, and the two HOTIs. To examine our predictions, we point out how a variety of experiments can be carried out. Our results establish a new TI physics paradigm and a unique quasi-1D material platform for exploring the interplay of geometry, symmetry, topology, and interaction. In this section, we present the most striking features of α-Bi 4 Br 4 and α-Bi 4 I 4 as HOTIs, i.e., the emergence of helical hinge states and their dependence on the (001) termination. In order to display the hinge states, we build the ab initio tight-binding models for both materials by using the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWF) for the p orbitals of Bi and Br/I. The MLWF are constructed from the bulk density functional theory (DFT) results that are obtained by the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional. (The computational methods are detailed in Sec. IV.) A. Helical hinge states of α-Bi4Br4 α-Bi 4 Br 4 has an AB stacking order in the (001) direction, similar to the Bernal stacked graphite. (The crystal structure of α-Bi 4 Br 4 is detailed in Sec. III.) Different from the Bernal graphite, the inversion center of α-Bi 4 Br 4 is not in the middle of a bilayer but in a monolayer, and each (001) monolayer of α-Bi 4 Br 4 is a 2D Z 2 TI. It follows that there are four possible scenarios of (001) termination, i.e., A-A, B-A, B-B, and A-B, and that they feature distinct patterns of helical hinge states, as depicted in the upper panels of Fig. In Fig. The system in Fig. We note that, because of the Z 2 character of 2D TI, the hinge states are gapped for the two even-layer scenarios yet remain gapless for the two odd-layer scenarios in the atomically thin limit. In the bulk limit, however, in each scenario the pair of hinge states are separate in space and gapless in energy. While the scenarios in Figs. B. Helical hinge states of α-Bi4I4 α-Bi 4 I 4 is similar to α-Bi 4 Br 4 in two aspects. First, the primitive unit cell of α-Bi 4 I 4 also consists of two (001) layers. As a result, there are also four possible scenarios of (001) termination, i.e., A-B, B-B, B-A, and A-A. Any many-layer system of α-Bi 4 I 4 even with stacking faults can be decomposed into them. Second, each (001) monolayer of α-Bi 4 I 4 is a 2D Z 2 TI with a crystal structure similar to that of α-Bi 4 Br 4 as detailed in Sec. III. However, in contrast to the case of α-Bi 4 Br 4 , the inversion center of α-Bi 4 I 4 is in the middle of two adjacent (001) layers. Since the A-and B-type layers are reflected to each other under inversion, only even-layer systems are inversion symmetric. Significantly, although the bulk α-Bi 4 I 4 has Z 4 = 0 as an inversion symmetric TRI insulator and trivial symmetry indicators in general In Fig. For the B-A termination in Fig. The key features of α-Bi 4 Br 4 and α-Bi 4 I 4 presented in Figs. Consider first the WTI β-Bi 4 X 4 In the case of α-Bi 4 Br 4 , the inversion center can only be placed in a (001) layer. Consequently, as depicted in Fig. In the case of α-Bi 4 I 4 , by contrast, the inversion center can only be placed between two adjacent layers. Accordingly, as depicted in Fig. Clearly, a key difference between the two α phases is whether the two side surfaces exhibit the same or opposite dimerizations. For α-Bi 4 Br 4 , because of the opposite dimerizations at the two side surfaces, there always exists two unpaired edge states, one at the top and the other at the bottom, independent of the termination. This is rooted in the fact that its inversion center can only be placed in a (001) layer. For α-Bi 4 I 4 , because of the same dimerization at the two side surfaces, the unpaired edge states always appear in pair at the top or bottom (or both). This originates from the fact that its inversion center can only be placed between two adjacent layers. We point out that compelling evidence of the revealed surface dimerization patterns in the two α phases is provided by their crystal structures in Fig. For completeness, we close this section by showing that α-Bi 4 Br 4 also hosts protected surface states at the (010) and (0 10) surfaces. The gapless surface Dirac cones are denoted as the red crosses in Fig. Moreover, when the effects such as dangling bonds and surface reconstruction are ignored, the two surface Dirac points are identified at (q a , q c ) = ±(0.861, 0.113)π. When a TRI (010) surface potential that breaks the C 2 symmetry is added in our calculation, the gapless Dirac cones in Fig. Both the α and β phases of Bi 4 X 4 crystallize in the same monoclinic space group C 3 2h (C2/m). They have three spatial symmetries: inversion (P), (010) mirror reflection (M b ), and twofold rotation around the b axis (C 2 ). Given that C 2 = M b P, only two of the three symmetries are independent. The building block of Bi 4 X 4 is an atomic chain with strongly covalent bonds between bismuth atoms. Each chain consists of four inequiva- lent Bi atoms and four inequivalent X atoms. As shown in Fig. We note that Bi 4 X 4 has two natural cleavage surfaces. For β-Bi 4 Br 4 , the inter-layer binding energy for the (001) and (100) planes are respectively 20 and 25 meV/ Å2 (slightly larger than that of graphite and smaller than that of MoS 2 ) While β-Bi 4 I 4 has been experimentally synthesized Each atomic chain is inversion symmetric in β-Bi 4 X 4 , as seen in Fig. Each (001) monolayer of β-Bi 4 X 4 consists of equally spaced atomic chains in the a direction, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. From the crystal structures in Fig. With the crystal structures of Bi 4 X 4 in Fig. Informed by the band inversions in Fig. Now we show that the band inversions and symmetry indicators of the two α phases can be directly understood by applying zone folding to the β phase WTI yet choosing two different locations for their inversion centers. Doubling the unit cell in the c axis folds the TRI momenta with q 3 = π back to those with q 3 = 0. This implies that, due to the zone folding, all the band inversions in the q 3 = π plane move to the corresponding TRI momenta in the q 3 = 0 plane. Moreover, at the new TRI momenta in the reduced Brillouin zone (BZ) with q 3 = π, the inversion eigenstates are symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of the band states at q 3 = ±π/2 in the original BZ, i.e., |q 3 = π, ± = (|q 3 = π/2 ± |q 3 = -π/2 ) / √ 2, where P |q 3 = ±π/2 = |q 3 = ∓π/2 and q 1 , q 2 = 0 or π implicitly. Consequently, the band states at the TRI momenta with q 3 = π are four-fold degenerate, and for each degeneracy the two Kramers pairs have opposite inversion eigenvalues. This implies that the TRI momenta with q 3 = π are irrelevant to the Z 2 and Z 4 indices. When the inversion center is placed in a (001) monolayer, Fig. BZ. This implies the symmetry indicators (001; 2). For the same choice of inversion center, the two band inversions appear at (π, π, 0) in the reduced BZ as sketched in Fig. Clearly, while the Z 2 indices are not robust against the unit cell doubling, they remain the same under the inversion center shifting. By contrast, the Z 4 index behaves in the opposite manner. Both Figs. 7(a) and 7(c) illustrate the band inversions of the β phase WTI, since its inversion center can be placed either in a (001) layer or between two adjacent layers. Moreover, Figs. illustrate the band inversions of α-Bi 4 Br 4 and α-Bi 4 I 4 , respectively, since the additional inter-layer couplings induced by the structure transitions are sufficiently weak compared with the bulk band gap of the β phase WTI. In fact, those weak couplings play two roles in determining the symmetry and topology of the two α phases. First, they reduce the translational symmetry, opening the side surface band gaps. Second, they reduce the inversion symmetry, fixing the inversion center locations. These two effects lead to Z 4 = 2 for α-Bi 4 Br 4 and Z 4 = 0 for α-Bi 4 I 4 . More fundamentally, they together give rise to the surface SSH models in Sec. II C and the surface topological invariants in Sec. V E. To better understand the physical mechanism of the band inversions revealed in Sec. IV, now we explain the band evolution of Bi 4 X 4 at various stages Due to the large electronegativity of halogen atoms, the bands near the Fermi energy are mainly determined by the 6p orbitals of bismuth atoms. First, consider the (010) mirror symmetry. The p y orbitals are decoupled from the p x,z orbitals since their mirror eigenvalues are different. Given the atomic chain orientation, the energies of p y orbitals are higher than those of p x,z orbitals; the hopping between p y orbitals is of σ-type, whereas that between p x,z orbitals is of π-type. Then, consider the inversion symmetry in a chain. Bi in/ex and Bi in/ex atoms are reflected to each other under inversion. They form the bonding and anti-bonding states split in energy: |Bi in/ex , p ± i = (|Bi in/ex , p i ± |Bi in/ex , p i )/ √ 2, where i = x, y, z. Next, we count the stronger intra-chain couplings. Because of the short Bi in -Bi in distance, the energy splittings between states |Bi in , p ± x and between states |Bi in , p ± y are large. On the contrary, the large Bi ex -Bi ex distance results in negligible energy splittings. However, states |Bi ex , p ± x,y can be coupled to states |Bi in , p ± x,y via the π-bonding and acquire splittings in the opposite fashion of |Bi in , p ± x,y . Due to the σ-bonding between states |Bi in , p ± z and |Bi ex , p ± z , the p z orbitals split and shift far away from the Fermi energy. Moreover, we take into account the weaker inter-chain couplings. As the chains are closer in the a direction than in the c direction, the energy splitting mainly occurs within each (001) layer due to the couplings in the a direction. Two adjacent chains in the same layer can be related by the inversion symmetry, and their states |Bi in/ex , p ± x form the bonding and anti-bonding states |Bi in/ex , p ± x , ± , where the new ± signs denote the inversion eigenvalues. As a results, the states |Bi in , p + x , -and |Bi ex , p - x , + become the valence and conduction bands closest to the Fermi energy, respectively. Finally, we include the effect of spin-orbit couplings (SOC). The SOCs mix the p x orbitals with the p y,z orbitals that have the same inversion eigenvalues. As a result, band inversions occur near the Fermi energy at either one or both of the two TRI momenta L and M , and Bi 4 X 4 become topologically nontrivial. The above picture for the β phase equally applies to α-Bi 4 Br 4 , as its inversion center is also in a (001) layer. For α-Bi 4 I 4 , as its inversion center is in the middle of two adjacent layers instead, the two pairs of ± signs above should be both interpreted as the labels of bonding and anti-bonding states, and the NN inter-chain couplings in the c direction needs to be further considered for states |Bi in , p + x , -and |Bi ex , p - x , + to form the inversion eigenstates that are eventually band-inverted by the SOCs. We construct the effective tight-binding model for both α-and β-Bi 4 X 4 based on their crystal and band structures revealed in Secs. III and IV. We start from the construction of the WTI model for the β phase and then derive the models for the two distinct α phases by applying zone folding and Peierls distortion. With reasonable sets of parameter values in Appendix B, our models well fit the band inversions and band structures in Fig. We choose a basis in which the three spatial symmetries discussed in Sec. III and the T symmetry can be specified as follows: where K is the complex conjugation. As such, the lowenergy model for β-Bi 4 X 4 can be built by using the four basis states |+, ↑ , |+, ↓ , |-, ↑ , and |-, ↓ , where ± and ↑ / ↓ denote the eigenvalues of σ z and s z , respectively. As illustrated in Fig. where H L is the (001) monolayer Hamiltonian, q i = k•a i , and a 1,2 = (a ∓ b)/2 and a 3 = c are the primitive lattice vectors shown in Fig. where τ z = ± denote the even and odd (001) layers. Note that in this model the inversion operator becomes P = σ z τ x for inversion center placed in the middle of two adjacent layers and remains P = σ z for inversion center placed in a layer. In order to make this model periodic in q 3 , we further perform the gauge transformation in Appendix C and obtain in which the inversion operator remains P = σ z τ x for inversion center placed in the middle of two adjacent layers and becomes P = σ z (1 + τ z )/2 + e iq3 σ z (1 -τ z )/2 for inversion center placed in a layer. Note that a 3 = 2c in both Eqs. ( In contrast to the β phase, the primitive unit cell of α-Bi 4 Br 4 consists of two (001) layers, and its inversion center can only be placed in a layer. Thus, Eq. (3) provides a reasonable, convenient starting point to construct the effective tight-binding model for α-Bi 4 Br 4 . Moreover, the even and odd (001) layers are nearly (001) mirror images of each other. Given s z H L s z = H L , the crystal symmetries, and the orbital characters, with the zeroth order corrections, α-Bi 4 Br 4 can be described by BiBr = Hβ + (d 0 + m 0 σ z )τ z + 2t c σ y s y τ y sin for which P = σ z . In Eq. ( for which Although the primitive unit cell of α-Bi 4 I 4 also consists of two (001) layers, different from α-Bi 4 Br 4 , its inversion center can only be placed in the middle of two adjacent layers. For this reason, while the even and odd layers are related to each other, the inter-layer spacings become not uniform any more. In this case, the inter-layer couplings become alternating in α-Bi 4 I 4 , and Eq. ( for which P = σ z τ x . In Eq. ( Following the ZKM theory We start from the β phase WTI that has two band inversions, one at M point (π, π, 0) and one at L point (π, π, π). Near the M L line, Eq. ( It is clear that the two Dirac surface states in Eq. ( which implies no surface dimerization since |T β,+ | = |T β,-|. The gapless nature and the absence of dimerization agree well with the edge construction in Sec. II C that the WTI side surface models are analogous to the critical point of the SSH model. In the same fashion, Eqs. ( with the inter-layer tunneling-up and -down matrices and the (201) and ( 20 1) surface Hamiltonians of α-Bi 4 I 4 h α BiI = D π,π + ηt b s z q b + [d c τ x + d c (τ x cos q 3 + τ y sin q 3 )] + ηs y [t c τ y -t c (τ y cos q 3 -τ x sin q 3 )] + ηtτ z , Evidently, surface dimerization is present in Eqs. ( From the analysis above, it is clear that a mirror (or s y -resolved) winding number for the model in Eq. ( for the model in Eq. ( For both α-Bi 4 Br 4 and α-Bi 4 I 4 , their winding numbers are independent of s y . This implies that the topological invariants and dimerization patterns are robust against mirror symmetry breaking. At the two opposite side surfaces, the winding numbers are different for α-Bi 4 Br 4 but the same for α-Bi 4 I 4 . Both conclusions are consistent with the dimerization analyses in Secs. II C, III D, and V D. Although a winding number is gauge dependent, the differences in winding number between the two opposite side surfaces (of the same α phase) and between the two different α phases are both gauge invariant. The terms ∝ τ z in Eqs. ( Although the dimerization analyses and the topological invariants above are sufficient to understand the helical hinge states of the two α phases, here we briefly discuss how to use the ZKM theory Consider the local frame of a generic surface formed by a vector j along the hinge, the outward surface normal k, and the direction i = j × k (at the surface). While the j axis is fixed, the k and i axes co-move with the surface. As the bulk translational symmetry is broken in the k direction by a topological boundary condition, we can derive a surface Hamiltonian that describes all the surfaces sharing the same hinge in the j direction For α-Bi 4 Br 4 , viewed in the local frame, the P symmetry dictates the mass term to have the opposite signs at two opposite surfaces. This is because the dimerization of α-Bi 4 Br 4 is a surface effect as revealed in Sec. V D. As a result, depending on the relative sign of the mass term at the top surface, an inversion symmetric sample exhibits one loop of hinge states in one of the two fashions, as depicted in Fig. Although both are HOTIs with helical hinge states, α-Bi 4 Br 4 is more intrinsic (bulk-obstructed) whereas α-Bi 4 I 4 is more extrinsic (boundary-obstructed) We stress that the effective models for the side surface states in Sec. V are continuum models in the chain direction but lattice models in the stacking direction. As the side surface states can be constructed by the helical edge states of (001) monolayers that are 2D Z 2 TIs, it does not exist any lattice model to account for the surface states in the chain direction. However, this is not the case in the stacking direction, as there are nevertheless dual surface Dirac cones that are gapless in the WTI case but gapped in the HOTI case. Best displayed by the quasi-1D Bi 4 X 4 , this special feature reflects the intimate relations between the HOTI, WTI, and 2D TIs. Given that the (001) monolayers of the four materials are all 2D Z 2 TIs as shown in Fig. A variety of experiments can be carried out to examine our predictions. The structure transition between the high-temperature β and low-temperature α phases can be characterized by the resistance discontinuity and its hysteresis in bulk transport A plethora of hinge state signatures can be obtained in a gate-tunable multi-terminal device. In such a device, the Fermi energy can be tuned by a gate voltage into the bulk, surface, and hinge states. (i) The charge neutrality point is set by the Dirac points of gapless hinge states. (ii) While the surface states have a much larger density of states (DOS), a 1D helical mode has a constant DOS, i.e., 1/π v F . The total DOS in the surface state gap can be used to estimate the number of hinges, step edges, or/and stacking faults that host 1D helical modes. (iii) The sign of Hall coefficient can indicate whether the Fermi energy crosses the electron or hole surface band and infer the size of surface state gap. (iv) In the surface state gap, nonlocal conductances can be analyzed to determine the hinge state pattern and layer stacking order. (v) From weak antilocalization in magnetotransport, the temperature dependence of dephasing lengths can be extracted. The Nyquist length L n and the phase coherence length L φ should both scale as T -1/3 , T -1/2 , and T -3/4 for the hinge, surface, and bulk states, respectively Our results establish a new TI physics paradigm and a unique quasi-1D material platform for exploring the interplay of geometry, symmetry, topology, and interaction. Besides the discussed experiments, studies on the coupling to ferromagnet, superconductor, or their linear junctions, the possible topological phase transitions under strain TABLE I. Crystal structure data of Bi4X4. For α-Bi4I4, the second line gives the values of the angle θ 2 and the distance Bi in -Bi ex . For α-Bi4Br4, the two lines list the parameter values of the two symmetry unrelated (001) layers, respectively. Note that α = γ = 90 where t 1 and t 2 are the NN couplings within a unit cell and between two unit cells, respectively. Because of its chiral symmetry, H(q) is characterized by the first winding number (evaluated in the trivial gauge where h(q) = (t 1 + t 2 e -iq )/| (q)|, ± (q) are eigenvalues of H(q), and Θ is the Heaviside function. Although the winding numbers are not gauge invariant, their differences are gauge invariant (when evaluated in the same gauge). Thus, there are N topological zero modes localized at any boundary across which ν 1 changes by N . In most cases t 1 and t 2 are assumed to be real, yet in general they can be extended to complex numbers and the conclusion Eq. (E2) remains the same. To show this explicitly, let t 1 = |t 1 |e iφ1 and t 2 = |t 2 |e iφ2 with 0 ≤ φ 1 , φ 2 < 2π in Eq. (E1), and we obtain H(q) = h x (q)σ x + h y (q)σ y , h x (q) = |t 2 | cos (q -φ 2 ) + |t 1 | cos φ 1 , h y (q) = |t 2 | sin (q -φ 2 ) -|t 1 | sin φ 1 , (E3) where σ are Pauli matrices. One can directly see from Eq. (E3) that The trajectory of (h x (q), h y (q)) is a cir- 12. The trajectory of (hx(q), hy(q)) in Eq. (E3). cle of radius |t 2 | centered at (|t 1 | cos φ 1 , -|t 1 | sin φ 1 ), as shown in Fig. 