Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) is a standard clinical procedure used to quantify antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Currently, the gold standard method requires incubation for 18-24 h and subsequent inspection for growth by a trained medical technologist. We demonstrate an automated, cost-effective optical system that delivers early AST results, minimizing incubation time and eliminating human errors, while remaining compatible with standard phenotypic assay workflow. The system is composed of cost-effective components and eliminates the need for optomechanical scanning. A neural network processes the captured optical intensity information from an array of fiber optic cables to determine whether bacterial growth has occurred in each well of a 96-well microplate. When the system was blindly tested on isolates from 33 patients with Staphylococcus aureus infections, 95.03% of all the wells containing growth were correctly identified using our neural network, with an average of 5.72 h of incubation time required to identify growth. 90% of all wells (growth and nogrowth) were correctly classified after 7 h, and 95% after 10.5 h. Our deep learning-based optical system met the FDA-defined criteria for essential and categorical agreements for all 14 antibiotics tested after an average of 6.13 h and 6.98 h, respectively. Furthermore, our system met the FDA criteria for major and very major error rates for 11 of 12 possible drugs after an average of 4.02 h, and 9 of 13 possible drugs after an average of 9.39 h, respectively. This system could enable faster, inexpensive, automated AST, especially in resource-limited settings, helping to mitigate the rise of global AMR. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is estimated to cause over 700,000 deaths annually, with 2.8 million cases and 35,000 deaths in the United States alone. Pure microscopy-based approaches have also been demonstrated for AST. In this work, we demonstrate an automated, cost-effective optical system for the early detection and quantification of resistance in AST using deep learning. The device can be placed directly inside a standard benchtop incubator and automatically monitor growth in all 96 wells of a standard microplate during incubation. The plate is periodically illuminated by red, green, and blue LEDs, and the transmitted light is relayed by an array of plastic optical fibers beneath the plate to two Raspberry Pi cameras for imaging. A neural network uses the intensity information from the images to classify each well as either turbid or non-turbid over time. This system eliminates the need to wait 18-24 h or more, offers significant time savings and does not rely on a trained medical technologist for readings as is necessary for conventional AST, while also being compact and cost-effective compared to commercially available automated AST systems. Our system was blindly tested on 33 unique clinical Staphylococcus aureus isolates, using a panel containing varying concentrations of 14 antibiotics. 95.03% of all wells containing growth were correctly identified, with an average of 5.72 h of incubation required to identify growth. 90% of all wells were correctly classified after 7 h, and 95% after 10.5 h. The system met the FDA-defined criteria The AST system (Figure The fiber array functions to demagnify the plate area, enabling imaging of all 96 wells without any optomechanical scanning components, while maintaining a compact form factor. The entire device measures 175 × 450 × 192 mm and the cost of the components (including all optics, electronics, and 3D printing) is under $500, which would drop significantly at higher manufacturing volume. Our system easily integrates with a typical clinical workflow, using any standard laboratory incubator and standard 96-well microplates. To operate our system, a user simply inserts a plate (Figure The data processing pipeline is shown in Figure A turbidity prediction is made for each well after each image (every 5 min) starting after 2.5 h of incubation. The normalized fiber intensities for all 3 illumination colors over the previous one hour are fed into a neural network that outputs a predicted probability of turbidity in the well at the current time. This is referred to as the window slicing method in the time series classification literature. Training neural networks via supervised learning requires ground truth labels for every training sample. Because a ground truth reading can only be performed via visual inspection by the trained medical technologist after incubation, ground truth labels were only available for the final time point of each patient plate (~18 h). Labels for the training plates at every other image time point during incubation were created manually by inspecting the fiber intensity plots for each well, such as those in Figures As mentioned previously, the 21-fiber bundles under each well were assembled without precise control of the mapping of each fiber from the well to the image to make the device easier to potentially manufacture in large quantities. In the imaged fiber bundles (Figure While the total number of training samples, each representing a single time point from a single well from a single patient plate, was large (263,019), the number of clinical isolates from which the training data was gathered was smaller (51). The variability among isolates accounted for much of the diversity of the dataset, both because each isolate had a unique resistance profile and because each plate was incubated on a different day by a set of rotating technicians. To ensure that the learned network model was robust to this isolate-to-isolate variability, we employed nine-fold cross-validation by randomly splitting the 51 clinical isolate plates into nine subsets and training nine models, where each model was trained on eight of the subsets and validated on the ninth. This process was repeated 50 times and the best model for each subset was selected to form a final composite "panel" of nine neural networks. This cross-validation/composite method (a type of model bagging) All experiments were performed at the UCLA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory by clinical staff, using 96-well microplates containing a Gram-positive antibiotic panel. Staphylococcus aureus isolates were prepared to a 0.5 McFarland standard in sterile water and then diluted in Mueller Hinton Broth. The diluted suspension was pipetted into all 96 wells and the plate was inserted into the AST system inside an incubator. 96-well microplates contained antibiotics in powder form pre-loaded into each well of the plate. Bacteria were pipetted into all 96 wells along with growth medium and inserted into the AST system inside an incubator. The plate was removed and ground truth reading was performed after 18-19 h. Initial experiments were performed on 47 plates, each with a quality control strain of S. aureus with a known resistance profile to ensure the system was functioning properly and the bacteria were not experiencing phototoxicity (Table Examples of fiber intensities and neural network turbidity predictions for blindly tested patient plates are shown in Figures Figure Maj rate remained below the FDA limit of 3% for 11 of 12 possible drugs, and the drug for which it exceeded 3% (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or Bactrim) was due to a single major error. It was not possible to calculate maj rate for two drugs (gatifloxacin and erythromycin) because re-sistance to these drugs was not observed for any clinical isolates. The maj rate for each of the other 12 drugs is plotted, but those that never move above 0% obscure one another. Vmj rate dropped below the FDA-permitted maximum of 3% before the end of incubation for 9 of 13 possible drugs. Again, the four drugs for which the system did not meet the FDA limit (levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and quinupristin/dalfopristin) each experienced only a single very major error. It was not possible to calculate vmj rate for vancomycin because no clinical isolates exhibited resistance to it. Using the data from Figure The curve labeled "panel of networks" corresponds to the composite panel of neural networks, whereas "single network" refers to the best individual network (by validation loss) from the panel. Three additional panels of networks were also generated (from a sample size of 50 nine-fold cross-validations as before) using only images of a single illumination color (red, green, or blue). Finally, a logistic regression model was tested, as well as a simple thresholdbased model, which classifies the well as turbid if at least two of the three most recent images have at least one fiber intensity lower than the threshold of 0.8876. This threshold value was determined by optimizing accuracy over the training patient plates. The panel of networks showed the best performance across all four metrics, but there was only a slight penalty in EA and maj rate by using a single network. The networks that used only images of a single color fared considerably worse than the network or panel of networks using all three colors. Among the three colors we would not expect a large difference, but green did perform the best, possibly since it used twice the number of pixels per fiber due to the Bayer filter array on the CMOS image sensor. The logistic regression performed better than the single-color networks, but not as well as the three-color network or panel of networks. The threshold-based simple approach was the worst performer, with under 90% CA and over 10% vmj rate. Figures The fiber intensities and network predictions for the wells corresponding to each of these errors are shown in Figures S8-10 along with an image of the wells captured with a smartphone camera at the end of incubation. Each drug for which our system exceeded the FDA-defined limit of 3% for maj or vmj rate only experienced a single error. With additional testing samples, the maj/vmj rates may drop below 3% for all drugs. In addition, the FDA defines major and very major errors as misclassification of a susceptible/resistant organism as resistant/susceptible. However, the one major error and one of the four very major errors from the network's predictions did not include a predicted susceptibility because the predicted MIC was undefined (known as a "skipped well"). We report these instances as major/very major errors, but they can be thought of as inconclusive results, for which a human could be notified to read the MIC manually or decide to repeat the test. The performance of the system demonstrates the potential to enable automated, cost-effective susceptibility testing with early results in resource-limited laboratories. Unlike the gold standard BMD method, our system does not require a full 18-24 h incubation or a trained technologist for plate readout and, unlike microscopy-based solutions, it requires no mechanical scanning components or bulky, costly hardware. Cost and access to trained personnel are primary factors that currently limit the reach of AST in developing regions. Our system also uses standard 96-well plates, which would allow it to more rapidly integrate with typical clinical workflow. In addition, because the system autonomously captures images during incubation without the need to remove the plate from the incubator, early results for drugs showing strong resistance can be sent to the physician as soon as they are available, while the device continues to monitor growth in the wells with the remaining drugs. Due to the phenotypic nature of our sensing mechanism, we believe it can be extended to almost any type of bacteria, or other plate-based tasks such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and culture samples. The fiber-based subsampling of the wells could enable the streamlining of daily laboratory tasks with robust, automated readout in a compact form factor. From Figure The presented system demonstrates the ability to conduct AST much faster than the gold standard method of incubation for 18-24 h followed by visual inspection. The time savings is critical to ensuring patients receive the most effective, targeted antibiotics and to limit the global rise in antimicrobial resistance. Our system also removes the need for a trained medical technologist and integrates with the standard clinical workflow using an incubator and 96-well microplates. The system is cost-effective due to the use of off-the-shelf components and could be particularly suited to resource-limited laboratories in developing regions, where antimicrobial resistance is predicted to cause the most deaths and access to trained personnel is limited. The AST system illumination is composed of two 8x8 arrays of individually addressable RGB LEDs (Adafruit Industries) whose pulse width modulation brightness is set by 2 Trinket microcontrollers (Adafruit Industries). The system contains 2016 0.75 mm plastic optical fibers (CK-30, Industrial Fiber Optics Inc.), which were epoxied and polished with a handheld polishing tool. The two common fiber bundles each contain fibers for half of the 96-well plate. They are each imaged by the combination of a 10.0 mm diameter × 50.0 mm focal length plano-convex lens (Edmund Optics) and a Raspberry Pi Camera Module V2 (Newark) with 1.12 μm × 1.12 μm pixel size. The two cameras are controlled by two Raspberry Pi 3 Model B computers. Images are captured in raw 10-bit format at 8.1 MP. Image processing was performed in MATLAB (MathWorks) and neural network training/testing was performed in Python using TensorFlow 1.14 (Google). The logistic regression model was created in Python with the scikit-learn library (David Cournapeau), using the saga solver, the elasticnet penalty with an L1 ratio of 0.9, and an inverse regularization strength of C = 2. All experiments were performed at the UCLA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory. The AST system was placed inside a 2cubic foot incubator (Binder) for the duration of the experiments. Initial experiments were performed using the ATCC43300 strain of MRSA in 47 plates. Confirmed clinical S. aureus isolates collected at the UCLA Clinical Microbiology Laboratory were tested on the platform for the remainder of the experiments. S. aureus isolates were prepared to a 0.5 McFarland standard in sterile water and 50 μL of this suspension was transferred into 11 mL of Mueller Hinton Broth. The dilution was inoculated into 96-well microplates (100 μL of bacterial suspension per well) containing a commercially available Gram-positive antibiotic panel (Sensititre Gram Positive MIC plates, ThermoFisher Scientific) shown in Table 