The effects of hydrogen incorporation into ’üó-Ga2O3 thin films have been investigated by chemical, electrical and optical characterization techniques. Hydrogen incorporation was achieved by remote plasma doping without any structural alterations of the film; however, Xray photoemission reveals major changes in the oxygen chemical environment. Depth-resolved cathodoluminescence (CL) reveals that the near-surface region of the H-doped Ga2O3 film exhibits a distinct red luminescence (RL) band at 1.9 eV. The emergence of the H-related RL band is accompanied by an enhancement in the electrical conductivity of the film by an order of magnitude. Temperature-resolved CL points to the formation of abundant H-related donors with a binding energy of 28 ┬▒ 4 meV. The RL emission is attributed to shallow donor-deep acceptor pair recombination, where the acceptor is a VGa-H complex and the shallow donor is interstitial H. The binding energy of the VGa-H complex, based on our experimental considerations, is consistent with the computational results by Varley et al. [J. Phys. Ga2O3 has attracted great interest in recent years due to its prospects for use in next generation high-power electronics, deep-ultraviolet optoelectronics, radiation detection and gas sensing devices. Luminescence in the ultraviolet-visible spectral range from 1.8 to 3.8 eV has been reported for ’üó-Ga2O3 bulk and nanostructures; however, the observed emission bands are highly dependent on the sample growth conditions and sample morphology. Nominally undoped Ga2O3 thin films (350 nm thick) were grown on c-sapphire substrates by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) using a Coherent LPX KrF (’ü¼ = 248 nm) laser as described elsewhere. The beam current was varied by changing the condenser lens setting of the SEM and measured by a Faraday cup on the sample holder. All CL spectra were corrected for the total system response of the light collection system. To confirm the reproducibility of film properties, the plasma treatment and CL measurements were repeated twice on different samples. The XRD ’Ć▓’ü▒’Ć»’üĘ pattern for the film shows three diffraction peaks at 2╬Ė = 18.73 0 , 38.22 0 , and 58.87 0 , which are indexed as the (-201), (-402) and (-603) reflections of monoclinic ’üó-Ga2O3 (Fig. The O 1s level exhibits a dramatic shift to a higher binding energy as well as changes in spectral shape from an asymmetrical board peak to a narrow peak after H doping. The spectra can be deconvoluted into two Voigt functions with a linear background. The main component at 532.3 eV labelled "O-Ga" in Fig. with high efficiency and form strong bonds with O atoms, which are responsible for the dramatic increase in the film conductivity shown in Fig. At higher temperatures, the electron becomes delocalized, resulting in the rapid decrease in the DAP intensity as shown in Figure while VB was kept constant at 1.5 kV. The integrated intensities are presented as a function of IB in Fig. The optical properties of hydrogen plasma doped ’üó-Ga2O3 films were investigated and interpreted with regards to the corresponding chemical, structural and electrical characteristics. A RL band at 1.9 eV was identified and ascribed to the highly H-doped near-surface region of the film. The emergence of the RL was accompanied by an increase in the film electrical conductivity by an order of magnitude. Both temperature-dependent electrical conductivity and CL results indicated the presence of an H-related shallow donor with an ionization energy of 28 ┬▒ 4 meV. In view of the theoretically predicted behaviour of hydrogen in ’üó-Ga2O3, the RL emission is attributed to radiative recombination involving the H-related shallow donor and VGa-H vacancy complexes.