Silicon nanocrystals (SiNCs) have been under active investigation in the last decades and have been considered as a promising candidate for many optoelectronic applications including highlyefficient solar cells. Some of the fundamental properties of interest in these nanostructures is the temperature dependence of their optical absorption onset, and how this is controlled by different passivation regimes. In the present work we employ first-principles calculations in conjunction with the special displacement method to study the temperature dependence of the band gap renormalization of free-standing hydrogen-terminated, and oxidized SiNCs, as well as matrix-embedded SiNCs in amorphous silica, and we obtain good agreement with experimental photoluminescence data. We also provide strong evidence that the electron-phonon interplay at the surface of the nanocrystal is suppressed by oxidation and the surrounding amorphous matrix. For the matrix-embedded SiNCs, we show a high correlation between the temperature dependence of the band gap and the Si-Si strained bonds. This result emphasizes the immanent relationship of electron-phonon coupling and thermal structural distortions. We also demonstrate that, apart from quantum confinement, Si-Si strained bonds are the major cause of zero-phonon quasidirect transitions in matrix-embedded SiNCs. As a final point, we clarify that, unlike optical absorption in bulk Si, phonon-assisted electronic transitions play a secondary role in SiNCs. Over the last decades, quantum confined semiconductors based on silicon have drawn great scientific attention owing to their unique electronic and optical properties. In this regard, silicon nanocrystals (SiNCs) have enabled interesting technological applications, including optoelectronic devices Various temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) measurements of SiNCs have been reported The interaction of electrons with quantized atomic vibrations, namely the electron-phonon coupling, is the underlying mechanism associated with temperaturedependent optical properties of materials In this study we rely on a recently developed methodology In addition to modifying the band structure, the electron-phonon coupling plays an important role in optical absorption leading to phonon-assisted electronic transitions. For example, in indirect gap crystals, optical transitions between the band extrema require the participation of a phonon to satisfy the momentum conservation rule. In nanocrystals made of indirect gap solids, however, the intensity of the absorption onset is also determined by zero-phonon quasidirect recombination that breaks the momentum conservation rule. This effect has been found to be pronounced in SiNCs, especially in relatively small size clusters Quantum confinement (QC) is the primary factor controlling quasidirect transitions. However, the absorption onset of SiNC structures is found to be consistently well below the quantum confined band gap In this manuscript, we also report results of firstprinciples calculations that unambiguously identify some of the main sources of quasidirect transitions in the SiNC/a-SiO 2 system, and clarify the role of each of its components (NC core, interface, matrix). This is made possible by the decomposition of density of states and optical absorption into atomic contributions, probing in this way the optical response of individual sites and local areas in the system. Our results show that, apart from QC, the dominant source of quasidirect transitions originates from strained Si-Si bonds in the core region induced by embedding. The organization of the manuscript is as follows: in Sec. II we briefly introduce the theory and main equations employed to investigate temperature-dependent optical properties of SiNCs, and outline the recipe used to obtain site decomposition of optical absorption. Section III reports all computational details of the calculations performed in this work. In Sec. IV we present our results on various SiNC systems. In particular, in Sec. IV A we report band gaps of H-terminated, oxidized, and matrixembedded SiNCs as a function of the nanocrystal diameter and compare to experiment. In Sec. IV B we compare our calculations of temperature-dependent band gaps of H-terminated, oxidized, and matrix-embedded SiNCs (all with diameter 2 nm) with bulk Si and experimental data. These calculations are followed by the analysis of phonon density of states and Eliashberg spectral functions of the three SiNC systems in Sec. IV C. In Sec. IV D we present the role of Si-Si strained bonds in the optical properties of matrix-embedded SiNCs, and in Sec. IV E, for the same structure, we compare Tauc plots of zero-phonon and phonon-assisted spectra. In Sec. V we summarize our key findings and indicate avenues for future work. In this section, we briefly describe the theoretical framework of the methodology employed to calculate temperature-dependent optical properties, and the decomposition of the dielectric function into site contributions. In the following, we adopt a Γ-point formalism, since our calculations are for free-standing and extended matrix-embedded SiNCs. Within the Williams-Lax Here the multi-dimensional Gaussian integral is taken over all normal coordinates x ν and the superscript denotes the dielectric function evaluated with the nuclei in configuration {x ν }. The widths of the Gaussian distributions are defined by the mean square displacements of the atoms along a vibrational mode ν, with frequency ω ν , and is given by σ 2 ν,T = (n ν,T + 1/2) /M p ω ν , where M p is the proton mass and n ν,T = [exp( ω ν /k B T )-1] -1 represents the Bose-Einstein occupation. The fundamental approach to numerically evaluate Eq. ( Recently, it has been shown that one can identify a single atomic configuration where ∆τ κα is the displacement of atom κ along the Cartesian direction α, and e ν κα is the component of the phonon polarization vector associated with the normal mode coordinate x ν = σ ν,T . The calculation of optical spectra with the ZG configuration yields correctly the adiabatic limit of phonon-assisted optical absorption as described by Hall, Bardeen, and Blatt In the same way with the Williams-Lax optical spectra, one can calculate temperature-dependent transition energies by directly replacing the dielectric function in Eq. ( where E g indicates the band gap energy evaluated with the nuclei of the system at their equilibrium geometry. The quadratic terms consist of the Fan-Migdal and Debye-Waller contributions to the electron-phonon renormalization A standard way to investigate the vibrational mode contribution to the band gap renormalization at finite temperatures is to calculate the Eliashberg spectral function, defined as: Integrating g 2 F g (ω, T ) over all phonon energies yields the sum of the Fan-Migdal and Debye-Waller corrections. This sum is usually evaluated in state-of-the-art perturbative calculations The imaginary part of the dielectric function in the independent particle and electric dipole approximations is given by In this expression m e and e are the electron mass and charge, the factor of two is for the spin degeneracy, V is the volume of the system, and p cv = ψ c |∇|ψ v is the optical matrix element representing direct transitions between the valence and conduction Kohn-Sham states |ψ v and |ψ c with energies ε v and ε c , respectively. Taking the expansion of the Kohn-Sham states as a linear combination of atomic orbitals, the optical matrix element is written as: where c jv represents the Kohn-Sham expansion coefficients of the state |ψ v , and φ j are the corresponding atomic basis states. To alleviate the notation we also define the matrix elements describing transitions between the basis states as pij = φ i |∇|φ j . Now we split the system into two groups of atoms, A and B, so that the total optical matrix element can be decomposed into the following contributions: where Here the self matrix elements, p AA cv and p BB cv , represent optical transitions between basis states that are associated entirely with atoms in the same group, while the cross-coupling matrix elements, p AB cv and p BA cv , represent optical transitions between basis states that are associated with atoms in different groups. By substituting Eq. ( where, for example, the dielectric function corresponds to optical absorption from atoms in group A only, and "cct" refers to the various cross coupling terms. We note that the above prescription to decompose optical absorption into site contributions can be generalized straightforwardly to an arbitrary number of groups. All first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory using numeric atom-centered orbitals as basis functions in the PBE generalized gradient approximation The dangling bonds of free-standing SiNCs are passivated with hydrogen atoms, as shown in Fig. All calculations of temperature-dependent optical properties were performed on SiNCs with diameter d = 2 nm. The structures with the nuclei at their relax positions are shown in Fig 1 . The Williams-Lax theory in the harmonic approximation together with SDM To elucidate the origin of the phonon density of states and band gap renormalization in different structures we decompose the atoms of the nanocrystal into two groups: surface and core atoms. The core contains Si atoms having as neighbors only Si 0 , i.e. Si atoms not bonded to any O or H atoms. The surface of free-standing SiNCs contains H, O, and passivated Si atoms (suboxides Si +1 , Si +2 , and Si +3 ). The surface of the matrix-embedded SiNC contains matrix atoms (suboxide Si +4 and O), and passivated Si atoms (suboxides Si +1 , Si +2 , and Si +3 ). To account for the effect of thermal expansion on the band gap of SiNCs we performed the following steps: (i) We took the volume of all nanocrystals to be equal to the convex hull volume formed by the outermost Si atoms. (ii) We mimicked volume expansion by increasing the distance of all Si atoms from the center of the nanocrystal by the same fraction. That is, we increased the volume without inducing distortion to the bond angles, and thus keeping the structures similar. (iii) For the case of matrix-embedded SiNCs, we neglected the thermal expansion of the matrix and left the positions of amorphous silica atoms at their relaxed coordinates. The rationale behind this choice is that the thermal expansion coefficient of amorphous silica Figure The solid curves in Fig. Figure Figure All curves in Fig. where a, Θ and p are model parameters representing the gradient of the high-temperature asymptote, the effective phonon temperature and the exponent of the temperature power law. This expression was chosen to (i) describe more accurately the non-linear dependence of the band gap at very low temperatures Figure Figure Phonon density of states (PDOS) of the Hterminated free-standing SiNC (red), oxidized free-standing SiNC (green), matrix-embedded SiNC in a-SiO2 (blue), and bulk Si (black). The shaded areas define the frequency range of the vibrational modes associated mainly with displacements of surface (light gray) and core atoms (dark gray). Percentages in round [square] brackets show the contribution to the vibrational modes associated with displacements of the indicated group of atoms in the free-standing [matrixembedded] SiNC. displacements of the artificially imposed H atoms that contribute to the band gap renormalization. This uncertainty in our calculations is shown as a blue shaded area in Fig. To explain the different behavior between the temperature-dependent band gaps of the three SiNCs employed in our calculations, we proceed with the analysis of their phonon density of states (PDOS) and the tem- perature dependence of their Eliashberg spectral functions (ESFs). Figure Figure atoms in the matrix-embedded SiNC. In this section, we analyze the role of Si-Si strained bonds in the optical absorption and band gap renormalization of matrix-embedded SiNCs. Figure Figure To clarify this observation, Fig. where l i (T ) and l 0 i are the bond lengths in ZG and equilibrium geometries, respectively, and S is the number of total bond lengths. Our choice of a quadratic deviation measure is rationalized by the fact that, the electronphonon renormalization, for relatively low temperatures, is predominantly quadratic in atomic displacements [first line of Eq. ( to correlate the band gap change and bond length distortion. The fit of Eq. ( In this section we analyze the Tauc plots In bulk semiconductors with an indirect band gap, optical transitions between the states of the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) are forbidden in the absence of phonons owing to the momentum conservation rule Figure It is evident that unlike crystalline silicon In the inset of Fig. In this manuscript we have performed a first-principles study of temperature-dependent optical properties of SiNCs. In a nutshell, we have demonstrated using SDM that the electron-phonon renormalization of the band gap of SiNCs strongly depends on the different passivation regimes. Starting from H-terminated free-standing SiNCs we have shown that the large zero-point renormalization and the band gap variation with temperature originates from the coupling of electrons with surface phonons. This surface effect is suppressed by oxidation and almost vanishes by inserting the nanocrystal inside the a-SiO 2 matrix. The present results help to clarify the experimental measurements regarding the energy shifts between the temperature-dependent PL peaks of oxidized free-standing and matrix-embedded SiNCs. Furthermore, our data for the band gap renormalization of matrix-embedded SiNCs exhibits good agreement with the experiment and follows closely the Varshni behavior of bulk Si. Importantly, our analysis reveals that the electronic structure of SiNCs is highly correlated with the strain of Si-Si bonds. In fact, in the case of matrix-embedded SiNCs, we have demonstrated a strong linear dependence between the band gap and the bond length variance induced by atomic vibrations. This result suggests the inherent relationship between electron-phonon coupling and thermally averaged structural perturbations that can be explored with non-perturbative approaches, like SDM. Beyond studying the temperature dependence of the band gap, we investigate the effect of phonon-assisted electronic transitions on the optical spectra of SiNCs. At variance with bulk Si, the spectrum close to the absorption onset of SiNCs is dominated by zero-phonon quasidirect transitions, while phonon-assisted recombination is less important. We also clarify that the origin of quasidirect transition probability in SiNCs is not only due to quantum confinement, but also due to strained Si-Si bonds (primarily) and oxygen-related surface states (secondarily). Finally, it should be possible to extend our present work to explore how the formation of oxygen bridge bonds, or other oxidation combinations can explicitly affect electron-phonon coupling in SiNCs. Furthermore, we expect that the calculation of temperature-dependent band gaps of other important nanostructures, such as Ge, SiGe and TiO 2 passivated nanocrystals should be within reach. Our study can also be upgraded with calculations of full photoluminescence spectra accounting for excitonic effects and exciton-phonon coupling 