Monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been in focus of current research, among others due to their remarkable exciton landscape consisting of bright and dark excitonic states. Although dark excitons are not directly visible in optical spectra, they have a large impact on exciton dynamics and hence their understanding is crucial for potential TMD-based applications. Here, we study brightening mechanisms of dark excitons via interaction with phonons and in-plane magnetic fields. We show clear signatures of momentumand spin-dark excitons in WS2, WSe2 and MoS2, while the photoluminescence of MoSe2 is only determined by the bright exciton. In particular, we reveal the mechanism behind the brightening of states that are both spinand momentum-dark in MoS2. Our results are in good agreement with recent experiments and contribute to a better microscopic understanding of the exciton landscape in TMDs. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit a number of fundamentally interesting and technologically promising properties Dark excitons are highly interesting for TMD research, as they can lie energetically below bright excitons represents a mixing parameter that determines whether an additional peak appears in PL spectra stemming from the spin-dark exciton. resulting in an additional peak in optical spectra, cf. Fig Theoretical approach: To obtain a microscopic access to the optical response of TMDs after an optical excitation, we apply the density matrix formalism with semiconductor Bloch equations in its core The PL is given by the time derivative of the photon den-arXiv:2005.13873v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 28 May 2020 sity c † q c q that is determined by the photon-assisted polarization c † q X b q corresponding to the recombination of an exciton (X b q ) under emission of a photon (c † q ). Here, we have introduced the photon creation and annihilation operators c † q , c q and the exciton annihilation operator X b q that will be defined below. The introduced PL equation only describes direct radiative recombination processes and thus contains only signatures from the bright exciton. To include also possible features stemming from dark excitons via higher order processes, we have to extend the PL equation by implementing phononassisted radiative recombination processes and the impact of a magnetic field. To account for excitonic effects, which are dominant in TMD monolayers Q is the interaction-free part for excitons, photons and phonons with the excitonic energy ε i Q in the state i = (s i , η i ) with the spin s i = ↑↑, ↑↓, ↓↑, ↓↓ and the valley η i = (KK, KK', KΛ, ΓK), the photon energy ω σ Q with the polarization mode σ, and the phonon energy Ω ζ Q with the phonon mode ζ. The exciton-photon interaction reads . with the optical matrix element M iσ Q The matrix element G ij reads in excitonic basis i ,s e j q φ i q φ j * q with the electrons (holes) keeping their spins, while mixing of spins in the valence (conduction) band of one valley takes place, i.e. ). Here, g c(v) ηi is the experimentally accessible g-factor for the conduction (valence) band in the valley η i and μ B is the Bohr magneton. The g-factors in 2D materials are an ongoing topic of research , and the new state operator , where we used the abbreviations ↑↓ and λ i = ±. The latter can be positive or negative depending on the energetic ordering in the investigated TMD material. Note that for the definition of the transformation matrix Û η , we exploited We can now transform the rest of the Hamilton operator into this basis, yielding for the exciton-photon coupling H x-phot = i Mi c Xη † i + h.c. with the new matrix elements Mi = M U 1i . Neglecting for the moment the interaction with phonons (hence q ≈ 0), we derive the equation of motions for the photon-assisted polarization appearing in Eq. ( To calculate the PL intensity in presence of a magnetic field we solve this equation in the adiabatic limit with the exciton occupations N η i , excitonic energy εη i and dephasing γ η i , where η and i are the exciton and spin index. Brightening of spin-dark excitons: For a better understanding of the influence of the magnetic field, we disregard for the moment the impact of momentum-dark excitons and consider only the bright state η = KK, i = ↑↑ (denoted by B) and the spin-dark state η = KK, i = ↑↓ (denoted by D). Furthermore we consider the situation μ B B ∆ η , where the energy difference between spin-allowed and spin-dark state is large compared to the Zeeman splitting. Here, the Zeeman term gives only a small correction to the energy, which is the case in tungsten-based TMDs for experimentally available magnetic field strengths. Then, we split up the sum over η in Eq. ( The first term describes the direct PL contribution stemming from the bright KK ↑↑ exciton and resulting in a resonance at the energy ε B . In addition, the magnetic field appearing in the second term gives rise to a new resonance at the position ε D due to the activation of spin-dark excitons. Assuming that excitons quickly thermalize, exciton densities can be approximated by equilibrium Boltzmann distributions Figure g ∆ is TMD-specific and depends specifically on the (i) relative energetic position of dark and bright excitons ( ε D ε B ≈ 1), (ii) the TMD-specific g-factor and dark-bright energy splitting ∆, and (iii) the relative temperature-dependent exciton densities ( ). In materials with ε D > ε B (e.g. MoSe 2 ) this factor will quickly approach 0 at low temperatures and hence we do not expect the dark state to brighten up, since its occupation is very low. On the other side, for tungsten-based materials with ε D < ε B the factor The inset reveals a quadratic behavior for the dark-bright peak ratio. (b) Surface plot of the PL as a function of energy and magnetic field strength. Note that the spectra are normalized to the bright exciton peak. The spin-dark exciton becomes visible from approximately 2 T on and grows with the magnetic field. will instead approach infinity at low temperatures and enables pronounced brightening of dark states. However, as the temperature increases the factor N D N B becomes smaller and hence the intensity of the peaks decreases as dark excitons thermalize and recombine via phonons. This is why spin-dark states are observed mainly at low temperatures Brightening of spin-and momentum-dark excitons: So far, we have only included the effect of phonons in the linewidth of the exciton resonances We extend the exciton Hamiltonian by the exciton-phonon coupling which creates an exciton with the momentum Q + Q in the state η 1 , l and annihilates an exciton with the momentum Q in the state η 2 , j under creation of a phonon with the momentum -Q and the mode ζ = (LA,TA,LO,TO). The exciton-phonon matrix element in the magnetic field basis reads Here, d λ Qζ denotes the electron-phonon coupling elements in the band λ = (c, v) The transformation into the magnetic field basis enables us to exploit the TMD Bloch equations for phonon-assisted photoluminescence derived in our previous work We obtain a new expression for direct photoluminescence which is analogue to Eq. ( where we have introduced the abbreviation . the oscillator strength. The position of the new phonon-induced signatures in the PL is determined by the energy of the exciton εν Q and the energy of the involved phonon ±Ω ζ Q . The sign describes either the absorption (+) or emission (-) of phonons. We take into account all in-plane optical and acoustic phononmodes. Moreover, the appearing phonon occupation η ± ζQ = ζQ is assumed to correspond to the Bose equilibrium distribution according to the bath approximation Brightening of spin-and momentum-dark states. PL with and without a magnetic field studied at 35 K for different hBNencapsulated TMD monolayers. The lower panels show the PL difference ∆PL = I14 T -I0 T illustrating directly the impact of the magnetic field. Without the latter, the PL in all TMDs but MoSe2 is dominated by phonon-sidebands of momentum-dark KK' ↑↑ , KΛ ↑↑ or ΓK ↑↑ excitons. They are located approx. 50-100 meV below the bright KK ↑↑ state. In presence of a magnetic field, additional shoulders are observed at the position of spin-dark KK ↑↓ or below the ΓK ↑↓,↓↑ excitons. The latter state appearing in MoS2 is both spinand momentum-dark and requires brightening via both phonons and an in-plane magnetic field. signatures are observed in most TMD materials. They stem from momentum-dark states (black vertical lines) and are activated via phonon-assisted radiative recombination As MoSe 2 does not exhibit any energetically lower lying dark excitonic states The field-induced difference in the PL between tungstenand molybdenum-based TMDs stems from different underlying brightening mechanisms: While in WSe 2 and WS 2 the magnetic field induces a mixing of spin-allowed and spinforbidden KK excitons, resulting in a peak at the position of the spin forbidden KK ↑↓ exciton, in MoS 2 it additionally couples spin-allowed and momentum-dark ΓK ↑↑ states with spinand momentum-dark ΓK ↓↑,↑↓ excitons, resulting in phonon replica energetically below these ΓK ↓↑,↑↓ states. The strong mixing of spin-and momentum-dark states in MoS 2 can be traced back to the degeneracy of the states and the strong electron-phonon matrix elements Comparing our results with experimental observations For molybdenum-based materials, we find that MoSe 2 is dominated by the bright KK ↑↑ exciton at all temperatures, however exhibiting an increased peak broadening at higher temperatures due to the enhanced exciton-phonon interaction. In contrast, MoS 2 shows even at low temperatures two broad peaks stemming from (i) phonon sidebands of the spin-and momentum-dark ΓK ↑↓,↓↑ excitons and (ii) direct emission from the momentum-allowed KK ↑↓ exciton around 1.95 eV. With increasing temperature, the indirect peaks become broader and decreases in intensity due to enhanced exciton-phonon scattering. We have investigated the impact of an in-plane magnetic field on optical properties of transition metal dichalcogenides. Exploiting a fully quantum-mechanical and microscopic approach, we provide insights into signatures of momentum-and spin-dark excitons in photoluminescence spectra. We find that the field-induced mixing of spin-up and spin-down states results in a brightening of spin-dark excitons resulting in new resonances. We show that the origin of the new peak is the direct emission of the KK ↑↓ exciton in tungsten-based materials, whereas for MoS 2 it is the indirect, phonon-induced transition from the spin-and momentumdark ΓK ↓↑,↑↓ excitons. Our work provides microscopic insights into experimentally observed photoluminescence spectra in presence of magnetic fields and overall sheds light on the excitonic landscape in 2D materials.