We demonstrate an optical data wavelength converter based on an electrically driven photonic molecule structure comprising two coupled active silicon microring resonators. The converter, supplied by a continuous-wave (CW) microwave drive signal equal in frequency to the desired wavelength shift, replicates an input optical signal at a new wavelength. The optical coupled-cavity system matches supermode resonances to the input and wavelength-converted optical waves maximizing the conversion efficiency. Two device designs that perform wavelength up-and down-conversion by 0.19 nm (24 GHz) with -13 dB conversion efficiency and 6 GHz bandwidth; and by 0.45 nm (56 GHz) with -18 dB efficiency and 5 GHz bandwidth are demonstrated. A 4 Gbps non-return-to-zero (NRZ) optical data stream is shifted in wavelength and successfully recovered. This architecture accepts CMOS-level RF drive voltages and can be integrated in monolithic CMOS electronic-photonic platforms with a simple signal source circuit as part of a self-contained subsystem on chip that generates and carries out the wavelength conversion, requiring no high-frequency (optical or electrical) and high-power external pump input to the chip. This type of device may become a new standard element in the component libraries of silicon and CMOS photonics processes. Conversion of optical data signals between the wavelength channels of wavelength division multiplexed (WDM) optical fiber communication systems has been shown to enable efficient use of network resources and increase capacity All-optical wavelength conversion based on a number of physical processes has been studied as an all-optical alternative to optical-electrical-optical conversion. Optical gating schemes, using cross-gain or -phase modulation between probe and pump signals, have been demonstrated in semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA) In this work, we report the first demonstration of optical signal wavelength conversion in a dual-active-cavity microring wavelength converter, illustrated in Fig. The wavelength converter is schematically illustrated in Fig. The system of two coupled resonators supports two resonant supermodes, with symmetric and antisymmetric electromagnetic field distributions in the cavities, as shown in Fig. Operation of the wavelength converter is based on the modulation-induced coupling described above. The input optical signal couples into the converter through the bus waveguide and excites one of the two supermode resonances, which is aligned in center frequency with the signal, as shown in Figs. A closed-form formula for the efficiency (conversion power gain) of the converter, derived in where δf int and δf tot are the intrinsic and total linewidths of the supermode resonances, δf pp is the peak-to-peak frequency swing of the cavity resonances due to modulation, and ∆f is the input signal detuning from a supermode resonance frequency. For given δf tot the peak conversion efficiency (∆f = 0) increases with δf pp and at δf pp = 2δf tot reaches its maximum, which is limited by the intrinsic linewidth δf int . The throughput bandwidth of the converter, defined as the full width at half maximum of the conversion efficiency G is given by Under weak (δf pp → 0) and optimum (δf pp = 2δf tot ) modulation conditions the bandwidth as given by Eq. 2 reduces to BW δfpp→0 = 0.64 δf tot , BW δfpp=2δftot = 1.41 δf tot . (3) Resonance linewidth δf tot can be adjusted to produce desired bandwidth by controlling the ring-to-bus coupling strength. Due to a fundamental tradeoff between the bandwidth and conversion efficiency The wavelength converter, designed for a foundry silicon photonics process with 220 nm-thick device layer is illustrated in Fig. The wavelength converter was fabricated in the IMEC ISIPP50G foundry silicon photonics platform To characterize phase shifter efficiency degradation at high electrical frequencies (RC bandwidth limit), we measured the small-signal EO s 21 response of a strongly overcoupled singlering microring modulator with ¿70 GHz optical linewidth, which is fabricated on the same chip and uses an active cavity identical to the cavities in the wavelength converters [see inset in Fig. We carried out wavelength conversion experiments on actual optical data streams. Figure 