Topological superconductors are exotic gapped phases of matter hosting Majorana mid-gap states on their boundaries. In conventional three-dimensional topological superconductors, Majorana in-gap states appear in the form of spin-1/2 fermions with a quasi-relativistic dispersion relation. Here, we show that unconventional Majorana states can emerge on the surface of three-dimensional topological superconductors protected by rotational symmetry. The unconventional Majorana surface states are classified into three different categories: a spin-s Majorana fermion with (2s + 1)-fold degeneracy (s ≥ 3/2), a Majorana Fermi line carrying two distinct topological charges, and a quartet of spin-1/2 Majorana fermions related by fourfold rotational symmetry. The spectral properties of the first two types, which go beyond conventional spin-1/2 fermions, are unique to topological superconductors and have no counterparts in topological insulators. We show that unconventional Majorana surface states can be obtained in the superconducting phase of doped Z2 topological insulators or Dirac semimetals with rotational symmetry. Topologically stable gapless surface states are the hallmark of three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) and topological superconductors (TSCs) Here, we show that unconventional MFs emerge on the surfaces of TSCs protected by n-fold rotation C n and timereversal T symmetries. By analyzing all possible realizations of anomalous surface states, we find that rotation-protected TSCs feature three types of surface MFs, two of which exhibit characteristic energy spectra that have no counterparts in TIs. The first type takes the form of higher-spin Majorana fermions (HSMFs), which generalize the spin-3/2 fermion in semimetals To convey the main ideas concisely, we focus on spin-orbit coupled systems below. However, our theory is also applicable to spin-rotation-symmetric and spin-polarized systems, as explained in detail in the Supplemental Material (SM) , where and Ψ = (ĉ k , ĉ † -k iσ y ) t is the Nambu spinor in which ĉk /ĉ † k are electron annihilation/creation operators. The superscript t denotes the matrix transpose. h(k) is the normal-state Hamiltonian, and the superconducting pairing function ∆(k) satisfies ∆(k) = -σ y ∆ t (-k)σ y due to the Fermi statistics. This BdG Hamiltonian has particle-hole P symmetry P H BdG (k)P -1 = -H BdG (-k) where which satisfies P 2 = 1. We use italic (calligraphic) symbols to indicate the symmetry operator of the BdG Hamiltonian (normal-state Hamiltonian). Let us assume that the normal state has C n symmetry about the z-axis, so that C n h(k)C -1 n = h(R n k), where R n k indicates the momentum after C n rotation of k. When ∆(k) is an eigenfunction of C n , i.e., ). Now we suppose that the normal state has time reversal symmetry T h(-k)T -1 = h(k), under T = iσ y K. When the pairing function is also time-reversal-symmetric, i.e., T ∆(k)T -1 = ∆(-k), the BdG Hamiltonian is symmetric under T = diag(T , T ). Consistency with C n invariance s ∇ k H s is defined along a loop surrounding the node at k = 0. The total winding number of surface MFs is protected by chiral symmetry, so it is robust independent of C 2 symmetry. To obtain surface states that require C 2 symmetry for their protection, let us consider a four-band surface Hamiltonian describing two overlapping MFs with opposite winding numbers: H s (k x , k y ) = k x σ x + k y ρ z σ y , which is invariant under S = σ z and T = iσ y K. Then, possible C 2 representations commuting with S and T , and satisfying (C 2 ) 2 = -1, are C 2 = -iρ z σ z and C 2 = -iσ z = -iS. In the former case, a mass term mρ y σ y opens the gap on the surface. On the other hand, in the latter case, no mass term is allowed, so the gapless spectrum is protected. In fact, the fourfold degeneracy at k = 0 is enforced by the representation C 2 = ±iS because so that H s (k = 0) = 0. This type of symmetry-enforced degeneracy is possible only on the surface of a TSC because C 2 = ±iS is an anomalous representation that mixes the particle-hole indices, which is impossible in an ordinary C 2 representation of the bulk states. The fourfold degenerate point disperses like spin-3/2 fermions We can understand the corresponding 3D bulk topology of H BdG using the 1D topology on C 2 -invariant lines [Fig. Doubly charged Majorana Fermi lines (DCMFLs).-Next, we consider odd-C 2 pairing characterized by C 2 S = -SC 2 . Odd-C 6 pairing also falls into this category. In these cases, no HSMF is allowed To understand the anomalous MFL, let us consider a Dirac fermion on a C 2 -invariant surface of a TI described by the Hamiltonian which is symmetric under The stability of the above MFL is due to its two Z 2 charges. If we choose a basis in which where O(k) is real-valued. The 0D topological charge is defined by the sign change of det O(k) across the MFL, while the 1D topological charge is defined by the winding number of the matrix O(k) around a loop surrounding the MFL Since a DCMFL is realized by odd-C n=2,6 pairing, it accompanies gapless hinge states between side surfaces, as shown in the middle panel of Fig. Quartet of Majorana fermions (QMF).-We again consider the surface Dirac fermions of TIs, but with an odd-C 4 pairing function. As (C 2 T ) 2 = 1 and (C 2 P ) 2 = -1, nodes now appear as points at generic momenta where the ∆ 1 τ x term is a potential mass term that anticommutes with the Dirac Hamiltonian τ z ⊗h D . The representation C 4z = iτ x σ z e -i π 4 σz allows a mass term ∆ 1 = m, thus giving trivial surface states. On the other hand, C 4z = τ z e -i π 4 σz forbids such a constant mass term. In this case, pairing terms split the fourfold degeneracy at k = 0 into four MFs with twofold degeneracy, as shown in Fig. In contrast to HSMFs and DCMFLs, P and S symmetries do not play a critical role in the protection of the QMF, so the surface structure is similar to that in TIs with C n symmetry Similar to the case of DCMFL, the QMF accompanies gapless hinge states between gapped side surfaces, as shown in Fig. Lattice model.-To demonstrate our theory, we consider the following model Hamiltonian describing a doped Z 2 TI or Dirac semimetal, where ρ i=x,y,z and σ i=x,y,z are Pauli matrices for orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. This is symmetric under time reversal T = iσ y K and mirror operations M x = iσ x , M y = iρ z σ y , and M z = iσ z . This model describes a C 4z symmetric Dirac semimetal when m 0 = m 1 = 0. Nonzero m 0 and m 1 , which breaks C 4z , M x and M y symmetries, opens a gap at bulk Dirac points leading to a Z 2 TI On the other hand, in the case of odd-C 2 pairing, as the presence of a single Dirac fermion on the surface is key for observing a DCMFL, any odd-C 2 pairing can induce a DCMFL, thus realizing a C 2 -protected TSC as long as the bulk gap fully opens. The surface spectrum for ∆(k) = ∆ o ρ x is shown in Fig. To describe an odd-C 4 TSC with QMF, we need a model whose Fermi surface does not cross C 4 -invariant lines; otherwise, the bulk gap does not fully open for odd-C 4 pairing. Hence, instead of Eq. (96), we consider the following model Hamiltonian for a doped Z 2 TI, where and C 4z = e -i π 4 σz . If we take |μ| larger than the gap induced by λ SO , the system has a torus-shaped Fermi surface, which is a characteristic of nodal line semimetals. As this Fermi surface does not cross a C 4z -invariant line, a fully gapped TSC can be obtained by introducing an odd-C 4z pairing. If we consider , the bulk and side-surface gap fully opens and QMF (hinge states) appears on the top surface (side hinges) [Fig. Our model study shows that doped Z 2 TIs having a band structure of massive Dirac semimetals are promising candidates for rotation-protected TSCs. Au 2 Pb is such a material Optical responses may be able to distinguish HSMF and DCMFL because DCMFL can show subgap optical responses down to zero photon energy while other MFs show zero optical response Interaction and disorder effects on new MFs can be an interesting subject. In the case of HSMFs, the Z classification will reduce to Z 8 , because the winding number in each eigenspace will take a Z 8 value in interacting systems Topological charges of gapless nodes at a generic momentum in the surface Brillouin zone. C2 is a twofold rotation around the surface normal axis. C2zT , C2P , and S do not change crystal momentum, so they constrain the band topology and gap closing condition at generic momenta. Z U(1) is the U(1) winding number carried by point nodes, 0D Z2 is the topological charge protecting line nodes, and 1D Z2 is the O(N) winding number that carried by a line node as a secondary topological charge Let us classify topological superconductors protected by C n symmetries. Before we move on to the topological classification, we note that the pairing function should be an eigenfunction of C n in order to preserve the C n symmetry in the superconducting phase (more precisely, to preserve the symmetry under the combination of C n and a global phase rotation). Since C n and C symmetries do not protect a nodal point or a nodal loop on the surface without time reversal symmetry, our discussion below is concentrated on the time-reversalsymmetric superconductors. To keep time reversal symmetry as well as C n symmetry in the superconducting phase, the pairing function has a real eigenvalue under the G operation. Otherwise, the pairing function is not invariant under time reversal symmetry because time reversal changes the eigenvalue of the pairing function. Thus, it is enough to consider only even-or odd- Throughout the classification, we assume that C n commutes with T , i.e., C n T = T C n . It is satisfied in physically relevant systems such as nonmagnetic systems with finite/negligible spin-orbit coupling (class DIII with C n n = -1 and class CI with C n n = 1) and spin-polarized systems without spin-orbit coupling (class BDI with C n n = 1). To study the protection of gapless states on the surface, we need to consider both C n -invariant momenta and generic momenta. At generic momenta, there is no C n -protected gapless point nodes for even-C n pairing because C n -related gapless states have the same U(1) winding number, so they are robust against breaking C n symmetry as long as chiral symmetry is preserved and are thus not C n -protected states. Therefore, only line nodes can appear as anomalous surface states at generic momenta. Since the 1D topological charge of line nodes is protected by rotational symmetries and is not the U(1) winding number protected by chiral symmetry [Table .I], line nodes can appear as C n -protected anomalous surface states. As for the high-symmetry momenta, it is enough to analyze C n -invariant momenta. For other high-symmetry momenta that are invariant under a subgroup of the C n group, the representation of the subgroup at C n -invariant momenta already captures the related topology. For example, let us consider the C 2 -invariant surface momenta X = (π, 0) and Ȳ = (0, π) of a C 4 -symmetric system. The C 2 -protected higher-spin spectrum occuring at X and Ȳ also occur at Γ = (0, 0) and M = (π, π). Since we consider strong topological phases that are robust against translation symmetry breaking that preserves C n symmetry, we can consider a unit cell doubling along both x and y directions (such that four unit cells merge into a large unit cell). By this process, the higher-spin spectrum at X and Ȳ are folded into the Γ point, but the strong topological phase does not change by definition. Therefore, the analysis of at the surface Γ point is enough to study the 3D strong topological phase protected by C 4 symmetry. We thus focus on the C n -invariant line in the 3D Brillouin zone, the 1D winding number on which is responsible for the protection of the gapless states at the corresponding C n -invariant momentum (as shown in the main text for C 2 ). In the following, we first classify the higher-spin Majorana fermions at Γ, i.e., classify 1D winding numbers along the line (0, 0, k z ) in the 3D bulk Brillouin zone. The classification of the 1D winding numbers for two physically relevant classes of spin-orbit coupled systems and spin-SU(2)-symmetric systems were done in Ref. Let us first forget about time reversal symmetry and consider C n and chiral symmetries only. In the case of C 2 symmetry, we have two 1D invariants for each eigensector . Since w = w + +w -is total the winding number, which serves as the 1D topological invariant of the system and is protected by chiral symmetry, there remains only one 1D invariant relevant for the 3D topology protected by the simultaneous presence of C 2 and chiral symmetries. Similary, there are two, three, and five crystalline 1D invariants for C 3 , C 4 , and C 6 symmetries because there are three eigenvalues for , AZ class (Cn) n T 2 P 2 S 2 even-C2 even-C3 even-C4 even-C6 odd-Cn=2,6 odd-C4 complex-Cn and six eigenvalues for for C 6 6 = -1 and C 6 6 = 1, respectively. Thus, in systems with C n and S symmetries, we have independent of the presence of spin-orbit coupling. Let us now consider the effect of time reversal symmetry in chiral-symmetric systems, described by which we derive in Sec. V. Here, s T and s C are defined by T 2 = (-1) s T and P 2 = (-1) s C . First, time reversal symmetry can impose constraints on Z U(1) : it is always trivial when the AZ class is BDI or CII where T 2 = P 2 . Also, in class CI, we have 2Z U(1) instead of Z U(1) because spinless time reversal symmetry forbids an odd 3D winding number, as shown in Sec. IV. Second, the C n -protected invariants Z HSF depends on whether the representation satisfies (C n ) n = 1 or -1. We explicitly count the number of constraints on the Z HSF invariants from time reversal symmetry below. In spin-orbit coupled systems and spin-SU(2)-symmetric systems, the AZ class is DIII and CI, respectively. For spinorbit coupled systems, where (C n ) n = -1, time reversal symmetry constraints are for C 2 eigensectors for C 3 eigensectors, for C 4 eigensectors, and for C 6 eigensectors. Here, we do not count the constraint on the total winding number w = i w i , because it is irrelevant for the 3D topological phase. Thus, by the zero, one, one, and two constraints on C n=2,3,4,6 eigensectors from time reversal symmetry, the topological classification is reduced to For spin-SU(2)-rotation-symmetric systems, where for C 2 eigensectors for C 3 eigensectors, and for C 4 eigensectors, and for C 6 eigensectors. Again, the constraint w = 0 on the total 1D winding number does not affect the classification of 3D topological phases. Thus, we have a classification We can also obtain a classification for the class CI systems with (C n ) n = -1 and the class DIII systems with (C n ) n = 1 although their relation to physical systems is not clear. The classifications are respectively and In spin-polarized systems without spin-orbit coupling, although time reversal and spin-rotation symmetries are broken separately, the combination of time reversal and a π-rotation of spin (around the axis perpendicular to the magnetic order) defines an effective time reversal satisfying T 2 = 1, so the AZ class is BDI. Also, a spinless representation of rotation operators is possible because spin and orbital degrees of freedom are independent, i.e., (C n ) n = 1. In this case, time reversal symmetry constraints on the 1D winding numbers are none for C 2 eigensectors, for C 3 eigensectors, for C 4 eigensectors and for C 6 eigensectors. Time reversal symmetry also imposes that the 3D winding number vanishes. Thus, For completeness, we also consider (C n ) n = -1 in the class BDI. We have constraints for for C 3 eigensectors, for C 4 eigensectors and for C 6 eigensectors. Thus, Similarly, for class CII systems with (C n ) n = 1 and C n = -1, we have and respectively. As shown in the main text, a single doubly charged Majorana Fermi lines can appear when T 2 = -1 and (C 2 T ) 2 = (C 2 P ) 2 = 1 are satisfied (T 2 = 1 excludes the presence of a single doubly charged Majorana Fermi line). In the case of even-C n pairing, the only possibility is to have Let us show that there exists a doubly charged Majorana Fermi line in this symmetry class. We consider the following Majorana Hamiltonian It has symmetries under where m 1,2 (-k) = m 1,2 (k). Nonzero m 1,2 deforms the fourfold degenerate point to a line node, as one can see from the spectrum of which is It shows that the gap closes at E = 0 when k , which forms a loop generically. The Hamiltonian H respects C n=2,4,6 symmetry with even-C n pairing where . Let us note that odd-C 6 pairing is even-C 3 . In this case, C 3 eigensectors have well-defined 1D winding numbers although we cannot assign the 1D winding number for C 6 eigensectors since C 6 and S do not commute. However, C 6 symmetry imposes that two sectors with eigenvalues λ and -λ, which has the same C 3 eigenvalue, has zero winding number. Moreover, since the odd-C 2,6 pairing also forbids a nontrivial 3D winding number, the only possibility is to have Majorana fermions at generic momenta with a trivial total winding number. For odd-C 2,6 pairing, the surface can always be gapped when C 2 2 = 1 because C 2 operator itself can serve as a mass term. To see this, we note that C 2 is a Hermitian matrix because it is a unitary matrix satisfying C 2 2 = 1, and it has the same symmetry property as the Hamiltonian, i.e., We thus consider the cases with C 2 2 = -1 only. A single doubly charged Majorana Fermi line can ppear when T 2 = -1 and (C 2 T ) 2 = (C 2 P ) 2 = 1. This condition is satisfied only when T 2 = C 2 2 = -1 and P 2 = 1 for odd-C 2,6 pairing, which is the case of spin-orbit coupled systems we treat in the main text. The low-energy Hamiltonian takes the form where μ is the chemical potential, and ∆(-k) = -∆(k). It is symmetric under C 2 = iτ z σ z , T = iσ y K, and P = τ y σ y K. If we require C 6 = τ z e -i π 6 σz symmetry, an additional constraint ∆(R 6 k) = -∆(k) is imposed. Table Let us first consider the former case. Since we consider odd-C 2,6 pairing with C 2 2 = -1, we have T 2 = P 2 = -1. We again introduce Here, we take T = iσ y K, P = iτ y K. Then, two possible C 2 representations are C 2 = -iσ z and C 2 = -iτ x σ y . Those two representations are equivalent because they are related by a unitary transformation of the basis by U = e -i π 4 τxσx . We take C 2 = -iσ z . Then, symmetry-allowed perturbations are where Next, we consider (C 2 T ) 2 = -1 and (C 2 P ) 2 = 1. Since (C 2 T ) 2 = -1, C 2 T symmetry imposes Kramers degeneracy at each momentum, so the minimal Majorana Hamiltonian needs four bands and takes the form H min = ρ 0 ⊗ (k x σ x + k y σ y ), where ρ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. It has C 2 T = iρ y σ x K and C 2 P = ρ y σ y K symmetries. The Majorana fermion described by this Hamiltonian carries the U(1) winding number two. Let us overlap two such Majorana fermions with opposite winding numbers to see whether a rotation-protected gapless spectrum can appear. Its Hamiltonian has a 8 × 8 form There are four mass terms preserving C 2 T = iρ y σ x K and C 2 P = iρ y σ y K symmetries, which are where m 1,2,3,4 are constants. We note that C 2 symmetry cannot forbid all mass terms. If we require that C 2 symmetry disallows all mass terms, C 2 anticommutes with the mass terms as well as H 0 . Then, C 2 should be proportional to the chiral operator S = σ z , but C 2 ∝ S is incompatible with the odd-C 2 pairing condition. Since C 2 anticommutes with S = σ z and H 0 , it should be either C 2 = -iτ y σ y , C 2 = -iτ x ρ i σ y for any i = x, y, z, or Let us now show that C 6 symmetry also cannot forbid all mass terms. When C 2 = -iτ y σ y , C 2 symmetry imposes m 1 = 0, and the mass term has the form δH mass = (m 2 ρ x + m 3 ρ y + m 4 ρ z )C 2 . In order for C 6 to eliminate δH mass , C 3 should act nontrivially on all Pauli matrices ρ i=x,y,z (C 2 acts trivially by definition). However, it is impossible because a C 3 rotation leaves at least one dimension invariant in the threedimensional ρ i space: the largest irreducible representation is two-dimensional, and the one-dimensional representation is trivial. Thus, there exists a C 6 -invariant mass term. We can analyze the case with C 2 = -iτ x ρ i=x,y,z σ y in a similar way. We choose i = x for simplicity, but it is straightforward to consider other choices. We have m 2 = 0 due to C 2 symmetry, and δH mass = (m 1 ρ x + m 3 τ z ρ z + m 4 τ z ρ y )C 2 . As in the previous case for ρ i s, σ 1 ≡ ρ x , σ 2 ≡ τ z ρ z , and σ 3 ≡ τ z ρ y satisfy the Lie algebra of Pauli matrices, [σ i , σ j ] = 2i ijk σ k . Again C 2 do not act on these Pauli matrices, and C 3 leaves at least one Pauli matrix invariant, so a mass term is allowed. Finally, when C 2 = -iτ x σ y , the mass term im 1 C 2 is invariant under C 6 . Thus, in all cases, the spectrum can be gapped in a way that respects C 6 symmetry and other internal symmetries T and S. As in the odd-C 6 pairing case, the only possibility is to have Majorana fermions at generic momenta with a trivial total winding number. Odd-C 4 pairing is even-C 2 , but a higher-spin spectrum cannot be protected because C 4 trivializes the 1D winding number in each C 2 eigensector. Also, odd-C 4 symmetry forbids a nontrivial 3D winding number. The anomalous surface states can thus appear as a quartet of Majorana fermions with zero total U(1) winding number or as a doubly charged Majorana Fermi line. A single doubly charged Majorana Fermi line can appear when C 2 2 = T 2 = P 2 = -1 for odd-C 4 pairing. This case is treated in the analysis of even-C 2 pairing above. The only thing to check is whether it is compatible with C 4 symmetry. One can see that the Hamiltonian Eq. ( As we show in the main text, a quartet of Majorana fermions can be protected by C 4 symmetry in the same way as in rotation-protected topological crystalline insulators. They are characterized by the (Z 2 ) M invariant. Such a quartet of Majorana fermions can be protected only in the spin-orbit coupled systems (C 4 4 = T 2 = -1 and P 2 = 1). A point node at generic mometna can be protected when either In the former, the system is either spin-orbit coupled system or spin-SU(2)-symmetric system ((C n ) n = T 2 = 1 and P 2 = -1). Since a d-wave pairing in two-dimensional spin-SU(2)-symmetric systems produces four Majorana fermions in lattice systems, we know that there is no anomaly associated with the existence of four Majorana fermions. (C 2 T ) 2 = -1 and (C 2 P ) 2 = 1 with odd-C 4 pairing can be realized in exotic systems satisfying either C 4 4 = -1, T 2 = 1 and P 2 = 1 or C 4 4 = 1, T 2 = -1 and P 2 = 1. In these cases, C 2 T symmetry imposes Kramers degeneracy at every momenta on the C 4 -invariant surface, and a stable Majorana point node has fourfold degenerate zero mode and carries an even number of winding number. It is nontrivial to see whether a quartet of these Majorana fermions can be protected by crystalline symmetry. Let us thus explicitly write down the low-energy effective Hamiltonian. We first consider C 2z T = iσ y K and C 2z P = K symmetries. The most general form of the fourband Hamiltonian is k y to describe a Majorana fermion. It has winding number two. Let us construct an eight-band Hamiltonian describing an overlap of two Majorana fermions with opposite winding numbers, which is Here, τ is the Pauli matrix for the flavor degrees of freedom. C 2z T -and C 2z P -preserving mass terms are Let us now see whether C 4z that anticommutes with the particle-hole operator can exclude all mass terms. A possible representation for C 2z is a linear combination of elements in {1, τ z } ⊗ {ρ x , ρ z , ρ y σ y } when C 2 2z = 1 and in iτ y ⊗ {ρ x , ρ z , ρ y σ y } ∪ {iσ y } when C 2 2z = -1, if we require that C 2z H 0 (k)C -1 2z = H(-k) and commutes with both C 2z T and C 2z P . Here, we can choose ρ x from {ρ x , ρ z , ρ y σ y } by a transform of basis without affecting the form of H 0 and δH. To see this, let us note that Γ 1 = ρ x , Γ 2 = ρ z , Γ 3 = ρ y σ x , Γ 4 = ρ y σ y , Γ 5 = ρ y σ z form five mutually anticommuting 4 × 4 matrices. Since {ρ x , ρ z , ρ y σ y } = {Γ 1 , Γ 2 , Γ 4 }, we can rotate them fixing Γ 3 = ρ y σ x and Γ 5 = ρ y σ z (consider a SO(2) rotation in a three-dimensional space with Γ 1 , Γ 2 , and Γ 4 as basis). It leaves H 0 invariant, and the form of δH is preserved after a redefinition of m 2 ,m 3 , m 4 . Thus, we have without loss of generality that C 2z = ρ x or τ z ρ x when C 2 2z = 1 [? ] and C 2z = iτ y ρ x when C 2 2z = -1 (we do not consider C 2z = iσ y = iS because it is inconsisent with the assumption of odd-C 4z pairing). Let us see there are no protected surface states. When C 2z = ρ x , we have m 1 = m 2 = 0. Let us write the remaining mass term as δH = τ y ρ x σ x (m 3 -im 4 ρ x σ y ) and note that ρ x σ y = C 2z S anticommutes with C 4z . Since the C 4z transformation of a mass term should be a mass term (because conjugating with C 4z does not change the commutation relation), the only possibility is that either the m 3 term or the m 4 term is invariant under , and the same conclusion is derived. When C 2z = iτ y ρ x , there exists a unique choice C 4z = τ z ρ y σ z e -i π 4 τyρx that eliminates all the mass terms if we forget about symmetry of H 0 . This choice is, however, inconsistent with C 4z symmetry of H 0 . Let us investigate the effect of spin rotation symmetry on the BdG Hamiltonian following Ref. Here, the corresponding Nambu spinor is Ψ↑ = (ĉ ↑k , ĉ † ↓,-k . The spin-up BdG Hamiltonian belongs to class A because there is no nonspatial symmetry constraint. If time reversal symmetry (under T = K) is present, the symmetry constraint where τ y is a Pauli matrix for the particle-hole indices. Therefore, a spin-z-preserving superconductor with time reversal symmetry belongs to the AZ symmetry class AIII. Let us now consider the full spin SU(2) rotation symmetry. Since spin SU(2) rotation symmetry imposes that h ↑↑ (k) = h ↓↓ (k), we can define the spinless BdG Hamiltonian as where we define h(k) ≡ h ↑↑ (k) = h ↓↓ (k) and ∆(k) ≡ ∆ ↑↓ (k). Here, compared to the case without spin rotation symmetry, we have a reversed sign for the condition that the pairing function satisfy: ∆(k) = + † ∆t (-k). Accordingly, the particle-hole operator for the spinless BdG Hamiltonian takes the form which satisfy P 2 = -1. Thus, a spin-SU(2)-symmetric BdG Hamiltonian is in class C. When time reversal symmetry is present, the combination of time reversal and a spin π-rotation defines effective spinless time reversal symmetry satisfying T 2 = +1, so the BdG Hamiltonian belongs to class CI. Up to now, we assume spin-singlet pairing. In spinpolarized normal metals, however, triplet pairing should occur, so the relevant BdG Hamiltonian takes the form where we suppose that spins are polarized along the ↑ direction. It has particle-hole symmetry under where P 2 = 1. While the spin polarization breaks time reversal symmetry and spin rotation symmetry individually, there remains a symmetry under the combination of time reversal and a spin rotation around the axis perpendicular to the spinordering axis. Since this effective time reversal T satisfies T 2 = +1, the BdG Hamiltonian belongs to the class BDI. Here we construct a model of spin-polarized C 2 -protected topological superconductor hosting a spin-3/2 fermion on the surface. This system belongs to the class C 2 2 = T 2 = P 2 = 1. We consider the following normal-state Hamiltonian. where f 1 = sin k x , f 2 = sin k y , and We show the numerically calculated spectrum for μ = -0.2, m 1 = m 2 = 0.2, and ∆ = 1 in Fig. Let us comment on the previous work on two-dimensional spin-3/2 fermions in the literature. About a decade ago, four spin-3/2 fermions called birefringent fermions (described by a variant of Eq. ( Here we show that the Berry phase on a time-reversalinvariant loop is always trivial in spinless systems with time reversal symmetry. From this, it follows that a single doubly charged Majorana Fermi line cannot appear in spinless systems, because it originates from the nontrivial Berry phase in the normal state. A. Constraint from time reversal symmetry Before we study the Berry phase around a time-reversalinvariant loop, let us first summarize the definition and some useful properties of the abelian Berry connection A(k) for the occupied states (i.e., E < 0 states in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism). The abelian Berry connection is defined by When the matrix element of time reversal operator at k is given by which satisfies when T 2 = (-1) s T = ±1, the Berry connetion satisfies the following constraint Now we suppose that the band gap is open on a timereversal-invariant loop l = l 0 + T l 0 , where l 0 is an arc whose starting-and end-points are nonzero k 0 and -k 0 . Then, the Berry phase Φ l on the loop l is where we use in the fourth line that l0 dk , N occ is the number of the occupied states on the loop and use Eq. (49) in the sixth line. Our derivation shows that in spinless systems where T 2 = 1, the Berry phase around a time-reversal-invariant loop is always zero (mod 2π). Thus, band crossing carrying Berry phase π (in particular, a 2D Dirac point) cannot appear at a time-reversal-invariant momentum (TRIM) in spinless systems. Alternatively, the same conclusion can be drawn for a 2D Dirac point by investigating the Hamiltonian. We consider the most general form of an effective two-level Hamiltonian around a TRIM (k = 0). If we take a basis where T = K without loss of generality, we find Since only f 2 is an odd function of k, while a Dirac point at a TRIM requires two independent components of f = (f 1 , f 2 , f 3 ) to be odd in k, we cannot achieve a Dirac point even after considering any other symmetry. We can relate the Berry phase of a Dirac fermion in the normal state to the 1D topological charge of a Majorana Fermi line as follows. Let us recall that a Majorana Fermi line can be realized on the surface of a topological superconductor when (C 2 T ) 2 = (C 2 P ) 2 = 1 and (C 2 T )S = S(C 2 T ) on the surface, where S is the Hermitian chiral operator [See Sec. I and Table . II]. If we choose a basis in which S = diag[1 N ×N , -1 N ×N ] and C 2 T = K where 1 N ×N denotes the N × N identity matrix, the surface BdG Hamiltonian takes the following off-diagonal form due to SH BdG (k) + H BdG (k)S = 0: where O(k) is real-valued because of C 2 T = K symmetry, so that it can be continuously deformed to an element of the orthogonal group O(N ) without closing the band gap. The 0D and 1D topological charges of Majorana Fermi lines are given by the zeroth and first homotopy classes of O(k), Here, we study the symmetry properties of the 1D and 3D winding numbers under crystalline and time reversal symmetries. Let G be a point group symmetry operator. Then, the 3D winding number in G-symmetric systems satisfies where the Hamiltonian H is G-symmetric, and the sign in the last line indicates the G-parity of the pairing function where R G k is the natural transformation of k under G. It shows that w 3D = 0 for odd-C n pairing, even-M , or even-I pairing. This is consistent with the constraint on the sum of winding numbers carried by MFs on G-invariant surfaces for G = C n or M . Let l be a G-invariant (invariant up to orientation reversal) loop in a 2D Brillouin zone. The winding number w l around the loop then satisfies where we use that G•l = (det G) l in the fifth line. Since w l = 0 for any G-invariant loop in the case of odd-C n or even-M pairing, the total winding number in the surface Brillouin zone should be zero. Let us also consider the 1D winding number w 1D defined on a noncontractible loop, which is a 1D Brillouin zone. We have where the sign in fron of s G captures the G-parity of the pairing function, and s G = ±1 is defined by Gk = s G k. Similarly, one can show that for time reversal symmetry, Note that the requirement S 2 = 1, needed for the above expression of the winding number, is satisfied when we define S as with the convention T C = CT , where T 2 = (-1) s T and C 2 = (-1) s C . Therefore, Thus, we have This shows that the winding number is trivial in the classes BDI and CII where (-1) s T +s C = +1. One can also derive In contrast, we have such that the winding number in the 1D Brillouin zone is trivial in the classes DIII and CI. More generally, if we consider a C n -invariant line, the winding number w λ 1D for each eigensector of C n rotational symmetry with eigenvalue λ satisfies where ρ i=x,y,z and σ i=x,y,z are the Pauli matrices for the orbital and spin degrees of freedom. It is symmetric under The corresponding Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian has the form of the doubled Z 2 topological superconductor. where τ i=0,x,y,z are Pauli matrices for the Nambu space, and we introduce 8 × 8 mutually anticommuting Gamma matrices where the four signs show their commutation (+) or anticommutation (-) relations with in order. One can see that a superconducting gap ∆Γ 6 is allowed for even-C 2 pairing, which shows that the bulk topology is trivial. However, C 4 symmetry forbids the bulk mass term because C odd 4z = τ z e -i π n ρzσz anticommutes with it. Therefore, the mass term is prohibited in the translationinvariant bulk for any odd-C n=2,4,6 pairing. However, ∆Γ 6 can describe the pairing gap on the boundary. We can see this by allowing the position dependence of the pairing in real space Here, M (r) is the bulk mass term which approaches to a constant value deep in the bulk and to zero on the boundary, and ∆(r) is the surface pairing function that is nonzero only near the boundary, where translation symmetries are broken. Since ∆(R n r) = -∆(r) for odd-C n pairing, the pairing gap has to close at n (mod 2n) points on the boundary. These are the locations where Majorana zero modes appear (often called Majorana corner modes Here we explain the topological invariant protecting the multiplet of Majorana fermions [a quartet of Majorana fermions is shown in Fig. Before we study the topological invariant around a C ninvariant loop, let us first see how C n symmetry constrains the abelian Berry connection A(k) for the occupied states. When the matrix element of C n operator is given by the Berry connetion satisfies the following constraint In spin-orbit coupled systems with both C n=2,4,6 and time reversal symmetries, we can define a Z 2 topological invariant Q n over a 1/n segment of a C n -invariant loop. We consider the Berry phase around a closed loop connecting Γ = (0, 0), k 0 , and R n k 0 for a nonzero k 0 [Fig. where we define Q k0 n on a line connecting k 0 and R n k 0 : This quantity does not depend on the choice of the initial point k We can see that Q n is quantized in the presence of time reversal symmetry by taking a real gauge where C 2 T |u nk = |u nk . In a real gauge, A(k) = 0 and D(k) belongs to an orthogonal group such that det D = ±1. From this, it follows that Q n = ±1 in a real gauge. Moreover, since Q n is gauge invariant, holds in any gauge. As is clear from the definition, Q n is closely related to Φ k0 1/n , and they are equivalent for the purpose of studying the local stability of gapless points within the 1/n sector of the Brillouin zone. In fact, they are identical when the spectrum is gapped at Γ because det D(Γ) = 1 due to Kramers degeneracy. However, when we study the global stability of gapless surface states protected by C n symmetry, we need to use the invariant Q n rather than the quantized Berry phase Φ k0 1/n . It is because Φ k0 1/n cannot be defined in the case where all the gap closing points gather at the Γ point [Fig. This Z 2 invariant Q n is the topological invariant carried by the gapless surface states of C n=2,4,6 -protected topological insulators proposed by Fang and Fu Our invariant Q n is equivalent to the Wilson line invariant defined to capture fragile topology in C 6 -symmetric systems in Ref. where is the projection to the occupied states at momentum k. Since the projection satisfies n in C n -symmetric systems, the Wilson line has the following property. Thus, the Wilson loop operator over a C n -invariant loop with initial point k 0 is given by where we use C n-1 n = (-1) s T C -1 n . Then, if we define the C n -Wilson line by it is independent of k 0 and gauge invariant up to similarity transformations, such that its spectrum is gauge invariant. This C. Explicit calculation for a spin-half fermion Q n can be exactly calculated analytically in the Dirac (or Majorana) point limit. Let us first begin with a twofold degenerate Dirac point at the Γ point described by Af half filling, one state is occupied at nonzero k, and it takes the form The matrix element of the rotation operator is given by On the other hand, the Berry connection is given by such that We have Thus, in the case of fourfold Dirac point formed by two identical twofold Dirac points, the rotation-protected topological charge is given by where s and s are defined for the rotation operator acting on h m and h l , respectively. It is consistent with the analysis based on the low-energy effective Hamiltonian in Ref. In the above, we show that C n -protected surface states of the Fang-Fu type where ρ i=x,y,z and σ i=x,y,z are Pauli matrices for the orbital and spin degrees of freedom. This system has symmetries under T = iσ y K, C 2z = -iσ z , and I = ρ z . It has one Dirac cone on each surface whose chirality depending on the sign ±. From this we construct the Hamiltonian of a C 2 -protected topological insulator as shows that there appears two eigenstates of the C 2 -Wilson line with θ 2 = π. Since the bulk is gapped, this nontrivial value should be attributed to the gapless surface states. One is from the top surface, and the other is from the bottom surface because of inversion symmetry. Thus, we conclude that Q 2 = 1 mod 2 for each of the top and bottom surface states. A. Dirac-semimetal-based model We consider two lattice models in the main text. One is a Dirac semimetal with gap-opening terms. It is where ρ i=x,y,z and σ i=x,y,z are Pauli matrices for orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively, and As we state in the main text, ∆(k) = ∆ 1a sin k z = ∆ e sin k z σ z is the unique even-C 2z pairing function that leads to a rotation-protected topological superconductor. Let us explain why it is so. They are ∆ 1a , ∆ 1b , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 in Table 