In this work, the energy band structures of BGaN and BAlN alloys are systematically studied through first-principles calculation using HSE hybrid density functional theory by MedeA-VASP. Direct-indirect bandgap transition of BGaN alloys at B content around 44% and that of BAlN alloys at B content about 24% have been identified. The variation of electron and hole effective masses of both materials at different B compositions have also been demonstrated. A large change in hole effective masses of BGaN and BAlN alloys from B=0% to 25% has been observed. Finally, a picture of energy bandgap versus lattice constant of III-nitride family with boron is shown. Wide bandgap III-nitride materials have attracted great attention due to their excellent properties for device applications. Recently, boron-containing III-nitrides have been added to the family due to their potential in adding more tunability to the bandgap and lattice parameter, in addition to other electronic properties For high electron mobility transistors, BGaN layers could be used as semi-insulating buffer layer or back-barrier layer to provide a polarization-induced band discontinuity and a resistive barrier originating from its excellent insulation properties The growth of BAlN and BGaN is still challenging due to a large difference in atomic radius between boron and aluminum and gallium, which is expected to result in a wide miscibility gap and phase separation at several percent of boron. Growing BGaN layers by using different substrates have been demonstrated, and BGaN layers with the boron content up to 5.5% and 4.3% have been reported in BGaN deposited on SiC substrates and AlN/sapphire templates, respectively In this work, the band structures of BxGa1-xN and BxAl1-xN are systematically studied through first-principles calculation based on density functional theory (DFT) using hybrid functional of Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE) in the MedeA-VASP code. The band structures of the studied alloys with varying B compositions were calculated and poltted. The direct and indirect bandgap energies are extracted and plotted as a function of B composition, and a directindirect bandgap crossover is observed. Furthermore, the variation of direct and indirect bandgap energies are further broken down for the comparison at different high symmetry points. The directindirect bandgap transition of BxGa1-xN alloys at B concentration around 44%, and at 24% for BxAl1-xN. Additionally, we extracted the electron and hole effective masses of both kinds of materials from their bandgap structures. The variations of effective masses at different B compositions have been demonstrated, and a drop in hole effective masses of BGaN and BAlN alloys from B=0% to 25% has been observed. Finally, a figure of Energy bandgap versus Lattice constant of Boron with III-Nitride family has been drawn through our first-principles calculation. In this work, the band structures of BxAl1-xN and BxGa1-xN alloys are systematically studied through first-principles calculation based on DFT. Since GaN is a direct-bandgap semiconductor and BN is indirect-bandgap, a crossover from direct to indirect bandgap will occur. The DFT calculations use hybrid functional of Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof (HSE) as implemented in the MedeA-VASP code. To cover different compositions of B, the supercell approach is applied. For the structure optimization process, all the structures have been fully relaxed using general gradient approximation (GGA-PBEsol) exchange-correlation with Hellman-Feynman force less than 0.02eV/Å The calculated band structures for the BxGa1-xN system are shown below (Figure To calculate the effective masses of electrons and holes near conduction bands minima and valence bands maxima, respectively, the band structures were calculated around those points with higher sampling. After that, the equation below was used to calculate those effective masses (Figure The calculated effective light hole (lh) and heavy hole (hh) masses drop significantly between 0 and 25% boron composition (Figure The same process is repeated for BAlN and the results are similarly show in Figures In this work we report the electronic band structures of BAlN and BGaN alloys using DFT. We also report some band structure dependent properties such as the bandgap and the direct-to-indirect bandgap transition and electron and hole effective masses. We find that the direct to indirect transition for BGaN and BAlN are near boron compositions of 44% and 24%, respectively. A huge drop in hh effective mass is observed for both BGaN and BAlN at boron compositions below 25%. A similar -but smaller-drop for lh is found in BGaN only. A figure showing the bangaps of nitrides in the wurtzite phase and their lattice parameters is made summarizing the results. This work should guide material growth experiment as interest in boron-containing nitrides increases. 