We use the method of free energy minimization to analyse static meniscus shapes for crystal ribbon growth systems. To account for the possibility of multivalued curves as solutions to the minimization problem, we choose a parametric representation of the meniscus geometry. Using Weierstrass' form of the Euler-Lagrange equation we derive analytical solutions that provide explicit knowledge on the behavior of the meniscus shapes. Young's contact angle and Gibbs pinning conditions are analysed and shown to be a consequence of the energy minimization problem with variable end-points. For a given ribbon growth configuration, we find that there can exist multiple static menisci that satisfy the boundary conditions. The stability of these solutions is analysed using second order variations and are found to exhibit saddle node bifurcations. We show that the arc length is a natural representation of a meniscus geometry and provides the complete solution space, not accessible through the classical variational formulation. We provide a range of operating conditions for hydro-statically feasible menisci and illustrate the transition from a stable to spill-over configuration using a simple proof of concept experiment. These investigations, which have found their confirmation in striking agreement with careful experiments, are among the most beautiful enrichments of natural science that we owe to the great mathematician. -Carl Fredrich Gauss on Laplace's theory of capillary action, which was later refined by him into its modern variational form. The Young-Laplace equation was developed by The existence of a static meniscus plays a critical role in capillary-shaped ribbon growth systems such as the Dendritic web growth Figure Several well known ribbon growth techniques can be characterized by the angle (β) at which the ribbon is pulled from the melt as illustrated in Figure Another family of ribbon growth methods, characterized by their low pull angles, are the Low Angle Silicon Sheet (LASS) process, and the Horizontal Ribbon Growth (HRG) process The main objective of this paper is to analyse these instabilities of the meniscus for the horizontal ribbon growth processes, while at the same time keeping the analysis general enough to be extended to other problems of physical or engineering importance. The meniscus profiles for HRG were first investigated by Classical variational analysis has proven useful in the study of meniscus stability for capillary based processes. For the Czochralski process, Outside the area of crystal growth, variational principles have been used to prove the existence and stability of menisci shapes for different capillary geometries Very recently It is important to note that heat transfer and fluid flow also play a critical role in capillary shaped crystal growth processes The free energy (∆U ) of the three phase system consisting of a rigid fixed ribbon, a gas and a liquid bounded by the interface x = x(y), as seen in Figure The right-hand side is divided into two terms. The first term represents the potential energy due to hydro-static pressure (∆P ). The second term represents the free surface energy of the interface due to surface tension (γ). H is the maximum height of the meniscus and corresponds to the length of integration in the vertical direction in the Cartesian co-ordinate system. The Euler-Lagrange equation for the variational problem that results from minimizing the free energy gives the Young-Laplace equation: (2) Analytic solutions have been developed for the Young-Laplace equation ( some cases the solution to geometric problems that use the classical variational formulation cannot be described by functions of the form x = x(y) in a Cartesian coordinate system. For example, the multi-valued meniscus of a non-wetting sessile drop on an incline plane cannot be described using single-valued functions Instead of denoting the interface in a Cartesian frame as y = y(x) or x = x(y), we represent them in parametric form x(s), y(s). The parameter s is chosen such that x(s) and y(s) come out as single valued functions with respect to the parameter. The reformulated free energy expression with respect to the parameter s is where s t is the total length of integration. The first term accounts for the hydro-static energy of the system. Due to the presence of gravity, the pressure in the liquid is given as a function of height, ∆P = ρg r (h -y), where ρ is the density of the liquid and g r is the acceleration due to gravity. The second term represents the surface energy of the interface due to interfacial tension γ. In performing this transformation, the value of ∆U must remain invariant for any type of parametric form chosen for x and y. Weierstrass showed that the necessary and sufficient condition for the invariance of ∆U is that the function g be homogeneous and of degree one in the variables x and y [Oskar Bolza, 2018, p. 118], i.e. g(x, y, kx , ky ) = kg(x, y, x , y ), ( where the prime represents differentiation with respect to s. From this homogeneity condition, there follow several relationships between the partial derivatives of G, which are useful in constructing the expressions for the first and second variation of ∆U . Non-dimensionalizing length scales with respect to the capillary length, λ c = γ/(ρg r ) yields, The homogeneity condition is not affected by non-dimensionalization. The objective is to find conditions on the stationary curves X(S), Y (S) that set the first variation of U to zero. This exercise leads to the well known Young-Laplace equation in parametric form. However, we briefly provide some important steps in the derivation as they will be useful in developing the forthcoming stability analysis. Let ξ(S) and η(S) be small perturbations to the curves X(S) and Y (S), with as small as desired. The end points on the curve are kept fixed i.e. ξ and η are taken to be zero at the end points. The energy of this neighbouring curve is given by Applying Taylor's formula to the integrand, we obtain that We call δ U the first variation of the energy functional U. For X(S), Y (S) to be a critical point of U, we infer that δ U = 0, i.e., for otherwise, we could increase or decrease the value of U by choosing to be of the same or a different sign of the integral in (5), respectively. Using integration by parts and assuming continuous derivatives of the functions involved, we arrive at the Euler-Lagrange equations: Due to the homogeneity condition (4), the two equations in (6) are not independent of each other, as we proceed to show. Differentiating (4) with respect to k, and substituting k = 1, yields Differentiating this expression with respect to X or Y , we obtain where G 1 is the common value of these expressions. Differentiating (7) partially with respect to X and Y we get Using ( This equation is the Weierstrass' form of the Euler-Lagrange equation. Evaluating the necessary terms we have that So the Euler-Lagrange equation becomes: (13) The differential equation ( where Ω is the tangential angle to the meniscus. These substitutions define the independent variable S to be the arc length of the meniscus and turn the Young-Laplace equation into This transformation splits the Young-Laplace equation into a system of 3 ODEs. We set the initial conditions of the meniscus to have general pinning conditions To find an analytic solution to the system of ODE's we differentiate (15) and substitute ( We observe that the dynamics of the tangent angle (Ω) are similar to the dynamics of a pendulum or an elastic rod where A is the constant of integration. For a simple pendulum, A defines the energy of the system. In our case, A represents the horizontal force balance of hydrostatic pressure, 1 2 ρg(h -y) 2 , and surface tension, σ cos Ω, along any longitudinal cross section of the meniscus. Using the initial conditions Ω(0) = θ and Ω (0) = H, we evaluate the integration constant as, Using the trigonometric identity cos Ω = 1 -2 sin 2 Ω/2, we arrive at The solution to this differential equation can be explicitly written down in terms of Legendre elliptic and Jacobi amplitude functions, where F (u|m) and is the incomplete elliptic integrals of the first kind and am(u|m) is the Jacobi amplitude function. Y (S) can be calculated directly using ( where dn(u|m) is the Jacobi delta amplitude function. Using the result (15), ( E (u|m) is the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind. Using these analytic expressions, we plot the interface for different values of pinning angle θ as shown in figure Certain sections of the curves in Figure In this section we consider the stability of the critical curves when the end-points are considered fixed. Using Taylor series representation, the second variation in parametric form is expressed as: where In order for the curve described by Y (S) and X(S) to be a minimum-and therefore stable-its second variation should be positive; so the value of the integral above must be always positive in the range of integration. Using a lengthy factorization, Weierstrass transformed the second variation into the classical quadratic functional In our application we find from ( and G 2 satisfies the following relationships: The form of the integral (25) allowed Weierstrass to apply the classical results of the calculus of variations. Namely, Legendre's necessary condition and Jacobi's test. Legendre's necessary condition for a minimum requires that along the stationary curve described by X(S) and Y (S). Jacobi's test requires that the solution to the differential equation, must not have conjugate points in the integration interval, i.e: For otherwise if u(S) = 0, it is possible to find a perturbation centered around S such that the second variation is negative. The Legendre test is satisfied by virtue of (11). In order to have the Jacobi test satisfied we require that the solution to the differential equation must not have conjugate points in the interval of integration. Equation ( Thus, we obtain that for some constant Dividing the expression above by Y 2 we get: So the condition for stability becomes The integral in ( sin(Ω(S)) = 0 ∀ S ∈ (0, S t ), (30) We apply the theory developed in the previous sections to study the properties of menisci in a silicon ribbon growth process while keeping in mind that they can be applied to a range of other problems of physical and engineering importance such as finding the size and stability properties of droplets. To characterize figure 1 in more detail, the edge of the crucible is considered to be rectangular (φ = 90 • ). One end of the meniscus is considered to remain pinned at the edge of the crucible and the other end to intersect the ribbon at a fixed angle (σ). The nature of the angle (σ) depends on whether solidification or melting takes place at the triple point, in which case σ is either the growth angle or the contact angle respectively. To maintain consistency in our analysis and for the sake of convenience, we assume σ to be a constant value of (11 The plot on the left in Figure Let x * and y * be the parametric coordinates describing the equation for a ribbon. We assume the shape of the ribbon to be a straight line starting from l c = -5.35cm (L c = -10) and represented by The desired solution is then given by any curve described in Figure We use a Newton-Raphson solver to find curves that satisfy (31). Two curves, one stable and one unstable, are found and illustrated in Figure The shape of the meniscus is influenced by the pull angle (β) through the boundary conditions described in (31). To get a better description of the meniscus multiplicity observed above, we vary the pulling angle to evaluate the feasibility of stationary menisci. Figure Representative meniscus shapes are drawn along the solution curves to describe their geometry for a few choice of pull angles. The dashed curves describe the family of unstable solutions, characterized by a point of zero slope where the Jacobi condition is not met. In the neighbourhood of this point, it is possible to perturb the curve such that the second order variation is negative and the solution is not a minimum. Vice versa, the solid curves describe the statically stable solutions Figure We observe that it is not always possible to find a feasible solution for any given value of pull angle. Such an operational limit was also observed in the thermal-capillary simulations performed by Given the narrow range of operation for negative pull angles, it would be desirable to operate the ribbon growth process at positive pull angles, beyond 4.5 • for the case of H = 1, as there is no upper limit to the height of the pulling angles. The feasible region on the right illustrates the variety of meniscus shapes that can be achieved for positive pull angles. The low-angle silicon sheet (LASS) growth process, where the ribbon is extracted from the melt at a slight positive angle with the horizontal takes advantage of this idea. A successful design for a ribbon growth process requires understanding the effect of the melt height (H) on the stability of the meniscus. It is therefore useful to study how the melt height influences the landscape of the solution space described in Section 6.1. Figure Representative meniscus shapes have been drawn for some chosen values of H and β. At some places, a plus symbol has been used to denote the point where the menisci belong. For H < 2 (h < 10.7 mm) we see that it is possible to find a stable meniscus for pull angles as large as 90 • . At this point the arrangement corresponds to vertical ribbon growth techniques like WEB, EFG. What is interesting to note is that as the pull angle increases, the meniscus becomes longer and the meniscus-ribbon triple point moves further away from the crucible edge. This observation is the guiding principle behind low-angle silicon sheet (LASS) growth process and circumvents the problem of ribbon freeze-over by moving the triple phase contact point on the ribbon away from the crucible edge. As the melt height increases, we see that above H = 0.2, the feasible solution space splits. The portion in between the regions is the melt spill-over region. In this region it is not possible to form a stable meniscus to support the melt from spilling over the crucible. Since the solution space for positive pull angles is much larger than the negative pull angles, the scale for the negative pull angles has been increased to meaningfully show the feasible solution space. Notice also that there is an upper limit to the height of the melt that the meniscus can accommodate. Beyond this height, a meniscus can no longer exist and the melt spills over from the crucible edge. The feasibility region shown in Figure A miniature proof-of-concept experiment is used to study and illustrate the mechanism of melt spill over in a HRG configuration when the pull angle is varied. A polyethylene ribbon (ρ pe = 0.93g/cm 3 < ρ water ) rests completely on top of the water contained in a plastic bath such that the inclination with respect to the top surface of the water can be varied. From Section 6.2, we observed a range of infeasible pull angles around the horizontal position (β = 0) when H was greater than 0.2. To test this hypothesis, we induce spill-over by slowly decreasing the angle of inclination with the water surface while photographing the changes in the shape of the water meniscus. Figure This paper provides a parametric formulation and a solution to the generalized static stability problem for the meniscus in a ribbon growth process. Due to the geometric nature of the meniscus problem, we observe that the method of parametric representation is not only preferable but also one which furnishes a complete solution. Using Weierstrass' variational theory, we found analytic expressions describing the shape of the meniscus and compared it with the family of Euler's elastic curves. This similarity can be used to exchange concepts from elasticity theory in order to study stability and bifurcations of menisci shapes in liquids and vice versa. The stability of the meniscus is evaluated using Legendre and Jacobi test conditions. A range of stable operating conditions are provided over the parameter space of melt height and pull angle. Two bifurcation points are observed which divide the solution space into two regions. The infeasibility zone between the two solution spaces, which include the horizontal position of the ribbon, didn't have a stable meniscus solution to support the ribbon. Growing a ribbon in this region leads to melt spilling over from the meniscus until the melt height decreases to the stable region. This argument is supported by doing a simple proof of concept experiment, in which the phenomena of spill-over is created using a polyethylene ribbon resting on a bath of water. Given the vast range of stable positive pull angles, we conclude that it is appropriate to incline the ribbon above a certain threshold angle to ensure stability of ribbon growth as the horizontal configuration was statically unstable. Figure The parametric Young-Laplace equation ( Consider the free energy formulation for the meniscus x(s), y(s) as defined in section 3 and add the surface energy of the solid boundaries in contact with the air and the liquid. For simplicity, we briefly consider the case where only the end point at the origin is varied while the end point at s t is considered fixed. In this case, ∆U = st 0 -∆P xy ds + γ x + y ds + A 1 γ 1 + A 2 γ 2 , where A 1 and A 2 are the areas of the solid crucible in contact with the melt and the air respectively. γ 1 , γ 2 are the interfacial energies of the melt and the air boundaries with the crucible (see figure As before, we introduce small perturbations of ξ(s) and η(s) into x(s) and y(s). These perturbations are fixed at s t such that ξ(s t ) = η(s t ) = 0. Using the definition (3), the first variation in energy is given by The first term can be interpreted as a dot product between δr = [ξ(0), η(0)] and t = [x (0), y (0)], which can be written in terms of the cosine of the angle between them. When θ ≤ θ e the meniscus recedes horizontally along the crucible boundary until it gets pinned to the inner corner of the crucible. An extended range of pinning angles, as illustrated by the shaded region in figure • ) across all operating conditions. The pull angle (β) and the height of the melt (h) serve as degrees of freedom. It is of interest to find stable operating regimes for the meniscus over the parameter space of β and h. The required material properties are summarized in table 1 and are used to dimensionalize the equations and the results.