Pentamode metamaterials are a type of extremal designer metamaterials which are able to demonstrate high rigidity in one direction and extremely high compliance in other directions. Pentamodes can, therefore, be considered as building blocks of exotic materials with any arbitrarily selected thermodynamically admissible elasticity tensor. The pentamode lattices can then be envisioned to be combined to construct intermediate extremal materials such as quadramodes, trimodes, and bimodes. In this study, we constructed several primary types of anisotropic pentamode lattices (with midpoint positioning of 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 42% of the main unit cell diagonal) and then combined them mutually to explore the dependence of elastic properties of hybrid pentamodes on those of individual constructing lattices. Several anisotropic individual and hybrid pentamode lattice structures were produced using MultiJet Additive Manufacturing technique and then mechanically tested under compression. Finite element models were also created using COMSOL Multiphysics package. Two-component hybrid pentamode lattices composed of individual lattices with extensively different (as large as of 2 order of magnitudes) / ratios were constructed and analysed. It was demonstrated that it is possible to design and construct composite intermediate extremal materials with arbitrary eigen values in the elastic tensor. It is concluded that the elastic , shear , and bulk moduli of the hybrid structure are the superpositions of the corresponding moduli of the individual lattice structures. The Poisson's ratio of the hybrid pentamode structure equals that of individual structure with higher Poisson's ratio. The yield stress of the hybrid pentamode lattice structure depends on the elastic moduli of the constructing lattice structures as well as yield stress of the weaker lattice structure. Mechanical metamaterials are rationally designed lattices that demonstrate exotic mechanical properties such as negative compressibility double negativity Pentamode metamaterials were first introduced theoretically by Milton and Cherkaev in 1995 Mathematically speaking, pentamodes are materials that have one extremely high pressure-type eigenvalue in their elasticity tensor, while the values of other eigenvalues in the elasticity tensor are negligible. Pentamodes can, therefore, be considered as building blocks of exotic materials with any arbitrarily selected thermodynamically admissible elasticity tensor. The pentamode lattices can then be envisioned to be combined to construct intermediate extremal materials such as quadramodes, trimodes, and bimodes In their early work, Milton and Cherkaev While anisotropy in design of pentamodes have been previously studies acoustically in In this study, the small diameter = 300 and the large diameter = 1100 was used in all the models. The unit cell size was also kept constant = 8 mm. We chose seven particular positions for P with distances from the vertex of 0.1 , 0.15 , 0.2 , 0.25 , 0.3 , 0.35 , and 0.42 (Figure Other than that point, the maximum differences between numerical and experimental values for relative density, elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, and yield stress are 10.6%, 8%, 6.6%, and 12.6%, respectively (Figure As expected, the variation of relative density with respect to its diagonal location is almost symmetrical and varies in a small range (0.046 < < 0.054). As seen in Figure Accordingly, the ratio / (also known as figures-of-merit, FOM) has a bell-shaped curve with peak point of 50 at 25% L and minimum of ≈3 at 10% L and 42% L (Figure As for the case of hybrid pentamode metamaterial, the differences between the numerical and experimental values of relative density, elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, and yield stress for the hybrid pentamode were 22.1%, 2.7%, 8.1%, and 38.8%, respectively (experimental results being: = 0.131, = 545 kPa, = 0.507, and = 12.87 kPa). The relative density, elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, and yield stress and values of FE hybrid models constructed from individual lattice structures with different %L is demonstrated in Figure As for the yield stress, it is expected that the yield stress of the hybrid structure is determined by the load which causes the weaker structure reach its maximum load. If two structures I (compliant) and II (stiff) with elastic modulus and yield stress of 2 , ,2 , and 22 , ,22 are combined, the ratio of the applied load sustained by the more compliant structure is (3 4 53 44 ) 6, where 6 is total external load applied on the structure. Therefore, the maximum stress in the compliant component in the absence and presence of the second stiff component II is 789,2 and ,2 . The yield strength curve obtained from this hypothesis and the numerical yield strength curve are demonstrated in Figure As for the Poisson's ratio, as long as the two individual structures do not interact with each other, the lattice with higher Poisson's ratio expands larger. As the imposed strain on both individual structures is identical (and equal to that of the hybrid structure), it is expected (and later confirmed numerically) that the Poisson's ratio of the hybrid structure is determined by the Poisson's ratio of the individual structure with higher Poisson's ratio value. Comparison of the expected and numerical results shows their good accordance in both topology shape and range (i.e. 0.36 < < 0.63). In summary, the effect of varying the midpoint positioning of the pentamode structure (as a way of making pentamode anisotropic) on its mechanical properties was investigated numerically and experimentally. Moving the midpoint point along the main diagonal from the vertex to the centroid of the unit cell decreases elastic modulus, shear modulus, and Poisson's ratio almost steadily. The yield stress and bulk modulus have their peaks at the midpoint original position (i.e. %25 L). Hybrid intermediate pentamode lattice structures were also constructed from individual pentamode lattice structures with different B/G ratios (with difference in B/G as large as 2 orders of magnitude). First and foremost, it was demonstrated that it is possible to design and construct composite intermediate extremal pentamode materials with arbitrary eigen values in the elastic tensor. Furthermore, it was concluded that the relative density, elastic modulus, shear modulus, and bulk modulus of the hybrid structure can be determined by superposition of the noted properties of the individual lattice structures. The results also showed that Poisson's ratio of the hybrid pentamode structure equals that of individual structure with higher Poisson's ratio. Moreover, the yield stress of the hybrid pentamode lattice structure depends on the elastic moduli of the constructing lattice structures as well as yield stress of the weaker lattice structure. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 