Metal-halide perovskites are rapidly emerging as solution-processable optical materials for light emitting applications. Here we adopt a plasmonic metamaterial approach to enhance photoluminescence emission and extraction of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) thin films, based on the Purcell effect. We show that hybridization of the active metal-halide film with resonant nanoscale sized slits carved into a gold film can yield more than one order of magnitude enhancement of luminescence intensity, and nearly threefold reduction of luminescence lifetime. This shows the effectiveness of resonant nanostructures in controlling metal-halide perovskite light emission properties over a tunable spectral range, a viable approach toward highly efficient perovskite light emitting devices and single-photon emitters. Efficient nanoscale light sources are key elements for the development of advanced nanophotonic circuits and integrated thin-film optoelectronic devices. Thanks to their exceptional optoelectronic properties, hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites are gaining prominence for solid-state lighting and displays. We selected a basic metamaterial design, a periodic array of nanoscale slits carved onto a continuous metallic film, which supports dipolar resonances in the visible spectral range whose wavelength is determined by the slit length. Six metamaterial nanoslit arrays (30 x 30 μm 2 squares) were fabricated by Focused Ion Beam (FIB) milling of a 30 nm thin gold layer, evaporated over a glass substrate. The arrays feature an increasing slit length L, ranging from 100 nm to 150 nm, in steps of 10 nm, a constant slit width W ≈ 35 nm, and a square lattice periodicity of 2L. Figure The photoluminescence spectrum of the MAPbI3 perovskite film peaks around the optical bandgap energy of ~1.62 eV, with relatively narrow full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of ~50 nm. Figures The experimental optical spectra were measured under normal incidence illumination using a microphotospectrometer with a circular collection aperture of 25 μm diameter, which allowed removing edge effects from the metamaterial arrays. The simulated spectra were obtained by threedimensional full-wave electromagnetic simulations using standard literature data for gold The effect of the nanoslit gold metamaterials on the light emission properties of MAPbI3 perovskite films was evaluated by measuring both steady-state and transient photoluminescence in three configurations: MAPbI3 film on glass, MAPbI3 film on gold (with ~5 nm SiO2 spacer) and MAPbI3 film on each of the six nanoslits metamaterial arrays (with ~5 nm SiO2 spacer). In the steady-state measurements, we excited the perovskite film using a ps pulsed diode laser and measured the emitted light with a scanning monochromator spectrometer, while time resolved measurements were performed using a ~100 fs optical parametric oscillator (OPA) as pump and a streak-camera to record the photoluminescence. We have chosen an excitation wavelength of lambda=405 nm, detuned from the metamaterials' resonance, and focused the laser beam to a spot size of about 15 μm to avoid any direct effect of the pump on the interaction between MAPbI3 emission and nanoslits's resonances. The steady-state results indicate that the photoluminescence of the MAPbI3 perovskite film is strongly enhanced by the interaction with the metamaterials and that the degree of enhancement can be controlled by the design of the nanoslits resonators. The measurements were performed selecting the polarization of the emitted light, whereas the polarization of the pump light was left unchanged Figures A direct manifestation of the enhancement of radiative emission rates by the Purcell effect is the reduction of photoluminescence lifetimes. The hybridization of the MAPbI3 film with the nanoslit metamaterials induces a significant reduction of both τ1 and τ2 (Figures Note that the Purcell factor reported here shall be considered as a lower bound, since time-resolved data were acquired for unpolarised emission while steady-state measurements indicate that nanoslit cavities affect almost exclusively TM polarized photoluminescence. Furthermore, all measurements were performed at room temperature, and a further increase in radiative rates could be expected at lower temperatures. Thus, the improvements in luminescence properties of perovskite films coupled to resonant metamaterial structures registered so far (enhancement of photoluminescence intensity, narrowing of steady-state linewidths and shortening of SE lifetimes) could arguably lead to a reduction of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) and lasing thresholds, an important step towards integrated perovskites light emitting devices. In summary, inspired by the proven ability of metamaterials to manipulate radiation, promote light-matter interaction and facilitate emission at any wavelength and across numerous types of media, we hybridized a metal-halide perovskite film with nanoslits gold metamaterials to control and enhance its optical emission. We demonstrated a substantial increase of the intrinsic photoluminescence intensity by more than one order of magnitude when the metamaterial resonance was tuned to the perovskite intrinsic emission peak. This increase in photoluminescence intensity is accompanied by a significant reduction in the spontaneous emission lifetimes, clearly indicating that the enhancement is radiative in nature. Improved performance and additional functionalities can be foreseen by optimization of the metamaterial structures and their coupling to the perovskite films (e.g., better permeation of the perovskite precursors into the nanostructured scaffold before conversion and crystallization). Similar design principles could also be adopted in the layout of electrodes Device Fabrication. The nanoslits metamaterials were fabricated by depositing a 30 nm thin film of gold, via thermal evaporation, over a glass coverslip substrate, followed by focused ion beam (FIB) milling, with a FEI Helios 650 dual FIB/SEM system, of the metamaterial arrays of nanoslits of increasing length and the constant width (nominally ~30 nm), and a second round of thermal evaporation of ~5 nm silica. The substrates were then exposed under UV ozone cleaning for 20 minutes before perovskite deposition. MAPbI3 perovskite film was deposited by spin coating from 0.33M solutions. In a typical example, PbI2 (89.12 mg, TCI, 99.99%), methylammonium iodide MAI (30.73 mg, Dyesol) and 13.7 μl of dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) were dissolved in 580 μl of dimethyl formamide DMF (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich). The solution was heated at 100 °C for 1h, and then spin-coated on the substrate at 4000 rpm, 15 s. Solvent quenching with 300 μl of toluene (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) was performed after 6s of rotation. The films were then annealed for 15 min at 100 °C on a hotplate. All the perovskite deposition procedure was performed in a glovebox under Ar inert atmosphere. Optical Measurements. The normal-incidence absorption spectra of the metamaterials were measured, for incident polarizations perpendicular and parallel to the main axis of the nanoslits (TM and TE orientations, respectively), using a microspectrophotometer (Jasco MV2000), through a 36× objective with a circular sampling aperture size of 25 μm × 25 μm. Steady-state photoluminescence spectra were measured under a microscope set-up and flow of nitrogen to avoid degradation of the MAPbI film due to moisture absorption. The samples were pumped using a PicoHarp 405 nm diode ps laser, with repetition rate of 40 MHz, focused down to a spot of ~20 μm diameter. The photoluminescence emission was polarized and detected by an ACTON spectrometer with an integration time of 100 ms per wavelength. Time resolved photoluminescence. Time resolved PL measurements were done by exciting samples with 400nm wavelength, 100 fs pulse duration and 1000 Hz repetition rate femtosecond laser pulses. Femtosecond laser pulses were generated by Spectra Physics amplified laser system (MaiTai, Spitfire Ace). SHG crystal was used to generate 400nm wavelength. PL signals from perovskite film on metamaterial samples were collected and collimated before focusing in to the Optronics streak camera (SC 10). Temporal resolution of this streak camera is ~50 ps. Simulations. Optical spectra and field maps were generated by full-wave electromagnetic simulations using COMSOL Multiphysics. Literature data were used to describe both the silica substrate, the gold film and the 5 nm silica overcoating, while experimental ellipsometric values were used for the perovskite film 