Absorption spectroscopy is widely used in sensing and astronomy to understand remote molecular compositions. However, dispersive techniques require multichannel detection, reducing detection sensitivity while increasing instrument cost when compared to spectrophotometric methods. We present a novel non-dispersive infrared molecular detection and identification scheme that performs spectral correlation optically using a specially tailored integrated silicon ring resonator. We show experimentally that the correlation amplitude is proportional to the number of overlapping ring resonances and gas lines, and that molecular specificity can be achieved from the phase of the correlation signal. This strategy can enable on-chip detection of extremely faint remote spectral signatures. Absorption spectroscopy is an important tool for the remote determination of molecular composition of a target gas where direct interaction with a target is not practical or feasible. Typical applications range from the measurement of trace gases in the atmosphere, gas emissions Most absorption spectroscopy platforms are built around some form of grating spectrometer that disperses the incoming light across a detector array to capture the spectrum, which is subsequently analyzed to extract the molecular absorption features of interest. In astronomy, modern large telescopes must be matched to correspondingly large grating spectrometers to match their étendues For this work, we target the most abundant isotope of hydrogen cyanide (H 12 C 14 N) gas as a proof of concept due to its strong absorption cross-section in the telecommunications C-band, as shown in Fig. We generate the HCN absorption spectrum A(λ) using line wavelengths and relative intensities from the high-resolution transmission molecular absorption database (HITRAN) The HCN P-branch centred at λ = 1540 nm (194.67 THz) was chosen as the target spectral signature since these lines have a lower relative line spacing change with wavelength than the R-branch at shorter wavelengths, and is therefore more suitable for correlating with the more periodic ring resonator transmission spectrum. Note that both the ring spectrum comb and the absorption line spacings are not truly periodic, and also change at different rates with wavelength. The spacing between HCN absorption lines varies from 0.74 nm to 0.82 nm (94 GHz to 105 GHz) for the HCN P-branch shown in Fig. Here we outline the simulation of the transmission through a ring resonator filter from its physical and optical characteristics. The resonance vacuum wavelengths λ m and frequencies ν m of a ring resonator occur under the condition where ne is the effective index of the waveguide mode, c is the speed of light, m is the longitudinal mode number, and L is the round trip length of the ring. The vacuum wavelength and frequency are related by ν = c λ . The FSR of a ring resonator in wavelength (frequency) is described by where the group index n g of the waveguide mode. The finesse (F) and quality factor (Q) are related to the coupling strengths and losses in the resonator, and are defined as: We designed a silicon-on-insulator strip waveguide with a height of 220 nm and width of 450 nm. We calculated the mode properties using a finite difference eigenmode solver (Lumerical Mode Solutions) as a function of wavelength and temperature. We use a temperature and wavelength dependent index of refraction model for silicon of the waveguide to determine effective and group indices The transmission through an add-drop ring resonator is expressed by for the through port, and for the drop port The parameters r 1 and r 2 are the coupling coefficients into and out of the ring, respectively, a is the single round trip amplitude transmission for the ring. The temperature dependent phase of the light in the waveguide is described by where n e (T) is the temperature dependent effective index. Since the TE mode is largely contained inside the silicon waveguide, the spectral shift with temperature can be approximated using the thermo-optic coefficient of silicon. We can use this temperature dependence to dynamically correlate the ring resonator output spectrum to the absorption lines of HCN. The spectral shift is described by where σ TO is the thermo-optic coefficient, λ 0 is the resonance wavelength and ΔT is the change in temperature. The resulting amplitude and relative phase of the integrated intensity can be used to identify and quantify the gas in the incident beam path. The thermo-optic coefficient of silicon is very large at 1.8×10 -4 K -1 , enabling tuning of the ring resonances with a small change in temperature. When light with an imprinted absorption spectrum is inputted into the ring resonator, the output spectrum of the ring resonator is where A(λ) is the gas absorption spectrum, and T d (λ, T) is the ring resonator drop port transmission spectrum. The correlation signal C(T) is therefore measured using a single channel detection element with spectrally uniform detection efficiency, and can be expressed by the integral A suitable ring length can be calculated from Equation 2 by solving for ring length given a target FSR of 0.77 nm (97.5 GHz) that matches the line spacing of a target molecule. From this simple calculation a group index of 4.34 leads to a ring length of ~709 μm. We verify the performance of a ring resonator with this ring length (L) by calculating the maximum correlation signal amplitude for ring lengths ranging from 400 μm to 1200 μm. Ring resonator drop port transmission spectra as a function of temperature and wavelength are correlated with an HCN absorption spectrum using Equation We also investigate the molecular specificity of our sensor, since multiple gases can have absorption features in the bandpass. In the case of acetylene (C2H2) present with HCN, we now have two additional non-periodic strong absorption lines which complicate our spectrum, as shown in Fig. The arrows in Fig. The performance of the sensor depends on the ring resonator coupling coefficients a, r1 and r2. Higher values of the single-pass amplitude transmission (a>0.95) correspond to less loss (e.g. less waveguide sidewall roughness) in the fabricated ring resonator, and generally leads to more light coupled into the drop port. However, obtaining high spectral contrast of the ring resonator filter relies on being near the critical coupling condition which total ring round trip loss including drop port coupling is equal to the through port coupling. The r1 and r2 parameters are set based on the coupling section lengths and coupling gaps (higher r1 and r2 values enable higher quality factors) and produce critical coupling conditions if r1=r2a. We have plotted the correlation signal as a function of temperature for a range of quality factors under critical coupling conditions in Fig. The peak-to-peak modulation of the correlation signal is maximized at r1=0.67 with r2=0.7 as shown in Fig. The silicon ring resonator devices are fabricated on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform using a JEOL JBX-8100FS E-beam lithography tool through Applied Nanotools. The ring resonator consists of a silicon waveguide formed into a racetrack loop. The entire chip with input and output coupling fibres is shown in Fig. The optical set-up is also alternatively configured with a broadband light source, a superluminescent diode system centred at 1555 nm (192.79 THz). In this case, the input light is passed through a tunable bandpass filter, enabling tuning of the centre wavelength and spectral width of the bandpass. In this configuration, the photodiode measures the total light power exiting the drop port. This configuration involves incoherent light, and enables the direct measurement the correlation signal, and therefore better represents more typical operating characteristics and conditions of the sensor. The racetrack ring resonators were first characterized from 1534 nm to 1543 nm (195.43 to 194.29 THz) at the through and drop ports using the tunable laser. The transmission characteristics of the drop outputs for a 737 μm long ring are shown in Fig. While the correlation technique can be applied either using the through or drop ports (or potentially both simultaneously), the drop port signal provides a higher signal to background ratio since the integrated power is less susceptible to interference and other spurious effects across the chip and measurement system. However, in a more complex two output configuration, both drop and through port signals can be used to provide intensity normalization. The gas cell is removed from the fibre-optic system when obtaining the reference correlation signals shown in Fig. In order to emulate the sensor operation using background broadband illumination, we integrate (using Equation With increasing bandpass widths, the correlation feature at 18 mA is more apparent and becomes broader. As is evident from Fig. We then demonstrate sensing using a weak broadband background provided by a superluminescent LED. The spectral power density detected at the photodiode is around 30 pW/nm (0.2 pW/GHz), or approximately >200,000 weaker than the tunable laser. This source better represents a dim target typically encountered in astronomical observations. Different bandpass widths and centre wavelengths are selected using a tunable external bandpass filter to accommodate 1 to 8 gas lines. The normalized transmission spectra through the filter and the gas cell for varying bandpass widths are measured using a tunable laser sweep and are shown in Fig. We describe an integrated photonic remote gas sensor using correlation-based detection and identification of absorption features of a gas contained within a broadband background light. By engineering a silicon waveguide ring resonator with appropriate length and group index, a integrated correlation filter is matched to gases with quasi-periodic absorption features over a bandpass of a few nanometres. We show that the overlap of the ring resonator drop port with the absorption lines of HCN produces a unique modulation pattern that identifies HCN based on the phase of the modulated correlation signal. We additionally demonstrate HCN detection with a weak broadband source. While demonstrated with HCN, many other gases with similar periodic absorption features such as CO2 and CO can be detected similarly with different ring lengths. We also show by simulation that the sensor can operate in the presence of C2H2 and should distinguish other gases with non-overlapping absorption features in the same bandpass. The sensor performs best with a bandpass filter of 6 nm (760 GHz) where up to 8 resonances contribute to the sensor response, with smaller bandpass filters leading to lower response. Simulations with larger bandpasses reveal negligible gain in signal amplitude with corresponding loss of contrast. In the case of saturated absorption lines, the sensor can still detect the presence of the gas if there is still some light in the bandpass, however, the saturation will decrease our ability to recover the relative column depth for saturated lines. Integrated correlation gas sensing has multiple advantages over dispersive spectroscopy regarding sensitivity for astronomy and remote sensing. Firstly, in a dispersive spectrometer, the light is divided by wavelength onto multiple pixels, reducing the photon flux per pixel. Whereas in our integrated correlation sensor, we collect all photons into a single detection element (or pixel). In the shot noise dominated condition, the signal-to-noise ratio is related to the photon count (N ph ) by SNR = √ N ph . To resolve the HCN absorption lines over 6 nm of spectral bandwidth for HCN, a dispersive spectrometer would realistically require at least ~30 pixels, reducing the SNR by a factor of ~5 when compared to the integrated correlation ring resonator. Considering the modulation of the ring spectrum across the absorption lines reduces the signal by a factor of ~2, the SNR at the photodiode is still a factor of ~3.5 higher than that of dispersive spectrometers. Secondly, the use of a single channel allows for the use of larger, higher performance detectors which can be optimized for higher quantum efficiencies, lower cost, lower dark currents, and no pixel cross-talk. Finally, the rapid modulation of the microheater current allows for lock-in amplification of the resulting signal that is not practically achieved for a highly multichannel detector arrays. A silicon waveguide ring filter transmission can be modulated at several kHz using thermal tuning as in this work, or at up to MHz frequencies and higher rates using carrier-based modulation The minimum sensitivity for the ring resonator correlation sensor can be related to the minimum HCN absorption depth detectable with lock-in amplification. We calculate this in the same manner as Vargas-Rodríguez et al. We can calculate the minimum lock-in detection signal for a Zurich Instruments MFLI lock-in amplifier with an input noise amplitude of N lock = 40 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz, and assume a reasonable noise equivalent voltage (NEV) of 100 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz. As in In practice, the single TE-optimized ring resonator remote photonic sensor will only be able to operate using half of the incoming incoherent light. Therefore an additional ring designed for TM polarization in a similar fashion should be used in parallel. A polarizing beam splitter implanted on-chip can divide incoming light into both ring resonators appropriately. This also enables polarization sensitivity of the incoming light if the output channels are separate. Another consideration involves the coupling light into a single mode fibre. Efficiently coupling light into a single mode fibre generally requires adaptive optics The primary disadvantage to this technique is the lack of spectral information. It is possible that false positives can be introduced with absorption line combinations from different gases. With higher specificity sensors (e.g. multiple rings or custom Bragg filters), signal contributions from such possible combinations can be suppressed. Simulations under a wide array of absorption line contributions can be used to anticipate these effects. Another possibility for improved sensitivity and specificity is through dispersion engineering of the ring resonator such that the overlap between resonances and absorption lines is possible over a larger bandpass. Unfortunately, it is difficult to achieve the required extremely high group velocity dispersions to match most gas absorption line distributions. Such dispersion could potentially be engineered through photonic crystal structures operating near the photonic band edge, but in practice this leads to prohibitively high propagation losses. In this work, ring resonators have been used as convenient device to generate a quasi-periodic comb filter. It also possible to create much more complex waveguide filters based on gratings to precisely match more complex gas spectra over wider spectral ranges, for example using layer peeling methods for Bragg gratings on the silicon nitride platform Our correlation technique reduces the detection requirement from a 1D photodetector array of typical dispersive spectrometer to single channel, which introduces cost and sensitivity advantages while maintaining molecular specificity as used in full spectrum acquisitions. In extremely low signal applications, avalanche photodiodes or photomultiplier tubes can be used. The multiplexed advantage of using a single channel for multi-gas sensing can also pave the way towards a form of 2D gas mapping where arrays of ring resonators can process light from individual pixels as a form of hyperspectral imaging. Possible applications range from low-cost remote monitoring of gas emissions to enabling astronomical observations of extremely weak absorption features such as exoplanet atmospheres during transits. This strategy can be employed on many other gases which exhibit unique correlation signals with a suitable integrated resonant cavity. Future work includes investigating devices which operate in the mid-infrared where device sensitivity can be significantly higher due to stronger absorption features.