We report an experimental study of Cooper pair splitting in an encapsulated graphene based multiterminal junction in the ballistic transport regime. Our device consists of two transverse junctions, namely the superconductor/graphene/superconductor and the normal metal/graphene/normal metal junctions. In this case, the electronic transport through one junction can be tuned by an applied bias along the other. We observe clear signatures of Cooper pair splitting in the local as well as nonlocal electronic transport measurements. Our experimental data can be very well described by using a modified Octavio-Tinkham-Blonder-Klapwijk model and a three-terminal beam splitter model. Superconductors are a source of quantum entangled particles in the form of Cooper pairs In this letter, we show the experimental observation of CPS in a hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) encapsulated single layer graphene device which is connected to two superconductors on its parallel edges and to two normal metal electrodes on the other two transverse edges. As a result, two transverse junctions are formed, namely the superconductor/graphene/superconductor (SGS) and the normal metal/graphene/normal metal (NGN) junctions. Due to a difference in the doping density across the two junctions, potential barriers are generated in the graphene channel which act as electronic beam splitters for CPS, similar to the one proposed by Bouchiat et. al. We have used the dry transfer technique for the fabrication of h-BN/graphene/h-BN van der Waals heterostructure which is similar to the one described in Wang et al. Fig. We study the Andreev processes in our device in two measurement configurations, namely the four-terminal or SGS and the three-terminal or NGS configurations. Fig. In order to interpret the experimental data, we employ a modified Octavio-Tinkham-Blonder-Klapwijk (OTBK) model Fig. Fig. As seen in Fig. h-BN crystallites (∼ 28 and ∼ 18 nm thick for the top and bottom h-BN layer, respectively) and single layer graphene were exfoliated from the commercially available h-BN powder (Momentive, grade PT110) and natural graphite (NGS Naturgraphit GmbH), respectively, on Si substrates with 300 nm thick SiO 2 layer. The h-BN/graphene/h-BN heterostructure was fabricated by the dry transfer method similar to the transfer technique shown by Wang et. al. 1 . The fabricated heterostructure was then transferred on a Si substrate with 1000 nm thick SiO 2 layer. The encapsulated graphene layer was connected to the metal electrodes on its edges in a self-aligned manner as described in Kraft et al. 2 , and adapted for two different contact materials in Pandey et al. 3 . We have used Ti/Al (5 and 60 nm, respectively) for the superconducting electrodes and Ti/Cu/Al (5, 80 and 5 nm, respectively) for the normal electrodes. For the fabrication of the top gate electrode, a 25 nm thick Al 2 O 3 layer was deposited by using atomic layer deposition. It was followed by the metallization for the top gate electrode made of Ti/Cu/Al (5, 100 and 5 nm, respectively). The Ti layer serves as an adhesive layer for all of the electrodes while the thin Al layer in the normal metal and gate electrodes serves as the capping layer to protect the underlying Cu layer from oxidation. Fig. We model the system with graphene being a multichannel conductor which is connected to four different terminals as shown in Fig. These terminals have the transmission probabilities τ l , τ r , τ t and τ b , respectively. We account for the local or direct transport processes by considering that the terminals are connected with ideal conductors (shown as solid lines in Fig. Using this approach, the transport through the beam splitter, which accounts for the nonlocal processes, can be described by the distribution functions as shown in Fig. The transmissions are constrained by the conservation of probability, and we are left with a single parameter r = 1 -τ lr = τ tl . The distribution functions in the beam splitter can be described according to the matrix given below Analogous to the OTBK model, the boundary condition for the distribution functions at the super-conducting terminal α, which is held at a chemical potential μ, can be given as: Here T α , R α and A α show the normal transmission, normal reflection and Andreev reflection coefficients as obtained from the BTK model. In a similar way, the boundary conditions at the normal terminal γ can be expressed by inserting T γ = τ γ , R γ = 1 -τ γ and A γ = 0 in Eq. ( Here α and β denote the beam splitter branches, f nss is a fit parameter to scale the nonlocal processes relative to the local processes and G αβ gives the two-terminal conductance. While the local processes between the NS and SS terminals are included in the model, they are weighed differently due to the finite transmission through the beam splitter. In addition, the model also includes the nonlocal multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) processes where the MAR cycle between the SS terminals begins due to an initial nonlocal Andreev process. The model is reduced to a conductance matrix in the normal state as described below: where diagonal elements in this matrix are given as: It should be noted that the conductance parameters G αβ are not the same as the two-terminal parametric conductance G αβ in Eq. ( The six independent off-diagonal elements in Eq. ( For simplicity, we have kept the ratios r and f nss equal for all four beam splitters. We have also set τ l = τ r = τ S , and τ t = τ b = τ N . Including the conductance parameters G αβ , this leaves us with 10 parameters. An arbitrary set of six parameters can be constrained by the measurements of the six normal-state two-terminal resistances for a given gate voltage. With this constraint, the positions of all the lines in the conductance maps are fixed, and practically independent of the choice of the remaing four free parameters. We have determined the parameters as follows: In the p-doped regime, transport between the superconducting terminals is dominated by the corners (as can be inferred from the normal-state resistances). Therefore, we have set G lr = 0. τ S can be determined quite accurately from the relative weight of the MAR features. In our previous work on similar two-terminal NGS structures, we have found τ N ∼ 0.6 -0.7 in the p-doped regime 3 . Since the current maps do not depend much on τ N , we have simply chosen τ N = 0.7. Finally, r was chosen to give a good representation of the small cross-shaped CPS features. The remaining parameters are then constrained. We have also tried to obtain better overall fits using joint least-square fits of several line traces. In addition, we have experimented with lifting the resistrictions outlined above. However, since the weight of the CPS features is quite small, they are not reproduced well by a fit, and the parameters do not change much compared to the ones we chose by hand. zero bias is due to a small supercurrent between the two S terminals which is not accounted for by the model. The sharp oscillatory features at finite bias are attributed to self-induced Shapiro steps. We have also mapped the supercurrent as a function of gate voltage (not shown), and found that the Shapiro features appear at fixed voltage spacings, and generally scale with the magnitude of the critical current. Like the MAR features, the Shapiro features only depend on the bias between the superconducting electrodes, and can therefore not be confused with the CPS features, which also depend on V ctrl . tance features due to (i) the electronic transport across the NGS corners of the device (marked NS), (ii) MAR taking place in the SGS junction (marked SS), and (iii) nonlocal transport due to the Cooper pair splitting (marked CPS). Note that the CPS features observed in the experimental data (Fig. Here we show the gate dependence of the CPS process in our device. As shown in the main text, the conductance features due to the CPS appear in the low bias regime. It is to be noted that the electronic transport in the low bias regime is mainly tuned by the proximity induced superconductivity in the SGS junction, however, the overall conductance of the graphene channel is tuned by the applied gate voltage. Fig. V. TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF THE COOPER PAIR SPLITTING Fig. 