This work provides a low-power method for chaos generation which is generally applicable to nonlinear M/NEMS resonators. The approach taken is independent of the material, scale, design, and actuation of the device in question; it simply assumes a good quality factor and a Duffing type nonlinearity, features that are commonplace to M/NEMS resonators. The approach models the rotating-frame dynamics to analytically constrain the parameter space required for chaos generation. By leveraging these common properties of M/NEMS devices, a period-doubling route to chaos is generated using an order-of-magnitude smaller forcing than typically reported in the literature. Chaotic dynamics have received interest owing to their extraordinary ability to generate complex behaviors, such as synchronization patterns, even in simple and fixed arrangements of coupled nodes. Countless applications have been discussed, spanning control systems, telecommunications and neuroscience Micro-and nano-electromechanical systems (M/NEMS) provide experimental platforms for investigating and generating such dynamics, as they are easily amenable to very large-scale integration, low-power operation, and they inherently exhibit rich nonlinear behavior An interesting case, is that of the static double-well potential, which is described by a Duffing equation (a system possessing a cubic nonlinearity)where the linear component is negative and the cubic component is positive. Period-doubling bifurcations and chaos in such systems have been studied In contrast to the static double-well systems, the approach presented here relies on the dynamicallygenerated double-well pseudo-potential that is created when a generic nonlinear Duffing resonator is driven into the bistable regime The main purpose of this work is to demonstrate chaos generation in a perturbed "dynamic double-well" in a manner that parallels chaos generation in driven "static double-well" systems, albeit with significantly lower drive amplitudes. Thus, two drive tones are applied to the system, whereby the first creates the "dynamic double-well" and the second perturbs it. Since the displacement of the M/NEMS resonator studied herein is moderate, i.e. on the order of the structural thickness, a perturbation-based approach to analyse the dynamics is justified When a Duffing resonator is driven near resonance, its steady-state response as seen in the RFA corresponds to a fixed-point in the phase space; in case the resonator is driven in the bistable regime, the response shows two distinct stable fixed points and a saddle-node point This argument can be demonstrated by considering the Duffing equation for a two tone-driven M/NEMS resonator, given as where x is the displacement, and γ, ω 0 , α are respectively the damping, natural frequency, and Duffing nonlinearity of the resonator. F 1 , F 2 , ω 1 , and ω 2 are the amplitudes and frequencies of two-externally applied driving forces, and η is the transduction coefficient.We introduce dimensionless constants as t = t × ω 0 , γ = γ/ω 0 , ᾱ = α/ω 2 0 , F1 = ηF 1 /ω 2 0 , and F2 = ηF 2 /ω 2 0 . Hereon, all equations are written using this form, however, the bars are dropped for convenience. The application of the RFA, in which the modal displacement takes the form x(t) = A(t) cos(ω 1 t + φ(t)), where A(t) and φ(t) are slowly varying amplitude and phase envelopes, gives the following rotating-frame system where X = A cos(φ) and Y = A sin(φ) are the rotating-frame quadratures, A 2 = X 2 + Y 2 , and δ = (ω 1 -ω 0 )/ω 0 (details are provided in the supplementary materials). Since Eqs. ( Initially, consider the conventional case with only one applied force, i.e., F 2 = 0, whereby the system in Eq. ( Note that for F 2 = 0 the system of Eq. ( The above arguments are corroborated by a combination of numerical simulations and measurements. The experiments are performed using a micro-beam GaAs piezoelectric MEMS resonator driven into the nonlinear Duffing regime, details regarding fabrication and basic properties of such resonators can be found in Ref. The application of a single-tone sweep produces the frequency response shown in Fig. The corresponding phase-space plots for period 1 (P1), period 2 (P2), and chaotic attractors are shown in Figs. Making F 2 = 0 is clearly a necessary but not sufficient condition for chaos generation, and the question of whether and where in the 4-dimensional parameter space (δ, Ω, F 1 , and F 2 ) chaos exists remains to be addressed. While bounds have been set on the values of F 1 and δ such that bistability exists for F 2 = 0, similar bounds for F 2 and Ω have yet to be determined. This task is usually performed by applying Melnikov's method, which sets strict conditions for the period-doubling bifurcation route to chaos to take place where F 2min is the minimum required F 2 necessary to induce period doubling, ω L is the libration frequency, and A 1 , A 2 , and A 3 , are the amplitudes of the three steady-state fixed points, with A 2 being the unstable one. Eq. ( A two-dimensional sweep of both Ω and F 2 provides further grounds for comparison between the numerical, analytical, and experimental results. Such a sweep is shown in Fig. Chaos is verified for a selection of experimental traces, where a correlation dimension Both results presented in Fig. Next, we verify how closely the analytical and numerical results evolve as a function of changing drive conditions (changing δ or F 1 ). Based on the analytical model, it would be expected that, as the edge of the bistable area is approached, the distance between one of the stable fixed points and the unstable fixed point shrinks to zero, and as a consequence, the necessary F 2 required to achieve P2 and chaos itself is reduced to zero. This is confirmed numerically by performing 3D sweeps (δ, Ω, and F 2 ) and tracking the minimum necessary values of F 2 and Ω for the onset of P2. These are plotted against δ (for F 1 = 3 V PP ), along with F 2min and Ω min as obtained from Eq. (3), in Fig. It is interesting to ask whether the perturbed homoclinic-based argument presented above remains valid for the region where bistability is suppressed by the damping (note that the Melnikov approach requires bistability in the lossless version of the system). Indeed, the Melnikov method requires a homoclinic in the undamped system; however, it also assumes that the additional damping and forcing (corresponding to the terms within the brackets in Eq. 2) are small, perturbation-like terms. The authors therefore conjecture that, in the case of suppressed bistability, these terms are sufficiently large to invalidate the perturbed Hamiltonian approach. On a practical note, it maybe tempting to pursue chaos generation by positioning the drive near the saddle point bifurcations, as that would require a very small perturbation tone. This, however, is not an optimal experimental condition as it would be easy under the effect of noise to jump to the adjacent potential well and remain stuck there in a low-amplitude libration orbit. It is therefore more favourable for practical ends to position the main tone towards the middle of the bistable region and apply a moderate-amplitude second tone. In summary, this work presented an approach to chaos generation in nonlinear M/NEMS resonators that uses drive amplitudes that are typically an order of magnitude smaller than those previously reported. The method relies on applying two drive tones in order to make the rotating-frame phase-space three dimensional, and presents a model that uses linearization of perturbations within the rotating-frame to constrain the parameter space where chaos can be generated. This approach demonstrates that once bistability has been accessed via the first applied tone, chaos can in principle be generated with an arbitrarily small value of a perturbing second tone. The generality of the proposed method, and the relatively low driving forces involved underline applicability to a large range of nonlinear resonators thus potentially placing resonators, particularly M/NEMS ones, as leading candidates for the high-integration physical implementation of networks and reservoirs, as well as the experimental investigation of chaos-related phenomena. The MEMS resonator used is a doubly-clamped beam structure that is 150 μm×20 μm×600 nm in size. The material consists of an Al 0.3 G 0.7 As/GaAs heterostructure, the interface of which forms a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) layer that is used as one of two transduction electrodes Electrical signals are supplied by two synchronized waveform generators (type WF1974, NF Corporation), whereas mechanical motion is detected via a Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV, Neoark Corporation) whose output signal is simultaneously fed to a vector signal analyzer (VSA, type HP89410A, Keysight) and a lock-in amplifier (type SR844, SRS). The output of the lockin amplifier is sampled using a digital oscilloscope (type MSO4034B, Tektronix). A schematic representation of the device and measurement setup is shown in Fig. To produce the sweeps shown in Figs. 1-2 of the main text, both applied driving tones are reset before each data point is sampled, to ensure that the system is in the desired branch in case an accidental branch jump took place. This protocol is equally followed in the numerical simulations for the same reasons. In practice, Duffing resonators exist in diversified forms including the following examples: a) having a negative linear component and a positive nonlinear component which is typically used to describe buckled beams where all quantities take the meaning defined in the main text. We also define δ = (ω 1 -ω 0 )/ω 0 . Because the vibration amplitudes are on the order of the beam thickness, the response of the structure can be where is meant to indicate perturbation-order terms. x(t) is assumed to take the following form Placing Eq.( Combining the above terms in Eq.( Its steady-state solution is obtained by solving Eq. ( (1) of the main text for the lossless case (i.e. γ = 0) and a low-loss case (γ = 10 -3 ). The associated rotating-frame pseudo-Hamiltonian corresponding to the steady-state solution of Eq. ( where X and Y are the in-phase and quadrature components, respectively, and the complex envelope is written as A = X + iY . Furthermore, we assume that A = A 0 + Ā, where Ā is a small perturbation term, and A 0 is the steady-state solution, which is written as A 0 = {A 1 , A 3 } with the subscripts 1 and 3 indicating the high-and low-amplitude solution branches, respectively. Thus expanding Eq. ( We linearize the above equation and drop the damping term, which simplifies the analysis but does not alter the results in a fundamental way, giving The eigenvalues of the above system, i.e. its libration frequency, are now obtained as Note that for the high-amplitude branch the libration frequency is ω L > 0, whereas for the low-amplitude branch the libration frequency is ω L < 0, where ω L represents the detuning with respect to δ. Experimentally-obtained libration measurements are shown in Fig. The libration frequency thus represents the natural frequency response of the system to an infinitesimally small perturbation force F 2 . The onset of the period-doubling bifurcation is considered to be the onset of inter-well jumps. This criterion is approximated by considering the threshold to be the libration amplitude A L equal to the amplitude difference between the saddle-node and whichever fixed point the system happens to be in, thus which, if we continue to treat the libration motion as linear orbits, gives the equation for the underdamped driven harmonic resonator The purpose of applying the Melnikov method is to obtain a concise and tractable analytical relation. This is done by first obtaining an analytical formulation for the Homoclinic orbit, then inserting it into the Melnikov integral Here, we attempt to obtain the analytic formulation in the rotating frame, which can be done by first reexpressing Eq. ( By rearranging and integrating, we obtain i Although Eq. ( To confirm chaoticity, the spectrum of Lyapunov exponents λ i is calculated directly from the differential equations using an established method based on solving the corresponding variational equation while iteratively applying the Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization where A 2 = X 2 + Y 2 , from which the presence of a zero exponent is evident. For convenience of comparison to numerical studies wherein the parameters of the Duffing equation are oftentimes set on the order of unity (e.g., Ref. Below, this yields δ ≈ 1 and Ω ≈ 1. The explicit Runge-Kutta (4,5) formula is used, setting relative and absolute tolerance to 10 -8 and 10 -10 respectively. Simulations representative of the physical device are undertaken with δ = 4.2, α = 6513.8 and F1 = 0.036. For the low-amplitude branch, we set F2 = 0.54 F1 and consider a chaotic case having Ω = -3.1, alongside a non-chaotic case (period-4) having Ω = -3.2. For the high-amplitude branch, we set F2 = 0.71 F1 and consider a chaotic case having Ω = 4, alongside a non-chaotic case (period-6) having Ω = 4.1. These settings are not critical. All simulations are run until τ end = 2.5 × 10 3 , performing the orthonormalization in steps of τ step = 3 × 10 -3 ; furthermore, to ensure stabilization of the initial transient, all data from τ < τ end /2 are discarded. In the low-amplitude branch, chaotic dynamics (Ω = -0.0031) are characterized by rapid convergence to one positive Lyapunov exponent, as visible in Fig. In the high-amplitude branch, chaotic dynamics (Ω = 0.004) are also characterized by rapid convergence to one positive Lyapunov exponent, as visible in Fig. For the chaotic parameter settings, the time-series of the state variable X in the low and high branches are visible in Fig. Oscilloscope recordings of the in-phase component, digitized at 10 MSa/s, are analyzed using canonical methods based on time-delay embedding as implemented in the TISEAN package (ver. 3.0.1) An independent confirmation of the attained dynamical complexity is provided via the permutation entropy, a robust rank-based measure; given the map-like series of l local maxima, this is estimated for an sequence order n = 7, representing the highest value meeting the coverage criterion l > 5n!, then normalized to h ∈ [0, 1]. For this purpose, all available 10 recordings of 10,000,000 points each are pooled to accumulate an adequate number of maxima; no uncertainty is therefore calculated Accounting for experimental device drift, the following settings are chosen for the low-amplitude branch ω 1 /2π = 1566.5 kHz, F 1 = 3 V and F 2 = 2.1 V; to obtain chaotic dynamics, we set ω 2 /2π = 1563.25 kHz, whereas for non-chaotic dynamics (period-2), we set ω 2 /2π = 1561 kHz. For the high-amplitude branch, the same values of ω 1 , F 1 and F 2 are kept; to obtain chaotic dynamics, we set ω 2 /2π = 1571 kHz, whereas for non-chaotic dynamics (period-3), we set ω 2 /2π = 1571.3 kHz. All measurements are taken while applying a -1.5 V bias. In the low-amplitude branch, chaotic dynamics (Ω = -0.0021) are associated to a correlation dimension D 2 = 2.3±0.1 alongside a permutation entropy h 7 = 0.81; nonchaotic dynamics (Ω = -0.0035) correspondingly feature D 2 = 1.8 ± 0.2 and h 7 = 0.44. In the high-amplitude branch, chaotic dynamics (Ω = 0.0029) are associated to a correlation dimension D 2 = 2.2 ± 0.1 alongside a permutation entropy h 7 = 0.62; non-chaotic dynamics (Ω = 0.0031) correspondingly feature D 2 = 1.6 ± 0.3 and h 7 = 0.44. Close agreement with simulations in D KY ≈ D 2 for the chaotic cases, and the marked difference in permutation entropy between the chaotic and non-chaotic settings, are noteworthy confirmations of the observation of low-dimensional chaos. For the chosen settings yielding chaotic dynamics in the low and high branches, representative time-series are visible in Fig. 