Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) has been used extensively for synthesizing two-dimensional (2D) materials, due to its low cost and promise for high-quality monolayer crystal synthesis. However, the understanding of the reaction mechanism and the key parameters affecting the APCVD processes is still in its embryonic stage. Hence, the scalability of the APCVD method in achieving large scale continuous film remains very poor. Here, we use MoSe 2 as a model system and present a fluid guided growth strategy for understanding and controlling the growth of 2D materials. Through the integration of experiment and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis in the full-reactor scale, we identified three key parameters: precursor mixing, fluid velocity and shear stress, which play a critical role in the APCVD process. By modifying the geometry of the growth setup, to enhance precursor mixing and decrease nearby velocity shear rate and adjusting flow direction, we have successfully obtained inch-scale monolayer MoSe 2 . This unprecedented success of achieving scalable 2D materials through fluidic design lays the foundation for designing new CVD systems to achieve the scalable synthesis of nanomaterials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have tremendous potential in revolutionizing a wide range of industries, including but not limited to energy storage One of the key reasons behind the uncertainty of the APCVD process is that it involves chemical reactions coupled with complex fluid mixing where the transfer of momentum, heat, and mass significantly affects the reaction process and thereafter the final product The schematic of the experimental setup and corresponding computer model for the MoSe2 growth are presented in Figure Considering the symmetry of the growth setup, only half of the substrate is shown for both morphology observation and simulation. In Figure From the TEM image and diffraction pattern (Figure We numerically simulated the entire process that happens in the reaction tube. Figures Figures 3c-3f present a snapshot (t = 0.04 s) of the simulation results during the reaction. The velocity distribution in the cross-section of the crucible, y = 0 cm, Figure More detailed distributions can be seen in Figure Similarly, Figures The mixture first flows towards the substrate, then becomes parallel to it, and subsequently deviates from the substrate when the gas flow approaches the exit between the substrate and the crucible. The exit acts as a throttle, near which the gas first flows towards the small gap, and then deviates from the substrate after it flows out of the crucible. At the center and close to the front edge, the straight flush to the substrate makes it easier for the products to attach to the substrate, consistent with the multilayer structure observed in Figure In summary, we have achieved the growth of inch scale continuous monolayer MoSe2 using an evolved APCVD by the design of the experimental setup to achieve optimal control of fluid flow. The CFD simulation analysis elucidates the mechanism involved in the APCVD process and guides the structure design and optimization. Our study shows that under the same experimental parameters, the change of the growth setup can significantly influence the evolution of the flow field and hence change the growth behavior. The factors that influence the APCVD process include but not limited to the precursor concentration distribution, fluid velocity (magnitude and direction), fluid shear stress over the substrate, as well as the mixing of Se and MoO3. The higher and uniform concentration of precursors, low shear stress, and small flow deviation to the substrate can create a stable growth environment for large-scale monolayer 2D materials. We believe the improvement of APCVD to achieve high-quality growth should consider how to control the flow field. We anticipate that this principle is applicable for other 2D materials' growth, but to obtain controlled growth, the optimization should be made according to the properties of the specific precursors (e.g., density, diffusivity, and reaction rate) and geometry of the growth setup. CFD simulation. To reveal the process that happened during the experiment, we use the commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software package, Ansys-CFX®, to conduct the numerical simulation. The computational domain is shown in Figure The reaction among MoO3, Se, and H2 are simplified and simulated as a single-step, irreversible gas-phase reaction: In our simulation, we use MoSe2 to represent the product produced in the gas phase and study how the concentration distribution, velocity, and shear stress can affect the deposition of the product. These principles also applicable if we use the intermediate phase MoO3-xSex (multistep reaction) These numbers are intended to provide physical insight and should not be considered as the exact number in the real case. The exhaust leaves the reaction tube through the outlet. For the remaining boundary conditions, the no-slip boundary condition is used for all the solid surfaces; all the walls in the heating zone are set to be 750 °C; all other walls are set to be 25 °C. Sample preparation and characterization. The TEM sample was prepared using PMMA assisted method. Briefly, the PMMA solution was spin-coated on the surface of the as-grown monolayer MoSe2 on a Si/SiO2 substrate at 4000 rpm for 1 min. Then, the sample was baked at 120 o C for 5 min. After that, the SiO2 layer was etched by the KOH solution (0.1 g/ml), and the detached PMMA/MoSe2 film was transferred into the deionized water to remove residual KOH. The PMMA/MoSe2 film was transferred to a TEM grid, and the PMMA was removed by the acetone and cleaned using isopropanol. The TEM image and selective area electron diffraction were obtained using a Hitachi H-7600 under the operation voltage of 100 kV. The annular dark-field STEM image was performed using an aberration-corrected Nion UltraSTEM100 operating at 60 kV. The morphology and distribution of as-grown MoSe2 were characterized using optical microscopy (BX51M, Olympus CO., JAPAN). The EDX was conducted using the scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4800). The thickness is characterized using atomic force microscopy (Agilent 5500). Raman spectroscopy and photoluminescence were conducted using a Renishaw instrument with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. qianhong.wu@villanova.edu (Q.W.) bo.li@villanova.edu (B. L.).