Recently, the niobium (Nb)-doped topological insulator Bi2Se3, in which the finite magnetic moments of the Nb atoms are intercalated in the van der Waals gap between the Bi2Se3 layers, has been shown to exhibit both superconductivity with Tc 3 K and topological surface states. Here we report on muon spin rotation experiments probing the temperature-and field-dependent of effective magnetic penetration depth λ ef f (T ) in the layered topological superconductor candidate Nb0.25Bi2Se3. The exponential temperature dependence of λ -2 ef f (T ) at low temperatures suggests a fully gapped superconducting state in the bulk with the superconducting transition temperature Tc = 2.9 K and the gap to Tc ratio 2∆/kBTc = 3.95 Topological superfluidity, and superconductivity, are well-established phenomena in condensed matter systems. A very good example of a topological system is the A-phase of superfluid helium-3 Currently, there are few potential material candidates for bulk TSC, obtained by following the latter approach: Sr 2 RuO 4 In this framework, the Nb-doped Bi 2 Se 3 system appears to be unique because macroscopic magnetic ordering below the superconducting critical temperature of 3.2 K has been reported We report on fully gapped and a time reversal invariant superconducting state in the bulk of topological system Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 . We evaluated the higher limit of the zero-temperature penetration depth to be ∼ 930 The details of the synthesis of the single crystal samples of Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 are reported elsewhere Transverse-field (TF) and Zero-field (ZF) μSR experiments were performed at the πE1 beamline of the Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland), using the Dolly spectrometer. The sample was pressed into a 5 mm pellet and mounted on a Cu holder using GE varnish. This holder assembly was then fixed to the 3 He cryostat. The Spectrometer is equipped with a standard veto setup providing a low-background μSR signal. All TF experiments were carried out after a field-cooling procedure in the temperature range of 0.26 -5 K. The μSR time spectra were analyzed using the free software package MUSRFIT Figure First, we have carried out ZF-μSR experiments above and below T c to search for possible magnetism (static or fluctuating) in Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 . As shown in Fig. Figure Here A S denotes the initial asymmetry, γ μ /(2π) 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, and φ is the initial phase of the muon-spin ensemble. B int represents the internal magnetic field at the muon site, the relaxation rates σ sc and σ nm characterize the damping due to the formation of the flux-line lattice (FLL) in the SC state and of the nuclear magnetic dipolar contribution, respectively. During the analysis σ nm was assumed to be constant over the entire temperature range and was fixed to the value obtained above T c where only nuclear magnetic moments contribute to the muon depolarization rate σ. In Fig. To proceed with a quantitative analysis, we note that the temperature dependence of the London magnetic penetration depth λ(T ) is related to the muon spin depolarization rate σ sc (T ) in the presence of a perfect triangular vortex lattice by the equation: where Φ 0 = 2.068×10 -15 Wb is the magnetic-flux quantum. Equation ( To investigate the superconducting gap structure of Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 , we analyzed the T -dependence of the magnetic penetration depth, λ(T ), which is directly associated with the superconducting gap. λ(T ) can be described within the local (London) approximation (λ ξ) by the following expression: (3) where f = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 is the Fermi function, φ is the angle along the Fermi surface, and ∆ i (T, φ) = ∆ 0,i Γ(T /T c )g(φ) (∆ 0,i is the maximum gap value at T = 0). The temperature dependence of the gap is approximated by the expression Γ(T /T c ) = tanh {1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 }, where γ n is the normal state Sommerfeld coefficient, f is the Fermi function with energy E = ε 2 + ∆ 2 (φ, T ). Therefore, applying the same methodology as adapted for analyzing λ(T ), we can analyze the specific heat data. be modeled by a fully gapped s-wave picture, yielding ∆/k B T c = 1.9, consistent with the μSR measurements. However this result has to be taken cautiously since we could not access the low temperature region of the specific heat. One of the findings of this paper is the absence of magnetism and time-reversal symmetry breaking state in the bulk of Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 below T c , classifying this system as a non-magnetic and time-reversal invariant superconductor. This is in contrast with a previous report In addition to the TRS invariant SC state, another interesting observation is the fact that the T c /λ -2 ef f ratio for Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 is comparable to those of high-temperature unconventional superconductors. Within the picture of Bose Einstein Condensation (BEC) to BCS crossover (5) Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 manifests a very unusual upper critical field behaviour signaling an unconventional nature of superconducting state in this compound Regarding the gap symmetry in Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 , using the tunnel-diode oscillator(TDO) technique Smylie et. al. Finally, the observation of the paramagnetic shift in the SC state of Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 , instead of the expected diamagnetic shift imposed by the SC state, deserves some attention. In general, the paramagnetic shift can have few possible causes: field induced magnetism In conclusion, we provide a microscopic investigation of the superconductivity in the layered topological superconductor candidate Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 with a bulk probe. Specifically, the zero-temperature magnetic penetration depth λ ef f (0) and the temperature as well as the field dependence of λ -2 ef f were studied by means of μSR experiments. The superfluid density can be described in a scenario of a complete gap. Though, future work will explore the relation between the measured muon depolarization rate and the penetration depth in anisotropic and possibly inhomogenous systems. Interestingly, T c /λ -2 ef f ratio is comparable to those of high-temperature unconventional superconductors, pointing to the unconventional nature of superconductivity in Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 . Furthermore, μSR, which is extremely sensitive magnetic probe, does not show evidence of any spontaneous magnetic fields that would be expected for a TRS breaking state in the bulk of Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 . Our results classify Nb 0.25 Bi 2 Se 3 as unconventional time-reversal-invariant and fully gapped bulk superconductor. 