Solar-driven interfacial steam generation for desalination has attracted broad attention. However, a significant challenge still remains for achieving a higher evaporation rate and high water quality, together with a cost-effective and easy-to-manufacture device to provide a feasible solar-driven steam generation system. In this study, a novel ultra-black paint, Black 3.0, serving as a perfect solar absorber is introduced into the hot-pressed melamine foam networks, allowing us to construct an ultra-black (99% absorptance in the solar region) and self-floating evaporation device. The high performing features of effective solar absorptance and salt-rejection capability contribute to a high-to-date evaporation rate of freshwater at 2.48 kg m -2 h -1 under one sun (1 kW m -2 ). This interfacial solar evaporator has a daily drinkable water yield of 2.8 kg m -2 even in cloudy winter weather and maintains stability in water with a wide range of acidity and alkalinity (pH 1~14). These features will enable the construction of a facilely fabricated, robust, highly-efficient, and cost-effective solar steam generation system for freshwater production. Access to freshwater is of pivotal importance to humanities. Fast population growth and climate change demand increasing supply of freshwater. Water scarcity has become a threat to the sustainable development of human society In a conventional solar-driven evaporation system, bulk water is heated to a high temperature to generate water vapor, resulting in a slow response to sunlight and heat loss to the bulk water or the external environment To yield a remarkable photothermal performance, the development of interfacial evaporation structure should center around the following four key factors. To obtain a high efficiency, a multilayered structure is proposed to take into account these pivotal factors and it provides us with more options to choose alternative appropriate materials Recently, many similar double-layered evaporation structures have been widely adopted. In most cases, such as air-laid paper An efficient solar steam generation depends highly on the photothermal conversion materials with broadband absorptance and high photothermal properties With the aim to further explore novel techniques and materials in improving evaporation efficiency and reducing cost for desalination, we have applied the blackest paint, called Black 3.0 Paint®, to the floating interfacial solar-driven evaporation device serving as the photothermal conversion material combined with a sheet of melamine foam (MF). Herein, a sheet of hot-pressed MF plays an ideal elastic skeleton material sprayed with Black 3.0 paint, serving on top as a perfect solar absorber to efficiently absorb and convert the solar radiation into heat. To achieve a perfect evaporation performance and high solar-thermal energy conversion efficiency, we demonstrate a self-floating three-layer evaporation structure with a two-dimensional water path to localize solar-thermal heat generation to the air/water interface. This entire device is made from the commercially available and low-cost materials: solar absorber uses a sheet of hot-pressed MF combined with Black 3.0 paint; two-dimensional water path is provided by the highly absorbent Webril all-cotton wipes, and thermal barrier uses the Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) foam. Under 1 sun illumination without solar concentration, this evaporation device yields an excellent evaporation rate of freshwater as high as 2.48 kg m -2 h -1 and a highlighted evaporation efficiency of 172.5%. Based on this multilayered evaporation structure, the novel Black 3.0 paint demonstrates a superb performance with cost-effectiveness, operability, and durability, which can be regarded as one of the indispensable choices of the solar-absorbing materials in the future development of the solar-driven evaporation process. The schematic of the synthesis process of the absorber layer is shown in Fig. The inexpensive Black 3.0 paint has gained great attention in creative art and as an superb solar photothermal material. As the blackest and most matte acrylic paint, Black 3.0 paint exhibits nearly perfect solar absorption at up to 99% of visible light. The paint can be easily applied via brushing or spraying onto most surfaces, such as wood, paper, canvas, and plastic. Last but not the least, the paint is light in density and very suitable to the desalination process. Figure Figures Localizing the heat converted from solar energy to the air/water interface is the critical step to achieve high evaporation performance. Figure The surface wettability of the evaporation device also plays an important role in the steam generation process. As shown in Fig. Avoiding salt accumulating in the evaporation device remains a significant character for a self-floating solar evaporation structure utilizing heat localization The steam generation ability of the evaporation device at a laboratory scale is tested combining an irradiation system to simulate the solar radiation, a weighing system monitoring the mass change of water in a beaker during a certain period of irradiation, and an infrared camera monitoring the real-time temperature. Both 3.5 wt% NaCl solution and DI water are prepared to keep the initial temperature at 21 • C in the 100 ml beakers. The evaporation device floated on water in the beaker filled with 127g of water, beneath the beaker is an electronic balance connected to the computer, and the simulated solar radiation was provided by a solar simulator. When the illumination began, the solar steam generation is determined by the balance, and the real-time temperature of the absorber sheet and water surface are monitored by an infrared camera. The laboratory temperature and humidity are kept at about 22 • C and 21%, respectively. Figure We have performed field test of this evaporation device to demonstrate the feasibility of scalable production of freshwater. We constructed a prototype of the evaporation system with a condensation chamber and an evaporation device of a large area of the absorber (24 cm × 24 cm ) inside, as shown in Figs. The average evaporation rate of drinkable freshwater, shown in Fig. We have demonstrated a high-performance, low cost, and simple interfacial three-layer steam generation device based on the novel commercial Black 3.0 paint, which is first applied to the solar steam generation as a promising candidate for the photothermal materials. Black 3.0 paint sprayed on a sheet of MF serves as the top solar absorber layer that can widely absorb the solar radiation and efficiently convert it into heat. The absorber layer which is placed on a PVC foam plane under 1 sun irradiation shows a significant temperature gradient and reaches up to 100 • C of equilibrium temperature. The absorber is shown to sport strong thermal and chemical stabilities under harsh environment, and it exhibits a remarkable salt rejection ability. All these performance contribute to the long-term durable steam generation process. In the laboratory experiments, enabled by the assistance of the low thermal conductivity PVC foam to reduce the heat loss and the cotton wipe to provide sufficient water through two-dimensional water path to the heating region, the evaporation device has reached a striking steam generation rate of 2.48 kg m -2 h -1 , 6 times higher than the natural evaporation, and a highlighted evaporation efficiency of 172.5% under 1 sun irradiation at the room temperature, surpassing most of the reported works. Even in the rooftop experiments during a cloudy winter day in Boston, MA with the maximum environment temperature of 4 • C, 2.83 kg m -2 d -1 of water can be collected. This simple, low cost, and easy to manufacture evaporation device is highly beneficial to large scale water desalination and purification applications. The commercial MF is purchased from South Street Designs company (UPC: 089902974060) with the dimension of 10 cm × 6 cm × 2 cm ($0.3/piece). Black 3.0 paint is purchased on the Culture Hustle ($0.146/ml). Webril pure cotton wipe is in the size of 0.2 m × 0.2 m ($2.99/m 2 ). The PVC foam insulator sheet is purchased from the McMaster-Carr with the dimension of 813 mm × 1219 mm × 13 mm ($58.7/m 2 ). Solar absorber layer is fabricated as follows: pristine MF is thoroughly washed several times with ethanol and deionized (DI) water and then put in an oven kept at 60 • C in preparation for the hot-pressing treatment. After it is totally dried, the MF is pressed at 200 • C for 6 minutes with a compression ratio of 4, which is the height ratio of pristine MF to hot-pressed one. Serving as the skeleton of the absorber, hot-pressed MF is cut into the desired shape with a thickness of about 1 mm. Black 3.0 paint is thinned with DI water under vigorous stirring for 5 minutes with a paintbrush, which helps to get a homogeneous mixture. The mass ratio of DI water to Black 3.0 paint is kept in the range of 0.35 ∼ 0.4 in the dilution process. Subsequently, the diluted Black 3.0 paint is sprayed onto the MF sheet by a touch-up spray gun (Paasche Airbrush, USA) with a 0.8 mm spray head at the pressure of 70 psi. The distance between the spray head and the MF sheet is about 25 cm. The golden rule is that 3 or 4 thin layers is much better than a single thick layer. And then dry it between each spraying with the hot air blower (Yihua Electronic Equipment Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China) at a temperature of 190 • C for 5 minutes. It's worth noting that this drying time is suitable for the specific dimension of the sample in this work. A piece of PVC foam (47 mm in diameter and 13 mm in thickness) is utilized as the thermal insulator. Webril pure cotton wipe is cut into a 47 mm circle with four extended strips of 30 mm in width and 20 mm in length. The hydrophilic cotton wipe wrapped around the PVC foam with the four strips tip soaking in the bulk water ensures that the water reaches the upper circular area due to capillary force. Then, the MF sheet is placed over the circular area of the cotton wipe. The steam generation experiments in the lab are carried out under a solar simulator (Newport, 94081A, class ABB) which supplies solar flux of 1 kW m -2 with an optical filter for the standard AM 1.5 G spectrum. 127g of DI water and seawater (3.5 wt% NaCl) are prepared at the same initial temperature of 21 • C and placed in the 100 ml beakers with a mouth diameter of 50 mm. The steam generation device is floated on the solution surface and the mass of water is accurately monitored by an electric balance (RADWAG, PS 1000.X2.NTEP) connected to a computer for recording the real-time mass change. The real-time temperature is monitored by an infrared radiation camera (FLIR, A655sc). The microscope images are obtained by using Metallurgical Microscope (AmScope, ME520TC-18M3) in the darkfield mode. The reflectivity spectra (UV-Visible-Near-infrared range: 200 nm ∼ 2500 nm) are measured by the Jasco V770 spectrophotometer at an incident angle of 6 • with the ISN-923 60 mm BaSO 4 based integrating sphere equipped with PMT and PbS detectors. The reflectivity spectra are normalized by a PTFE based reflectance standard. The transmittance spectra (Mid-infrared region: 2.5 μm ∼ 20 μm) are measured by the Jasco FTIR 6600 spectrometer at a normal incident angle with reference to the background spectrum of a hydraulic pressed KBr film (20 psi). The Extech EC400 ExStik salinity meter is utilized to characterized the water quality of the collected water samples.