Marcasite class of compounds provide facile platform to explore novel phenomena of fundamental and technological importance, such as unconventional superconductivity or high performance electrocatalyst. We report the synthesis and experimental investigation of a new marcasite CoSeAs in this letter. Experimental investigation of the new material using neutron scattering measurements reveal weak magnetic correlation of cobalt ions below T = 36.2 K. The modest isotropic exchange interaction between cobalt moments, inferred from random phase approximation analysis, hints of magnetically unstable environment. It is a desirable characteristic to induce unconventional superconductivity via chemical pressure application. Transition metals are at the core of almost every novel phenomena in magnetism. CoSeAs stands at the cross-roads of CoSe and CoAs compounds that crystallize in MnP-type tetragonal structure. While CoSe is argued to manifest a combination of ferromagnetic and spin glass properties, There is not much known about CoSeAs. The knowledge of electrical conducting properties and a theoretical understanding of the density of states at the Fermi surface are necessary to characterize the new material. We have performed first principles electronic structure calculations for CoSeAs based on the density functional theory by employing the plane-wave basis set, as implemented in the Quantum-ESPRESSO. As shown in Fig. Elastic scattering measurements on CoSeAs powder are used to infer the underlying static magnetic correlation between Co ions. We show the representative scans at two temperatures in Fig. 2 )= 0.2695 ×10 -12 cm, g is the Lande splitting factor and was taken to be g = 2, f (Q) is the magnetic form factor, and e -Wj is the Debye-Waller factor and was taken to be 1. To gain insight about the strength of exchange inter-action between Co ions in CoSeAs, we have performed detailed inelastic measurements. In Fig. The absence of any dispersion in experimental data suggests an isotropic nearest neighbor interaction in the system. Further quantitative information is obtained by analyzing the dynamic susceptibility χ (Q, E), given by where γ 0 2 = 0.073/μ B 2 , k i and k f represent initial and final neutron wave vectors and f (Q) is the form factor of magnetic ion (in this case Co ion). In Fig. We have fitted the data using random phase approximation (RPA) model. where Γ Q ± = Γ[1∓χ 0 J] and χ 0 is static susceptibility. Clearly, the RPA model describes the dynamic properties of CoSeAs very well. Fitted value of J = 0.25(4) meV at T = 1.7 K indicates weak exchange interaction between Co-ions. Obtained values of Γ is plotted as a function q at T = 1.7 K, manifesting q-independent characteristic of the dynamic behavior. of wave vector Q in Fig. In summary, we have synthesized a new marcasite phase material CoSeAs. Neutron scattering investigation of polycrystalline CoSeAs reveals the development of long range magnetic order below T c = 36.2 K. Given the fact that only a very few transition metal marcasites are known to manifest magnetic order, this is an important finding. Moreover, the weak nearest neighbor exchange coupling between Co ions makes it an interesting candidate material for the exploration of unconventional superconductivity using chemical doping method. Chemical pressure can further distort the anion octahedron, encompassing the transition metal ion, to induce a transition to new phase of material. Further research works are highly desirable in this pursuit. Besides the exploration of a possible superconducting state in chemically doped CoSeAs, we envision two possible applications of the new compound as photovoltaic absorber and in the design of robust electrocatalyst. There is an increasing trend in the use of marcasites and pyrites for photovoltaic application in recent years. DKS thankfully acknowledges the support by the Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under the grant no. DE-SC0014461. This work utilized facilities supported by the Department of Commerce.