Discovering and isolating infected individuals is a cornerstone of epidemic control Mass quarantine has shown its effectiveness in controlling the epidemic outbreak during the COVID-19 pandemic, but with a considerable social and economic cost Regardless of whether it is performed in person or digitally, contact tracing in practice often discovers super-spreading events, which are abundant in many epidemics The contact tracing's ability to detect super-spreading events can be, in part, attributed to the "friendship paradox" Here we argue that contact tracing is assisted by an additional statistical bias in social networks. This bias is leveraged when the contact tracing is executed backward to identify the source of infection (parent). This is because the more offsprings (infections) a parent has produced, the more frequently the parent shows up as a contact. Both biases can be at play at the same time, and thus their effects are additive, resulting in an exceptional efficacy of backward contact tracing at identifying super-spreaders and super-spreading events. A leading factor that determines the strengths of these statistical biases is the structural properties of the underlying contact network itself, in particular, the heterogeneity of the degree (i.e., the number of contacts). Heterogeneous networks, where the number of contacts varies significantly among individuals, have a larger variance in the degree, which in turn produces a stronger friendship paradox effect. Real networks are known to be heterogeneous Here, we analyze the statistical biases that backward contact tracing leverages. Using simulations on both synthetic and empirical contact network data, we show that strategically executed contact tracing can be highly effective and efficient at controlling epidemics. Our results call not only for the incorporation of contact tracing as a more crucial part of the epidemic control strategy, but crucially for the implementation of backward-facing contact tracing protocols both in traditional and digital contact tracing programs to fully leverage the biases afforded by empirical network structures. Face-to-face contacts between people can be represented as a network, where a node is a person and an edge indicates a contact between two persons. When a node in the network is infectious, the disease can be transmitted to the neighbors through its edges (Fig. Formally, if we sample a node at random, the distribution of degree (i.e., the number of contacts) is given by {p k }, which can be expressed as the probability generating function (PGF), i.e., The PGF is a polynomial representation of the degree distribution; for example, the average degree can be calculated using a derivative k = ∑ k kp k = G 0 (1). Now, consider that a node is infected and the disease is transmitted through an edge chosen at random. Then, the disease is k times more likely to reach a node with degree k than a node with degree 1. Therefore, the number of other contacts (i.e, excess degree; k -1) found at the end of that contact is generated by where k is a normalization constant. Note that the average excess degree is larger than or equal to the average degree, G 1 (1) ≥ G 0 (1) (Friendship paradox). This property can be leveraged by the so-called "acquaintance sampling" strategy, where one randomly samples individuals and then samples their "friends" by following contacts An often overlooked fact about contact tracing is that there are two directions that the contact tracing can lead to discovery of infected individuals. The first is following the direction of the transmission-to whom the transmission may have occurred-and the other is reaching to the parent-from whom the transmission occurred. The difference has a profound implication on the statistical nature of the sampling. Disease spreading can be represented as a tree composed of edges from parents to offsprings (Fig. other offsprings for the parent is generated by The contact tracing samples a parent having k -2 degree (i.e., the number of other offsprings) with a probability proportional to k(k -1)p k (∼ k 2 p k )-a bias stronger than acquaintance sampling (∼ kp k ). To illustrate this in practice, we simulate the Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered (SIR) model on a degree heterogeneous network generated by the Barabási-Albert (BA) model Backward tracing needs information about the direction from which the infection occurs. However, except for a few diseases The backward tracing leverages the two sampling biases attributed to the heterogeneity in the degree distributions. Therefore, we hypothesize that contact tracing is highly effective in degree heterogeneous networks. As a proof of concept, we simulate epidemic spreading using the SIR model on a network with a power-law degree distribution. The network is generated by the BA model composed of 250, 000 nodes with minimum degree 2 We intervene epidemic spreading from t = 0.5 by detecting and isolating newly infected individual at the time of infection with probability p s (i.e., probability of detecting infection). Then, from each detected individual, we add each contact (i.e., neighbor) to a contact list with probability p t (i.e., probability of successful tracing). At every interval of ∆t = 0.25, we isolate the most frequent n nodes in the contact list and then clear the list. Note that contact tracing with p t = 0 is equivalent to case isolation, i.e., we discover and isolate newly infected nodes with probability p s but do not trace close contacts. We model the contact tracing as preventing infections to all nodes rooted from the isolated nodes in the transmission tree. The disease infects roughly 30% of nodes at the peak of infection (Fig. Contact tracing isolates fewer nodes in total while preventing more cases than case isolation, resulting in a high cost-efficiency in terms of the number of prevented cases per isolation (Fig. Outbreak investigation can be considered as contact tracing for 'gatherings' (e.g. the closure of churches, grocery markets, or any spontaneous gatherings; see Fig. Contact tracing is effective at detecting the gatherings with super-spreading events for the same reason as for super-spreaders; gatherings with k participants are detected with a probability roughly proportional to k 2 (see People-gathering networks in Methods). To test its effectiveness, we generate synthetic peoplegathering networks composed of 200, 000 person-nodes and 50, 000 gathering-nodes with a power-law distribution of exponent β = -3 using the configuration model As in the case of people contact networks, contact tracing substantially reduces the peak of infections (Fig. A virus can easily spread in a densely connected population where people routinely have face-to-face contact with each other such as students participating in the same class We test the effectiveness of contact tracing for a temporal contact network of 567 university students, which is constructed using the physical contact data collected in the Copenhagen Network Study The epidemic spreading is simulated using a more empirically-grounded model-Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) model-which reflects the fact that many infectious diseases have an incubation period before being infectious We carry out contact tracing on the third day and onward in the same way as for the synthetic networks except how we compile the contact list. We detect newly infected individuals with probability p s at the time of infectious. Then, with a probability p t , a close contact for each detected individual is traced and added to the contact list; we consider a node as a close contact if and only if it has contact with the detected individual for at least one hour in the previous seven days. The contact tracing is carried out at every interval of 24 hours. People-gathering networks. The people networks and people-gathering networks are generated by the BA and the configuration model, respectively. a. Contact tracing lowers the peak of infection by more than 50% of that for case infection. b. The effectiveness stands out even if we cannot trace all but few nodes. c. The efficacy of contact tracing is substantially enhanced when the detection probability is increased. d-f. Compared to case isolation (p t = 0), contact tracing (p t > 0) isolates fewer nodes while preventing more cases. Therefore, contact tracing is highly cost-efficient in terms of the number of prevented cases per isolation. g-i. Contact tracing is also highly effective for people-gathering networks. j-l. Compared to case isolation, contact tracing isolates a comparable number of cases while preventing more cases, leading to a higher cost-efficiency. Each point indicates the average value for 30 simulations. The translucent band indicates the 95% confidence interval estimated by a bootstrapping with 10 4 resamples. Our simulation shows that case isolation alone reduces the peak of infections by roughly 15% (Fig. Let us investigate how much contact tracing would be necessary to prevent an outbreak. We calculate the epidemic probability-the probability of sustained transmission of disease-for networks with an Control of an outbreak using contact tracing in heterogeneous networks. We use the BA network, where each of 250,000 nodes has a degree at least 2 and attempt to control the spread of a disease with transmissibility T using tracing probability P. Markers show the average of 100 Monte Carlo simulations, and solid lines show the results of our analytical formalism. a. The probability of sustained transmissions goes down monotonically with more contact tracing, but without undergoing the usual sharp epidemic transition. Unlike in mass-action models, there are diminishing returns to contact tracing: While it efficiently identified super-spreading events in heterogeneous networks, the epidemic eventually localizes around low degree nodes which are harder to protect with contact tracing alone. b. The regime of smeared epidemic transition increases with the frequency of contact tracing. At a high frequency of contact we find the probability of sustained transmission remains low even for high values of transmissibility well-beyond the epidemic threshold. arbitrary degree distribution under contact tracing based on a branching process formalism (see Epidemic probability in Methods for the derivation of the probability). We consider a contact network of people, where a disease is transmitted from an infected person i (i.e., parent) to susceptible person j (i.e., offspring) with transmission rate T . The parent is identified and isolated with probability P = p s p t (i.e., tracing probability) from its offspring j by contact tracing. Our analytical solution (see Epidemic probability in Methods), as well as a numerical simulation (Fig. We show that contact tracing leverages two sampling biases arising from the heterogeneity in the number of individual's contacts. Our theoretical and simulation analyses indicate that contact tracing can be a highly effective and efficient strategy even when it is not performed on a massive scale, as long as it is strategically performed to leverage the sampling biases. Furthermore, contact tracing can be more cost-efficient than case isolation in terms of the number of prevented cases per isolation, in particular when detecting infection is difficult. The effectiveness and efficiency hinge upon the fact that backward tracing can detect super-spreading events exceptionally well. Therefore, we argue that (i) even when massive contact tracing is not feasible, it may still be worth to implement contact tracing, (ii) not all contact tracing protocols are equal-it is crucial to implement the protocols that leverage the presented biases, and (iii) the "cheaper" contact tracing offered by digital contact tracing may hold even greater potential than previously suggested In the context of digital contact tracing, our results show the need for (i) backward contact tracing that aims to identify the parent of a detected case and (ii) deep contact tracing to notify other recent contacts of the traced nodes. Current implementations of digital contact tracing, including the Apple and Google partnership An implementation of our model does not necessarily require any compromise in terms of privacy or decentralization of the contact tracing protocol itself There are several caveats to be considered. First, diagnostic tests and isolation are assumed to be instantaneous in our simulations. A huge delay may degenerate the effectiveness of preventive measures, in particular case isolation in which immediate isolation is crucial. Second, we assume that every individual has an equal probability of infection and isolation, which, however, may vary depending on demographics. The heterogeneity in the probabilities may hinder the effectiveness of opt-in contact tracing strategies. For example, it is possible that a virus is constantly sourced from people who refuse contact tracing Even with the aforementioned limitations, our results suggest that contact tracing has a larger potential than commonly considered. Because the effectiveness hinges upon the ability to reach the "source" of infection, our results underline the importance of strategic contact tracing protocols. We use the dataset collected in the Copenhagen Network Study 38 to construct the temporal network of physical contacts between students in a university. The data set contains information on the physical contacts between more than 700 students in a university estimated by Bluetooth signal strength. We remove all individuals from the data that have a valid Bluetooth scan in less than 60% of the observation period. Then, we regard that two individuals i and j had a contact if i or j received the Bluetooth scans from the other with the signal strength more than -75dB. We note that one receives the signal strength at approximately 1m distance from the device We simulate the SIR model for the static contact networks and people-gathering networks using the EoN package For the student contact network, we simulate the SEIR model with the parameters used in studies on the COVID-19 disease In the people-gathering network, a person-node is connected to a gathering-node if he/she joined the gathering. The degree of a person implies how mobile the person is across diverse sets of gatherings, and the degree of a gathering indicates the number of participants for the gathering. Denoted by G 0 (x) and F 0 (x) the generating functions for the degree distributions of persons and gatherings, respectively, which are defined as The transmission event happens from a person to others via a gathering. When we trace a gathering from a person, a gathering with k participants is k times more likely to be sampled than the gathering with only one person. Therefore, the excess size of the gathering is generated by The probability distribution of the number of one's neighbors through gatherings is given by G 0 (F 1 (x)). Because larger gatherings would produce more infections and thus more likely to be traced, the number of participants of the gathering except for the original spreader and the isolated individual is given by the probability generating function In other words, contact tracing samples a gathering with k participants with probability roughly proportional to k 2 . Therefore, as is the case for people contact networks, contact tracing is effective at identifying super-spreading events and prevent numerous further disease transmission events. We calculate the probability that the contact tracing stops the spreading of disease. To keep the analysis simple, we assume that every newly infected node has a probability P to lead to its parent node and we can prevent the infections to all of the parent's grandchildren by notifying the infected node. The probability of epidemics is determined by the offspring distributions, i.e., number of nodes to which an infected node spreads the disease. We note that the offspring distribution depends on how we sample nodes due to the sampling biases (see Results). Specifically, if we sample infected nodes at random or by following a random transmission, the offspring distributions are given by generating functions respectively, where T is the probability of transmitting disease through an edge, and r k and q k are the probabilities of having k offsprings, respectively. With contact tracing, the offsprings of a parent can continue the spreading process if and only if successful contact tracing does not take place for all the offsprings, which occurs with probability (1 -P) k . Therefore, the nodes sampled by following a random transmission have the offspring distribution given by where the R 1 denotes the R 1 under contact tracing, and R 0 is the analogous function for R 0 . We have distinguished standard transmissions (counted with the variable x) from transmissions that occurred but are isolated quickly enough by contact tracing to stop the transmission tree (counted with the variable y). This gives us a way to calculate the coefficients r k of R 0 (x, 1) which specify the distribution of successful branching events in the transmission tree (i.e., those that can continue spreading). The probability u that transmission to a node without contact tracing around the parent does not lead to sustained transmission is given by the self-consistency condition u = R 1 (u, 1) , (10) where the right-hand side gives the probability that the offsprings also do not lead to sustained transmission (1 if contact tracing occurs, and u otherwise). The probability of an epidemic is then the probability that at least one transmission around patient leads to sustained transmission, or