Nowadays, long distance optical fibre transmission systems use polarization diversity multiplexed signals to enhance transmission performance. Distributed acoustic sensors (DAS) use the same propagation medium ie. single mode optical fibre, and aims at comparable targets such as covering the highest distance with the best signal quality. In the case of sensors, a noiseless transmission enables to monitor a large quantity of mechanical events along the fibre. This paper aims at extending the perspectives of DAS systems with regard to technology breakthroughs introduced in long haul transmission systems over the last decade. We recently developed a sensor interrogation method based on coherent phase-sensitive optical time domain reflectometry (φ-OTDR), with dual polarization multiplexing at the transmitter and polarization diversity at the receiver. We name this technique Coherent-MIMO sensing. A study is performed from a dual-polarization numerical model to compare several sensor interrogation techniques, including Coherent-MIMO. We demonstrate that dual-polarization probing of a fibre sensor makes it insensitive to polarization effects, decreases the risks of false alarms and thus strongly enhances its sensitivity. The simulations results are validated with an experiment, and finally quantitative data are given on the performance increase enabled by Coherent-MIMO sensing. Optical fibres, the ones dedicated for sensing applications as much as the ones in already deployed cables in telecom infrastructure, can be employed as distributed acoustic and strain sensors. These sensors can serve in many fields, from marine environment monitoring The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the numerical model used for the simulations, under static conditions and with the inclusion of noise contributions. Section 3 investigates the different manners to recover and compute the phase from the received backscattered field, and summarizes the main fading effects that can be identified and mitigated with modern sensing schemes. Section 4 compares the performance of interrogation methods when the number of used polarization channels varies using simulations; in this section, polarization diversity is used at the receiver side, simulations are run to identify and discuss the remaining sensitivity issues. Finally, section 5 details the experimental setup that validates simulations results and assesses the sensitivity of the developed MIMO sensor. Several existing models investigated the backscattered phase and amplitude from optical fibres. The first step is to consider the fibre under static conditions where φ is the common phase term to cover all possible unitary matrices. It results from Eq. ( As we are interested in the backscattered light, the forward and reflection paths are modelled for each fibre segment. The reflection is placed at the end of the fibre segment. It can be modelled either as a perfect reflection M = [ 1 0 0 1 ] , or considering polarization transfers at the reflection, introducing a transfer coefficient α ∈ [0, 0.05]: ]. The value of this polarization transfer coefficient has to be measured and verified. The existence of such a transfer coefficient was considered for physical properties of silica where A i and p i stand for the dual-pass attenuation and phasor from the fibre start, and where |p i | follows a Rayleigh distribution 1We change the formalism for the round-trip Jones matrix with respect to the one we used in As the SOP of the emitted signal at the transmitter and the incident signal at the receiver side aren't perfectly aligned, a misalignment parameter θ will be considered. It is reported as an additional rotation, for example at the entrance of the system No phase retarder is added as the considered fibre portions at the transmitter and receiver are small compared to the fibre sensor length L f . Finally, the polarization beat length L pb of the simulated fibre is considered. This way, the speed of polarization variations from one fibre segment to the other is controlled. For single mode fibres, L pb is of the order of magnitude of 10m , with i the segment index, λ any polarization parameter (referring to β, γ or Θ), λ N ew randomly drawn as described in the beginning of this section and independent from λ i . Several simulations for different L s /L pb ratios are shown in Figure Similar to The receiver is made of a coherent mixer, subject to insertion losses and additive white noise caused by thermal and quantum noise from the photodiodes. The white noise of the receiver is considered as , where the contributions of the shot noise σ 2 s and thermal noise σ 2 th are dominant compared to the relative intensity noise (RIN) in our case. Altogether, we previously showed This section focuses on the phase estimation methods to be used according to the number of used polarization states at the transmitter and receiver side. The following notations are adopted: SISO stands for Single polarization Input -Single polarization Output sensing, which means that the light sent to the fibre sensor is linearly polarized in one direction and that the backscattered light is recovered on one polarization at the receiver side. SIMO stands for Single polarization Input -Multiple polarization Output sensing, which is often referred to as "polarization diversity receiving in φ-OTDR": linearly polarized light is sent to the sensor, typically with a narrow linewidth laser, backscattered light is recovered on both polarizations using a polarization diversity receiver. Finally, MIMO stands for Multiple polarization Input -Multiple polarization Output sensing, where light is sent on two orthogonal polarization states at the transmitter side, and polarization diversity detection is used at the receiver. MISO setup is also considered: Multiple polarization Input -Single polarization Output sensing, where polarization diversity is used at the transmitter but not at the receiver. The Jones formalism is used. The dual-pass fibre channel is noted H, or H i considering the particular segment i. We define H = [ h x x h x y h y x h y y ], with complex scalar coefficients. where det H is the determinant of H. SIMO probes a single polarization. For a recovered signal on both polarizations, if the first row of H is sent: Note that in Eq. ( ) with , the real and imaginary parts of h xx and h yx data SISO recovers information on one polarization only (h xx for example), such that the estimated phase is φSISO = ∠(h xx ). MISO proceeds the same way, and recovers h xx + h xy with no additional information to differentiate both components. Estimated MISO phase is then φMISO = ∠(h xx + h xy ). Existing SISO and MISO configurations do not necessarily include a coherent receiver with polarization diversity but rather a single polarization or single 90 • hybrid direct detection receiver, and use all-optical techniques to recover the phase such as delay lines, dual pulses, chirped pulses... Using direct detection, there is no sensitivity to SOP variations of the incoming light: the full intensity of the signal is received Here, coherent detection -coherent φ-OTDR is used. Coherent receivers are sensitive to the SOP of incoming light. To recover the full signal, there is a need to use a polarization diversity scheme, where each polarization component is detected by projecting the incident signal over two orthogonal polarization states and beating each projection with the same local oscillator (LO) Several fading types were mentioned in the introduction. Now that the phase estimators are defined, this section aims at linking phase estimators to their respective fading risks. Interference fading, or coherent fading Polarization fading was identified in interferometric sensors Referring to the notations in subsection 3.1, polarization fading strongly impacts SISO configuration: when detecting h xx , an intensity fading will occur for periodic (Θ, β) pairs corresponding to orthogonality between the emitted x-polarization and the received x-polarization, resulting in no reliable phase estimation if the detected intensity is too low. Conversely, SIMO and MIMO modes are supposed to be resilient to polarization fading, meaning there will always be a phase estimation that is stable in time: φ SI MO = ∠(p i × (e j2γ i cos 2β ij sin 2β i (e j2γ i cos 2Θ i + sin 2Θ i ))) (here Eq. ( Recent and older results, together with our definitions of SISO and SIMO, agree on the need for multiple receivers, should it be in direct detection With phase OTDR, a local phase information is processed as a differentiation between the phase estimated at one fibre segment location and that estimated at one previous location. The first fibre segment serves as a reference. Repeating this phase estimation process in time allows to capture and localize mechanical perturbations that may affect the fibre. The phase retrieval is detailed below. In static mode, for two segments i and j with j > i, the measured differential phase is constant over time and given by φ st atic = φ j -φ i . In dynamic mode, assuming a strain is applied locally at segment position i, the phase is linearly disturbed relatively to the perturbation, following: where n is the refraction index, ξ photo-elasticity coefficient (= 0.79 for silica), δl the fibre strain. So if i is disturbed, the measured phase is φ dyn = φ j -φ i +2∆φ single-pass = φ st atic +∆φ dual-pass . The phase delay is applied twice since the light does a round-trip in the segment (way faster than the mechanical disturbance action, so the measurement of mechanical perturbations is considered instantaneous). For the detection of an event, we chose to monitor the standard deviation of the differential phase over time, along the fibre distance (denoted StDv). When an event occurs along the sensor, phase variations appear in time, thus increasing the phase standard deviation locally. The displayed traces in this section are simulations of a coherent detection -coherent φ-OTDR, where the phase is recovered according to the estimators defined in subsection 3.1. All simulations are static, e.g with no strain applied to the sensor. Therefore, this study focuses on the false alarm issue, not onto the non-detection case: the main requirement for phase sensors is that no variation or "false alarm" occurs when the fibre is not disturbed, which is also the condition to achieve the highest sensitivity. A simulation study of non-detection case would require a dynamic model, which is out of the scope of this paper. Firstly, the global behaviour of the StDv along sensor distance is considered to highlight the difference between the given phase estimators. Secondly, paying attention to the StDv peaks, we show how they relate to the polarization rotation and birefringence in the fibre segments. Figure Regardless of the phase estimation method, the evolution of the state of polarization in the fibre is described mainly by Θ, β, γ and θ defined in subsection 2.1 provided that the Rayeligh scattering is an ideal reflector (no polarization crosstalk at reflection stage). In Figure Back to subsection 3.1, the SIMO phase estimator was defined as: φ SI MO = ∠(p i × (e j2γ i cos 2β ij sin 2β i (e j2γ i cos 2Θ i + sin 2Θ i ))) if we dismiss α and θ. It is recalled that Θ stands for the random polarization rotation in the fibre segment, and β, γ are phase retarder coefficients, defined in subsection 2.1. This estimator is declared immune to intensity fading issues as it allows to get a phase estimation at all locations in the fibre, regardless of the state of polarization. However, the phase ∠p is modulated by the coefficient c mult,SIMO = e j2γ cos 2βj sin 2β × (e j2γ cos 2Θ + sin 2Θ) This coefficient is plotted in Figure Note that there is no phase fading with MIMO phase estimation since the equivalent coefficient for MIMO is c mult,MIMO = abs(det H) = 1 since H is a unitary 2 × 2 matrix. To begin quantifying the performance increase brought by MIMO probing and its associated phase estimation compared to SIMO, a study is conducted by means of simulations. Here, the fibres are probed using complementary Golay sequences on either one or two polarizations. The use of these complementary sequences allows for a mathematically perfect estimation of the backscattered optical field, considering either a single polarization channel, or a dual-polarization one, as demonstrated in The statistical study is conducted on a high number of simulations (N = 10 6 simulated points, corresponding to 2000 fibre generations for 340 m length, 40 fibres for 25 km and 20 for 50 km), with f symb = 50Mbaud, corresponding to 2m gauge length. MIMO and SIMO probing simulations are run on randomly generated fibres, and the differential phase StDv is derived for every fibre segment. The polarization beat length L pb is selected such that L pb ≤ L s , assuming independent polarization state between consecutive segments (see subsection 2.1). Three different fibre lengths are simulated to investigate the influence of distance on the StDv distribution according to the phase estimation method, so to compare the relative robustness of the SIMO and MIMO estimators over distance. Considering that the phase StDv is a measure of noise, we define the signal to noise ratio as SNR phase = 10 log 10 (1/σ 2 phase ). The mean value of the SNR phase for MIMO is 1dB above SIMO for all simulated lengths (50km, 25km, 340m). Moreover, the additional variance of SNR phase in SIMO compared to MIMO method is of 3dBrad 2 at 340m, 11dBrad 2 at 25km and 7dBrad 2 at 50km. We conclude that MIMO enhances the mean achieved SNR and also reduces its fluctuations with respect to SIMO. From a high number of random simulations, it appears that SIMO phase estimations bring in more variations than MIMO, for the same simulated fibre with same scatterers distribution and birefringence, and for all distance ranges. The performance gap between SIMO and MIMO methods is striking for short distances, and remains significant at very long distances (50km here) when coherent fading and attenuation also affect the measurement. MIMO sensing appears as a strong, stable phase estimator on short fibre lengths as well as on longer distances. An experiment is performed on 340m SMF, with no perturbations around the fibre so to stay in static mode as in the simulations. The fibre is interrogated with BPSK sequences on one (SIMO) or both polarizations (MIMO). The setup is described in Figure Note that there is only a short distance of fibre here, so the overall measurement shows low phase standard deviation values, well below 0.1rad. A first look at Figure The SIMO estimated phase on half of the fibre segments varies more than the MIMO estimated phase on 75% of the (same) fibre segments. It is consistent with the values obtained through As for the SNR phase values, and despite the restricted number of measured points, the variance of SNR phase is 2.3dBrad 2 higher in SIMO compared to MIMO, which is consistent with the simulation value (3dBrad 2 at 340m). Although no SIMO probing was experimented on longer fibre, it is expected that the relative distribution of SIMO and MIMO is not supposed to vary much. In a recent work The exploitation of two orthogonal polarization channels in an optical fibre was highlighted in the case of optical fibre sensing. From a numerical model of the Rayleigh backscattering in singlemode fibres, simulations were run for different configurations of transmitter and receiver. Several phase estimation methods for coherent φ-OTDR were compared, among which Single polarization Input -Multiple polarization Output sensing (SIMO), often referred to as "polarization diversity receiving in φ-OTDR" in the literature, and Multiple polarization Input -Multiple polarization Output sensing (MIMO). It was demonstrated that some sensing configurations, in particular those with no polarization diversity, were sensitive to fading effects and could neither allow to correctly recover the intensity nor the phase information from all fibre locations. Even with polarization diversity at the receiver, we pointed out that SIMO estimated phase is subject to a modulation which biases the phase estimation for some fibre segments and triggers local phase variations. It was shown both in simulation and through experiment performed in the absence of mechanical perturbation that SIMO estimated phases vary considerably more than MIMO estimated ones, for the same fibre in the same conditions: Coherent-MIMO, by completely mitigating the effects of polarization, appears twice more sensitive and more reliable. In essence, we were able to thoroughly compare existing interrogation methods for coherent optical fibre sensors, and so to demonstrate the superiority of Coherent-MIMO over partial polarization diversity sensing techniques in terms of sensitivity. It proves that further research on dual-polarization interrogation of fibre sensors is of great interest, and gives insights on the key concerns towards a more reliable and sensitive fibre sensing.