This paper explores the time-modulated waveguide setups for unique and accurate permittivity and permeability extraction of lossy dispersive samples with phase-less measurements. We theoretically demonstrate that when the position of the short-circuit termination is dynamically modulated in a predefined way, the phase information of the reflection S-parameter manifests itself into the amplitude level of the emerging harmonics. Being insensitive to the calibration plane shifts and phase uncertainties in reflection measurements while bypassing a priori knowledge about the material under test (MUT) and also the transmission coefficient, can be enumerated as the main advantages of the proposed time-modulated retrieval scheme. Moreover, the presented reconstruction algorithm offers a simple post-processing step to facilitate fast computations of εr and μr. Several illustrative examples at X-band frequencies have been presented to numerically verify the validity of the proposed approach for some applicable and practical types of homogeneous materials. Two possible realization and measurement configurations are suggested and discussed based on mechanical actuation and electrical phase control. We have also performed an uncertainty analysis to examine how the realization tolerances can affect the accuracy of results. By involving the temporal dimension, the proposed strategy takes a great step forwards in phase-less reconstruction of the electromagnetic parameters. Electromagnetic characterization of materials is a reach, huge and old topic of microwave engineering. Almost any application of electromagnetic energy in which electromagnetic wave interacts with some sort of material, requires precise knowledge of complex permittivity and permeability. Electromagnetic characterization is used in a diverse field of scientific and industrial applications such as agriculture Microwave techniques proposed for material characterization can be categorized as resonant and non-resonant methods. Resonant methods are highly accurate but suffer from being narrowband, and material properties are just inferred in some discrete frequency points. Nonresonant methods, on the other hand, are broadband with acceptable accuracy and can be used for a wide class of materials such as composites, very lossy samples, and metamaterials In one classification, non-resonant methods can be grouped into transmission/reflection and reflection-only techniques. Transmission/reflection is the conventional material characterization technique in which material under test (MUT) is loaded in a specific transmission line (such as coaxial line or rectangular waveguide). Complex permittivity and permeability are determined by measuring and processing the transmission and reflection data Another important feature of the non-resonant measurement approaches is the nature of the measured quantity. Generally, conventional methods read complex scattering parameters to characterize the MUT As seen above, there is no phase-less reflectiononly technique that provides complex permittivity and permeability with broadband specifications. The aim of this paper is to suggest a scalar reflection-only method for complex material characterization by using the benefits of time-varying systems. Time-varying media and time modulated electromagnetic systems have drawn great attention of electromagnetic society in recent years Prior to presenting the inverse problem, we investigate the interaction of the electromagnetic fields with a dielectric sample loaded in a time-varying waveguide. Fig. Let us consider that the dielectric sample is illuminated by a monochromatic guided wave (dominant mode) with the transverse components of and suppressed time-harmonic dependence exp(j2πf 0 t). The time-domain reflected wave at the left side of the MUT can be written as Since the position modulation of the short-circuit termination has a fixed period, the reflection coefficient can be mathematically described as a periodic function of time, and defined over one period as a linear combination of q scaled and shifted pulses in which, and S 11,n =r n φ n denotes the complex reflection Sparameter, with r n and φ n representing the reflection amplitude and phase during the n th time interval (n-1)T m /q≤t≤nT m /q, respectively. It should be pointed out that r n = 1 (∀n ∈ N + {0}) when loss-less samples are measured. Based on the impedance transformation concept Here, γ z0 = (π/a ) 2 -k 2 0 and γ zd = (π/a ) 2 -k 2 0 r μ r indicate the z-directed wavenumbers inside the air-filled and sample-filled sections, respectively. Meanwhile, L n is the length of the air-filled section during the n th time interval, k 0 = 2πf 0 √ ε 0 μ 0 , ε 0 , and μ 0 refer to the wavenumber, permittivity, and permeability of the free-space, respectively, ε r =ε r -jε r and μ r =μ r -jμ r represent the relative complex permittivity and permeability of the sample, respectively, and finally, Z T E 0 = j2πf 0 μ 0 /γ z0 and Z T E d = j2πf 0 μ 0 /γ zd stand for the characteristic impedances of the air-filled and sample-filled sections, respectively. The reference plane is arbitrarily set at the sample boundary (z =0). As can be deduced from Eq. ( S 11,n mπ sin( mπ q ) exp -jmπ(2n -1) q (10) The details of the derivation steps are summarized in Appendix. The spectral information of the reflected field can be found by taking the Fourier transform of Eqs. (3), Here, we assume a monochromatic excitation with the angular frequency ω 0 =2πf 0 . Following the temporal modulation, a nonlinear phenomenon occurs as characterized by the emergence of a series of harmonics around the central frequency, with phases/intensities (a m ) determined by the complex reflection S-parameter in each time slot r1 jmπ e jφ1 1 -r2 r1 e ∆φ odd harmonics 0 even harmonics Before presenting the proposed method, a conventional time-independent configuration for electromagnetic parameter retrieval in short-circuited waveguides is schematically depicted in Fig. In this paper, as an alternative approach, we will exploit only the amplitude information of the harmonics (|a m |) emerging in the proposed time-modulated waveguide configuration to indirectly extract the accurate phase of the reflection S-parameter, thereby circumventing any difficulties and uncertainties accompanied with the phase calibration procedures. Our idea is graphically sketched in Fig. In the case of loss-less (or extremely low-loss) MUT, r 1 r 2 1, and the above expressions can be reduced to odd harmonics 0 even harmonics 1) The harmonic intensities are a nonlinear function of phase difference ∆φ, not the absolute phases φ 1 and φ 2 . Therefore, the phase information of S 11,1 and S 11,2 can not be recovered, separately, and the number of equations is decreased by one. 2) Since the intensities of odd harmonic frequencies differ just by the harmonic order factor, one of them can be employed as the independent information, only. 3) Given trigonometry formulas, the amplitude information of the synchronous component and odd harmonics are not independent in the case of loss-less (or extremely low-loss) dielectric samples. 4) The parameters r 1 and r 2 can be simply measured in a phase-less scheme when the short-circuit termination is statically located at L 1 and L 2 , respectively. 5) The profile of harmonic intensities are an even function of harmonic order (m) meaning that the positive and negative harmonics do not reveal independent data. In overall, ∆φ is the key unknown parameter in the inverse problem which manifests itself into the measured harmonic intensities. According to the first remark, the reduction in number of equations can be compensated by appending a new test configuration in which the position of short-circuit termination is cyclically swapped between L 1 and L 3 with modulation frequency f m . Con-sequently, ∆φ 12 =φ 1 -φ 2 and ∆φ 13 =φ 1 -φ 3 should be inevitably taken as the unknown parameters in the inverse problem instead of φ 1 and φ 2 . After delving into the nonlinear nature of Eqs. ( 3 ) m = ±3, ±6, ±9, ... To sum up, the flowchart for the proposed scalar material characterization using the time-modulated waveguides is shown in Fig. In order to extract the phase difference factors ∆φ 12 and ∆φ 13 , uniquely, three distinct measurements are adopted in this paper, wherein {L 1 , L 2 , L 1 , L 2 , ...}, {L 1 , L 3 , L 1 , L 3 , ...}, and {L 1 , L 2 , L 3 , L 1 , L 2 , L 3 , ...} are the time program for the position modulation of the short-circuit termination. The magnitudes of reflection S-parameters r 1 , r 2 , and r 3 are initially simulated or measured. In each measurement, the intensity of one of the non-trivial harmonics is recorded as independent data. The harmonic order can be arbitrarily chosen by considering different criteria such as frequency isolation, ease of recording, strength, and so on. As emphasized, these measurements are repeated for two identical samples with different thicknesses h 1 and h 2 to yield the unknown parameters ∆φ 12,h1 , ∆φ 13,h1 , ∆φ 12,h2 , and ∆φ 13,h2 . The systems of nonlinear equations for two thicknesses are quite independent and can be solved, separately. Indeed, for each thickness, we have a system of three coupled equations to extract ∆φ 12,hi and ∆φ 13,hi (i = 0, 1). A fast optimization is adopted to numerically solve both systems of equations through minimizing the error between measured/simulated and analytically calculated harmonic intensities (Eq. ( After obtaining ∆φ 12,h1 , ∆φ 13,h1 , ∆φ 12,h2 , and ∆φ 13,h2 from the simulated or measured data, Eqs. ( The numerical technique 'fmincon' function in MAT-LAB is applied to Eqs. ( In this section, the validity of the devised method is investigated through different illustrative examples. In our demonstrations, we used a WR-90 waveguide cell with length of 44.38 mm and cross section of 22.86×10.16 mm 2 to determine the electromagnetic parameters using temporal modulation. For each example, the simulated data are computed in several equally distributed distinct points from f 0 =8 to 12 GHz. To provide independent data with acceptable discrimination, the position of the short-circuit termination is temporally modulated between L 1 =0 mm, L 2 =5 mm, and L 3 =10 mm. It is worth mentioning that this set of positions can be adaptively changed for each frequency to increase the accuracy of the results, especially for high refractive index or very lossy materials. The magnitudes of the reflection S-parameter, r 1 , r 2 , and r 3 , are numerically calculated by using a waveguide measurement setup built in a commercial software, CST Microwave Studio (Fig. In the first example, different non-magnetic practical materials listed in Table . I are considered to be characterized with two unknown parameters (ε r and tanδ e ). To inspect the validity range of the proposed algorithm, a broad range of permittivity ∈[2, 20] and loss tangent ∈[0, 1] quantities are surveyed with diverse thicknesses. The harmonic components captured in the reflection side of the short-circuited waveguide are illustrated in Figs. The real and imaginary parts of the electromagnetic parameters for a linear, isotropic, and homogeneous dispersive material can be mathematically expressed by a one-term Debye model or a single-component Debye form Here, the subscripts "s" and "∞" represent the relative electromagnetic parameters at the static and high frequencies, respectively, τ e/m is the relaxation time, ω 0,e/m =2πf 0,e/m and δ e/m indicate the electric/magnetic resonant frequency and the width of Lorentzian peak, respectively, and finally, σ e denotes the electrical conductivity of MUT. We consider two isotropic lossy specimens with h 2 =h 1 /3=1 mm and different dispersion models specified in Table. II. The same procedure discussed in the previous section is sequentially carried out to extract ε r (ω)=ε r (ω)-jε r (ω) and μ r (ω)=μ r (ω)-jμ r (ω) except that the amplitude levels of two harmonics including the synchronous component are involved in each measurement. Starting from L=0 mm, the step size of automatic position variation for the movable short-circuit termination is set as 5 mm. Figs. 5e-g illustrate the amplitudes of the harmonic components as the input data of inverse problem. The magnitudes of the reflection Sparameter are numerically recorded by using the waveguide setup shown in Fig. The temporal modulation can be realized with either electrical or mechanical mechanism. Under mechanical reconfiguration, a movable short-circuit plate terminates the measurement cell. The accurate displacement of the metal plate can be guaranteed by a stepper motor, a rotatable cylinder, and a non-rotatable square-section FIG. shaft. The working principle for precise control over the position of the short-circuit terminations is as follows. The stepper motor is driven by a power driver that is connected to an external micro control unit and rotates the rotatable cylinder. The rotatable shaft is actuated by clockwise/counter-clockwise rotation of the rotatable cylinder and pushes/pulls the non-rotatable square-section shaft together with the metal plate on the top through a soft joining mechanical structure. The switching program is already saved into the memory of micro control unit. Given the maximum available speed of the linear actuators up to 15000 mm/s, the frequency gaps between the neighboring harmonics can be chosen up to 100 Hz. Despite being very small in comparison to the central frequency, the frequency intervals are still high enough to be discriminated by the spectrum analyzers. According to Eq. ( In the end, we want to analyze the sensitivity of the proposed algorithm with respect to any uncertainty that may occur in our measurements. It is to be underlined that there are many mechanisms contributing to the error budget in reconstruction of the permittivity and permeability parameters. Since there are already many works related to the usual uncertainty terms (arising from higher-order modes, lateral fitting, sample thickness, and so on) In summary, we proposed an analytical strategy based on temporal-modulation of short-circuited waveguides for unique extraction of the electromagnetic parameters of MUT with amplitude-only reflection measurements. We demonstrated that when the position of short-circuit termination is switched cyclically in a predefined way, a set of harmonic components emerge whose intensities are a nonlinear function of the reflection phases. Several examples were illustrated for which the true and reconstructed electromagnetic parameters of the lossy dispersive specimens are in an excellent agreement without any priori knowledge of MUT parameters. The feasibility of the proposed approach was comprehensively discussed through two different realization schemes and the uncertainty analysis. We note that even though our demonstrations are presented for X-band waveguide setup, the proposed material characterization method can also be applied for sheet resistance extraction The harmonic components a m as the Fourier series coefficients of S 11 (t) are derived in detail as follows: (n-1)Tm/q exp (-j2πmf m t) dt S 11,n sin mπ q exp -j mπ (2n -1) q (A1) In addition, the detail expressions for the theoretical values of r and ∆φ are 