Silicon nanoparticles possess unique size-dependent optical properties due to their strong electric and magnetic resonances in the visible range. However, their widespread application has been limited, in comparison to other (e.g. metallic) nanoparticles, because their preparation on monodisperse colloids remains challenging. Exploiting the unique properties of Si nanoparticles in nano-and micro-devices calls for methods able to sort and organize them from a colloidal suspension onto specific positions of solid substrates with nanometric precision. Here, we demonstrate that surfactant-free Silicon nanoparticles of a predefined and narrow ( < 10 nm) size range can be selectively immobilized on a substrate by optical printing from a polydisperse colloidal suspension. The size selectivity is based on differential optical forces that can be applied on nanoparticles of different sizes by tuning the light wavelength to the size-dependent magnetic dipolar resonance of the nanoparticles. The theoretical and experimental advances in plasmonics have led to remarkable control in squeezing, enhancing and manipulating optical electric fields on the nanoscale. 1-3 More recently, a new research front has emerged focusing efforts on understanding and exploiting optical magnetic resonances of high refractive index (HRI) nanoparticles (NPs). Initially conceived to control the magnetic component of light through optically induced Mie resonances, HRI NPs have found further applications due to their reduced dissipative losses in comparison to metals and to the possibility of confining both electric and magnetic fields. These features promoted the investigation of dielectric optical nano-antennas made of HRI NPs as the magnetic homologs of metallic (plasmonic) nano-antennas. NPs with size-dependent optical properties can be sorted according to their size using optical forces. Si NPs were generated via LAL Substrates were surface functionalized using a layer-by-layer deposition of polyelectrolytes following the same protocol as in previous works. The prepared samples were stored in MilliQ water until use. Dark field images were acquired using a digital colour camera. Single nanoparticle scattering spectra were obtained with a spectrometer (Shamrock 500i, Andor) based on 150 lines/mm grating and a EMCCD camera (Andor Ixon EM+ 885). Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were obtained with a ZEISS LEO 982 GEMINI electron microscope in the secondary electron mode, using an in-lens detector to improve resolution. Figure where E 0 is the field intensity, j 1 (kr) is the l= 1 spherical Bessel function and X 11 the vector spherical harmonic (as defined by Jackson). Under this condition, the force can be shown to be independent of the beam polarization and it is given by (see SI for details) where R is the radius of the NP, Q pr is the radiation pressure efficiency, n h refractive index of the medium, and a 1 and b 1 are the resonant electric and magnetic coefficients, which are related to the electric and magnetic polarizabilities as α E = i(6π/k 3 )a 1 and α M = i(6π/k 3 )b 1 , respectively. This simple expression for an isolated, free standing Si NP can be obtained from the so-called Generalized Lorentz-Mie theory or directly through the known results of a dipolar excited particle in an arbitrary exciting field Reciprocally, a monochromatic focused beam is expected to selectively push NPs of a small range of sizes. Furthermore, the size range can be tuned by changing the beam wavelength, as shown in Figure The size of each printed NP was determined using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). Figure for the 405 nm, 532 nm and 640 nm beams, respectively. Ideally, low laser powers close to the printing threshold are desirable in order to maximize selectivity and accuracy. Also, lower irradiances are in principle required to print larger particles, as deduced from the similar Qpr for the three wavelengths (Figure In conclusion, differently sized Si NPs can be selected and deposited one by one on a substrate by optical printing from a polydisperse colloid. Starting from a suspension containing NPs with radii ranging from 10 to 100 nm, subpopulations with a radius dispersion below 10 nm can be selectively printed using monochromatic laser light. Tuning the laser wavelength gives control over the average NP size; printing with light of 405 nm, 532 nm, and 640 nm deposits Si NPs with radii of (43 ± 6) nm, (59 ± 9) nm and (73 ± 7) nm, respectively. The NP size as well as the size dispersion of the optically printed NPs is in remarkable agreement to the theoretical predictions of radiation pressure exerted with a tightly focused, monochromatic laser beam. Under these conditions, the radiation pressure on HRI NPs is dominated by the magnetic dipolar resonance, whose size dependency is the basis for the NP size selectivity. This technique enables experimental optical sorting of HRI NPs directly by its optical function, rather than hydrodynamic diameter or density. Future applications include systematic studies correlating optical properties to morphology of a large number of single NPs, and nanofabrication using HRI NPs as building blocks in combination with other colloidal nanomaterials. Details about theoretical calculations. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. Metamaterials.Mater. Today 2009, 12