Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have attracted remarkable interest for visible and near infrared single-photon detection, owing to their outstanding performance. Conventional SNSPDs are generally used as binary photon-counting detector. Another important characteristic of light, i.e., polarization, has not been resolved using SNSPDs. In this work, we simulated, fabricated, and characterized a linear polarimeter based on a four-pixel NbN superconducting nanowire array, capable of resolving the polarization state of linearly polarized light at the single-photon level. The detector array design is based on a division of focal plane sensor, in which the orientation of each nanowire division (pixel) is offset by 45°. Each single nanowire pixel operates as a combination of photon detector and almost linear polarization filter, with an average polarization extinction ratio of approximately 10. The total system detection efficiency with four pixels is approximately 1% at a total dark count rate of 680cps, when the detector array is free-space coupled and illuminated with 1550nm photons. The Stokes parameters are extracted from polarization measurements of the four pixels. The mean errors of the measured AoP and DoLP were about -3° and 0.12, respectively. Our 2 / 31 results indicate that it is possible to develop a scalable polarization polarimeter or imager based on a superconducting nanowire array. This detector array may find promising application in single-photon polarization detection and imaging. Most of the imaging sensors found in daily life are designed to detect light intensity and wavelength, corresponding to human perception of brightness and color, respectively. Imaging sensors do not generally detect the polarization state of light, since humans are not strongly sensitive to polarization information. However, capturing the optical properties of polarized light has proved to be important, since it can provide additional visual information, even in environments with severe optical scattering, such as in target contrast enhancement in hazy conditions For example, in 2019, using an advanced photon-counting Lidar system operated at 532nm and 1064nm, NASA's ICESat-2 altimeter achieved unparalleled precision in measuring the heights of Earth's surfaces Generally, the polarization characteristics of light are described by three important parameters: Light intensity (I), angle of polarization (AoP), and degree of polarization (DoP). The most common method for defining these parameters is to use the Stokes vector S = (S0, S1, S2, S3) T , where superscript T is the matrix transpose, and Si (i = 0, 1, 2, 3) is the Stokes parameter. Stokes vector analysis requires measurement of light intensity at four different polarization angles using a polarimeter. Depending on the time or spatial division configurations used, polarimeters are usually classified as one of three types: The division of time polarimeter (DoTP), division of amplitude polarimeter, and division of focal plane (DoFP) polarimeter To analyze the Stokes vector of the incoming light at the photon-starved or even the single-photon level, a common approach is to place a rotating polarizer before the semiconductor single-photon detectors In recent years, superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have attracted significant attention for their exceptional performance characteristics, including high SDE (>90%) biofluorescence imaging For example, Verma et al To reach this goal, two major challenges must be addressed: Firstly, it is difficult to resolve the polarization state of light using only one SNSPD, due to the complexity of the Stokes vector. Secondly, the cross-coupling of optical power between polarization modes caused by the birefringence effect To address the problems mentioned above, we simulated, fabricated, and characterized a polarization-sensitive four-pixel NbN SNSPD array, used as a DoFP sensor. The nanowire was patterned with a width of ~50nm and a pitch of ~200nm, to ensure a high average PER of approximately 10. The SNSPD array was characterized with a free-space coupling setup, guaranteeing reliable polarization analysis and real-time calibration in the same optical path. By means of Stokes parameter measurements, we successfully demonstrated a single-photon linear polarimeter based on a superconducting nanowire array for the first time. The absence of moving parts enables the possibility of developing a high performance, real-time polarization detector. Such a detector may be of interest in single-photon polarization detection and imaging applications. In general, the polarization state of light will be transformed after the light linearly interacts with an optical system (the sample). The transformation process is described by Sout = MSin To map polarization state using a superconducting nanowire (or SNSPD), we introduce a method analogous to SNSPD. Since the SNSPD is polarization-sensitive, we treat it as a combination of an analog polarizer (AP) and a polarization-insensitive detector (PID), as shown in Fig. Photons transmitted through the AP will be detected by the PID; the most commonly detected will be those polarized in parallel with the nanowire. Based on this hypothesis, we can apply existing theories developed for polarizers to the SNSPD. The theoretical details can be found in Appendix A. To obtain the optical properties of the input polarized light, according to Stokes' theorem, three important parameters must be measured: I, AoP, and DoP. Here the DoP can be divided into degree of linear polarization (DoLP), and degree of circular polarization (DoCP). Since DoFP sensors without a 90° phase retarder do not normally detect circular and elliptical polarization, linearly polarized light is thus incident to the sample in this study, and the Stokes parameter S3 = 0 (i.e., DoCP = 0). In low light levels, the intensity I is proportional to the number of photons per unit of time received by a single-photon detector, i.e., the detector's photon count rate (PCR). To obtain the Stokes parameter Si, we must measure Iθ or PCRθ. Then, we construct the DoFP layout using the SNSPD, as shown in Fig. We can express Si in terms of PCRθ: Notably, in our study, the incident light is backside illuminated. From the perspective of the incident light, the nanowire orientations at 45° and 135° shown in Here, we denote AoP as α. The Stokes parameters are often normalized to the value of S0, such that the differences between Iθ and PCRθ will be eliminated in the process of solving the equations for the DoLP and AoP. It is known that the PCR of the SNSPD is proportional to its SDE (η ) when the incident photon rate (Rin) is constant (or calibrated), i.e., PCR=η R Generally, η can be expressed where η is the optical coupling efficiency, η A is the absorption efficiency, and η I is the intrinsic detection efficiency of the nanowire. According to Eq. ( For each run of the SDE measurement, the η is constant, and the SNSPD will obtain a maximum absorption efficiency (η ∥ ) or maximum PCR (PCRmax) when the light polarization is parallel to the nanowire (i.e., TE mode), and a minimum absorption efficiency ( η ) or minimum PCR (PCRmin) when the light polarization is perpendicular to the nanowire (i.e., TM mode). Then, we can further define PER in terms of PCR or η as PER= ∥ (8) We simulated the optical absorption of the nanowire on a SiO2/Si/SiO2 substrate (268nm SiO2, 400μm Si) by varying the nanowire's geometrical parameters. The simulation was performed using commercial finite element software (Comsol Multiphysics, RF module) where a = 0.12, b = 1, and c = 0.13 are the fitting parameters. The coefficient π represents conversion between degrees and radians. A 7nm thick NbN thin film was deposited by magnetron sputtering onto a two-inch thermal-oxidized Si substrate, with 268nm thick SiO2 on both sides of the substrate. The film was then patterned into a nanowire array using electron beam lithography (EBL, JOEL, 100kV accelerating voltage), and reactive ion etched in CF4 plasma. Each pixel of the array comprised a meandering nanowire structure, with nanowire orientations of 0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°, respectively. Fig. As shown in Fig. The nanowire array was illuminated from the back side of the substrate by light transmitted through free space. The half-wave plate controlling the polarization angle was rotated to obtain maximum (minimum) count rates for each pixel, corresponding to the polarization direction parallel (perpendicular) to the nanowire. At these specific angles, the SDE of each pixel was recorded as a function of bias current. By blocking the laser with a shutter, we recorded the count rates as the DCR for each pixel. The total SDE and DCR of the multipixel array was obtained by summing the SDE and DCR values recorded for each pixel. Because the light was normally incident to the elements of the optical path during the polarization measurements, changes in polarization state were negligible. This shrinkage also could lead to the lens losing focus, creating a larger light spot than expected. When all the pixels were biased at 5.5μA (in the saturated SDE region), the total SDE of the array was about 1% and the total DCR about 680cps. In other words, the DCR of each pixel was around 170cps at this IB. In our experiment, the measured PCRmax for each pixel was of the magnitude ~1 × 10 4 cps, which is nearly two orders of magnitude higher than the DCR, guaranteeing high contrast during data acquisition. To explore the upper boundary of this device's SDE, we re-measured it in a 2K G-M cryocooler system by coupling the device with a GRIN lens fiber with backside illumination In this manner, the difference between PCRθmax of the four pixels is eliminated, while the influence in η A due to variations in α (i.e., the polarization information of the incident light) is preserved. For quantitative analysis, we fitted the experimental data with cosine functions (indicated with dashed lines). A good fit was obtained with the function expressed below: where the fitting parameters a0 = 0.44 ± 0.02, b0 = 0.994 ± 0.01, and c0 = 0.55 ± 0.01, and the fitting θf = 6.2°, 45.9°, 94.9°, and, 139.4° differ slightly from the design values (0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°). This may be due to misaligned orientation between the transmission axis of the half-wave plate and the pixel nanowire. This angular-shift error is systematic and could be removed with further calibration. The fitting functions for PCRs are similar to the function for theoretically predicting η , shown in Eq. ( We calculated the AoP by substituting the PCR * shown in Fig. To study the effect of PER on the accuracy of the polarization state measurement, we extracted the Stokes parameters of the incident light using a different device with a lower average PER value of about 3 [see Appendix C], comprised of a 100nm wide nanowire array with the same pitch and thickness as the 50nm wide device used in the present study. We then performed an experiment to compare these two devices. nanowire array has mean AoP error of about -5.5°, which is slightly larger than the 50nm wide device. However, even for the case with PER of ~10, errors appear in the measured S1, and S2, due to the limited PER and the simplified model used. These errors could be eliminated in the future by use of a higher PER value or additional calibration. In this study, an assumption of uniform illumination and uniform η A∥ was made to calibrate the measured PCRθ, owing to inefficient optical coupling. This assumption ignores certain information, such as differences in active area, wire width, and coupling efficiency between the nanowire pixels. PCRθ normalized under this assumption produces acceptable experimental results, which indicates that either the differences mentioned above are quite small, or these physical quantities contribute less error than the others (such as the PER). We speculate that the PER could be a dominant factor in the simplified model. Moreover, this assumption can be relaxed by improving the coupling accuracy or using uniform illumination. An SNSPD-based polarimeter offers several advantages: Firstly, due to the combination of polarization sensitivity and single-photon detection ability, a SNSPD-based polarimeter can avoid misalignment issues introduced by the integrated charge-coupled device (CCD) polarization image sensor fabrication process Future development of a high performance, scalable SNSPD-based polarimeter presents multiple opportunities and challenges. Firstly, the SDE of the detector in this study is limited by low optical coupling and absorption efficiency. However, encouraging results have shown that by integrating Al gratings, a single pixel SNSPD can achieve simulated The scale expansion of the SNSPD-based polarimeter is limited by the number of cryogenic coaxial cables installed, which would increase the heat load on the refrigerator. This problem is also one of the challenges encountered in the development of multipixel SNSPD arrays. It is encouraging that recently the SNSPD array and cryogenic readout technology have developed rapidly In summary, we present a linear polarimeter based on an array of SNSPDs, including simulation, fabrication, and experimental verification. The pixel of the array comprises a ~50nm-wide, 0.25 filling factor NbN nanowire, with an average PER of ~10. The four nanowires were oriented with an offset of 45°, forming a division of the focal plane. By characterizing the device in a free-space coupling cryostat, we confirmed successful detection of the polarization state of a linearly polarized light at 1550nm, with a total SDE of ~1% at a low total DCR of ~680cps. The mean errors of the measured AoP and DoLP were about -3° and 0.12, respectively. Our result indicates that it is feasible to develop a high performance, scalable, single-photon A partial polarizer's Mueller matrix MP where q is the major transmittance, and r is the minor transmittance. As MP shows, calculations for a non-ideal polarizer would be complex. For an ideal linear polarizer (iLP), i.e., q = 1, r = 0, MP can be reduced to MiLP. MiLP= MiLP corresponds to the simplest case for MAP, i.e., when the PER of the SNSPD is much greater than 1. Then, we obtain four Mueller matrices corresponding to each nanowire orientation θ = 0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°. S2=I45°-I135° 