The properties of quantum materials are commonly tuned using experimental variables such as pressure, magnetic field and doping. Here we explore a different approach: irreversible, plastic deformation of single crystals. We show for the superconductor Introduction. The application of reversible, elastic uniaxial strain has emerged as a powerful means to study and manipulate quantum materials The local atomic arrangement near dislocation cores is very different from the bulk and significantly modifies nearby electronic properties Here we use electron-doped strontium titanate, SrTiO3 (STO), as a model system to study the effects of significant plastic deformation on electronic properties. We show that superconductivity in STO is considerably enhanced by plastic deformation, and that self-organized dislocation structures play a crucial role. Although superconductivity in the cubic perovskite STO has been known for decades 11 , its origin remains poorly understood and cannot be explained by the standard electron-phonon pairing mechanism, as it prevails to extremely low charge-carrier densities, where the Debye frequency is much larger than the Fermi energy superconducting materials of high interest, including bismuthates, ruthenates, and high-Tc cuprates Perhaps less widely appreciated, STO also has remarkable mechanical properties for a ceramic material. Single crystals can be plastically deformed to a high degree in compression, without macroscopic cracking, even at ambient temperature Structure and dynamics of plastically deformed STO. Using specially designed uniaxial pressure cells (Fig. Away from the Bragg peaks, we observe features that are not present in undeformed samples, most prominently cross-like diffuse patterns (Figs. We find clear evidence of deformation-induced ferroelectricity in Raman scattering experiments on undoped and Nb-doped samples (Fig. Figure This suggests that the self-organized dislocation structures play a major role in the Tc enhancement. The decrease in the perpendicular resistivity channel matches well with signatures in the diamagnetic response and with the onset of nonzero nonlinear susceptibility (Fig. We also measured several deformed samples that were oxygen-vacancy-doped (OVD), with Hall electron concentrations up to 10 19 cm -3 ; no resistive transition was detected down to 360 mK. In addition to the clear enhancement of superconductivity below 1 K, deformed STO samples show intriguing transport and magnetic properties at much higher temperatures. First, we note that a small diamagnetic response is present in the ac susceptibility up to at least 1.5 K (Fig. Furthermore, resistivity anisotropy develops already at around 30-50 K, and R | falls below the robust normal-state T 2 dependence characteristic of undeformed samples The difference is even larger if we consider the increase of the normal-state residual resistivity due to deformation (Fig. We expect the deformation effect on the resistivity to consist of an increase due to added dislocations and a decrease related to superconducting correlations. To disentangle these contributions, we extract, for a set of 0.2% Nb-doped samples, both the measured residual resistivity ratio (RRR) and an RRR determined by fitting the high-temperature resistivity data to a T 2 form (Fig. Our analysis suggests that superconducting correlations appear in deformed STO at temperatures as high as 30-50 K. We attempted to search for a corresponding diamagnetic signal, without conclusive results. The main issue is the presence of weak defect-induced magnetism Ferroelectric fluctuations and superconductivity. We now propose a simple scenario to connect the existence of self-organized dislocation structures observed by diffuse scattering, the onset of inhomogeneous ferroelectric order and enhanced ferroelectric fluctuations observed by Raman scattering, and the local enhancement of Tc observed by transport measurements. STO is a quantum paraelectric with an anomalously high dielectric constant thought to result from fluctuations of a soft polar TO phonon. Application of strain or "negative" pressure Here, u i are components of the TO displacement field with wavevector q, ω T 2 ≈ (2meV) Close to the dislocation core, the generated strain field, which can be calculated using standard elasticity theory (see Methods), is very large and induces ferroelectric order. While Eq. ( ( and r min < 0 the ferroelectric state (where ω min is imaginary). The shaded region is the area, of order 10 6 a 2 with a denoting the lattice constant, where r min is suppressed by a factor of 2 or more with respect to its value in the undeformed sample (see Methods). For the experimentally relevant case of the dislocation wall shown in Fig. Discussion. Our work shows that plastic-deformation-induced dislocation structures enhance ferroelectric fluctuations and superconductivity in STO. This has wide-ranging implications for both the superconducting pairing mechanism in STO and similar materials, as well as for diverse material systems where plastic deformation, and dislocation engineering more generally, could be used to tune local electronic ordering. Superconducting pairing in STO has been attributed to electron-phonon interactions, plasmons, ferroelectric quantum critical fluctuations, local modes, and oxygen-vacancy negative-U centres More broadly, plastic deformation and dislocation engineering can be used to manipulate any properties of quantum materials that couple to strain. A necessary prerequisite for this is to reach the plastic deformation regime; STO is a model system because of its remarkable ambienttemperature ductility, but most materials become ductile close to their melting temperature or under high strain rates. In particular, we expect that dramatic superconductivity enhancement is possible in other materials that are close to a ferroelectric instability, such as PbTe 50 and KTaO3 Samples. Single crystals of undoped and Nb-doped STO were sourced commercially (MTI Corp.) and polished to have parallel and perpendicular faces for uniaxial pressure experiments. Oxygenvacancy doping (OVD) of Nb-free STO was achieved through annealing in a high vacuum of 10 - 5 mbar with a titanium getter at 800°C for 2 h. Samples for transport measurements were 0.5 mm thick and typically ~1-2 mm laterally, while the neutron scattering samples were 1 mm thick and 5-6 mm laterally. Uniaxial pressure. Two different custom-built uniaxial pressure cells were used to deform STO single crystals for transport, magnetometry and neutron scattering measurements. Both cells use the same operating principle: the force on the sample is supplied by the piston of a pneumatic cylinder, and the sample deformation is measured using a linear variable transformer (i.e., a set of two coaxial coils). Such a design is scalable and enables the application of very high forces, while stress-strain diagrams can be easily measured, since the displacement is determined independently. The pressure cell used for smaller samples has a maximum force of 350 N and uses two coaxial sapphire rods as anvils for sample compression. Our large sample cell has a maximum force of 5000 N, and sintered carbide plates are used as anvils. Both systems are operated with the same high-precision pressure regulator, with a maximum operating gas pressure of 10 bar. The high ductility of STO at ambient temperature makes it very convenient for plastic deformation studies, since it is not necessary to perform the deformation at high temperatures. The sample is always compressed along the [010] direction. Out of the six possible {110} slip planes, four are found to be active under plastic deformation for the applied stress direction. However, experimentally, we find that only two out of these four slip planes are active, as shown in Fig. Diffuse neutron scattering. These experiments were performed on the CORELLI Diffuse X-ray scattering. The experiments were performed on Beamline 6ID-D of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The beamline employs a superconducting magnet undulator and double-crystal monochromator to produce a high-energy monochromatic Xray beam. For our experiments, the X-ray energy was 87 keV. A Pilatus 2M CdTe detector, whose sensor layer is optimized for high energies, was used to collect frames at 0.1 s exposure while samples were continuously rotated at 1°/s about a horizontal axis. Three sets of rotations were performed in each measurement between which (i) the detector was translated by 5mm in both the horizontal and vertical directions in order to cover gaps in the scattering between detector chips, and (ii) the sample rotation axis was offset by ±15° from perpendicular to the beam in order to allow artifacts caused by scattering in the detector sensor layer to be masked. The counting time at each temperature setting was 20 minutes. See the Supplementary Material in [56] for more details. The data covering a range of ~±15 Å -1 in all directions, were collected down to 30 K using an Oxford N-Helix helium cryocooler, and transformed to S(Q) using the software package CCTW (https://sourceforge.net/projects/cctw/). Raman scattering. For Raman scattering measurements we used a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD detector and 1800 gr/mm grating. The measurements were done in the confocal backscattering geometry. The BragGrate notch filters were used to acquire data at low energies, down to around 10 cm -1 . The He-Ne laser line wavelength was 632.8 nm. The sample was held in a liquid-helium-flow cryostat. The focused laser beam spot was about 10-μm-diameter on the sample surface. To obtain the imaginary part of the Raman susceptibility, χ′′(ω), the raw intensities were divided by the Bose factor. The static real part is calculated from the frequency-dependent imaginary part using the Kramers-Kronig relation To obtain the integrals, the imaginary part of the Raman conductivity χ′′(ω)/ω was fit to a Lorentzian curve up to 140 cm -1 and the area under the curve was calculated after subtraction of a constant offset. Transport and magnetization measurements. For low-temperature measurements we used a homebuilt Transport measurements were performed using a high-throughput dipstick probe that was directly inserted into the was measured with a Hall bar contact configuration using the 7 T MPMS and 9 T PPMS magnets, with field and current reversal (and AC current in the MPMS). From the dependence of the Hall voltage on thickness and contact placement/size, we estimate that the corrections due to geometry and contact shorting are below 20%. Theory of the local ferroelectricity, the T c enhancement and the diffuse scattering pattern. For simplicity, we assume a cubic system and neglect lattice distortions and the antiferrodistortive transition in STO. The susceptibility of a polar optical mode can be written as Here, ω T and c T (ω L and c L ) denote the frequency and velocity of the transverse (longitudinal) component of the mode, and E T is an unimportant overall scale. We assume that ω T ≪ ω L so that the longitudinal mode can be safely integrated out. The coupling to the strain is given by Λ ij = λ 1 (3ε 0 )δ ij + To simplify what follows, we neglect the effects of Λ ij on the irrelevant longitudinal mode and set the coupling to the shear strain to zero (i.e., λ 3 = 0). Then, the matrix Λ ij is diagonal, and the effect of the strain field is to lift the degeneracy of the modes in the transverse sector ω T 2 δ ij → ω i 2 δ ij = (ω T 2 + Λ ii )δ ij . To find the strain field we solve the textbook problem of an edge dislocation along the c-axis Here, an overline denotes complex conjugation. Using Eq. ( By substituting the position-dependent ε ij (z) in Λ ij , we obtain a set of three frequencies, ω i 2 (z) = ω T 2 + Λ ii (z), which in turn define an inhomogeneous dimensionless parameter r i (z) = ω i 2 (z)/ω T 2 that sets the distance to the putative ferroelectric QCP for a transverse mode polarized along the i axis (with r i < 0 denoting the ordered state and r i > 0 denoting the disordered state). We note that the main difference between a single dislocation and a wall is that the strain decays polynomially for the former, ε ∼ |b| r , and exponentially for the latter, ε ∼ e -r/|b| . To produce Fig. We note that the real material will also have wall intersection points, which act like strain multipoles and should have an associated long-range strain component. However, from the fact that we do not observe appreciable Bragg peak broadening, we conclude that their volume fraction must be very small; this is in line with the TEM observation and DP oversaw transport measurements by SH, BD and JR; ML and DP designed and manufactured the pressure cells; DP, AK and MG wrote the paper, with input from all authors. All data and materials are available from corresponding authors upon reasonable request. , and the feature around q = -0.1 in the ε = 0% sample is from a detector artefact. The tails of the peaks are likely dominated by dislocation scattering Dislocation scattering. The observed resistivity anisotropy that sets in below 30-50 K in deformed samples is striking, especially in OVD crystals (Fig. Anisotropic mobility is in principle expected for scattering from a single dislocation in a metal [3]. However, the slip planes in STO are {110}, and multiple slip systems are active for stress along [100]. This likely averages out the anisotropy and leads to a simple homogeneous residual resistivity increase. It is not clear how dislocation scattering could lead to a decrease of R | with deformation, as seen most clearly in OVD samples (Figs. Lin, X. et al. Critical doping for onset of two-band superconductivity in SrTiO3-δ. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 207002 (2014) Spinelli, A., Torija, M. A., Liu, C., Jan, C. & Leighton, C. Electronic transport in doped SrTiO3: conduction mechanisms and potential applications. Phys. Rev. B 81, 155110 (2010)