Spin-fluctuation-mediated unconventional superconductivity can emerge at the border of magnetism, featuring a superconducting order parameter that changes sign in momentum space. Detection of such a sign-change is experimentally challenging, since most probes are not phase-sensitive. The observation of a spin resonance mode (SRM) from inelastic neutron scattering is often seen as strong phase-sensitive evidence for a sign-changing superconducting order parameter, by assuming the SRM is a spin-excitonic bound state. Here, we show that for the heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn5, its SRM defies expectations for a spin-excitonic bound state, and is not a manifestation of sign-changing superconductivity. Instead, the SRM in CeCoIn5 likely arises from a reduction of damping to a magnon-like mode in the superconducting state, due to its proximity to magnetic quantum criticality. Our findings emphasize the need for more stringent tests of whether SRMs are spin-excitonic, when using their presence to evidence sign-changing superconductivity. Understanding the physics of unconventional superconductors, which include cuprate, iron-based and heavy fermion superconductors, remains a major challenge in condensed matter physics. Unlike conventional superconductors with phonons responsible for binding electrons into pairs, pairing in unconventional superconductors occurs due to electronic interactions While sign-changing superconductivity in cuprate superconductors has been confirmed through phases-sensitive tunneling experiments Experimentally, the SRM is typically identified through the appearance of additional magnetic scattering in the superconducting state relative to the normal state, peaking at a well-defined energy E r and an intensity that tracks the superconducting order parameter In this work we use inelastic neutron scattering to systematically study the SRM in the prototypical heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 (T c = 2.3 K) In the spin-exciton scenario, the SRM is a bound state residing below the PHCO with , resulting from a sign-change in the superconducting order parameter In the prototypical heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 , like the cuprates, the superconducting order parameter is d x 2 -y 2 -wave To elucidate whether the SRM in CeCoIn 5 has any downward-dispersing features, we carried out detailed inelastic neutron scattering measurements of the SRM in CeCoIn 5 using PANDA, along the (H, H, 0.5) direction for E E r ≈ 0.6 meV, with results shown in Fig. For a spin-excitonic SRM that is isotropic in spin space, the application of a magnetic field should split it into a triplet in energy To address these questions, we studied the SRM in CeCoIn 5 using MACS, under an applied magnetic field perpendicular to the [H, H, L] scattering plane, with results shown in Figs. Q AF for E E r at zero-field, as demonstrated in Fig. These disparate behaviors at different energies can be understood to result from the doublet splitting of the upwarddispersing SRM, as schematically depicted in Fig. In addition to splitting the SRM into two upward-dispersing branches, energy-(H, H, 0.5) and energy-(0.5, 0.5, L) maps in Fig. Our results demonstrate the SRM in CeCoIn 5 disperses upward, without downward dispersing features, inconsistent with expectations for a spin-exciton in a d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor. This suggests that either the superconducting order parameter in CeCoIn 5 is not d x 2 -y 2 -wave, or that the SRM is not spin-excitonic. While nodeless s ± superconductivity has been proposed for Pu-based 115 heavy-fermion superconductors In the cuprates, X-or Y-shaped excitations with dominant upward dispersing branches, which may result from either localized or itinerant electrons, have been observed In CeCoIn 5 , based on the electronic structure extracted from scanning tunneling microscopy measurements In addition to demonstrating the SRM in CeCoIn 5 disperses upward at zero-field, our results in Fig. While a SRM that is isotropic in spin space is expected to split into triplets in energy under applied field In conclusion, our detailed inelastic neutron scattering measurements indicate the SRM in CeCoIn 5 disperses upward without any downward dispersing features, indicating it is not spin-excitonic in origin. Under an applied magnetic field, the SRM splits into two upward-dispersing branches and progressively loses its dispersive characters with increasing field, suggesting the SRM in CeCoIn5 results from the removal of damping to a pre-existing magnetic mode in the superconducting state. As such, our results suggest the SRM in CeCoIn 5 is not a result of the sign-change in its superconducting order parameter. Our findings demonstrate SRMs observed in unconventional superconductors can have origins other than spin-excitonic, in which case their presence may not provide information on the superconducting order parameter. Single crystals of CeCoIn 5 were prepared by the indium self-flux method Neutron scattering experiments were carried out on the PANDA cold three-axes spectrometer at the Heinz Maier-Leibnitz Zentrum Data shown in Fig. 