In topological n-type thermoelectrics based on Bi 2 Te 3 with atomic substitutions Bi → In, Te → Se, S, the morphology and the surface states of Dirac fermions on the interlayer (0001) surface of van der Waals were studied by scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) techniques. By the STM method, the dark and light spots on the surface were found, which intensities depend on the composition and thermoelectric properties of solid solutions. The observed surface morphology features in the solid solutions are explained by distortions of surface electronic states originated by atomic substitutions, influence of doping impurity, and formation of structural defects. Fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the morphology STM images of the (0001) surface were used to obtain the interference patterns of the quasiparticles excitation caused by surface electrons scattering by defects. The Dirac point energy and its fluctuations, peak energies of surface defects, the positions of the valence and conduction band edges, and the energy gap were determined from an analysis of tunneling spectra. A correlation between the parameters of surface states of Dirac fermions and thermoelectric properties was found. Thus, a contribution of the fermions surface states increases with rise of the surface concentration in solid solutions with high power factor, and the largest concentration value was observed in the Bi 1.98 In 0.02 Te 2.85 Se 0.15 composition. The dependences of Fermi energy on the wave vector for different solid solutions are described by a set of Dirac cone sections, which are close within the 2 limits of the fluctuations of the Dirac point energy that explained by weak changes of the Fermi velocity in the compositions at studied atomic substitutions in the bismuth telluride sublattices. Bismuth telluride based thermoelectrics are characterized by high figure of merit at operating temperatures of 100-500 K depending on the composition and charge carriers concentration and are widely used as thermoelectric energy converters for various purposes Currently, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) methods are used to study the surface electronic states of Dirac fermions One of the specific features of topological thermoelectrics is the existence of some residual conduction in the bulk associated with defects. The optimal ratios between bulk and surface conductance can be achieved by defects compensation with variation of the thermoelectric material compositions x Se solid solutions were carried out by STM method in Ref. The influence of topological surface states of fermions on the thermoelectric properties of topological materials has been considered in a number of modern aspects of scientific studies. Comprehensive analysis based on topology and thermal quantum field theory carried out in In Refs. One of the effective methods for studying of the topological and thermoelectric properties of the materials is the external pressure method. Investigations of layered solid solutions of n-Bi 2 Te 3-y-z Se y S z and p-Bi x Sb 2-x Te 3 showed that the increase by 2-3 times of the power factor in the region of isostructural phase topological transitions at pressures of about 3 GPa is associated with rise of the mobility of charge carriers Ingots of solid solutions Bi 2 (Te, Se) 3 , Bi 2 (Te, S) 3 , (Bi, In) 2 (Te, Se) 3 , and Bi 2 (Te, Se, S) 3 were grown by directed crystallization method, which have been used to obtain multicomponent thermoelectrics of homogeneous composition. The studied samples were cut from single-crystal blocks of bulk ingots along the interlayer planes of van der Waals (0001) oriented along the growth axis perpendicular to the crystallographic axis of third order c. All samples crystallize in a rhombohedral crystal structure with five atoms in the primitive unit cell and the space group 5 3d R3m (D ) . The samples with a high Seebeck coefficient at |S| > 270 V μ K -1 have optimal thermoelectric properties for the low-temperature region of 100-220 K Petersburg Morphology images of the (0001) interlayer surface with atomic resolution was measured by the STM method at a constant tunneling current mode of 0.1, 0.15, 0.2 nA (feedback turned on) and in voltage range (30-150 mV) in solid solutions, and up to 800 mV in Bi 2 Te 3 . The dI/dU spectra were measured by the STS method at preselected sample points in the constant height mode (feedback turned off) at a modulation voltage of 5-10 mV and a frequency of 7 kHz. A In the Bi 2 Te 2.94 S 0.06 solid solution [Fig. According to Besides, to the Dirac point energy fluctuations, the peaks p i corresponding to surface levels formed by defects were found in Fig. From the differential tunneling spectra plotted in Fig. The n s is determined in accordance with the expressions [51] where the wave vector k F is equal to and v F is the Fermi velocity. The Fermi velocity was determined in accordance with the Vegard's law using data for the B 2 Te 3-y Se y solid solutions system at y = 0 For Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.15 S 0.15 composition, calculations of wave vector k F were carried out using v F for of Bi 2 Te 2.7 Se 0.3 , since the total atomic substitution in the Te sublattice in these thermoelectrics was the same. However, ARPES studies The morphology of the van der Waals interlayer surface (0001) and the differential 