The nature of superconductivity in heavy-fermion materials is a subject under intense debate, and controlling this many-body state is central for its eventual understanding. Here, we examine how proximity effects may change this phenomenon, by investigating the effects of an additional metallic layer on the top of a Kondo-lattice, and allowing for pairing in the former. We analyze a bilayer Kondo Lattice Model with an on-site Hubbard interaction, -U , on the additional layer, using a mean-field approach. For U = 0, we notice a drastic change in the density-of-states due to multiple-orbital singlet resonating combinations. It destroys the well-known Kondo insulator at half filling, leading to a metallic ground state, which, in turn, enhances antiferromagnetism through the polarization of the conduction electrons. For U = 0, a superconducting Kondo state sets in at zero temperature, with the occurrence of unconventional pairing amplitudes involving f -electrons. We establish that this remarkable feature is only possible due to the proximity effects of the additional layer. At finite temperatures we find that the critical superconducting temperature, Tc, decreases with the interlayer hybridization. We have also established that a zero temperature superconducting amplitude tracks Tc, which reminisces the BCS proportionality between the superconducting gap and Tc. The Kondo Lattice Model (KLM) Another fascinating aspect of the heavy-fermion class of materials is the proximity of (and sometimes coexistence with) superconductivity and magnetic order in several compounds From the theoretical point of view, a convenient starting point to model superconductivity in these materials is the KLM. Superconductivity in the standard KLM was found in the paramagnetic sector in the uncompensated regime through variational Monte Carlo simulations to the KLM, such as frustration due to second-neighbor hopping With this in mind, here we investigate the effects of spatially separating Kondo and pairing physics by considering a bilayer in which the top layer favors superconductivity (through pairing of c-electrons) and the bottom layer has an itinerant d-band which is allowed to hybridize with the f -electrons; these two layers hybridize with each other through a hopping term, t z , as shown in Fig. The system is described by a two-layer Hamiltonian, The first term describes the hopping of electrons both on the top (conduction, c) and bottom (d) layers (see Fig. It is important to notice that in the noninteracting limit (U = J = 0), and at half filling, the system is metallic up to t z = 4t, beyond which a band gap opens. Therefore, as we tune in U , J, t z (< 4t), and the band filling competing effects may emerge between superconducting (SC), antiferromagnectic (AFM), and singlet (Kondo) phases. In order to investigate the main features of this competition, we adopt a Hartree-Fock approach and with σ σ σ α,β denoting the elements of the Pauli matrices, and f iσ (f † iσ ) being creation (annihilation) operators for localized electrons. With the transformations of Eqs. ( at the price of introducing mean-field variables that should be determined self-consistently, as described below. Here, we include μ and ε f as Lagrange multipliers, in order to fix (on average) the electronic density to the desired values in their respective bands, and ε k = -2t(cos k x + cos k y ) is the dispersion for the bare conduction electrons. Notice that the electronic density of the conduction bands c and d is fixed on average as n = (n c + n d )/2, and for the localized electrons it is set as n f = 1; N is the number of sites. A quantitative measure of the hybridization between d and f bands is given by where 1 is the unit operator, and we assume The nature of magnetic ordering enters in H HF through the wavevector Q and the magnetization amplitudes, m d and m f ; these describe the average of d and f spins operators as and where R i is the position vector of site i on the lattice. And, finally, we note that different dimensionless pairing amplitudes appear in H HF , defined as where α, β = c, d, f . They measure the relative importance of the different pairing channels, and we recall that P cc connects with the Hartree-Fock superconducting gap in the single layer attractive Hubbard model through ∆ = 2|U | P cc . The mean-field Hamiltonian, written in a basis of spinors with 12 components, can be diagonalized to obtain the eingenvalues λ k,ν . Then, the Helmholtz free energy is written as apart from a constant term. Given this, the meanfield variables are then determined self-consistently by minimizing the Helmholtz free energy with aid of the Hellmann-Feynman theorem, The calculations have been carried out for lattices of size N x × N y = 200 × 200 with periodic boundary conditions. Once convergence is achieved, we are able to investigate spectral properties, by calculating the singleparticle Green's function (see, e.g. Refs. where T is the time ordering operator, τ is the time, and α = c, d, f . Taking the time Fourier transform, and performing an analytical continuation allow one to obtain the spectral function, from which we obtain the density of states (DOS) as Let us start by examining the ground state properties. We first discuss (Sec. III A) how the presence of a conducting layer without pairing (that is, we set U = 0 on the conduction layer) affects the magnetic transition between an AFM state and the Kondo singlet state. Then, in Sec. III B we concentrate on the Kondo phase and study the influence of an extra conducting layer (still without pairing) on the the different conducting channels. Finally, in Sec. III C we switch on the attractive interaction on the conduction layer, and analyze how the transport properties change. A. The AFM-Kondo transition (U = 0) The free energy is minimized for fixed electron density, n, and Kondo coupling J; at first we set t z /t = 1. From this we obtain the magnetization amplitudes, m d and m f , as well as the hybridization, V ; the results for half filling (i.e. one local moment and one electron per site, n = 1) are shown in Fig. It is also interesting to examine the effect of t z on the c-band, deep in the antiferromagnetic phase. Figure Away from half filling the system is no longer an insulator, so that the increased electron mobility weakens the RKKY interaction. Accordingly, Fig. Further decrease in the electronic density drives the system to a ferromagnetic state, as in the single-layer KLM. However, since our main interest here is in the effect of the extra layer on the transport properties in the Kondo-singlet phase, we have not pursued a detailed analysis of the magnetic properties. Let us then examine the effects of the c-layer on the transport properties within the Kondo phase. Figure Let us now switch on the coupling J in such way that the system is in the Kondo (singlet) phase for half filling and t z = t. The top row of Fig. The bottom row of Fig. n=0.9 FIG. Away from half filling, our self-consistent procedure leads to quasi-rigid bands, whose corresponding DOS's are shown in Fig. Further insight into how the presence of an extra metallic layer affects the otherwise insulating character, can be obtained by defining which respectively probe c-f hybridization and the triple c-d-f hybridization. When varying the filling, as displayed in Fig. Before proceeding with the effects caused by having |U | on the additional metallic layer, it is worth recalling what happens in the case of a single-layer KLM with an attractive interaction in the d-band, in the regime where d and f -electrons are strongly hybridized into singlets By contrast, in the bilayer system the pairing interaction acts solely on the c-electrons of the extra layer. Therefore, for any small, finite |U | pairs can be formed on the c-layer, without the need to break up singlet pairs formed in the d-f layer. However, as discussed earlier, the inclusion of such metallic layer changes the spectral weight at the Fermi level, which may lead to new pairing features. In view of this, it is interesting to examine the behavior of the pairing amplitudes defined in Eq. ( Figure Further insight into this interplay between pairing in different channels can be gained by examining the electron densities on c and d-orbitals. At half filling, the minimum free energy corresponds to n c = n d = 1, but when n = (n c + n d )/2 < 1 the Hubbard attraction induces electron migration to the c-layer, thus causing charge imbalance, n c > n d . This migration, in turn, depends on the hybridization between c and d-orbitals. Figure Finally, we briefly discuss thermal effects on the pairing properties by searching for solutions of Eq. ( We have studied some proximity effects arising when a normal or superconducting layer is close to a layer of singlets, the latter being either in the insulating or (Color on line) Superconducting critical temperature, Tc/t, and ground state pairing amplitude, Pcc, as functions of the interlayer hopping tz/t, for U/t = 2.0 and n = 0.9. In (a), only Tc is shown, for three different values of J/t, while in (b) Tc is compared with the ground state pairing amplitude, Pcc, for a single J/t. in the metallic state, as controlled by doping. To this end, we let a Kondo-lattice layer hybridize (intensity t z ) with an additional conducting c-layer, in which we can turn on a pairing interaction, U . Within a Hartree-Fock approximation, we have found that this setup drastically changes the spectral properties of the single-layer Kondo lattice model. On the magnetic side, J < J c (t z ), the RKKY interaction is enhanced as a result of the induced antiferromagnetic order on the c-layer. On the singlet side, hybridization with the c-band changes the gap in the d-band into a pseudogap (in the sense that it is only non-zero at the Fermi energy). The otherwise gapped total density of states now acquires a peak at the Fermi energy. With the onset of an attractive interaction on the additional metallic layer, superconductivity is now possible for any non-zero |U |, due to the drastic changes in the spectral weight at the Fermi energy. As a result, we have established that pairs may be formed among c-, and f -electrons, suggesting the occurrence of a superconducting Kondo phase. We have also established that while the hybridization between the c and d-layers is crucial for superconductivity from the spectral point of view, on the other hand it also tends to decrease T c . This means that application of uniaxial pressure to increase t z should be carefully controlled. Nonetheless, by adding another mechanism which induces pairing in the d-layer (such as local spins fluctuations, Heisenberg coupling of local moments, or magnetic frustration due to next-nearest-neighbor hopping) one could counteract these effects of t z . The Hartree-Fock approximation for the attractive potential term in Eq. ( with being the dimensionless pairing amplitude; for the singlelayer attractive Hubbard model it reduces to the gap parameter, ∆ ≡ 2|U |P cc , and n c = c † i↑ c i↑ + c † i↓ c i↓ is the electronic density on the c layer, both taken as homogeneous throughout the sites. The operator s c i is defined as in Eq.( (A3) Following the procedure presented in Ref. 