Soiling impacts the photovoltaic (PV) module performance by reducing the amount of light reaching the photovoltaic cells and by changing their external spectral response. Currently, the soiling monitoring market is moving toward optical sensors that measure transmittance or reflectance, rather than directly measuring the impact of soiling on the performance of photovoltaic modules. These sensors, which use a single optical measurement, are not able to correct the soiling losses that depend on the solar irradiance spectra and on the spectral response of the monitored PV material. This work investigates methods that can improve the optical detection of soiling, by extracting the full soiling spectrum profiles using only two or three monochromatic measurements. Spectral transmittance data, measured with a spectrophotometer and collected during a 46-week experimental soiling study carried out in Jaén, Spain, was analysed in this work. The use of a spectral profile for the hemispherical transmittance of soiled PV glass is found to significantly improve the soiling detection, returning the lowest errors independently of the PV materials and irradiance conditions. In addition, this work shows that it is also possible to select the measurement wavelengths to minimize the soiling loss detection error depending on the monitored PV semiconductor material (silicon, CdTe, a-Si, CIGS and a representative perovskite). The approaches discussed in this work are also found to be more robust to potential measurement errors compared to single wavelength measurement techniques. The accumulation of dust, particles, and contaminants on the surface of photovoltaic (PV) modules, a process known as soiling, produces significant losses worldwide The amount of energy produced by a PV module depends on the spectral profile of the incoming solar irradiance that reaches the PV cell and the internal spectral response of the PV cell itself. In addition, the impact of soiling on the transmittance of the PV cover glass is not uniform across the spectrum of sunlight, but varies with the wavelength. More losses are registered in the blue region of the spectrum at shorter wavelengths The impact of soiling on the electrical performance of PV modules is generally quantified through the soiling ratio where Isc ssssssss (tt) and Isc ssrrrr (tt) are the short-circuit current of the module in natural soiling conditions and the short-circuit current that the same module would generate if no soiling was accumulated on its surface. According to this definition, the soiling ratio changes over time, has a value of 1 for no soiling and decreases as soiling increases. The soiling losses are given by 1r ss (t). The use of the short-circuit current ratio of Eq. ( As mentioned, the impact of soiling on the electrical performance of a PV module not only depends on the transmittance of soiling, but also on the spectral response of the PV materials and on the spectral distribution of the irradiance. The same methodology described in the literature (λλ,tt)•SSSS(λλ)•ddλλ For this study, we shall neglect the reflection and absorption losses of the glass itself. A more precise analysis would include the transmission of the clean glass inside the integral of both the numerator and denominator of Eq. ( Optical sensors take a single measurement and thus neglect the wavelength dependent effects of soiling, together with the different spectral responses possible for the various types of PV absorber materials. In reality, the spectral profile of the transmittance due to soiling changes depending on the amount and the type of soiling deposited, which varies from site to site and can also vary with time at the same site An example is shown in Fig. In the next sections, the experimental methods are described that were used to collect and analyse the necessary transmittance data so that a determination can be made using Eq. ( The same experimental soiling transmittance profiles described previously where ττ ssssssss (λλ) and ττ ssrrrr (λλ) are the weekly measured spectral transmittances of the outdoormounted coupon and of the clean coupon, respectively. The transmittance loss at a given wavelength can be calculated as 1 -ττ(λλ). The present dataset consists of 34 ττ(λλ) measurements, collected over 48 weeks. The data shown in this work starts from those measured in the third week of the data collection, here labelled as "week 1". Some weekly measurements are missing because they were not taken, or because the transmittance data was too noisy. Maximum and minimum weekly average soiling transmittances of 1.000 and 0.926 were experienced, with rainfalls and stochastic events affecting the soiling loss profile, as detailed previously It is important to mention that the value of the average transmittance (ττ bb ) is strongly affected by the wavelength limits that are adopted in the calculation. Table Table 0.300 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.425 0.450 0.475 0.500 Loss/% 2.7% 2.6% 2.4% 2.3% 2.1% 2.1% 2.0% 1.9% 1.8% The spectral models, which are described below, are compared with three single wavelength value models: • Broadband (average) Transmittance (ττ bb ): the transmittance profile is assumed to be flat, with a value equal to the simple average of the spectral transmittance. • Transmittance at 0.55 μm (ττ0.55): the transmittance profile is assumed to be flat, with a value equal to the transmittance measured at a wavelength of 0.55 μm. • Transmittance at the optimal wavelength (ττopt): the transmittance profile is assumed to be flat, with a value equal to the transmittance measured at the wavelength that returns the lowest error. The optimal wavelength of each material is selected according to the results shown in the previous study The 3v1e equation has recently been utilized to model the spectral transmittance of soiling on glass where ττ(λλ) is the spectral transmittance at a wavelength λλ (expressed in μm) and αα * , ββ ssssss * and γγ * are wavelength independent variables. It was suggested that ββ ssssss * represents both the mass of particles per unit area on the glass surface and the strength of forward scattering of those particles, αα * relates to the size of the particles and γγ * is an offset correction parameter, needed to consider mechanisms taking place when particles are deposited instead of suspended. For example, measurement A in Fig. As in previous work The variables provided as input to the model to generate the irradiance profiles are shown in Table The curve fitting has been performed through the curve_fit function in the SciPy library for Python 2.7 • The mean absolute error (MAE) expresses the average value of the absolute errors between the measured and modelled data. 4. Spectral Transmittance Modelling The models listed in Section 3.2 have been tested to assess their ability to reproduce the spectral profiles of the 34 transmittance measurements taken during the data collection period. For each week, a number of simulated transmittance profiles were generated by using both the flat and the spectral models and these were then compared with the measured transmittance spectrum due to soiling. The errors found in the estimation of each week's spectral transmittance profiles were calculated from Eqs. ( On the other hand, assuming a flat transmittance profile can produce significant errors (up to 3.4% MAE), especially in conditions of higher soiling. For the given dataset, a single wavelength measurement returns lower absolute errors than the average transmittance value, even if it is exposed to a systematic over-estimation of the transmittance (and under-estimation of the losses) as proved by the high positive ME values. The optimal wavelengths range between 0.6 and 0.8 μm, in the region of the spectra where the losses are at a minimum. It is interesting to mention that this approach limits the MAE, but produces the largest ME (i.e. the largest overestimation of the transmittance and the largest under-estimation of the losses). These aspects can be explored further by looking at the errors for the transmittance data from each week, and how this depends on the characteristics of the transmittance spectra. This is shown in Figure This result is confirmed if, for each transmittance spectrum in the dataset, the average spectral transmittance of each waveband (UV, visible and near infrared) is compared to the broadband transmittance (i.e. the average transmittance across the whole spectrum). This is done through the Waveband Specific Transmittance (WST), which expresses the ratio between the average spectral transmittance of a waveband ii and the broadband transmittance, calculated as, where λλ 1ss and λλ 2ss are the shortest and longest wavelengths of the ii-th waveband. According to its definition, it has a value < 1 (< 100%) if the transmittance of the ii-th waveband is lower than the broadband transmittance and has values > 100% otherwise. The smaller its value, therefore, the more the losses are in the specific waveband. For the analysed dataset, the plots reported in the last three rows of Fig. In the previous section, we have shown how the use of spectral models can improve their utility as replacements for the full, measured soiling transmittance profiles. These models are based on two or three variables, which means that the full transmittance spectrum for soiling can be modelled by measuring the transmittance at only two or three wavelengths, respectively. In this section, we aim to understand which combinations of wavelengths can be used to model the transmittance spectra due to soiling with the highest accuracy. As a first step, each week's transmittance profile has been modelled by using the transmittance measured at a number of wavelengths equal to the number of each model's variables. Wavelengths between 0.30 μm and 1.10 μm have been considered, at steps of 0.05 μm. The results from all of the transmission curves of the study were combined. The results show the mean MAEs, obtained as an average of the MAEs calculated for each of the 34 transmittance curves, following these steps: 1. Each transmittance curve is modelled and a MAE is calculated. 2. The average of the MAEs is calculated. Fig. In our previous work On the other hand, the spectral models always return among the lowest errors, independently of the conditions. Indeed, the spectral transmittance models are found to be the more robust to the change in irradiance spectrum. The use of the spectral transmittance models is found to be particularly important for low and intermediate energy materials, because of their extended absorption band, which goes from the strongly affected blue wavelengths to the less impacted longer wavelengths. It should be noted that the plots for p-Si and CIGS are not shown, as the results are similar to those found for m-Si, since they all have very similar small bandgaps. As was discussed in connection with the first two rows of Fig. Our previous work In the previous section, we showed which combinations returned the lowest errors when the three-variable single exponential (3v1e) model was employed. In this section, we want to investigate if it is possible to further lower that error by using the two-variable equation and by tuning the wavelengths according to the PV material in use. Indeed, each PV material is able to work in a different absorption band. This means that the estimation of soiling might rely on modelling only a limited portion of the spectrum instead of the full spectrum. Therefore, it might be possible to identify combinations of wavelengths that optimize the soiling ratio estimation for the spectral absorption of a selected PV material. For this reason, the analysis described in the previous section has been repeated by taking into account each material's specific absorption band and the three irradiance spectra considered in this work. The results, plotted in Fig. So far, the present analysis has not taken into account how a transmittance measurement error can propagate in the estimation of the soiling ratio. In general, a ±0.5% uncertainty at each wavelength is associated with the transmittance measurements made with a spectrophotometer On the other hand, the differences are similar for most of the models when a-Si and perovskite materials are considered; this is due to the limited range of spectral response (waveband) of these higher bandgap materials. In these conditions, the average transmittance is found to provide one of the best results, because the error is attenuated thanks to the larger number of data points considered with this approach. In general, the performance of the spectral models tends to improve under conditions of the reference and red-rich spectra. Overall, the 2v1e model, when fed with measurements at PV material-optimized wavelengths, is found to return the lowest errors in all the cases. It is important to mention that this 2v1e* approach would optimize the performance for a single PV material only, as different wavelength combinations are required for each of the various PV materials. Otherwise, if multiple PV technologies need to be investigated with one soiling sensor, the other two spectral models should be utilized. We turn our attention back to Figs. It is therefore clear from this exampleand from the analysis presented throughout this workthat the use of spectral models and the techniques which we have applied to a particular location in southern Spain should be repeated for other sites with diverse climates and varied soiling conditions. Concurrently, the empirical relationships of Eqs. ( Monitoring soiling is an essential task to minimize the losses of PV systems deployed worldwide, while limiting the operation and maintenance costs. In order to limit the installation and operation costs, the soiling sensor market has been moving toward maintenance-free optical soiling detectors that measure the transmittance of soiling to quantify the soiling losses occurring on a PV system. Some commercial soiling sensors currently available are based on a single optical measurement, which can give a good estimate of the soiling trends, but do not consider the spectral profile of soiling and do not perform any correction based on the spectral irradiance distribution or the spectral response of the PV materials they are monitoring. In particular, the errors of single-measurement systems are expected to rise with the severity of soiling, due to the larger soiling loss occurring at shorter wavelengths. In this work, we investigated the possibility of estimating the soiling transmittance spectra using empirical spectral models and compared these to the use of single wavelength transmittance measurements. For the two spectral models studied, we identified optimal wavelength combinations that resulted in a minimization of the errors in soiling transmittance estimation. In general, better results were obtained when a three measurement model was employed, compared to a two measurement model. When used to estimate the soiling losses of different PV materials exposed to the same soiling under different irradiance conditions, the spectral models were found to perform significantly better than single-measurement approaches for most of the PV materials. It was also possible to further reduce the error in the estimation of the soiling ratio for the two-measurement model by optimizing the combinations of wavelengths depending on the PV absorber materials. These models have also been found to be more robust to transmittance measurement errors. In general, the utilization of spectral models is therefore beneficial, especially in high soiling conditions. From the analysis presented in this paper, one can conclude that optical techniques for monitoring the consequences of soiling in PV could be improved by utilizing two or three wavelengths to estimate the full transmittance spectra, rather than just one. This will make it possible to adjust the soiling measurement, not only to different irradiance conditions but also for different PV module materials. This would enable features currently lacking in both optical sensors and standard soiling stations. This study was conducted at a single location, and should be repeated for a larger number of locations experiencing more significant soiling losses. Future studies should analyse the time series of the transmittance data and soiling loss for each location by using Eqn. 4 and the methods described in this work. Accepted Manuscript (Postprint): L. © 2019. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ © This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/