Ferroelectric liquid crystals (FLCs) couple the direction of their spontaneous electric polarization to the direction of tilt of their optic axis. Consequently, reversal of the electric polarization by an electric field gives rise to an immediate and lasting optical response when an appropriately aligned FLC is observed between crossed polarizers, with one field direction yielding a dark image, and the opposite direction yielding a bright image. Here this peculiar electro-optic response is used to image, with high optical contrast, 180° ferroelectric domains in a crystalline substrate of magnesium-doped lithium niobate. The lithium niobate substrate contains a few domains with upwards electric polarization surrounded by regions with downward electric polarization. In contrast to a reference non-chiral liquid crystal that is unable to show ferroelectric behavior due to its high symmetry, the FLC, which is used as a thin film confined between the lithium niobate substrate and an inert aligning substrate, reveals ferroelectric domains as well as their boundaries, with strong black and white contrast. The results show that FLCs can be used for nondestructive read-out of domains in underlying ferroelectrics, with potential applications in e.g. photonic devices and non-volatile ferroelectric memories. Over the past decades, the focus of research on ferroelectricity has shifted from bulk materials to thin films and nanostructures, where interfaces are key. Here, we describe a polarization direction-mediated alignment of the optic axis in surfacestabilized ferroelectric liquid crystals As FLC, we chose a room temperature multi-component mixture W-235B, purchased from the group of Prof. R. Dabrowski, Military University of Warsaw (Poland), exhibiting a long natural pitch, facilitating efficient surface stabilization, and a birefringence in the range 0.12-0.14. We used a minimum amount of the FLC, confining it between the LiNbO3 substrate and the polyimide-coated glass substrate without any spacers, pressing the substrates together by hand while the LC was heated up to the isotropic (I) phase to obtain a very small but uncontrolled cell gap (estimated on the order of 1 μm). The substrates are kept together by capillary forces from the FLC. The W-235B mixture exhibits the phase sequence "Crystal -10 SmC* 86 SmA* 90 N* 106 I" /°C (temperature indications from manufacturer, ignoring twophase coexistence). For comparison, we chose a non-chiral LC, 2-(4-hexyloxyphenyl)-5octylpyrimidine (6OPhPy8, purchased from Synthon, Germany), which exhibits the phase sequence "Crystal 28 SmC 45 SmA 58 N 65 I" /°C. Textures were studied using an Olympus BX51 polarized light microscope working in transmission with a U-25LBD daylight color filter inserted. This compensates for the reddish illumination from the microscope lamp but instead leaves a light bluish tone to images devoid of strong colors. The temperature of the sample was controlled with a Linkam LTS120 hot stage. The LCs were heated up to the I phase and then cooled down towards room temperature at cooling rate ranging between 5°C min -1 and 30°C min -1 , taking texture photographs in the process. SSFLCs arise by confining a chiral smectic-C (SmC*) LC between tightly spaced flat substrates that impose a planar alignment, forcing the smectic layers to orient (largely) orthogonal to the cell [Figs. This geometrical coupling between n and Ps means that an electric field applied along the smectic layers, orthogonally to the substrate plane of our samples, forces n to tilt right or left, depending on the direction of the field and of the n-Ps coupling. The benefit is that n rotates 180° around the SmC* tilt cone, corresponding to a reorientation of the optic axis by twice the tilt angle, 2, if one changes the electric field direction between up and down. This inversion of electric field is what happens when one moves across a domain wall between 180° ferroelectric domains at the surface of a ferroelectric substrate. Thus, the electro-optic response of the SSFLC gives rise to a strong contrast between the 180° ferroelectric domains when the sample is observed in polarized light microscopy, as we demonstrate here using sandwiched SSFLC on a LiNbO3 single crystal. We observe the contrast evolution in the different phases of the FLC at different temperatures (I, N*, SmA*, SmC*), and compare with the evolution of a non-chiral reference LC, that thus does not exhibit ferroelectricity although it has the corresponding (non-chiral) phase sequence (I, N, SmA, SmC). The ferroelectricity of SSFLCs is a generic property of SmC* LCs in which the helix has been unwound by confinement, and the response is generic to applied electric fields, hence our findings apply to any ferroelectric substrate and can be realized with any SmC* LC with appropriate alignment and helix unwinding. Fig. Images in the isotropic phase [Figs. 2(a) and (e)] are identical to images of LiNbO3 obtained in air where domains can be localized only because their domain walls appear as shiny stripes, as a result of local strain-induced birefringence. In the SmC* phase, where the confined W-235B is in the SSFLC state, there is a strong contrast with reverse-poled domains appearing white and the virgin background black, for the sample orientation in Fig. In the SmC phase of 6OPhPy8 the optic axis also tilts away from k by ±θ, but there is no spontaneous electric polarization that couples to the tilt. This means that the opposite electric fields arising from the 180° domains of LiNbO3 have no impact on whether the optic axis tilts . This confirms that the electric polarization of the domains of LiNbO3 (~70 μC cm -2 ), In summary, we demonstrated that SSFLCs accurately reveal the 180° electric polarization contrast of opposite domains in ferroelectrics, here exemplified by a Mg-LiNbO3 single crystal, with high-contrast as viewed in a polarized light microscope. Contrary to previous reports of LC-enabled visualization of ferroelectric domains, which exclusively used nematic LCs, whose symmetry is too high to distinguish between opposite directions of electric field, the behavior here fully complies with the expected behavior of a surface-stabilized ferroelectric SmC* phase. The results show that SSFLCs can be used for non-destructive read-out of domains in ferroelectrics, of potential use, e.g., in photonic devices and non-volatile ferroelectric memories. Having established the physical foundations of the method, future work will include in-depth systematic investigations of its practical aspects. In particular, engineering efforts will be required to reach an optimal spatial resolution and extend the stability in time of the LC response to the polarization of the substrate. The spatial resolution is ultimately limited by the size of the domains in the FLCs. Based on literature and standard LC technology, we believe that a resolution of ~4 μm can be achieved, See supplementary material for videos of burst-like textural reconfiguration upon fast cooling and texture variation upon rotation of the SSFLC.