The growing diffusion of integrated photonic technologies requires fast and noninvasive quality control techniques for mass-production. We present a general diagnostic technique for sub-ps imaging of photonic circuits combining wide-field optical microscopy and optical gating. The simultaneous access to multiple parameters of a photonic structure enables an unprecedented characterization of its functional design 1 Rapid progress in lithographic techniques and hybrid material integration is leading to complex on-a-chip platforms with thousands of elements miniaturized into integrated photonic circuits. Nowadays, photonic circuits are widening their applicability thanks to their competitive performances, replacing conventional microelectronics in specific fields ranging from signal processing In this paper, we present a multi-domain approach for the diagnostic of integrated photonic circuits. By combining principles of time-resolved optical gating and wide-field microscopy, we demonstrate far-field temporally and spatially resolved signal tracing with subpicosecond temporal resolution and ∼μm spatial resolution. The high temporal resolution allows to detect not only geometrical defects but also functional deviations with respect to the desired operation of photonic structures (e.g., due to density inhomogeneities). It is interesting to comment in more detail on the similarities and differences between the proposed method and other established reflectometry techniques such as OFDR. In an OFDR measurement, even in the simplest single arm geometry, the presence of multiple reflections can often lead to additional intermixing terms that do not correspond to real reflections, introducing an ambiguity in the interpretation of the resulting spectrum. The apparatus developed for ultrafast imaging of photonic circuits is reported in Figure At first, the setup has been tested to characterize single mode waveguides. The photonic structures presented in this work have been designed for operation at telecom wavelengths and fabricated in a polymeric matrix by 3D lithographic technique of Direct Laser Writing (DLW). Free-space beam propagation is converted into an on-chip guided mode by grating couplers optimized to work at perpendicular incidence for a selected polarization. Assuming a negligible dispersion in the wavelength range of interest, the effective refractive index of our single-mode waveguide can be estimated by measuring the time delay acquired by the pulse propagating along a waveguide of known length. Characterization of waveguides of various configuration is summarized in Figure Looking more closely at the late time range of a different waveguide configuration (see Figure This first example shows basic diagnostic steps to evaluate the effective refractive index of the mode and track light dynamics at the grating coupler in a simple circuit with no defects. However, different types of imperfections may be introduced accidentally during fabrication. For example, using DLW lithographic patterning, photonic components can be affected by scattering defects due to incidental polymer burning or deviations from the designed geometry because of positioning errors. Similar problems may occur with other fabrication techniques as e-beam lithography. To investigate such issues, a single mode waveguide with two defects was analyzed (Figure As we show in Figure While the short separation between the two events makes them unresolvable in the time In order to show the applicability of the method to more complex circuits, we study a whispering gallery mode resonator vertically coupled (Figure At each round trip, the resonant cavity mode loses a fraction of power back into the bus waveguide, which depends on the same coupling coefficient (insertion losses), and into free space, which instead depends on the intrinsic quality factor of the cavity. Photonic circuits employed in commercial devices usually include multiple waveguides to interconnect and manipulate optical signals. Coupling among parallel light pathways is achieved by directional couplers whose intensity ratio splitting is determined by the coupling length. Additionally, each pulse experiences at least one event of partial power transfer through a directional coupler and one power split though a Y-connector. It is interesting to follow the light dynamics through the paths that are nominally identical by design (e.g., output port 1 and 2). Thanks to the far-field imaging nature of our technique, the circuit analysis does not require any scanning process and the whole structure can be monitored at once in a wide field acquisition. As we collect a set of time-resolved images of the entire structure, individual transmission curves are retrieved for each output port by spatially integrating the signal in their corresponding regions. Figure For the investigated device, the performance of the splitters does differ significantly (90:10, 82:18 and 97:3 for the leftmost, the upper and the lower splitter, respectively) despite their nominally identical design. Ultrafast imaging was performed using femtosecond pulses produced by a Ti:Sapphire modelocked infrared laser (Tsunami, Spectra Physics, central wavelength λ gate = 820 nm, FWHM = 9 nm), and an optical parametric oscillator (OPO Opal, Spectra Physics, central wavelength λ probe = 1550 nm, FWHM = 15 nm). At the phase-matching condition, sum-frequency generation occurs in a 0.5 mm thick bismuth borate (BiBO) crystal. The gate pulse path is tuned by a linear motorized stage (ThorLabs Inc., ODL300, 300 mm Travel), which can be moved with precision up to 0.5 μm (corresponding to a round-trip delay of ∼3 fs). Sum-frequency signal with λ signal = 536 nm is recorded by a photomultiplier tube (ET Enterprises) or low noise CCD camera (Andor iKon M912). Light emerging from the sample is collected by a set of collection optics imaging the spatial distribution of light on the nonlinear crystal facet. The same facet of the crystal is illuminated with an expanded gate beam providing a uniform illumination over its surface to ensure flat upconversion efficiency all over the image. Polarization of the gate pulse is tuned by a half-wave plate in order to achieve maximal in-coupling. This allows in turn to select the polarization of collected light through the upconversion process by rotating the non-linear crystal. Time-resolved images reported in the paper are overlaid to wide-field illumination images for the sake of clarity. The probe beam is focused (Mitutoyo NIR 10× NA 0.26) on a target input coupler and the output signal is collected by an infinity-corrected collection objective (Mitutoyo NIR 20× NA 0.4, 50× NA 0.42 or 100× NA 0.5). Images at different delay values (shown in color) are recorded for different positions of the translation stage, and superimposed to a zero-delay (grayscale) image recorded with a collimated probe beam illumination. This allows to see the structure through the same set of imaging optics (including the nonlinear crystal) and identify the structural features corresponding to each signal. Investigated devices have been fabricated using a commercial 3D Direct Laser Writing platform (NanoScribe GmbH) based on two-photon polymerization employing a commercial photoresist (Ip-Dip from Nanoscribe GmbH, n = 1.53 Finite element based calculations were performed using a commercial software (Comsol 4.3), to optimize and evaluate the mode propagation inside the photonic structures. Mode analysis calculation was performed to evaluate the effective refractive index of the guided mode within the single mode waveguide while grating coupler design has been optimized in order to maximize free-space to on-chip light propagation (frequency domain calculation). We described a novel technique for functional photonic circuit diagnostics and quality control. This technique merges complementary approaches enabling a detailed characterization of photonic components. Notably, spatio-temporal characterization of photonic circuits gives access to device linear and non-linear characteristics. Although the technique is demon-strated for the common C-band wavelength region, its basic working principle is that of optical gating which can be readily extended to other frequency regions. Measurements are performed in a non-contact, far-field fashion making this method compatible with 3D or vertically stacked structures that would not be suitable for a scanning near-field investigation. Besides, the technique can be generalized to work in reflection mode, lifting the requirement for transparent substrate. Finally, the technique does not rely on any specific material characteristics, and is therefore applicable also to silicon, hybrid or polymer photonic platforms.In this respect, our proposed technique fills the lack of available diagnostics approaches for complex multi-branched integrated circuits, while at the same time offering a defect positioning resolution that is significantly superior to the state-of-the-art demonstrated so far over linear waveguides using OFDR. Remarkably, the diagnostics potential of our technique extends not just to geometrical defects close to the optical diffraction limit, but it can detect also slight variations from the intended design of investigated photonic circuits. Indeed, there can be imperfections that are undetectable even under scanning electron microscopy inspection (e.g., regarding the material density or the presence of buried defects) and yet affect the functionality of the photonic device. On the other hand, devices exhibiting slight geometrical deviations might still perform as intended, in ways that are impossible to predict or model beforehand and that can only be assessed using in situ, functional diagnostic techniques. 