Advances in SRF technology over the last 40 years allowed achieving accelerating gradients ~ 50 MV/m corresponding to peak surface magnetic fields close to the theoretical limit of niobium. However, the quality factor decreases significantly with increasing accelerating gradient. This decrease is expected since increasing the rf field increases the number of quasiparticles and therefore the rf losses. Recently, a new phenomenon of increase in quality factor with the accelerating gradient has been observed when SRF cavities are doped with certain non-magnetic impurities. In particular, the diffusion of nitrogen into the niobium cavities' inner surface has been successfully implemented into the commercialization of SRF technology. The quest is still ongoing towards process development to achieve high accelerating gradient SRF structures with high-quality factors for future high energy accelerators. Here, we present the review of the research on process development to this date via nitrogen diffusion, material analysis, and present the summary of current theoretical understanding behind high Q0 SRF cavities. I. Superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) technology is being used not only for the basic fundamental nuclear physics research but also for applications that have benefited society The superiority of superconducting cavities over the normal metal cavities is their ability to store a large amount of energy with much lower power dissipation. The performance of the SRF cavities is measured in terms of the quality factor Q0=G/Rs, where G is the geometric factor which depends on the cavity geometry and Rs is the surface resistance, as a function of accelerating gradient, Eacc. For typical cavities of resonating frequency 0.5-3 GHz operating at a temperature ~2.0 K the quality factor is in the 10 10 -10 11 range. In the last four decades, much research work has been focused on improving the accelerating gradient and quality factor of these SRF cavities. Considerable effort has gone into pushing the quality factor to higher values as well. Higher Q0 for the reduction of cryogenic losses, requiring liquid helium cryogenic plants with lower cooling capacity, and higher Eacc to achieve higher beam energy and smaller footprint are desired. Some of Eacc and Q0 requirements for some current and future SRF based accelerator is shown in Fig. In the past decade, the development of high-quality factor SRF cavities via material diffusion in a thin layer at the inner surface of the cavities has been achieved. It was first realized by serendipitous titanium doping during annealing at high temperature (~1400 °C) without any post-annealing chemistry The historical development of SRF technology over the last four decades can be found in Ref. Over the last several decades, several attempts were made to increase the quality factor of SRF cavities. The Nb surface is covered by a few nanometer-thick oxide structure and higher concentration of interstitials at the metal-oxide interface. Work was done to passivate the Nb surface with a less-defective oxide An exploration similar to that of Ref. Figure After the demonstration of an exceptionally high quality factor on nitrogen-doped SRF single-cell cavities, the focus quickly shifted to the application of nitrogen-doped cavities in multicell cavities and eventually in a superconducting linear accelerator. Around the same time, the LCLS-II project quickly adopted nitrogen-doping as part of the treatment processes for the SRF cavities to be installed in cryomodules Generally, most of the SRF facilities are equipped with a vacuum furnace capable of reaching a temperature of 1250 C with resistive heaters. The SRF facilities at Fermi Lab [31]. These furnaces are equipped with dry roughing pumps, cryopumps, residual gas analyzers, vacuum gauges, and gas delivery systems. The high purity nitrogen (> 99.9999%) was used during the doping process with the flow controlled by a mass flow controller. Typically, the temperature of the furnace is ramped up to the desired temperature (800-1000 oC) at the rate of 3-5 oC/min and hold for few hours (~3 hours), mainly for hydrogen degassing. At the end of the degassing cycle, high purity nitrogen gas is injected for some time (2-30 min), also called soaking time, with the specified partial pressure of nitrogen (~25 mTorr). During the early stage of the recipe development, the gas was turned off, the furnace was evacuated and the furnace was naturally cool down to the room temperature. Later, the recipe was modified in such a way that after the soaking time, the furnace was evacuated and the cavity was further annealed before cooling down to room temperature. A typical nitrogen doping temperature and pressure profile is shown in Fig. Figure. Thermal diffusion of nitrogen into Nb is a method that had been used in the past to produce NbN films Historically, the Nb-N system is interesting because of the superconducting behavior of the -NbN1-x phase Reaction rate of nitrogen in atmospheric pressure Very limited work has been done on the dependence of nitrogen diffusion on crystal orientation in high-purity SRF niobium One of the required steps after the nitrogen doping to achieve high quality factor is controlled electropolishing of the inner surface of the cavity. A recent study on a single cell cavity also showed an encouraging result when the post doping material removal was done by buffered chemical polishing (BCP) The initial research and development on nitrogen doping were limited to Fermi Lab, Jefferson Lab, and Cornell University. The research groups working closely started developing a "optimum" recipe on single-cell cavities by changing the nitrogen diffusion time † . Some details of the recipe development are already mentioned in section III, A. Several trials were done on the exposure and annealing time to identify the best recipe that met the LCLS-II cavity performance specifications. A recipe 2N6 (2 minutes nitrogen exposure followed by 6 minutes of annealing in UHV environment) was chosen to be used for the project and technology was transferred to the cavity manufacturers Research Instruments, Germany and Zanon in Italy. The electropolishing process had already been implemented by the cavity vendors for E-XFEL process but it was refined by Jefferson Lab, mainly cavity temperature, acid flow rate and cathode optimization. The niobium for cavity fabrication was obtained from Tokyo Denkai, Japan and Ningxia, China, with similar material specifications as for E-XFEL project The rapid progress on the development of SRF cavities with nitrogen doping was mainly due to the requirements for the LCLS-II project. As a part of R&D and possible use in future accelerator projects, nitrogen doping work was carried out in other parts of the world, KEK in Japan The nitrogen doping provided an avenue for the operations of the future accelerators with reduced power consumption due to cavities with high quality factors, particularly CW accelerators which are operated with an accelerating gradient of  25 MV/m. Coincidently, most of the nitrogen doped cavities are limited to an accelerating gradient  25 MV/m, significantly lower than that without doping. For example, the average accelerating gradient of 743 cavities used in XFEL projects was 31.4 ± 6.8 MV/m A. High-Temperature Nitrogen Doping One of the routes to increase the accelerating gradient currently being pursued is to use a modified nitrogen doping recipe by varying the nitrogen diffusion and annealing time. Once again LCLS-HE project-driven R&D is being conducted independently at Jefferson Lab and Fermi Lab pursuing different doping recipes. Jefferson Lab is exploring the doping recipe where the nitrogen is introduced in the furnace for a short time (2-3 minutes) followed by a longer annealing time (~60 mins). The hypothesis behind this recipe is that the nitrogen will diffuse deeper into the bulk with uniform concentration, leading to a high accelerating gradient. Recipe applied to single-cell cavities reached ~35 MV/m, however with the high field Q-slope An alternative to the nitrogen doping at high temperature followed by the electropolishing to control the optimal nitrogen concentration within the rf penetration depth was realized by adding nitrogen to the low-temperature baking used to mitigate the high-field Q-slope In particular, at Jefferson Lab, a benefit to the cavity performance similar to that achieved by nitrogen doping followed by EP was observed when the nitrogen gas was introduced into the furnace at elevated temperature (~ 250-300 oC) and let the cavity cool down to lower temperature (120-200 C) and hold at that temperature for an extended period of time (24 -48 hours) In the quest for high gradient, high quality factor SRF cavities, a two-step low-temperature baking process showed an increase in accelerating gradient as well as quality factor well above 40 MV/m The quality factor of single-cell SRF cavities with nitrogen infusion, at (a) Fermi Lab Sample coupons treated along with SRF cavities provide very useful information about the mechanism behind the rf performance of nitrogen-doped and infused SRF cavities. Several surface sensitive techniques are: Scanning electron microscope, Electron diffraction X-ray, Transmission electron microscopy, secondary ion mass spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Magnetometry, and Tunneling. Surface imaging with SEMs along with EDX allowed looking into the surface of niobium after the nitrogen doping. Almost all high-temperature doping recipes produce triangular or starlike shaped structures on the surfaces of niobium (Fig. SIMS has been an excellent tool to measure elemental concentration on the surface of the nitrogen-doped Nb samples. Ions beams, primarily 16 O2 + , 16 O -, 133 Cs + , or Bn m+ (n=1-5, m=1,2) are used to bombard the sample surface at an energy that is enough to eject secondary ions from the surface of the Nb. The ejected ions are detected and analyzed by the mass spectrometers to infer the composition of the sample Diffusion depth profile of nitrogen to the (a) partial pressure of nitrogen XPS studies are done to identity the near-surface composition on SRF niobium. Historically there have been several XPS studies done to understand the loss mechanism of SRF cavities on EP, BCP and Low temperature baked SRF niobium The superconducting properties such as the transition temperature and critical fields can be extracted from the dc magnetization and susceptibility measurements. In particular, dc magnetization can be used to estimate the field of first flux penetration (Hffp), which is believed to be one of the causes of cavity quench. The measurement showed that Hffp is lowered by ~ 15% due to the nitrogen doping (Fig. The BCS surface resistance depends on many superconducting parameters and among them are the superconducting gap and density of states (DOS) of the quasi-particles at the Fermi level. The tunneling spectroscopy such as point contact tunneling (PCT) and scanning tunneling microscope (STM) is particularly useful in determining the local DOS of quasi-particles and superconducting gap as well as imaging vortices. PCT measurements done on nitrogen-doped Nb showed a more homogeneous distribution of the superconducting gap compared to non-doped samples and also favorable surface oxidation states on the surface As mentioned earlier, the increase in quality factor can be realized by minimizing the surface resistance, either residual or BCS, or both. Statistically, it was found that the residual resistance of doped SRF cavities is lower than the non-doped counterpart when rf tested in the low residual magnetic field environment. It is to be noted that the residual magnetic field has a severe effect on doped cavities compared to non-doped cavities One of the peculiar observations in the doped cavity is the increase in quality factor as a function of the microwave field tangential to the inner surface of the cavity. This means that the surface resistance decreases with the rf field, contrary to the perception that the microwave field suppressed the superconductivity leading to the decrease in quality factor Q0 with accelerating gradient Eacc Hrf The original BCS theory was developed without taking into account the amplitude of the rf field and the theory explains well the temperature dependence of surface resistance at low rf field Engineering the niobium surface with impurity doping within the rf penetration depth in SRF cavities has been extremely beneficial to achieve high quality factor, potentially cost-saving on current and future SRF based accelerators. SRF cavities with high quality factor (Q0>3×10 10 ) at 2.0 K and accelerating gradient ~ 20 MV/m have been successfully produced commercially and are in the process of installation at SLAC for the LCLS-II project. Efforts are being made to extend high quality factors towards higher accelerating gradient with modification of existing recipes as well as exploring new recipes. High Q0 and high gradient SRF cavities would be of great interest for lowering the cryogenic heat load of future high-energy accelerators. High quality factor SRF cavities are also drawing interest in several other applications. For example, quantum computing with microwave resonators † In literature, the recipe is usually defined as xNy, where x (1-30 mins) represents the nitrogen diffusion time and y (0-60 mins) represent the annealing time in minutes in UHV environment.