Ti3C2TX nano-sheets (MXenes) are an emerging class of two-dimensional materials with outstanding potential to be employed in energy storage, catalysis, and triboelectric applications, on length scales ranging from the nano-to macroscopic. Despite rapidly accelerating interest in this new class of materials, their nanoscale frictional properties and in particular, their potential for solid lubrication on the nanoscale, have not been explored in detail yet. In this short communication, we present the first results on the nanoscale frictional characteristics of MXenes, in the form of a friction map obtained on an isolated Ti3C2Tx nanosheet deposited on a silicon dioxide substrate via friction force microscopy. Our experiments reveal that few-layer Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets indeed act as solid lubricants on the nanoscale, reducing friction on the silicon dioxide substrates, although not as effectively as few-layer graphene. The results reported here pave the way for further studies focusing on nanoscale solid lubrication achieved by Ti3C2TX (MXene) nanosheets. The discovery of MXene nano-sheets by Gogotsi's group in 2011 significantly expanded the family of 2D layered nano-materials Moreover, various MAX phases based upon different early transition metals were utilized to synthesize molybdenum-, vanadium-and niobium-based MXene nano-sheets. Until today, the MXene family already consists of more than 30 experimentally-verified members with variations in the early transition metal, the stoichiometry as well as mixtures between carbidic and nitridic structures From a structural point of view, Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets demonstrate great similarities with graphene nano-sheets due to their 2D layered-like structure with layer-by-layer distances of less than 1 nm. The 2D structure together with their chemical bonding and the resulting mechanical properties make these nanosheets promising candidates in the field of tribology. This idea was supported by numerical studies using density functional theory (DFT) calculations and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations demonstrating low interlayer friction for Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets and suggesting solid lubrication capabilities reported, with only one study that does not focus on individual nano-sheets Motivated by the lack of nanotribological studies performed on Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets in the literature and to put theoretical predictions of nanoscale lubricative properties High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) equipped with energy dispersive Xray spectroscopy (TEM-EDX) using an EDAX detector was utilized to assess the overall quality and chemical composition of the as-synthesized Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets. For imaging and chemical analysis, an acceleration voltage of 200 kV was utilized. In-situ diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) was performed to characterize the surface chemistry of the Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets. For this purpose, a Nicolet iS50 infrared spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with an MCT detector cooled by liquid nitrogen, a Ge-on-KBr On-Axis beam splitter and DiffusIR Environmental Chamber (Pyke) were used. In order to obtain spectra with a good signal-to-noise ratio, 200 scans with a resolution of 8 cm -1 were collected. The sample of interest was directly placed into the sample holder without any pre-treatment (packing or dilution), flushed with Argon and heated up to the desired temperature. In order to analyse the intercalated water present between the nano-sheets, temperature-programmed decomposition massspectroscopy (TPD-MS) was performed on the nano-sheets without any pre-treatment using the 3Flex from Micromeritics coupled with a mass spectrometer (Cirrus 2, MKS Spectra Product). For this purpose, the nano-sheets (15 -30 mg) were heated in a quartz reactor (helium atmosphere with a flow rate of 100 mL/min) with a heating rate of 10 °C/min until a final temperature of 800 oC was reached. Water formed during this treatment was characterized by mass spectrometry (m/z 18). The surface chemistry of the Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets was investigated by X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Physical Electronics 1257) using non-monochromatic MgKα radiation. For this analysis, the XPS system was operated at 15 kV and 400 W. All scans were acquired using a pass energy of 44.75 eV. Narrow scans of the C1s, F1s, O1s and Ti2p peaks were acquired using a step size of 0.1 eV. For the C1s, F1s and O1s peaks, the Shirley method was used to subtract the background. In case of the Ti2p peak, a linear background subtraction was utilized. All photoelectron peaks were fitted using Lorentz-Gaussian functions. Friction force microscopy (FFM) experiments were performed with a commercial atomic force microscope (Bruker, Dimension 5000) under ordinary laboratory conditions. Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets in powder form were dispersed in a glass container by the addition of acetone, followed by ultrasonication for 10 minutes. The resulting solution was then deposited onto a SiO2 substrate via drop-casting using a micropipette (droplet volume: 0.5 mL). The SiO2 substrate was pre-heated up to 150 °C for ~5 minutes to facilitate acetone's evaporation and thus achieve a more homogenous dispersion of nano-sheets on the substrate. All FFM measurements presented here were conducted using two silicon cantilevers (Nanosensors, PPP-CONTR) with normal spring constant values of 0.61 N/m and 0.42 N/m, as determined by the Sader method The HR-TEM micrograph (Figure TEM-EDX (Figure The TPD-MS used to characterize the water release from the nano-sheets shows three distinct peaks (Figure In order to evaluate the potential of Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets as solid lubricants on the nanoscale, FFM measurements were conducted. While a large portion of the SiO2 substrate surface was covered by a film consisting of densely packed Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets after drop-casting, regions on the substrate comprising isolated nano-sheets were occasionally observed, which allowed for the evaluation of their nanoscale lubricative properties. Figure To further explore the nanotribological properties of Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets, we have performed loaddependent friction measurements on an area containing multiple nano-sheets, whereby the applied load was varied from 0.7 nN to 26.3 nN (Figure While the results for the load dependence of friction reported in Figure Assuming that no transfer of Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets to the tip apex takes place during the experiments, it may be argued that interlayer sliding between Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets does not play an essential role in FFM measurements. If that is indeed the case, other mechanisms leading to low friction at the tip-Ti3C2Tx interface, including but not limited to those involving topographical roughness and/or suppressed chemical interactions of the tip apex with the surface groups on the Ti3C2Tx nano-sheets would need to be explored. Last but not least, the role that intercalated water molecules (as verified by the results of TPD-MS (Figure We presented here the first experimental results on the nanoscale solid lubrication characteristics of Ti3C2TX nano-sheets obtained via FFM. Friction maps revealed that few-layer Ti3C2TX nano-sheets indeed act as solid lubricants on SiO2 substrates, with friction mitigation capabilities that are somewhat inferior to that of graphene and MoS2. Further work needs to be performed in order to elucidate the mechanisms behind the lubricative character of Ti3C2TX nano-sheets and evaluate their effect on relevant applications such as triboelectric nanogenerators 