In this work we investigate theoretically the influence of a Fermi velocity modulation in the electronic and transport properties of magnetic graphene superlattices. We solve the effective Dirac equation for graphene with a position dependent vector potential and Fermi velocity and use the transfer matrix method to obtain the transmission coefficient for the finite cases and the dispersion relation for a periodic superlattice. Our results reveals that the Fermi velocity modulation can control the resonance peaks of the transmittance and also works as a switch, turning on/off the transmission through the magnetic barriers. The results obtained here can be used for the fabrication of graphene-based electronic devices. Since its first experimental realization In the last years, several works have investigated the influence of a Fermi velocity modulation in the electronic and transport properties of graphene The combination of magnetic barriers and a Fermi velocity modulation was already investigated. However, it is important to mention that it was considered only the cases of a single In this work we investigate the effects of a modulation of the Fermi velocity in the electronic and transport properties of magnetic graphene supeprlattices. We consider three cases: magnetic barriers, magnetic barriers and wells and a periodic superlattice. We use the transfer matrix method to obtain the transmission coefficient for the finite cases and the dispersion relation for the periodic case. We obtain, for instance, that the Fermi velocity modulation can control the transport properties, turning on/off the transmission through the magnetic barriers, which can be used for the fabrication of graphene-based electronic devices. We also find that the Fermi velocity can enhance or reduce the transmittance of the system and modulate the electronic structure. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we write out the effective Dirac equation of the system and the transmission coefficient for the finite cases and the dispersion relation for the periodic case. In Sec. III we obtain the results numerically and discuss the influence of the Fermi velocity in the electronic properties of the system. The paper is summarized and concluded in Sec. IV. The effective Dirac equation that describes quasiparticles in a single layer graphene with a perpendicular magnetic field B(x) and a modulated Fermi velocity v F (x) is given by where σ = (σ x , σ y ) are the Pauli matrices, A is the vector potential and Ψ(x, y) is a spinor of two components that represents the two graphene sublattices. The Eq. ( In the Landau gauge we have that A = (0, A y (x), 0). The wave functions are translationally invariants in the y direction, which allows us to write Ψ(x, y) = ψ(x)e ikyy . Also, defining φ(x) = v F (x)ψ(x), Eq. ( We will use dimensionless units and express all quantities in units of B 0 , which is the magnitude of the magnetic field, and B = hc/eB 0 , the associated magnetic length. Then, A y (x) will be written in units of B 0 B , x in units of B , k y in units of -1 B and E in units of hv F / B . In this dimensionless units, the Fermi velocity modulation will be included in the problem by the energy. So, Eq. ( and Uncoupling these equations for φ A , one obtains that where The solution of this equation depends on the form of A y . φ B is obtained by replacing φ A in Eq. ( Let us first consider the case of N magnetic barriers, which is shown in the continuum black lines of Fig. where n = 0, .., N -1 and L = w b + w w . A y (x) The y component of the vector potential for the cases of magnetic barriers (continuum black lines) and magnetic barriers and wells (dashed red lines). In the regions with constant A y , we have that where A 0 and C 0 are constants that give the amplitude of the waves in the region. This solution can be written as where For the regions where A y depends on position, we have that where Considering the continuity condition for φ(x) in the interface of each region, it is possible to obtain a matrix that connects the amplitude of the waves in the incoming and outgoing regions, which is given by where the indices i and f represent, respectively, the incoming and outgoing regions and with It is important to remember that the wave function of the problem is ψ(x), and not φ(x). However, since we are considering that the Fermi velocity is the same in the incoming and outgoing regions, the matrix M obtained for φ is the same for ψ. From Eq. ( where k i x and k f x are the x component of the wave vector in the incoming and outgoing regions, respectively, and we put C f = 0. Writing the wave vectors in terms of the incident and exit angles, θ 0 and θ f , respectively, we have that where N w b B 0 is the total magnetic flux. The conservation of k y implies that k i y = k f y , which gives us So, the transmission through the barriers is only possible when which restricts the transmission for a smaller range of θ 0 then [-π/2, π/2]. For the case of magnetic barriers and wells, the vector potential is given by This vector potential can be seen in the red dashed lines in Fig. where and the transfer matrix is where here In this case, the total flux is given by N (w b -w w )B 0 . So, we have that Here we consider the case of a periodic magnetic superlattice, which is possible considering barriers and wells with w b = w w . From the transfer matrix method, we have that where The Bloch theorem says that ψ(0) = e -iKxL ψ(L), where K x is the Bloch wave number. Comparing Eqs. ( which yields the dispersion relation 2 cos With the transmission coefficient for the finite cases and the dispersion relation for the periodic case, we can now obtain and analyze the results. We will consider each case separately. In Fig. For the case without a Fermi velocity modulation (black lines) one can see that, as the magnetic flux is divided by adding more barriers, the transmission increases and tends to the classical limit, where the transmission is 1 when Eq. ( The transmittance for various values of energy is shown in Fig. One can also note the appearance of oscillations in the transmission for higher values of E. It is possible to thought these magnetic barriers as Fabry-Pérot interferometers, where different incidence angles give rise to constructive or destructive interferences. At this way, the modulation of the Fermi velocity can control the Fabry-Pérot resonances, selecting which incidence angle will be transmitted, and also cancel the interference process, as occurs for ζ = 1. The control of the transmittance by a modulation of v F can be seen more clearly in Fig. Let us now consider the case with magnetic barriers and wells. In Fig. Increasing the width of the regions, it is possible to restrict the transmission to a very small range of incidence angle, as can be seen in Fig. In Fig. A contour plot of the transmittance as a function of the incidence angle and ζ can be seen in Fig. The band structure for the periodic superlattice case can be seen in Fig. In this paper we have investigated the influence of a Fermi velocity modulation in the electronic and transport properties of magnetic graphene superlattices. We obtained that, for the case of finite magnetic barriers, the Fermi velocity can enhance or reduce the transmission through the magnetic barriers and also to control the resonant peaks in the transmittance. We also showed that the magnetic field can select the incidence angle that will be transmitted, which can be used to create a colimator of electrons beams. The Fermi velocity in such colimator works as a switch, since it can tune the transmittance from 0 to 1. For the case of a periodic magnetic graphene superlattice, we found a linear dispersion relation that is proportional to the ratio of the Fermi velocity in the two regions of the superlattice. The results obtained here are useful in the development of new electronic devices based on graphene.