We study the performance of an electromechanical harmonic oscillator chain as an energy harvester to extract power from finite-bandwidth ambient random vibrations, which are modelled by colored noise. The proposed device is numerically simulated and its performance assessed by means of the net electrical power generated and its efficiency in converting the external noise-supplied power into electrical power. Our main result is a much enhanced performance, both in the net electrical power delivered and in efficiency, of the harmonic chain with respect to the popular single oscillator resonator. Our numerical findings are explained by means of an analytical approximation, in excellent agreement with numerics. A huge development in the miniaturization capability of electronic devices has been observed in the last few years. However, the energy density available in batteries aimed at providing the powering for such devices has not reached the same rate of improvement when operated in stand-alone configurations Regardless of the employed transduction mechanism, most of the vibrational energy harvesters -also known as vibration power generators -consider a linear spring or single harmonic oscillator as the mechanical element of the device and treat the external vibrations as sinusoidal vibrations. Thus the maximum power is generated when the resonant frequency of the generator matches the ambient vibration frequency, known as resonant energy harvesting To overcome these difficulties, a different approach based on the exploitation of the properties of non-resonant oscillators, i.e. characterized by a non-linear dynamical response, has been proposed However, the concept of white noise is an idealisation that may not be valid in many practical situations. Random fluctuations acting on physical, chemical or biological systems actually have a finite correlation time. For example, in the classical Brownian process there is a timescale given by the typical collision time of the fluid molecules with the Brownian particle below which fluctuations cannot be considered uncorrelated. The existence of finite correlation times is even more important in complex fluids, where hydrodynamic fluctuations can be correlated over long time intervals. This is specially relevant for practical harvesting. Since an efficient harvester would require to have a response that peaks within the lower end of the frequency bandwidth, where most of the noise energy is concentrated -and considering that there are physical limits to the mass or string constants that can be used to tune the resonant frequency of such harmonic oscillator-it is unclear that the optimal harmonic harvester (see Ref. After some early experimental and simulation studies Notwithstanding the recent advances in nonlinear vibration energy harvesters, some important issues have remained unaddressed so far. The mechanical part of these systems is usually modelled with a harmonic potential plus a nonlinear one that can be considered as an effective potential that accounts for the degrees of freedom not explicitly considered in the linear description. This issue becomes relevant at nanometric scales wherein the detailed structure of the mechanical resonator has to be taken explicitly into account. This is not only to construct the model, but also to assess the influence of these non-accounted for degrees of freedom in the dynamics. Some examples in this direction consist in the studies of nanowire resonators In this paper we propose a new energy harvester system that is able to effectively extract energy from the low end part of the environmental (colored) noise spectrum, where most energy is available, while being linear, simple, and amenable to analytical treatment. Our model consists of a N harmonic oscillator chain with one end in contact with the ambient reservoir, while the other end is attached to a transduction circuit. We show that this configuration is able to overcome the single harmonic oscillator efficiency, specially in the case of ambient noise with a finite correlation time. We find that the harmonic chain leads to a broad spectral response of the first oscillator -the one in contact with the ambient-that overlaps with that of the external noise. This leads to an optimal energy extraction from the latter, in sharp contrast with the narrow spectral response of single, linear-oscillator-based harvesters. Furthermore, the harmonic lattice lends itself to analytical treatment. We have derived an analytical approximation that sheds light on the results of spectral analysis obtained by numerical simulations. Our analytical results for the harmonic chain help explaining why our proposed model outperforms the single oscillator case for the considered parameters, both in delivered power as well as in efficiency. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we present the model as well as our methodology. Numerical as well as analytical results are reported in Sec. III. Finally, in Sec. IV we discuss the results so far obtained and propose ways to continue this line of research. An energy harvester is a device that converts the power supplied by external noise into electrical energy. This process begins with the damped oscillator being driven by the external noise. Kinetic energy is then converted via a piezoelectric transducer mechanism into electrical energy that is then stored in a capacitor. We will begin reviewing the original implementation where q is the displacement from the equilibrium position and p is the momentum, with the dot standing for temporal derivative. In this equation k is the harmonic constant, γ is the linear damping coefficient, ξ(t) is the random driving force, and F tran (q, V ) is the transducer force due to the motion-to-electricity conversion mechanism, which depends on the geometry of the transducer and on how the circuit that implements the energy conversion cycle operates. It opposes to the motion, just as the friction force, and has its origin in the energy loss that occurs when kinetic energy is converted into electric energy. The simplest expression for this function is where k v > 0 is a piezoelectric parameter and V (t) is the electric voltage of the circuit. The dynamical equation for the voltage has the form V = F (p, V ) -V /τ p , where τ p = R L C is the time associated to the charging process of the piezoelectric element, which is larger than any other characteristic time of the system, C is the capacitance of the piezoelectric component, R L is the load resistance, and is the connecting function with the oscillator. In the following the latter will be taken as where k c is the coupling constant of the piezoelectric sample. In this work we are considering a Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) random force, with mean , where σ is the amplitude and τ c is the correlation time. The limit τ c → 0 and σ 2 → ∞, with D = σ 2 τ c constant, corresponds to the white noise limit Therefore the complete set of equations reads as Since the total mechanical energy of the oscillator is E = p 2 /2m + U(q), where U(q) = kq 2 /2 is the harmonic potential, the corresponding instantaneous power is given by its temporal derivative, i.e. Ė = q[ ṗ + U ′ (q)]. If in this last expression we substitute Eq. (2b) and take the statistical average we obtain where • • • implies both a time-average during the observation interval and an ensemble average over noise realizations. qξ is the power delivered by the noise, γ q2 is the power dissipated by friction, and k v qV is the power transferred from the oscillator to the transducer. Next, if in dV 2 /dt = 2V V we substitute Eq. (2c), take the statistical average, and consider that the system is in the stationary regime -thus d V 2 /dt = 0-, we obtain the relation V 2 = k c τ p qV . The transducer's efficiency in converting mechanical to electrical power is given by Since the transduction mechanism is not the object of the present study we can consider, without loss of generality, that η me = 1, which implies that k c = k v = C = 1, being values that we will henceforth employ. The conversion efficiency of the power delivered by the noise to power transferred from the oscillator to the transducer is η rm = k v qV / qξ ; thus the overall conversion efficiency of power delivered by the noise to net electrical power can be written as As a mechanical resonator we now consider a one-dimensional chain of N nearest-neighbor harmonic oscillators, as sketched in Fig. where F i = -F (q i+1 -q i ) + F (q i -q i-1 ) and F (x) = -kx being the force on the ith oscillator due to the nearest-neighbor interaction within the lattice. The mechanical energy is defined through the expectation value of the lattice Hamiltonian, that is, It can be immediately shown, employing Eq. (6b), that where q1 ξ is the power delivered by the noise, γ q1 2 is the power dissipated by friction with the first oscillator in the lattice, and k v qN V is the power transferred from the Nth oscillator to the transducer. Since we have been able to maintain the analogy with the original single-oscillator case, we can infer that the total efficiency of the conversion process from power delivered by the external noise to final net electrical power can be defined as the quotient of both powers, and thus which is an expression completely analogous to the one previoulsy employed in the literature The simulations are performed by solving numerically the Langevin equations (2a-2d) and (6a-6d) by using the so-called Heun algorithm; trajectories are computed over an interval of 4096 time units after a transient of 10 3 starting from a set of initial conditions given by {q(0) = p(0) = V (0)(≡ V 0 ) = 0}. An ensemble average over 10 3 independent realizations has been performed for the chosen parameter set. In Fig. The efficiency dependence on τ c is displayed in Fig. Furthermore, even if the single-oscillator N = 1 harvester has also an almost τ c -independent efficiency in that same value range, the corresponding net electrical power, see Fig. In order to elucidate the origin of the poor performance of the single-oscillator energy harvester we carry out a spectral analysis of all the dynamical variables involved. Thus in Fig. V are now coupled to the behavior of the external noise at low frequencies, which assures a significant correlation in that frequency regime. This spectral behavior explains the nondecaying correlations depicted in Fig. values. An additional advantage is that this result is robust for larger system sizes, since the spectra in Fig. Next, to gain a deeper understanding of the low-frequency behavior depicted in Fig. After substituting Eq. ( where and From Eq. ( with the constant Then, from this last expression it is clear that, in the ω → 0 limit, |q(ω)| 2 ∼ k -2 | ξ(ω)| 2 . This is precisely the coupling of the displacement and external noise that can be appreciated in Fig. which is again the behavior displayed in the aforementioned figure. From the close coupling between the displacement and voltage inferred from Eq. (10b) it is immediate to deduce that the output voltage will experience a drastic drop in the low-frequency region, which prevents the harvester to adequately perform in the long correlation time limit τ c ≫ 1. For the analytical treatment of the chain we employ the methodology recently developed in Ref. where These are the corresponding expressions of Ref. Therefore, after substituting Eq. (15b) into Eq. ( After some algebra, it can be shown that the order of magnitude of the prefactor in the last equation has the form On the other hand, for the last oscillator, from Eq. (15b) we obtain And again, after some lengthy algebra we obtain the expansion for ω → 0 and the corresponding momenta of both boundary oscillators, at lowest order in ω, depend on the frequency as Finally, since from Eq. (10b) we have that V (ω) = [k c ωτ p /(ωτ p -i)] qN (ω), employing Eq. (15b) we obtain the approximation for ω → 0, which is in excellent agreement with the simulation results in Figs. 4(b) and (c). In summary, our analytical results show that, in the low-frequency limit, the single harmonic oscillator harvester is able to extract energy from the noise generating an electric potential with a power spectrum that decays as | V (ω)| 2 ∼ ω 2 | ξ(ω)| 2 , leading to less energy being harvested at lower frequencies. In contrast, for the N-oscillator chain, Eq. ( Since the total power transferred from the oscillators to the transducer is given by V 2 = dω| V (ω)| 2 , these results explain the much better performance of the harvester based on a chain as compared with the single oscillator, as shown by the numerical results in Fig. Our results for the linear oscillator lattice electromechanical energy harvester interacting with an external finite-bandwidth ambient noise clearly show that its performance is enhanced, both in the net electrical power delivered and in its efficiency, compared with the single oscillator instance for any finite value of the noise correlation time τ c . For sufficiently large values of τ c , both net electrical power and efficiency become constant and take large values, in sharp contrast to the single oscillator energy harvester, where the combined goals of both maximum power and efficiency cannot be attained simultaneously. By means of spectral analysis we have elucidated the origin of the poor performance of the single oscillator energy harvester: a power-law frequency dependency ∼ ω 2 of the velocity power spectrum that renders its contribution negligible in the low-frequency limit. This, in turn, reduces significantly the power that can be harvested from the external noise. On the contrary, for the chain system resonance with the extra frequencies afforded by the additional degrees of freedom contributes to a non-decaying velocity/momentum power-spectrum in the low-frequency region, wherein most of the noise energy resides, thus rendering a consistent performance of the device for finite correlation time values. These numerical findings have been corroborated by an analytical approximation, with excellent agreement between both. While most studies of energy harvesters typically consider uncorrelated environmental noise, the reality is that this limit is an idealisation to describe noises correlated over very short times. However, in many potential applications, like electromagnetic plasmas As for possible experimental implementations we recall that the phonon mean-free path in graphene (∼775 nm near room temperature 