We propose and demonstrate a method for the construction of highly uniform, multilayered, orientation-controlled superstructures of CdSe/CdZnS core/shell colloidal nanoplatelets (NPLs) using bi-phase liquid interface. These atomically-flat nanocrystals are sequentially deposited, all face-down onto a solid substrate, into slabs having monolayer-precise thickness and excellent homogeneity over several tens of cm 2 areas. Owing to the near-unity surface coverage and film uniformity of this deposition technique, amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) is observed from an uncharacteristically thin colloidal film having only 6 layers of NPLs, which corresponds to a mere 42 nm thickness. Furthermore, systematic studies of optical gain properties of these NPL superstructures constructed having precise numbers of NPL layers tuned from 6 to 15 revealed the reduction in the gain threshold with the increasing number of NPL monolayers, along with a continuous spectral shift in the position of the ASE peak (by ~18 nm). These observations can be well explained by the variation of the optical field confinement factor with the NPL waveguide thickness and propagation wavelength. This work demonstrates the possibility of fabricating thickness-tunable, large-area three-dimensional superstructures made of NPL building blocks, which can be additively constructed one monolayer at a time. The proposed technique can also be extended to build hybrid NPL films of mixed orientations and allow for precise largearea device engineering. Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) have been thoroughly investigated for the past two decades as optical gain material, largely owing to their favorable properties including wide color tunability, high quantum yield and strong optical abrosption. NCs of different dimensionalities, including quasi-0-dimensional quantum dots, 1-dimensional nanorods (NRs) and 2-dimensional colloidal quantum wells each have thus far been characterized widely in terms of their optical gain performance for their potential use as optical gain media in NC lasers. To address these issues, we propose and demonstrate the construction of superstructures of NPLs, all oriented face-down, with a precise number of complete monolayers of these NPLs using a thin film deposition technique which we have developed to create large-scale (several tens of cm 2 ) and thickness-controlled (1-to 15-monolayered) films of NPLs. In this strategy, densely-packed single layers of NPLs are deposited on substrates repetitively via this self-assembly deposition, yielding excellent homogeneity throughout the film. This sequential deposition of NPLs enables controlling the thickness of the resulting films precisely and creating large-area slabs of NPLs with a desired thickness, which can be in principle utilized as optically active structures. In our previous work, In contrast to the widely studied layer-by-layer deposition technique based on dipping into alternating solutions of positively and negatively charged polymers and/or colloidal nanoparticles (e.g. charged semiconductor NCs), Here, we systematically studied the optical gain properties of these multilayered NPL superstructures while decreasing the number of NPL layers. Thicker NPL films lead to gain easily at reduced gain thresholds. However, as making the film thinner and thinner, it becomes progressively difficult to observe gain. The dense packing and high uniformity of our deposited NPL superstructures on fused silica, on the other hand, enable the observation of optical gain down to 6 layers of such NPL constructs, which is altogether as thin as 42 nm. This film thickness is much smaller than the previously reported thicknesses typically of few 100s nm for the NC films displaying optical gain, Therefore, the observation of optical gain is limited to the critical thickness, below which no waveguiding mode within the NPL slab exists. Below this critical thickness, which is thus a cut-off thickness for waveguiding of the NPL slab, the resulting confinement factor is practically zero. Right above the critical thickness, however, there is a sudden major jump of 4 orders of magnitude in the confinement factor. By increasing the number of NPL layers in the film further beyond the critical thickness, we were able to observe gradual decrease in the gain threshold, which can be explained by progressively increasing field confinement factor within the NPL slab. In this work, equipped with the ability of large-scale bottom-up construction of highly uniform NPL waveguides, we demonstrate the first account of optical gain in only few NPL layers where the film thickness is precisely controlled. Our results show that NPLs as well as other types of NCs can benefit from this sequential liquid-air interface deposition technique for creation of two-or three-dimensional (3D) pure or hybrid NC superstructures. In the case of anisotropic NCs such as NPLs, the particle orientation can also be used in principle as an additional degree of freedom to choose and control in each layer during their 3D construction. In this work, CdSe NPLs of 4.5 monolayer (ML) atomic thickness (having 5 Cd and 4 Se crystal planes alternatingly) were synthesized according to the previous literature. To deposit these NPLs into thickness-controlled thin films, we modified our original selfassembly procedure, which we previously reported, At the end of this procedure, one full monolayer of NPLs is deposited onto multiple substrates, as seen in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of one of the substrates shown in Figure In order to create thicker films with multiple NPL layers, this self-assembly procedure is repeated on the same previously deposited substrate as many times as desired. The resulting films are robust and maintain their strong emission and high uniformity. A cross-sectional TEM image taken from an exemplary case of 11 NPL layers, seen in Figure In addition, ellipsometric measurements on the thicknesses of multilayered NPL films having different numbers of layers verify the linear trend between the film thickness and the number of NPL layers as seen in Figure To characterize the NPL planar slabs in terms of their optical gain performance, we deposited NPL multilayers through the aforementioned construction procedure onto fused silica substrates with a varying number (n) of NPL layers up to n = 15. We were able to observe amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from these films with n = 6 and above, whereas no ASE has been observed for n ≤ 5. We therefore present our results for the films ranging from n = 6 (42 nm thick) to n = 15 (105 nm thick). We use a stripe excitation configuration for the ASE measurements, where the optical pump is normally incident on the specimen and the PL emission is collected from the side (see Experimental Section). The PL spectra were collected at various pump fluences for each n. These spectra are shown in Figure The tendency of the gain threshold to drop with increasing n is also seen in Figure To elaborate on the observed characteristics of the NPL slabs, we employed a numerical analysis of guided modes within the NPL layer. Approximating the NPL multilayer as a homogeneous medium, our structure can be modeled as an asymmetric planar waveguide confined between semi-infinite fused silica and air (Figure where λ is the wavelength of the mode in free space. The calculated mode intensity profile of TE 0 mode is also plotted in Figure By increasing the thickness of the gain medium even further, the optical gain is facilitated by the stronger confinement of the optical mode into the NPL slab, hence the reduction in the gain threshold. To account for the spectral shifting of the ASE peak with film thickness, we consider the variance of the mode confinement with mode wavelength. Previously, observing a similar trend in the ASE peak of optically pumped polystyrene films, Calzado et al. argued qualitatively that each vibronic mode experiences a different loss at different film thicknesses. As a result, the propagation losses for the modes having longer wavelengths are enhanced compared to those supported at shorter wavelengths, which explains the blue-shift of the ASE peak at thinner polystyrene films. To test if this simple formalism can explain the observed ASE shift, we model the unsaturated material gain as a generalized Gaussian function: where G 0c is the unsaturated gain coefficient at the peak wavelength λ c , and β and α are parameters related to the shape and width of the distribution, respectively. λ c is fixed at 665 nm since it is the peak of the most red-shifted ASE feature among all the tested multilayered films. The parameters β and α are swept to find the parameter couple that minimizes the difference between the experimentally determined ASE peaks and the calculated ones. The optimum parameters found this way are β = 2.0 and α = 64, for which Equation 2 is plotted in Figure Indeed, the experimental ASE peaks seem to be saturating towards a definite red shift around λ = 665 nm. Although this type of red shift is expected for NCs having type-I band alignment In summary, we have created planar waveguides made out of the superstructures of our NPLs laid in face-down orientation by a sequentially-repeated liquid interface self-assembly technique, which is applicable to large scales. The multilayered NPL films prepared with this technique have close packing and excellent uniformity over many tens of cm 2 large areas. These NPL constructs can work as optical slab waveguides, of which optical confinement is revealed as a function of the number of NPL layers, or equivalently, their film thickness, at a monolayer precision. Our findings show that these self-assembled NPL slabs can also be used as optically active planar waveguides with precise thickness-controlled gain, which can find applications in on-chip active photonic devices requiring in-plane waveguided light. The gradually decreasing gain threshold observed with increasing number of layers is revealed to result from the optical confinement increasing with the deposited NPL layers. In the case of electrically-driven NC films, the organic surfactants in NC films act as insulating barriers that impede charge or heat transfer, limiting their use in electroluminescent devices. The ultimate thickness of our NPL film inducing optical gain is as small as ~40 nm, with only 6 layers of NPLs, may result in significant reduction of organic barriers that should be overcome by the electric current in the vertical direction. This work may therefore serve as a foundation for developing the optically active media of electrically-driven NPL lasers without having to switch to inorganic ligands. The technique presented in this work can be readily extended to other types of NCs to create large-area hybrid NC supertructures, which can be useful for device fabrication. In addition, the anisotropy of the non-spherical NCs can also be used as a degree of freedom to create NC multilayers having different orientations in different layers. Therefore, this multilayered self-assembly technique paves the way for exploration of a rich variety of large-area bottom-up NC superstructure construction. Synthesis of CdSe/Cd 0.25 Zn 0.75 S core/shell NPLs. CdSe/CdZnS core/alloyed-shell NPLs have been synthesized with some modifications by using the hot-injection shell synthesis recipe reported in our recent works. have been started at 165 °C using 10 mL h -1 rate of syringe pump until the temperature reached 280 °C, and then the rate has been decreased to 4 mL h -1 . Before cooling to room temperature with cold water, the solution is kept for an hour at 300°C. Hexane (5 mL) is added at room temperature and the solution is cleaned four times with absolute ethanol. Finally, the precipitated NPLs is dissolved in hexane. Multi-layered self-assembly of CdSe/Cd 0.25 Zn 0.75 S: Precleaned fused silica substrates having 13×13 mm 2 size or silicon substrates with 10×10 mm 2 size are treated with the vapor of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane at 200 °C under nitrogen environment for 30 minutes in order to render their surfaces hydrophobic. After the NPL solution is fully evaporated, one drop of silicone oil (silicone elastomer, Sylgard 184) dissolved in hexane (2 mg/mL) is dropped from close to the edge of the DEG interface, which compresses the NPL membrane. As the peristaltic pump slowly drains the DEG, the NPL membrane on the interface eventually settles onto the substrates. Any residual DEG on the substrates is dried under vacuum at room temperature. For multilayered deposition, the same substrates are submerged back into DEG for another deposition cycle. The number of depositions carried out on a substrate determines the number of NPL layers on it. Optical gain measurements: Multilayered NPLs deposited on fused silica have been placed in front of a pulsed laser beam at normal incidence, whose intensity is adjusted with a neutral density filter on the optical path. A Ti:Sapphire laser amplifier (Spitfire Pro) generates laser pulses at 800 nm with a pulse width of ~110 fs and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The wavelength of these pulses is converted to 400 nm with a frequency-doubling barium borate crystal. The residual 800 nm light is filtered out with a short pass filter. The 400 nm beam is focused along one dimension onto the sample with a cylindrical lens to obtain a stripe excitation having a width of ~150 μm. The emission of the sample is collected from the side with an optical fiber. The spectra are recorded with an optical spectrometer (Maya 2000, Ocean Optics). The modal analyses were carried out using a commercially available mode solution software package (Lumerical FDTD) with two-dimensional layout. The refractive indices of CQW and fused silica used in the simulations were 2.10 and 1.45, respectively. The confinement factor was calculated based on the ratio of the fundamental transverse electric mode energy confined within the active NPL film to the total mode energy. 