In this work, single crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes (NFs) are formed in a highly dense array by Au seeding of a Fe substrate by a thermal oxidation technique. The NFs are conformally decorated with a thin FeOOH cocatalyst layer. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) measurements show that this photoanode with the α-Fe2O3/FeOOH NFs rooted on the Au/Fe structure exhibits a significantly enhanced PEC water oxidation performance compared to the plain α-Fe2O3 nanostructure on the Fe substrate. The α-Fe2O3/FeOOH NFs on Au/Fe photoanode yields a photocurrent density of 3.1 mA cm -2 at 1.5 VRHE, and a remarkably low onset potential of 0.5-0.6 VRHE in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm -2 ) simulated sunlight illumination. The enhancement in PEC performance can be attributed to a synergistic effect of the FeOOH top decoration and Au under-layer. While FeOOH facilitates hole transfer at the interface of electrode/electrolyte, the Au layer provides a sink for the electron transport to the back contact: this leads overall to a drastically improved charge-separation efficiency in the single crystalline α-Fe2O3 NF photoanode. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting to produce hydrogen fuel with abundant solar energy is a promising strategy to resolve the current energy and environmental crisis. In this work, we first show that a gold nanoparticle (Au NP) seed layer on an iron substrate can be used to trigger the thermal growth of a high density array of single crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanoflakes (NFs). The Au NPs remain as an under-layer between the NFs and the iron substrate. The single crystalline α-Fe2O3 NFs then can be decorated with a FeOOH cocatalyst by a precipitation method, without any change of crystallographic structure and/or morphology. The Au at the NFs/Fe interface provides an electron sink, and thus an ideal junction to the conducting surface. The synergistic effect between FeOOH as an OEC and the Au sublayer not only significantly facilitates charge transfer at the surface, but also increases the electron transport to the back contact. As a result, a considerably enhanced water splitting performance of such photoanodes is obtained with a photocurrent density of 3.1 mA cm -2 at 1.5 VRHE, and an onset potential of 0.5-0.6 VRHE (with AM 1.5G simulated sunlight, 100 mW cm -2 , in 1 M KOH). This is the lowest onset value combined with the high photocurrent for PEC water oxidation on a non-doped 1D α-Fe2O3 photoanode. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this is to achieve a bimodal separation of electron-hole pairs through a single crystalline hematite layer without using additional element doping. Furthermore, a synchronous light X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SIXPS) technique is used to elucidate the mechanism of FeOOH OEC on the α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. Scheme 1 illustrates the synthesis process of the α-Fe2O3 NFs formed on the Fe substrate. First, an Au NPs layer was seeded on Fe foil by a self-induced decoration (Figure In order to decorate the NFs with the FeOOH cocatalyst, the as-grown NF arrays are immersed in a FeCl3 aqueous solution from 1 h to 45 h by a facile "top-down" method (see SI). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed to characterize the morphology change of α-Fe2O3 NFs photoelectrodes without and with the Au NPs layer (Figures S3-S4, and Figure The decorated NFs were then investigated for PEC performance under AM 1.5G sun irradiation in 1 M KOH electrolyte. Figure Figure Figure XPS shows no trace of Cl (Figure The photoinduced charge transfer and separation process plays a crucial role in reaching high light-toenergy conversion efficiencies. Here we use a XPS technique that is combined with synchronous light illumination (SIXPS) to directly extract charge transfer information (Figure These findings are consistent with the PEC performance as shown in Figure Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) provides further information on the interfacial properties of the electrodes. Figure In the present work we show how to form high density single crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanoflake arrays on a substrate using Au seeding and thermal oxidation. The α-Fe2O3 NFs can be decorated with a FeOOH cocatalyst by a precipitation method. A synergistic effect between FeOOH and Au not only significantly facilitates charge transfer at the interface of electrode/electrolyte, but also increases the electron transport to the back contact, and thus considerably improves the charge-separation efficiency in a α-Fe2O3 NF photoanode. The α-Fe2O3 NF photoanode yields a photocurrent density of 3.1 mA cm -2 at 1.5 VRHE, and a remarkably low onset potential of 0.5-0.6 VRHE under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight (100 mW cm -2 ) in 1 M KOH. The lower onset value in this work is the lowest report so far combined with one of the highest photocurrent for PEC water oxidation observed for a 1D α-Fe2O3 photoanode without additional doping element up to now. We believe this work not only represents a significant step towards an increased photoresponse for hematite photoanodes, but also introduces a new strategy for designing 1D efficient photoanodes. For the preparation of α-Fe2O3 NFs on Fe, we used iron foils (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) that were degreased by sonicating in acetone and ethanol for 10 minutes, followed by drying in a nitrogen stream. The samples then were thermally annealed in a furnace (Heraeus Furnace, ZEW 1451-4) in air at 400 °C. For this, the samples were placed in a ceramic boat and inserted in the furnace at room temperature. The temperature was ramped up with a heating rate of 10 °C min -1 , kept at the desired temperature for 1, 2, and 3 h, and finally the samples were removed from the furnace. For the preparation of α-Fe2O3 NFs on Au/Fe, the iron foils were immersed in 5 mM HAuCl4 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%) aqueous solutions for various times (10 sec, 1 min, 30 min, and 60 min) by in situ precipitation of Au nanoparticles on the top surface of Fe foils, following by drying in an air stream. Then, the Au/Fe foils were thermally annealed in the furnace in air at 400 °C, with ramping rate of 10 °C min -1 , kept at the desired temperature for various times, and finally the samples were removed from the furnace. For the preparation of α-Fe2O3/FeOOH NFs on Au/Fe, the 5 mM FeCl3 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) aqueous solutions were prepared. The samples were immersed in the FeCl3 solutions for various times by a facile "top-down" method (The front sides of NFs were face to the bottom), following by rinsing with distilled water and drying in a nitrogen stream. Characterization. X-ray diffraction (X'pert Philips MPD with a Panalytical X'celerator detector, Germany) was carried out using graphite monochromized Cu Kα radiation (Wavelength 1.54056 Å). A fieldemission scanning electrode microscope (Hitachi FE-SEM S4800, Japan) was used for the morphological characterization of the electrodes. TEM analysis was performed on a FEI Tecnai TF20 microscope operated at 200 kV. Raman spectra were acquired using a Renishaw in Via Reflex Confocal Raman Microscope with an excitation laser wavelength of 532 nm. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra were taken on an UV-2550 (Shimadzu) spectrometer by using BaSO4 as the reference. The Fourier transform infrared spectra of the samples were recorded using a Nexus 870 spectrophotometer from 4000 to 500 cm -1 equipped with an ATR assembly. Synchronous illumination X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SIXPS). System diagram of the synchronous illumination X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SIXPS) was shown in Figure 