We report a joint experimental and theoretical investigation of the high-pressure structural and vibrational properties of terbium sesquioxide (Tb2O3). Powder x-ray diffraction and Raman scattering measurements show that cubic Ia3 (C-type) Tb2O3 undergoes two phase transitions up to 25 GPa. We observe a first irreversible reconstructive transition to the monoclinic C2/m (Btype) phase at ~7 GPa and a subsequent reversible displacive transition from the monoclinic to the trigonal P3 m1 (A-type) phase at ~12 GPa. Thus, Tb2O3 is found to follow the well-known C→B→A phase transition found in other cubic rare-earth sesquioxides with cations of larger atomic mass than Tb. Our ab initio theoretical calculations predict phase transition pressures and bulk moduli for the three phases in rather good agreement with experimental results. Moreover, Raman-active modes of the three phases have been monitored as a function of pressure and latticedynamics calculations have allowed us to confirm the assignment of the experimental phonon modes in the C-type phase as well as to make a tentative assignment of the symmetry of most vibrational modes in the B-and A-type phases. Raman-active modes frequencies together with their pressure coefficients for the three phases of Tb2O3. These results are thoroughly compared and discussed in relation to those reported for rareearth and other related sesquioxides. It is concluded that the evolution of the volume and bulk modulus of all the three phases of these technologically relevant compounds exhibit a nearly linear trend with respect to the third power of the ionic radii of the cations. KEYWORDS: Terbium (III) oxide, rare-earth sesquioxides, diamond anvil cell, x-ray diffraction, Raman scattering, ab initio calculations 1.-Introduction Rare-earth (RE) sesquioxides (SOs), in particular lanthanide SOs (Ln2O3; Ln=La to Lu, Y and Sc), are an important family of materials due to their remarkable fundamental properties and potential applications. These compounds are highly interesting and versatile for different types of applications because the Ln radius can be finely tuned along the lanthanide family with the filling of f orbitals, thus enabling a wide range of technological advances including light emitters (lasers and improved phosphors), catalysts, and high-dielectric constant (high-k) gates. In particular, terbium sesquioxide (Tb2O3) has attracted considerable attention in the last few years as a high-k material Despite the large amount of work performed on the study of Ln2O3 properties at HP, relatively little is known about Tb2O3 under compression. Hoekstra and co-workers transformed the cubic phase into the monoclinic one at 2.5 GPa and 905 oC. In this work, we present a thorough experimental and theoretical study on the structural and vibrational properties of Tb2O3 under compression, where powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman scattering (RS) measurements at HP have been complemented with theoretical ab initio calculations. We will show that C-type Tb2O3 undergoes two PTs up to 25 GPa: a first irreversible C→B PT, and a second reversible B→A PT. The experimental and theoretical equation of state (EoS) of the three phases of Tb2O3 will be provided and compared with isostructural compounds. In particular, we will show that there is a linear trend between the bulk moduli of the three C-, B-, and A-type phases and the cube cation ionic radius. Additionally, up to thirteen optical Raman-active modes of C-type Tb2O3 have been monitored as a function of pressure, while sixteen and four Raman-active modes have been observed in the B-and A-type phases, respectively. The assignment of the symmetries of the different phonons in the three phases is supported by the results of ab initio lattice-dynamics calculations, and the experimental and theoretical phonon pressure coefficients in the three phases have been compared with those of isostructural SOs. Millimeter-sized pure cubic Tb2O3 single crystals with [112] crystallographic orientation were the starting material employed in this study. Le Bail fits confirmed the cubic Ia3 symmetry and allowed extracting a lattice parameter, a = 10.7323(3) Å, and volume, V0=1236.17 Å 3 , in good agreement with previous structural characterizations. Powder angle-dispersive XRD measurements at HP were performed at room temperature in the BL04-MSPD beamline at ALBA synchrotron facility. The sample was loaded with a 4:1 methanol-ethanol mixture in a membrane-type diamond anvil cell (DAC) with diamond culets of 400 m in diameter. The applied pressure was determined with the EoS of copper. Figure Room-temperature unpolarized HP-RS measurements were excited with the 532-nm line of a solid state laser. For these experiments, micron-size fragments without well-known orientation were obtained from the single crystals. Inelastically-scattered light was collected with a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR UV spectrometer equipped with an edge filter that cuts Raman signals below ∼50 cm -1 and a thermoelectrically cooled multichannel CCD detector enabling a spectral resolution better than 2 cm -1 . The applied pressure was determined using the luminescence of small ruby chips evenly distributed in the pressure chamber. Ab initio total-energy calculations at 0 K for the C-, B-, and A-type phases of Tb2O3 (and also for other SOs) were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) Figure On the upstroke, the B-type phase was always found to be accompanied by the C-type or the Atype phase, this last phase emerging around 12.0 GPa. Above this pressure, the A-type peaks start to broaden upon compression, most probably as a consequence of the loss of hydrostatic conditions of the pressure-transmitting medium. Å 3 , B0=148(2) GPa and B0'=2.1(4), respectively. The value of V0 obtained from the 3 rd -order BM-EoS fit is similar to that measured outside the DAC and in previous reports. Å 3 , B0=140.5(4) GPa and B0'=4.2(1), respectively. It must be noted that there is an excellent agreement between our experimental and theoretical V0 and B0 values for C-type Tb2O3 (see Table The good agreement observed between our theoretical and experimental data for the unitcell volume of C-type Tb2O3 is also found in the evolution of its free atomic coordinates (see Fig. We have not found in the literature the report of any pressure dependence of the atomic coordinates or of the cation-anion interatomic distances in other isostructural C-type or bixbyitetype SOs. Our present calculations in Lu2O3, Sc2O3, and In2O3 (see We have to note that the negligible change of the atomic parameters of the C-type structure of SOs with pressure is consistent with the negligible variation of those parameters upon changing ionic radius, as noted by Richard et al. The C→B PT occurs in Tb2O3 at ~7 GPa on the upstroke. This is a first-order PT with an experimental (theoretical) relative volume reduction of 8% (7.8%). The B-type phase, shown in Full pattern matching of B-type Tb2O3 allowed us to extract its lattice parameters at different pressures between 7 and 11 GPa on the upstroke and also from 10 GPa down to room pressure on the downstroke. As expected, a monotonous decrease of the unit-cell volume of B-Tb2O3 up to 11 GPa is observed (Fig. Indeed, the B→A PT is of weak first-order character since it shows a very small volume reduction (<2% according to GGA-PBE). Trigonal A-type Tb2O3, shown in Fig. As observed, there is a monotonous decrease of both a and c lattice parameters of the trigonal phase with increasing pressure and there is a good agreement between the experimental and theoretical results. It must be noted that the experimental (theoretical) value of the c/a ratio for A-type Tb2O3 at 12.2 GPa is 1.534 (1.548) according to data in Table Figure As can be seen, both experiment and theory indicate that the c/a ratio decreases with pressure; i.e. upon compression it progressively deviates from the ideal value of the hexagonal close packing of cations. The experimental curve, however, exhibits a kink around 15 GPa that is probably a consequence of the broad XRD reflections that are detected for this phase, giving rise to large experimental errors in the determination of the lattice parameters. Figures S8a and 8b in the SI show the pressure dependence of the theoretical free atomic coordinates and Tb-O distances in A-type Tb2O3. As observed, the GGA-PBE calculations predict almost no change in the two free atomic parameters (zTb, zO) with increasing pressure as well as a monotonous decrease of Tb-O distances, with no sudden changes that could give rise to the kink observed in the experimental c/a ratio. As it was already commented for the case of the C-type phase, it can be concluded that the decrease of Tb-O distances with pressure in A-type Tb2O3 is fully determined by the lattice parameter reduction due to negligible change in the free atomic parameters with pressure. We want to note that the change of the free atomic parameters with increasing pressure in B-type Tb2O3 (not shown) is also rather small although not negligible. These results are consistent with the negligible change of theoretical free atomic parameters of both B-type and A-type phases on changing ionic radius. GPa GPa by Next, we would like to compare the bulk moduli of A-, B-and C-type Tb2O3 with those of other RE SOs and isostructural SOs. Only a few works have attempted to understand the overall compression behavior of this family of materials. In Fig. Similar to the case of the unit-cell volume, the largest underestimation corresponds to In2O3 and Tl2O3. Similarly, the bulk modulus of C-type Fe2O3 is expected to be somewhat overestimated and a value close to 220 GPa is expected. Unfortunately, there is no reported bulk modulus, to our knowledge, for this metastable phase of Fe2O3. Finally, it is worth noting that similar conclusions to those here obtained for the Ctype/bixbyite phase of SOs can be reached for the B-and A-type phases of SOs. Figures S10a and S11a in the SI show the increase of the unit-cell volume pfu in B-and A-type RE SOs with increasing Z, except along the lanthanide series due to the lanthanide contraction effect. Our calculations are in good agreement with other theoretical calculations. In turn, Figures As can be seen in both figures, there is a linear relationship between the bulk modulus and r Ce2O3 are likely underestimated. We have to note that our results on the linear behavior of the bulk modulus of B-and A-type SOs with respect to the cation ionic radius is in agreement with previous calculations. This result is also in agreement with previous theoretical estimations. GPa. Above 6.8 GPa, new Raman peaks emerge in the spectra that have been attributed to the monoclinic B-type phase. In particular, a very weak feature at 185 cm -1 is observed at that pressure, despite the new phase is only clear above 7.5 GPa. RS spectra indicate that the monoclinic phase is stable up to 10.6 GPa, in agreement with our XRD results. At 11.5 GPa, other Raman peaks showed up, as evidenced by the appearance of features at 490 and 530 cm -1 , that have been attributed to the trigonal A-type phase. Finally, the A phase was found to back-transit, on the downstroke, to the B-type phase below 10.4 GPa. The B-type phase was fully recovered at 8.4 GPa and, similarly to our XRD results, it was found to be metastable down to 0 GPa. In order to help in the identification of this metastable phase, the RS spectrum of the B-type phase at room pressure is plotted in Fig. A g (PBEsol) B g (PBEsol) only the two phase transitions observed by HP-XRD but also that the trigonal A-type nature of the HP phase above 12 GPa, as it only displays 4 Raman-active modes. We have plotted in Fig. Moreover, the comparison between the calculated and experimental frequencies and pressure coefficients allows us to assign the symmetries of the different Raman peaks from the two HP phases with a high degree of certainty. This is particularly useful, as polarized measurements are not feasible for these phases. The symmetries of the different modes are displayed in the first column of these three tables. The pressure dependence of the Raman-active mode frequencies of C-type Tb2O3 shown in Fig. 11 and 12 is similar to that reported in the literature for B-type Lu2O3, As regards the lattice dynamics of C-type SOs, several works have recently addressed the comparison of Raman-mode frequencies in C-type SOs. This means that the smallest pressure coefficients must be found in the low-frequency region, while the largest pressure coefficients are found in the medium-and high-frequency regions. In particular, the three highest-frequency modes (Ag and Fg 2 ) are always among the Raman modes with the smallest pressure coefficients, which is some cases can be negative, like in C-type Tb2O3. Table This behavior is also observed in many materials with cubic structures or derived from them, like zincblende or wurtzite compounds such as ZnO 128 or AlN, 129 and AB2X4 chalcogenides. This seems to be the case of C-type rare-earth sesquioxides and other isostructural sesquioxides. As regards the lattice dynamics of B-and A-type SOs, there are several works in which a comparison between their Raman-mode frequencies at room pressure is reported. However, we do not know any study in which the pressure coefficients of their Ramanactive modes have been compared. A characteristic feature of B-type SOs is that their vibrational spectra can be divided into four regions: i) the low-frequency region below 125 cm -1 ; ii) the medium-low-frequency region between 125 and 250 cm -1 ; iii) the medium-high frequency region between 250 and 300 cm -1 ; and iii) the high-frequency region above 300 cm -1 . Among all these spectral regions, only a small phonon gap seems to be visible between the medium-high-(between 300 and 450 cm -1 ) and high-frequency regions (above 450 cm -1 ). In Tb2O3, such a gap is observed between 450 and 490 cm -1 . The modes in the whole medium-frequency region are generally bending RE-O modes, while those in the high-frequency region are generally stretching RE-O modes. In any case, we can observe similar trends to those observed for C-type SOs. In general, the Raman-active mode frequencies of B-type SOs increase with increasing the atomic number; i.e., with decreasing the unit-cell volume. This result means that despite Lu having larger mass than Tb, most modes of B-type Lu2O3 are observed at higher frequencies than in B-type Tb2O3 due to the dominance of the lanthanide contraction effect over the cation mass. The largest difference in frequency due to the lanthanide contraction effect is observed in the high-frequency modes. These modes are mainly related to O vibrations so the cation mass is not the dominant factor. On the contrary, both effects get balanced in the low-frequency region, where the vibrational modes have a larger contribution of cations. This explains the similar frequencies of Bg 1 , Ag 1 , Bg 2 , and Ag 2 modes along the Sm to Lu series (see Table The characteristic phonon modes of A-type SOs have been studied and compared for several SOs. It must be stressed that there is an increasing difference between the frequencies of the two stretching modes, , of A-type Ln2O3 compounds as the atomic number increases or the unit-cell volume decreases (see Table and A-type Y2O3 to room pressure suggest that there is a quadratic trend for A-type RE SOs instead of a linear trend as previously assumed. In a similar way, the comparable frequencies of the two bending modes of A-type RE SOs along the whole RE series also breaks for Y2O3. However, this disagreement can be solved if we assume that the two low-frequency modes of A-type SOs, whose frequencies are usually below 200 cm -1 , are related to cation vibrations as in C-type SOs and then strongly influenced by the cation mass. In such a case, we can renormalize the frequencies of Y2O3 by multiplying the real frequencies of Y2O3 by m Y /m Ho = 0.7342 since the ionic radii of Y and Ho are very similar. The above conclusions regarding the nature of the Raman-active modes of A-type SOs are supported by our ab initio calculations of A-type Tb2O3 at 0 GPa (see Table Our calculations have allowed us to represent the atomic vibrations of the Raman-active modes of A-type Tb2O3 using the J-ICE software. In summary, we have provided RS measurements and lattice dynamics calculations of Tb2O3 up to 25 GPa and shown that there is a good agreement between experimental and theoretical frequencies for the Raman-active modes of the three phases (C-, B-and A-type) of Tb2O3. This result confirms the two structural phase transitions already observed by XRD measurements and supported by total-energy ab initio calculations. Since B-type Tb2O3 is metastable at room conditions on downstroke when starting from the B-or the A-type phases, we have provided for the first time the RS spectrum of B-type Tb2O3 at room pressure and at high pressures that will help future studies to identify this phase by RS measurements instead of resorting to more elaborate XRD measurements. Besides, we have provided the pressure dependence of A-type Tb2O3 from 11 to 25 GPa. On top of that, we have analyzed in detail the nature of the Raman-active modes of A-type Tb2O3 in relation to previous works of A-type RE SOs. Finally, we have studied and compared the pressure coefficients of the different Ramanactive modes of C-, B-and A-type RE SOs (including Sc2O3 and Y2O3) and found a good correlation between the Raman-active modes between the three phases. Notably, we have found that modes below (above) ~200 cm -1 correspond mainly to vibrations of Ln (O) atoms. We have reported a joint experimental and theoretical study of the structural and vibrational properties of cubic terbium sesquioxide at high pressure. Powder x-ray diffraction and Raman scattering measurements up to 25 GPa show that C-type Tb2O3 undergoes two phase transitions: a first irreversible reconstructive transition to the monoclinic B-type phase at ~7 GPa and a subsequent reversible displacive transition from the monoclinic to the trigonal A-type phase at ~12 GPa. We speculate that the C-B transition is a strong first-order phase transition (volume collapse around 8%) involving a considerable structural reconstruction. Thus, most likely there is a kinetic energy barrier that prevents the system to go back from the B-type structure to the original C-type structure on decreasing pressure (i.e., with decreasing the energy provided to the system). Therefore, the irreversibility of this transition at room temperature can probably be linked to the kinetic-energy barrier effect, as observed in other cases like for instance the zirconscheelite phase transition in a number of ABO4 compounds. The C→B→A phase transition sequence is in good agreement with those observed in rare-earth sesquioxides crystallizing in the cubic phase as recently reviewed. Raman-active modes of the three phases have been monitored as a function of pressure, and rather good agreement with lattice-dynamics calculations has been found. This agreement has allowed us to confirm the assignment of the experimental phonon modes in the C-type phase as well as to make a tentative assignment of the symmetry of most vibrational modes in the B-and A-type phases. Finally, the Raman-active phonon frequencies and their phonon pressure coefficients for the three phases of Tb2O3 have been compared with those of other rare-earth sesquioxides. In particular, we have shown that the stretching Raman-mode frequencies of A-type sesquioxides do not scale linearly with pressure as previously assumed and that Raman-mode frequencies of B-type and A-type Y2O3 at room pressure do not seem to scale with those of other rare-earth sesquioxides and the same seems to be valid for Sc2O3. The present work has been devoted to construct a reference framework to understand the high-pressure behavior of the structural and vibrational properties of RE SOs and isostructural compounds. We hope that this study will stimulate further work on different sesquioxides to better constrain their bulk moduli, since some values reported in the literature seem to be quite underestimated or overestimated. We also hope that more work will be carried out on the less well-known A-type phase sesquioxides. In particular, more high-pressure studies should be performed in the following compounds: Dy2O3, Ho2O3, Er2O3, Tm2O3, Yb2O3, Lu2O3 and Sc2O3. Such studies would complete the sequence of known A-type sesquioxides and would provide a better understanding of the behavior of this phase under compression. We have obtained the isothermal compressibility tensor coefficients for monoclinic B-type Tb2O3 at several pressures using the IRE (Institute of Radio Engineers) convention for the orthonormal basis for the tensor: e3||c, e2||b*, e1||e2×e3. The tensor has been obtained with the finite Eulerian approximation as implemented in the Win_Strain package [42]. The change of the  monoclinic angle (always perpendicular to the b axis) with pressure implies that, in this monoclinic compound, the direction of the a axis changes with pressure assuming both b and c axis constant. Furthermore, the departure of this monoclinic angle from 90o indicates that the direction of maximum compressibility is not exactly that of the a axis. Therefore, in order to evaluate the direction of maximum compressibility as a function of pressure we have calculated and diagonalized the experimental and theoretical isothermal compressibility tensor, ij, at different pressures. The experimental and theoretical elements of this tensor at different pressures are reported in Tables First of all, we have to note that there is a reasonable good agreement between the experimental and calculated axial compressibilities (ii coefficients) at room pressure because 11 > 33 > 22 in both cases. This result shows that the compressibility along the a-axis is greater than those to the c-axis and b-axis. A diagonalization of the ij tensor at room pressure yields for our experiments the maximum, intermediate and minimum compressibilities 3.6(4)•10 -3 , 2.1(3)•10 -3 and 1.9(6)•10 -3 GPa -1 , respectively; whereas for the case of our calculations the obtained values for the compressibilities are 3.7(4)•10 -3 , 2.0(5)•10 -3 and 1.8(3)•10 -3 GPa -1 . These experimental (theoretical) results indicate that around 42% (43%) of the total compression at room pressure is being accommodated along the direction of maximum compressibility. Taking into account the eigenvector ev1, the major compression direction at zero pressure occurs in the (010) plane at the given angle Ψ (see Tables As regards the behavior of the experimental and theoretical compressibility tensor under pressure, it is found that 11 > 33 > 22 is maintained as pressure increases. This result shows that a greater compressibility along the a-axis is found under pressure and that b-axis is the one that undergoes less compression. The experimental (theoretical) compressibility along the a-axis,11, increases slightly (does not change) under pressure. The compressibilities along b-axis and c-axis, 22 and33, decrease as pressure increases. The experimental (theoretical) maximum compressibility, 1, varies slightly (increases slightly) under compression. The intermediate and minimum compressibility, 2 and 3, decrease with pressure. Under compression, the experimental (theoretical) direction of maximum compressibility, , approaches (moves away slightly) the a-axis. In both cases, the direction of maximum compressibility under pressure is always closer to the a-axis than to the c-axis. To conclude, the experimental and theoretical direction of intermediate compressibility under pressure is in the (010) plane perpendicular to the direction of maximum compressibility, and the direction of minimum compressibility is along the b-axis. a This work; b Ref. 107 ; c Ref. 109 ; d Ref. and La2O3 in order to extend the range of cation ionic radii in possible C-type/bixbyite SOs. a a a a 