Optical relief gratings are usually composed of physical grooves with a constant periodicity, and typically suffer from light scattering, are mechanically fragile and are single function. Here, we develop WO 3 -based gratings by using a recently reported electron-proton synergistic doping route under ambient conditions. This doping strategy is compatible with conventional ultraviolet photolithography, and we show that it induces a selective insulator-metal phase transition and coloration in WO 3 , with spatial-resolution up to micron-scale. Due to the electrochromic-induced-contrast, a WO 3 volume phase grating without grooves and a WO 3 relief grating with tunable periodicity are demonstrated. Both gratings can be rewritten after a reset procedure by annealing in air. Our experiments demonstrate WO 3 -based gratings and an attractive technique for rewritable oxides. rating has a periodic structure that splits and diffracts light into several beams traveling in different directions. As one of the most important components in optics, gratings are commonly used in monochromators and spectrometers On the other hand, the common materials used for the production of typical relief gratings, such as glass, silicon, copper, or photoresist, do not have abundant properties to be modulated, which limits multifunction of grating devices In this study, we developed rewritable WO 3 -based gratings by using the recently proposed doping method, i.e., electron-proton synergistic doping route Electron-proton synergistic doping in WO 3 system. Figure Based on above model, we predicted that WO 3 could be a good sample due to its high work function Experimental and calculated results for WO 3 system. The H atoms existed in the samples were examined by secondary-ion mass spectrum (SIMS) in Fig. As we know, infrared is usually reflected by metal inset of Fig. The mechanism of the quick insertion of H atom into WO 3 film by the zinc-acid treatment was also investigated by theoretical calculations. Considering the Fermi level difference for the Zn/WO 3 interface, electrons would flow from Zn to WO 3 . The computed differential charge distributions of Zn/WO 3 interface confirmed the charge transfer behavior (Fig. Production of WO 3 -based gratings. Because the observed synergistic doping effect in WO 3 film was quite fast and the doping area was selective at ambient, some interesting patterns could be fabricated by combining with UV lithography. Fortunately, photoresist usually made by photopolymer materials are often stable in acid Based on the above results, it was suggested that the controllable optical grating devices could be produced in this way. The specific procedures were descripted in Supplementary Fig. While if treat these two arrays by the synergistic doping, the areas without coated photoresist layer were dyed as shown in Supplementary Fig. Traditional relief gratings usually have a fixed period. Here, we developed a kind of relief grating with reversibly tunable periods. By combining UV lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE), a WO 3 relief grating of 16 μm period was made in Fig. Low scattering performance of the planar grating. For typical relief gratings, scattering originates from random errors and irregularities of surfaces and sides, which cannot be avoided due to the physical grooves. In contrast, our planar grating with smooth surface can basically survive in these scattering. Figure better accidental resistant than typical relief gratings, whose grooves are easily damaged by fingerprints, aerosols, moisture, or the slightest contact with any abrasive material. To conclude, we applied electron-proton synergistic doping to WO 3 film successfully and realized a direct visualization of insulator-metal transition in WO 3 film due to its pronounced electrochromic effect. This phase transition originated from the H atoms doping, which resulted in a stable metallic state of WO 3 film in air. We proved the synergistic effect was compatible with conventional ultraviolet photolithography. A kind of novel volume phase grating without physical grooves was developed, which showed better performance than typical relief gratings. The period of the WO 3 relief grating can also be tuned by selective hydrogenation. More importantly, all the prepared gratings can be restored via an annealing procedure then reprocessed. Our experiment not only demonstrate a facile electron-proton synergistic doping strategy for oxide materials, but also supply a technique for tunable and rewritable grating fabrication in the future. WO 3 film deposition. WO 3 thin films were prepared on c-Al 2 O 3 single-crystal substrates by reactive magnetron sputtering in an argon-oxygen atmosphere at 200 °C with a stoichiometry WO 3 target. Before loading the Al 2 O 3 substrates into the chamber, they were cleaned with acetone and ethanol in an ultrasonic bath, and then rinsed several times with deionized water. The flow rates of argon and oxygen were fixed at 6.0 and 1.0 SCCM, respectively. The radio-frequency sputtering power during the deposition was maintained at 80 W. Under these conditions, the prepared WO 3 thin films were amorphous. The amorphous structure is in favor of the ions/protons insertion into WO 3 film and induced quick electrochromic results Characterizations. The purity of zinc particle and needle is >99.99%. The 2%wt H 2 SO 4 solution was adopted in all experiments. The square resistance as a function of temperature was examined by an electric measurement system (ZJ2810B) with a variable temperature stage (Eurotherm 3504). The average rate of heating up is 0.15 K s -1 and cool down by nature. Highly sensitive SIMS measurements (Quad PHI6600) were conducted to directly examine the hydrogen, oxygen, and aluminum concentration in each sample. H + signals were normalized by the background signal in the substrate. The inductively coupled plasma optic emission spectrometer (iCAP 7400) was used to trace zinc concentration after the prepared H x WO 3 was dissolved in hot H 2 SO 4 solution. Encapsulating films in vacuum sealer bags by Deli 14886 (Vacuum Power: -85 kPa). To examine the crystal structure, XRD tests were carried out by Philips X'pert Pro, radiation source Cu K α , λ = 0.15148 nm. The SEM images were recorded by XL-30 ESEM. Raman spectroscopy tests were recorded at room temperature by LabRAM HR Evolution. A 633 nm laser was used as the excitation source. The optical transmission was measured at room temperature by using a UV-Vis-IR spectroscopy (SolidSpec 3700). A home-made device was used for measuring the diffraction of the grating (Supplementary Fig. Computational details. All the calculations of the present work were performed by the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package with the density functional theory 