We report a very high precision interferometric sensor with resolution up to ∼ λ/1024, exploiting hollow photonic bandgap waveguide-based geometry for the first time. Here sensing has been measured by a complete switching in the direction of the outgoing beam, owing to transverse momentum oscillation phenomena. Using a 1.32 μm source and core-width of 7.25 μm, a complete switching cycle is obtained even due to a small change of ∼1 nm in the core-width. Using hollow-core photonic bandgap waveguide, Talbot effect, revivals of the initial phase, oscillation in the transverse momentum along with multi-mode interference served as the backbone of the design. The ultra-sensitive multi-mode interferometric sensor based on photonic crystals will certainly open up a paradigm shift in interferometer based sensing technologies toward device-level applications in photonic sensing/switching and related precision measurement systems. Interferometry is a technique where different characteristics of light waves and the matters they interact with are measured precisely and examined intensively, primarily to sense displacement, vibration, distance, etc. In the optical domain, interferometric techniques have a huge number of applications including sensing To fit the demand, they came up with a design that contains two parallel fully reflecting metal mirrors together acting as a planar waveguide and light wave entering into it at an angle α, which in turn excites different modes inside the waveguide depending on the angle α Of late, in many instruments such as optical splicers, modulators, switches, etc. higher resolution needs to be realized alongside increased accuracy for far and wide applications. But with a view to achieve higher resolution using the existing setup is restricted due to the presence of large attenuation encountered by higher order modes emerged from the reflection in between two metal mirrors. In this letter, we propose a new prototype of photonic crystal based interferometric sensor to achieve the resolution significantly enhanced beyond the limitations of former designs. Exploring the light guiding mechanism, the interplay between multimode guidance and loss minimization of higher order modes has been judiciously implemented to achieve the targeted resolution. Focusing on the interaction between lower order mode with a FIG. higher order mode, and keeping in mind that the relative loss should be minimum along with a maximum difference in the order of selected modes, the prototype has been proposed. To sense a small displacement, as small as 1 nm, we design our interferometric device using 1D photonic crystals. In our design, we guide the wave utilizing the bandgap supported by 1D periodic structure, that consists of 6 bi-layers in both the arms (as shown in Fig. On account of guiding a light of wavelength 1.32 μm light using Photonic Crystals, bandgap engineering has been performed to achieve the corresponding stop band by modulating the spatial periodicity (Λ) and refractive indices(n) of the periodic cladding. Fig. In Fig. Here λ is the operating wavelength (= 1.32 μm) of the input from Nd:YAG source. Thus, for an incident angle α for m = 0 only TE 0 will get excite. We can dissolve the phase constant k of any incoming wave into two components k x = k cos(α) and k y = k sin(α). Now, on exciting two modes (say, u and v, with {u, v} ∈ m) inside the waveguide with proper choice of α, the phase difference between them, after propagation of distance L along the axial (i.e. x) direction, can written as where, k xu and k xv represent x component of the phase coefficient of mode u and v respectively. Here, the change in phase due to small change in core width can be obtained from Eq. 2 as A complete switching of output deflected beam is observed when δΦ accumulates the value of 2π. Thus, considering δΦ = 2π Eq. 3 can be rewritten as Eq. 4 signifies that the amount of displacement experienced by the upper arm of the waveguide that will make the output beam to swing back to its initial direction. The power coupling coefficients with respect to α corresponding to different modes have been calculated using overlap integral between the launched mode and excited mode, taking into account the diffraction effect of the light beam while propagating in free space due to the inclination between the fiber output end and waveguide axis. In Fig. To achieve the targeted fringe spacing, further optimization of L (length of the waveguide) has been taken into account. Hence, a systematic study of light-wave dynamics through the waveguide has been performed. Light wave suffers a small but significant free space propagation before entering into the waveguide due to the presence of finite gap while being coupled into the waveguide through the coupling fiber. The associated electric field of the wave just before entering the waveguide can be expressed as, E 0 (x, y) = E 0 exp [-ik(x cos α + y sin α)] . (5) After entering the waveguide, during propagation, the light wave must satisfy the condition, kd co sin(α m ) = mπ for quantization of transverse component wave vector (k y ). Here, α m is the angle between k-and x-axis for m th mode. Whereas, after entering into the waveguide, the wave distribution immediately takes the following form given by [9] Here, c m takes into account the effect of initial distribution of the fields on the m th mode, given that Accordingly, we get transverse momentum of the field distribution inside the waveguide using Fourier transform, which has been expressed as, Using Eq. 6, with the condition x = L, Eq. 8 can be further elaborated as, It is evident from Eq. 9 that, any change in L keeping d co unaltered, will essentially make the momentum distribution at the output to oscillate between α and -α. For our proposed geometry we have λ/d co 1 and hence sin(α) 1. To further analyse the wave dynamics, we choose to define dimensionless normalised length r = L/S, where S is the self imaging period Moreover, to identify the length scales of self imaging period and length required for transverse momentum beating, we define a new propagation parameter p = S/S b . Here, S b refers to the period of light momentum beating that is given by (as λ/d co 1) For our design, p turns out to be 6. Now, phenomena like full, half or fractional revivals of the initial wave at the output are a direct consequence of modulation in light intensity inside the waveguide due to transverse momentum beating Hence we set the value of r to be an integer while optimizing the length of the device for full revival. This essentially leads to an optimized device length L = 111.5 mm. Now, loss ( ) suffered by different modes can be obtained from, = 4.34 where, k and g represent the wave vector and full width half maxima (FWHM) of the field confinement variation with n ef f , respectively. It is observed from Fig. Thus, by virtue of our proposed interferometric device we obtain a 1.29 nm spatial resolution (or, λ/1024 fringe spacing). Focusing on the interaction between the lower with a higher order mode, keeping in mind that the relative loss should be minimum along with a maximum difference in between the selected modes i.e., maximizing (v -u), we have considered the interaction between 0 th and 2 nd order modes. Moreover, better spatial resolution or sensitivity can be obtained by systematically customizing the refractive indices and periodicity of the 1D photonic crystal to realize sharp confinement for the lower as well the selected higher order mode. Due to sharp confinement, the intensity contrast among the modes will be better as a consequence of low loss ( ) of the respective modes. We have addressed the fabrication tolerance of the optimized device geometry. In this direction an estimated error of ±0.1 μm in alignment of the core width (d co ) along with ±0.1 μm fabrication tolerance in device length is expected to affect the sensitivity by 4%. Further improvement in sensitivity can be systematically achieved by analyzing the trade-off between confinement factor of the chosen set of modes and the difference in the order of chosen modes. Thus following Eq. 4, interaction between the lowest (u) and highest (v) possible mode inside the guide yields maximum sensitivity for a given structural parameters, but the trade-off governs the intensity contrast between the selected modes. For 111.5 mm length there exits a field confinement ra-tio of ∼ 4, ∼ 7.5, ∼ 14.7 in between 0 th and 1 st , 0 th and 2 nd , and 0 th and 3 rd modes, respectively. Which indicates the existence of depreciation in intensity contrast between the selected pair of modes. It is clear from the power coupling coefficient plot (Fig. In summary, we have reported a new design of an interferometric sensor, where a slight variation in the guide width using the actuator can precisely control the output beam to oscillate resulting in a sensitivity as high as ∼ λ/1024 for potential sensing/switching action. Here, the optimized multimode waveguide has been chosen to realize such an ultra-high resolution sensing/switching element when implemented using the photonic crystals. This specific design has enabled high confinement factors for the fields facilitating the waveguide to accommodate higher order modes. An optical fiber supporting a TEM 00 having mode diameter in accordance with the core width of the guide has been used to excite different modes, interaction among which can produce MMI that in turn makes the output beam to oscillate. Further improvement in sensitivity can be achieved deliberately by further optimization of the photonic cladding to support the modes with a higher difference to commensurate with appropriate relative loss. This structure can be used to make a more compact and robust design of such ultra sensitive interferometer based waveguide sensor wherein the sensitivity of the apparatus would depend on the design of the waveguide within which the phenomenon of MMI is carried out. Proposed interferometric sensing scheme offers a good scope to be exploited in photonic sensing/ switching and related precision measurement systems.