Josephson junctions containing three ferromagnetic layers with non-collinear magnetizations between adjacent layers carry spin-triplet supercurrent under certain conditions. The signature of the spin-triplet supercurrent is a relatively slow decay of the maximum supercurrent as a function of the thickness of the middle ferromagnetic layer. In this work we focus on junctions where the middle magnetic layer is a [Co/Pd]N multilayer with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), while the outer two layers have in-plane anisotropy. We compare junctions where the middle PMA layer is or is not configured as a synthetic antiferromagnet (PMA-SAF). We find that the supercurrent decays much more rapidly with increasing the number N of [Co/Pd] bilayers in the PMA-SAF junctions compared to the PMA junctions. Similar behavior is observed in junctions containing [Co/Ni]N PMA multilayers. We model that behavior by assuming that each Co/Pd or Co/Ni interface acts as a partial spin filter, so that the spin-triplet supercurrent in the PMA junctions becomes more strongly spin-polarized as N increases while the supercurrent in the PMA-SAF junctions is suppressed with increasing N . We also address a question raised in a previous work regarding how much spin-singlet supercurrent is transmitted through our nominally spin-triplet junctions. We do that by comparing spin-triplet junctions with similar junctions where the order of the magnetic layers has been shuffled. The results of this work are expected to be helpful in designing spin-triplet Josephson junctions for use in cryogenic memory. When a superconducting (S) metal is placed in contact with a non-superconducting or normal (N) metal, electron pair correlations extend into the normal metal, giving rise to the superconducting proximity effect 1 . That proximity effect can extend into N over distances of several hundred nanometers at sufficiently low temperature, and indeed one can observe supercurrent in S/N/S Josephson junctions where the distance between the two S electrodes exceeds a micron 2 . If the normal metal is replaced by a ferromagnetic material (F), then the situation changes drastically. The pair correlations oscillate in sign as they penetrate into F, due to the momentum mismatch between the majority and minority spin Fermi surfaces in F In 2001 Bergeret, Volkov, and Efetov predicted that it is possible to induce spin-triplet pair correlations in a conventional spin-singlet superconductor in contact with a ferromagnetic material with an inhomogeneous magnetization containing non-collinear elements In this work we focus on Josephson junctions of the form proposed by Houzet and Buzdin Most recently, we replaced the PMA system with a PMA SAF, motivated by a desire to reduce stray fields produced by domain walls in the PMA system The purpose of this paper is to address both questions raised above. We address the second question in section III, by comparing the critical current in our "standard" spin-triplet junctions with the critical current in junctions containing the same magnetic layers, but with the order of the PMA SAF and one of the two in-plane ferromagnetic layers reversed. These so-called "shuffled" junctions are not capable of converting spin-singlet pairs to spin-triplet pairs and back again. The spin-singlet supercurrent, on the other hand, is less sensitive to the order of the layers, so the critical current of such junctions provides a measure of the maximum spin-singlet supercurrent that can propagate through the spin-triplet junctions. We observe that the supercurrent in the shuffled samples is significantly smaller than that in the standard junctions, confirming that the latter do indeed carry predominantly spin-triplet supercurrent. We address the first question in section IV, by comparing the critical current in junctions containing the same PMA material system -[Co/Pd] n multilayers -either with or without the SAF configuration. We observe that the critical current decays much less steeply with increasing n in the junctions with the simple PMA system than in the junctions with the PMA SAFs. We propose an explanation for this observation, namely that each Co/Pd interface acts as a partial spin filter for supercurrent. As a result, the spin-triplet supercurrent becomes more strongly spin-polarized in the PMA system as the number n of [Co/Pd] bilayers increases. Polarization of the supercurrent hardly affects the magnitude of the supercurrent in the PMA junctions, while it causes a strong suppression of the supercurrent in the PMA-SAF junctions. The questions addressed here are not just of academic interest. Magnetic Josephson junctions with a controllable phase state have potential for use in cryogenic memory Before continuing, we discuss the complications that arise when characterizing ferromagnetic Josephson junctions with an applied magnetic field. If one applies a magnetic field to a standard Josephson junction (JJ) in a direction perpendicular to the current flow, the critical current I c oscillates in amplitude and decays as a function of field magnitude A schematic drawing of our Josephson junctions with "standard" spin-triplet JJ geometry, with the middle F layer a PMA SAF, is shown in Fig. The magnetic heart of the PMA-SAF spin-triplet junctions is Ni(1.6)/Cu(4)/[Pd(0.9)/Co(0.3)] n /Ru(0.95)/ [Co(0.3)/Pd(0.9)] n /Cu(4)/Ni(1.6)/Cu(7)/Au (2). The PMA junctions are nearly identical, except that the central Ru(0.95) layer is replaced by a Pd(0.9) layer so that the PMA system continues uninterrupted from one side to the other. Because our sputtering system contains seven sputtering guns, we can sputter the entire stack for the PMA junctions without breaking vacuum. The PMA-SAF triplet junctions, however, contain eight different materials, hence we coat the base with a thin Au layer, break vacuum to replace the Nb target with Co, pump down again, and lightly ion mill the Au layer before depositing the magnetic stack. We then use electron-beam lithography with the negative e-beam resist ma-N2401 and Ar ion milling to define the junctions. The junctions are elliptically shaped with lateral dimensions of 1.25 μm x 0.5 μm. Ion milling is immediately followed by thermal evaporation of SiO x without breaking vacuum, to isolate the bottom and top superconducting electrodes. After the e-beam resist if lifted off, top leads of Nb(150)/Au(15) are sputtered through another photolithographic stencil after gentle in-situ ion milling of the protective Au layer. Crosssection TEM pictures of our junctions are shown in ref. 23. Fabrication of the junctions shown schematically in Figures To characterize the junctions, we measure I-V curves as a function of field H ext applied parallel to the long axis of the elliptical junctions. The I-V curves have the standard shape for overdamped junctions (RSJ model), In a previous work, Figure The primary goal of this work is to understand the difference in supercurrent transmission between spin-triplet junctions containing a PMA-SAF and those containing a single PMA layer of the same total thickness. A schematic diagram of the PMA spin-triplet junctions is shown in Figure Before we attempt to explain the results shown in Fig. Let us now focus on what happens inside the PMA system in the middle of the sample. It is well-known in normal-state spintronics that a charge current passing through a ferromagnetic material F becomes partially spin-polarized due to the differences in density of states, Fermi velocity, and mean free path between majority and minority spin electrons. It is undoubtedly true that F also acts as a spin filter with regard to the m s = +1 and m s = -1 spin-triplet electron pairs A possible explanation for the increase in spin-filter efficiency with N is that each individual Co/Pd interface acts as a partial spin filter, due to a spin-scattering asymmetry at the Co/Pd interface favoring transmission of majority-spin pairs over minority-spin pairs. Unfortunately, the spin-scattering asymmetry at the Co/Pd interface has not been measured. Fortunately, however, the interfacial spin-scattering asymmetry has been determined for several other material interfaces by analyzing Giant Magnetoresistance data obtained from metallic multilayers and spin valves. Is it possible to create a quantitative model to explain the slopes in Figs. We start with the assumption that the total supercurrent through the junction is equal to the sum of the m s = +1 and m s = -1 triplet components of supercurrent in the central F layer of the junction. (That assumption can be justified using the hand-waving model of supercurrent in refs. where T ms=+1 and T ms=-1 represent the transmission amplitudes of the m s = +1 and m s = -1 triplet components through the central F layer of the junction. We will assume that each of those amplitudes can be expressed as a product of transmission amplitudes at the interfaces inside the F layer. (We neglect bulk effects for simplicity.) Let t ↑ and t ↓ be the transmission amplitudes through a single Co/Pd interface for the majority-band and minority-band electron pairs, respectively. A PMA junction with N Co/Pd bilayers contains 2N Co/Pd interfaces, hence we have A PMA-SAF junction contains, in each half of the SAF, N -1 Co/Pd interfaces and one Co/Ru interface. To keep the formulas as simple as possible, we will assume that the Co/Ru interface has the same properties as the Co/Pd interface, so we can say that each half of the SAF has N Co/Pd interfaces. (Deviations from that assumption will affect the intercept but not the slope of the line depicting log(I c ) vs N .) Since majority-band pairs in one half of the SAF become minority band pairs in the other half, we have: Putting all this together gives us: If we define the ratio r = t ↓ /t ↑ , then we can write If each I c depends exponentially on N , as the data in both Figs. CoN i = 0.19 for the smallest value N = 4 in Fig. In conclusion, we have measured the supercurrent in spin-triplet junctions containing ferromagnetic multilayers with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). We compared the behavior of the supercurrent in junctions where the PMA layer is or is not configured as a synthetic antiferromagnet (PMA-SAF). The critical current decays much more steeply with increasing number of multilayer repeats N in the PMA-SAF junctions than in the PMA junctions. We attribute that difference to a strong increase in the degree of spin polarization of the supercurrent with increasing N , due to the cumulative spin-filtering effect of the interfaces within the PMA multilayers. We also compared the supercurrent in spintriplet junctions with that in junctions where the order of the layers was shuffled. Because the shuffled junctions are not capable of converting spin-singlet supercurrent to spin-triplet supercurrent and back again, we believe that they provide an estimate of how much spin-singlet supercurrent is transmitted through the spin-triplet junctions containing the same number of kind of ferromagnetic layers. As expected, the supercurrent is noticeably smaller in the shuffled junctions than in the triplet junctions even for N = 2, and much smaller for N = 4. The results of this work are expected to be helpful in designing spintriplet Josephson junctions for use in cryogenic memory.