Micromechanical modeling and mechanical properties of polyurethane (PU) hybrid nanocomposite foams with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) were investigated by mean of tensile strength, hardness, impact strength and modified Halpin-Tsai equation. Three types of graphene, with varied flake sizes and specific surface areas (SSA), were utilized to study the effect of graphene types on the synergistic effect of MWCNT/GNP hybrid nanofillers. The results indicate a remarkable synergetic effect between MWCNTs and GNP-1.5 (1:1) with a flake size of 1.5 μm and a higher SSA (750 m 2 /g), which tensile strength of PU was improved by 43% as compared to 19% for PU/MWCNTs and 17% for PU/GNP-1.5 at 0.25 wt% nanofiller loadings. The synergy was successfully predicted using unit cell modeling, in which the calculated data agrees with the experimental results. Polyurethane (PU) foams, which are economic due to their low density, are frequently used in a widespread range of applications, such as insulation goals, automotive and electronic industries. However, their applications are limited because of their poor mechanical properties. Therefore, it seems attractive to modify PUs using nanoparticles to modify their mechanical properties One-dimensional (1D) multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and two-dimensional (2D) graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) owing to their superior properties can be used as hybrid nanofillers to form well-dispersed three dimensional (3D) networks, which can overcome the dispersion problem of single nanofillers Recently, carbon nanotubes/graphene hybrid nanofillers were used in polymer nanocomposites to improve the mechanical properties The tensile strength and modulus of CNT+GNP/epoxy were increased by 14.5% and 22.6% at 1 wt% loading, respectively, which is obviously higher than the results of graphene/epoxy nanocomposites. The synergistic effect of the combinations did not completely understand. It is vital to determine the effect of nanofillers size on the properties of the hybrid nanocomposites. In addition, the ratio of the nanofillers is a significant parameter regarding the reinforcing capabilities of the nanocomposites Gao et al. A key question is which types of graphene are best suited to show a synergistic effect with MWCNTs to reinforcing polymeric nanocomposites. To investigate this, we compared three commercially available varieties of graphene with different flake sizes (24, 5 and 1.5 μm), aspect ratios and specific surface areas (150 and 750 m 2/ g) to study synergistic effect of GNP with MWCNTs on tensile, hardness and impact properties of PU hybrid nanocomposites. We have observed a high synergistic effect and substantial improvement using GNP-1.5 with a lower flake size and a higher specific surface area at a low concentration of 0.25 wt%. Various nanofiller ratios were tested to find the optimal loading for mechanical properties and the highest synergy. The tensile strength of the single and hybrid nanocomposites was also compared with the predictions of the well-established Halpin-Tsai model, which was modified by adding an exponential shape factor, and the results fitted the experimental data successfully Materials and experimental setup Fabrication of PUs was done by mixing the polyol and isocyanate in a weight ratio of 1:1.25, as recommended by the manufacturer according to Table According to the manufacturer, GNP-1.5 has a smaller diameter of 1.5 μm, a thickness of 3 nm, but a higher specific surface area of 750 m 2 /g. Prior to the synthesis of PU foams, 1.5 g of MWCNTs were added to 500 mL of 35% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) at room temperature and mixed for 90 min. Subsequently, the solution was filtered and washed twice with distilled water to eliminate any H2O2 and then dried in an oven at 80°C for and graphene, (2) different contents and ratios of carbon nanotubes/graphene hybrid nanocomposites at 0.25 to 0.75 wt% nanofiller contents. Nanofillers were added to the polyol and were stirred at 200-2000 rpm for 5 min. Then the mixture was ultrasonically dispersed for 5 min using an ultrasonic bath and stirred again at 2000 rpm for 5 min. Finally, the isocyanate was added to the nanofiller/polyol mixture and stirred for 20 s, as shown in Fig. A turning machine was used for cutting slices of cured nanocomposites with a thickness of 10 mm. The slices were cut in a CNC machine according to ASTM 6110 for Charpy impact tests and ISO 1926 for tensile tests of rigid cellular plastics. Tensile properties were performed on at least five samples of each nanocomposite using Shimadzu, UTS machine equipped with a 1 kN load cell under a strain rate of 5 mm/min at room temperature. The impact strength of unnotched samples was obtained with a Devotrans Charpy impact machine. XF hardness tester is used to investigate Shore-0 hardness tests and at least six points of a sample were examined perpendicular to blowing direction. Raman spectroscopy was performed for the structure analysis of graphene nanoplatelets using a Renishaw inVia Raman spectrometer with a 532 nm laser. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a RIGAKU Diffractometer using Cu (Ka) radiation. Thermogravimetric analysis was done under a nitrogen atmosphere on a Q600, TA Instruments with a heating rate of 5°C min -1 . Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of the specimens was studied in the wavenumber range from 4000 to 650 cm -1 at a resolution of 4 cm -1 using a Thermo Scientific iS10 FTIR at room temperature. Dispersion states of hybrid nanofillers were investigated using Hitachi HighTech HT7700 transmission electron microscopy (TEM). XRD spectra of graphene nanoplatelets are shown in Fig. Raman spectra is a useful tool for the characterization of crystal structure, disorder and defects in graphene-based materials. The graphene nanoplatelets exhibit D-band and G-bands which indicates defects and the sp 2 carbon networks of the sample, respectively for GNP-1.5, suggesting more defects on the graphene sheets. Furthermore, the intensity ratio of D-band to G-band (ID/IG = 0.49) of GNP-1.5 is much higher than those of GNP-24 and GNP-5 (ID/IG = 0.08), representing more defects and porous graphene The final properties of PU foams are severely dependent on its morphology, density, cell size, and walls thickness. In addition, the homogeneous dispersion of nanofillers in the polymer matrix is a key factor to fabricate reinforced polymer nanocomposites. Thus, it is very important to first characterize the microstructure of fabricated nanocomposites. Cross-sections of samples were fractured perpendicular to the foaming direction and fractured surfaces were coated with gold. Fig. Consequently, it is expected that the mechanical properties of nanocomposites with carbon nanotubes/graphene hybrids could be higher than others carbon nanotubes are well connected to 2D planar graphene floor via π-π stack interaction Uniaxial tensile testing was used to examine the mechanical properties of neat polyurethane and its nanocomposites reinforced with carbon nanotubes and graphene nanoplatelets. MPa, whereas the addition of 0.25 wt% MWCNT, 0.25 wt% GNP-24 and 0.5 wt% GNP-1.5 enhanced the strength to about 0.468, 0.476 and 0.486 MPa with 19%, 21% and 24% improvement, respectively. The trend of strength improvement for MWCNTs is similar to GNP-24 and GNP-5, in which higher strength can be seen in the nanocomposites with 0.25 wt% nanofillers. The reinforcement efficiency of GNP-24 is obviously superior to that of GNP-5, which approves that a larger aspect ratio is beneficial for interfacial stress transfer from the matrix to graphene Results of a similar study by Valles et al. Due to the better reinforcement effect of GNP-24 in comparison with GNP-5, GNP-24 was used for fabricating hybrid nanocomposites with MWCNT in different ratios to investigate synergistic effects of both nanofillers. The tensile strength of pure PU and PU/MWCNT+GNP-24 hybrid nanocomposites with fixed nanofiller contents (0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 wt%) are demonstrated in Fig. . As expected, a synergistic effect was observed for the strength where the nanocomposite with MWCNT+GNP-24 (1:3) showed the highest increase of 23% (0.483 MPa) relative to an increase of 12% and 15% for the single MWCNTs and GNP-24 based nanocomposites in 0.5 wt% loading, respectively. In nanocomposites with 0.75 wt% nanofiller loadings a similar trend was observed whereas the hybrid nanocomposite containing MWCNT+GNP-24 (1:3) showed the highest strength in this content. The higher tensile strength of hybrid nanocomposites clearly presents a synergistic effect. As presented by Yang et al. In this paper, three types of graphene nanoplatelets were used to investigate the effects of graphene size, specific surface area and their defects on the mechanical properties of hybrid nanocomposites. this is achieved at a nanofiller content of 0.25 wt% is remarkable. Whereas, there are moderate improvements in the PU/MWCNTs (~19%) and PU/GNP-1.5 (~17%) nanocomposites. Consequently, graphene nanoplatelets with a higher SSA and more defects have a greater ability to self-assemble with MWCNTs, which GNP-1.5 with MWCNTs exhibit a noticeable synergistic effect in reinforcing PU. Lin Chen et al. Where, Vf, G and VG are the volume fraction of graphene in nanocomposites and volume of single graphene, respectively. Assuming the graphene are located at the center of the cuboid as illustrated in Fig. Where DG and tG are the diameter and thickness of graphene, respectively and HG corresponds to the distance between two half graphene. By simultaneously solving Eqs. ( Moreover, to achieve the synergistic effect in nanocomposites with larger flake graphene, either CNTs with a larger length should be used or the HG should decrease by enhancing the ratio and content of graphene. Aside from tensile strength, impact properties are crucial in foam applications, which is related to fracture toughness As reported in our previous works GNP-24 has a superior reinforcement effect in comparison with other nanofillers that approves a larger aspect ratio is advantageous for interfacial stress transfer from the matrix to nanofillers In the case of GNP-1.5, the higher specific surface area endows a better dispersion and an effective enhancement Nanocomposites show lower hardness in higher loadings (0.50 and 0.75 wt%) due to agglomerations. The hybrid nanocomposites were fabricated to overcome this challenge, which synergistic effect among nanofillers could reduce agglomerations. In (1:3) showed the maximum reinforcement of 15.4% compared to an increase of 10% and 11% with single MWCNTs and GNP-24 based nanocomposites in 0.5 wt% loadings, respectively. In nanocomposites with 0.75 wt% nanofillers, a similar trend was observed whereas the hybrid nanocomposite containing MWCNT+GNP-24 (1:3) indicates the highest hardness in this content. These results exhibited that MWCNTs and graphene showed the highlighted synergistic effect in enhancing the hardness of the nanocomposite foams. Three types of graphene nanoplatelets were used to examine the influence of graphene size, specific surface area and defects on the mechanical properties of hybrid nanocomposites. Fig. The well-established Halpin-Tsai model, which can be widely utilized for predicting the tensile strength of randomly distributed nanofiller reinforced nanocomposites, was usually employed to calculate the theoretical tensile strength of the perfect dispersed nanocomposites. The experimental results of the nanocomposites are compared with the calculated values using the Halpin-Tsai equations as follows: Where σC, σL and σT are the nanocomposite, the longitudinal and transverse tensile strength, respectively. In our equations, graphene was assumed as effective rectangular fibers and MWCNTs were considered as discontinuous fibers, given by In the above relations, Vf is the volume fraction of MWCNTs and graphene, which can be calculated based on the density and weight fraction of nanofillers and neat PU For graphene, CGNP = (2/3)(l/t), where l and t refer to the diameter and thickness of graphene. The parameters ηL, ζL ηT and ζT are given by; Where σf and σPU are tensile strengths of nanofillers and the polyurethane matrix, respectively. The parameters ηL and ηT were used for MWCNTs, while ζL and ζT were utilized for graphene nanocomposites. The tensile strength of PU is σPU = 0.3933 MPa and the strength of MWCNTs and graphene are assumed 63 GPa and 130 GPa, respectively The constants a and b are the degree of nanofiller aggregations, accounting for the nonlinear behavior of the Halpin-Tsai equation and are found with respect to experimental results. The modified Halpin-Tsai equation may be rewritten as follows: After an organized variation of aggregation-related a and b constants, ψ relations become equal to: For PU/MWCNT (8a) ψ = C GNP e -905.64V f -0.63 For PU/GNP-24 (8b) ψ = C GNP e -1048.93V f +0.817 For PU/GNP-5 (8c) ψ = C GNP e -444.43V f +0.696 For PU/GNP-1.5 Experimental results and theoretical fits by Halpin-Tsai equation (Eqs. ( Halpin-Tsai equation with the exponential shape factor (Eqs. ( Comparisons indicate that there is an obvious difference between the experimental strength results and Halpin-Tsai equation, while the predictions of the modified Halpin-Tsai equation correlates well with the experimental data. It is noteworthy that the experimental results of nanocomposites with GNP-24 and GNP-5 are far from the Halpin-Tsai equation (blue lines in Fig. In addition, the modified Halpin-Tsai equation can be used for hybrid nanocomposites using ψ instead of CCNT and CGNP in Eq. 9. For example, ψ for the modified Halpin-Tsai model for the hybrid nanocomposite with MWCNT+GNP-24 (1:1) equals to: are closer to the longitudinal tensile strength of the theory (black columns), which approves the 3D uniform dispersion In summary, graphene type dependence of three-dimensional graphene/MWCNTs hybrid nanofillers on mechanical properties improvement of polyurethane nanocomposites was studied using tensile test, impact strength, hardness and micromechanical modeling. Three types of graphene with various flake sizes and specific surface areas were used to achieve a synergistic effect at 0.25 to 0.75 wt% loadings. MWCNTs and GNP-1.5 (1:1) with a flake size of 1.5 μm and a higher SSA (750 m 2 /g) exhibited the highest synergistic effect at a low nanofiller content of 0.25 wt%, which the tensile strength was improved about 43%, in comparison with pure PU. Modified Halpin-Tsai modeling with an exponential shape factor was used to fit with the tensile strength results of the single and hybrid nanocomposites. A unit cell containing graphene and MWCNTs structure was introduced to predict the optimal ratio and content of the nanofillers in hybrid nanocomposites to attaining the synergism, which the modeling results were extremely compatible with the experimental data. The connections between the graphene and MWCNTs were more possibly formed when the length of carbon nanotubes is higher than the gap between graphene in the unit cell. The presented model could provide guidance for achieving the synergistic effect between different CNTs and graphene without many experiments.