Pursuing fractionalized particles that do not bear properties of conventional measurable objects, exemplified by bare particles in the vacuum such as electrons and elementary excitations such as magnons, is a challenge in physics. Here we show that a machine-learning method for quantum many-body systems that has achieved state-of-the-art accuracy reveals the existence of a quantum spin liquid (QSL) phase in the region 0.49 J2/J1 0.54 convincingly in spin-1/2 frustrated Heisenberg model with the nearest and next-nearest neighbor exchanges, J1 and J2, respectively, on the square lattice. This is achieved by combining with the cutting-edge computational schemes known as the correlation ratio and level spectroscopy methods to mitigate the finite-size effects. The quantitative one-to-one correspondence between the correlations in the ground state and the excitation spectra found in the present analyses enables the reliable identification and estimation of the QSL and its nature. The spin excitation spectra containing both singlet and triplet gapless Dirac-like dispersions signal the emergence of gapless fractionalized spin-1/2 Dirac-type spinons in the distinctive QSL phase. Unexplored critical behavior with coexisting and dual power-law decays of Néel antiferromagnetic and dimer correlations is revealed. The power-law decay exponents of the two correlations differently vary with J2/J1 in the QSL phase and thus have different values except for a single point satisfying the symmetry of the two correlations. The isomorph of excitations with the cuprate d-wave superconductors revealed here implies a tight connection between the present QSL and superconductivity. This achievement demonstrates that the quantum-state representation using machine learning techniques, which had mostly been limited to benchmarks, is a promising tool for investigating grand challenges in quantum many-body physics. Collective excitations such as magnons and phonons consist of many elementary particles and provide us with fundamental understanding beyond the non-interacting picture, where the spontaneous symmetry breaking and associated Nambu-Goldstone bosons are required in many cases. Fractionalization, on the other hand, offers another route to realize emergent particles manifesting even in the absence of the symmetry breaking and serves as one of the central concepts in modern physics. The conventional elementary particles themselves can often be viewed as a bound state of more elementary objects, namely, the fractionalized particles, and such exotic particles emerge through the deconfinement. A prominent example of the deconfinement occurs in quantum chromodynamics: The proton and neutron that had been considered to be elementary particles before have turned out each to be a composite particle of three quarks with fractionalized charges, though quarks are hardly detected in experiments directly because of the confinement. In condensed matter, though the electron is an elementary particle in the vacuum, such deconfinement of electrons can be seen at low energies in specific circumstances fol- * yusuke.nomura@riken.jp lowed by the ground-state structure of materials. Consequential emergent fractionalized particles were discovered in examples of polyacetylene soliton The QSL is a potential platform of such a fractionalization, where suppressed magnetic order by geometrical frustration of the spin interaction is expected to drive the fractionalization. The QSL phase was theoretically proposed both through numerical supports and mean-field theories However, theoretical and experimental efforts have not yet identified and established the nature of fractionalized particles in reality due to their hidden nature and various theoretical difficulties. So far, several different types of QSL have been proposed. One of the important properties to characterize the QSL is the excitation spectra: They are classified, first, by whether the excitations are gapped [as in the cases of gapped Z 2 spin liquids (shortranged resonating valence bond (RVB) states) To establish the real existence of the QSL and then narrow down the nature of the QSL, we need to identify excitation spectra connected to experimental indications for a proper Hamiltonian that really accommodates the QSL state. However, it remains a challenge because of highly competing energies of various quantum states. We need a highly accurate framework for both ground and excited states in a momentum-resolved fashion. Such high accuracy is offered by a recently developed machine learning method for the ground state. Here, we extend this method to represent both the ground and excited states. To be more precise, we employ the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) combined with pair-product (PP) states We then apply the RBM+PP to a candidate Hamiltonian of the spin-1/2 antiferromagnetic (AF) Heisenberg model on the square lattice with the nearest-neighbor and next-nearest-neighbor exchange interactions, J 1 and J 2 , respectively, called the J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model. We employ two independent analyses to settle down the controversy and obtain firm evidence for the QSL phase: A finite range of the QSL phase in the region 0.49 J 2 /J 1 0.54 is found. In the QSL phase, the singlet and triplet excitations are both gapless at four symmetric momenta in support of the nodal Dirac (or quadratic touching) dispersion of the fermionic spinon at (±π/2, ±π/2) in the Brillouin zone, which brings the coexisting powerlaw decay of spin-spin and dimer-dimer correlations. The isomorphic structure of the gapless excitations of spinons at (±π/2, ±π/2) with the d-wave superconducting state in the cuprate superconductors is suggestive of a mutual profound connection. The two-dimensional (2D) J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg Hamiltonian reads where S i is the spin-1/2 operator at site i, whose α (α = x, y, z) component is S α i = 1 2 c † i σ α c i with the electron operator c † i = (c † i↑ , c † i↓ ) and the Pauli matrix σ α . We set J 1 = 1 as the energy unit and we restrict the parameter range as 0 ≤ J 2 ≤ 1. i, j and i, j denote nearestneighbor and next-nearest-neighbor bonds, respectively. In this model, the J 1 and J 2 interactions compete with each other (the former favors the Néel-type AF configurations, whereas the latter favors the stripe-type AF configurations). Although it is clear that Néel-and stripe-type AF phases exist for small and large J 2 regions, respectively, around J 2 = 0.5, which is the classical boundary between the Néel and stripe phases, unconventional quantum phase(s) such as QSL may emerge. Despite many theoretical efforts To settle the phase diagram after various highly controversial proposals, one needs to satisfy at least the following three requirements: 1. Systematic investigation on finely-resolved J 2 dependence must be performed to establish whether the QSL exists as a phase in a finite J 2 interval because the QSL region is not expected to be wide. 2. Calculation must be highly accurate because quite different states are highly competitive with near degeneracy of the energies. 3. Reliable estimate of the thermodynamic limit to ensure it in the realistic bulk systems. When finitesize systems are studied, methods that are sizeindependent or have small finite-size effects are required to allow reliable extrapolation to the thermodynamic limit. Although recent rapid progress in variational numerical methods has contributed to better accuracy, previous studies satisfying all the points hardly exist. Most of the studies have argued whether the order parameter is finite or not in the thermodynamic limit; however, the order parameter is tiny around the continuous phase transitions, and it is hard to discuss whether the order parameter is really zero or not. Also, when finite-size systems are studied, the direct extrapolation of the order parameter has a large finite-size effect. Exceptionally, Ref. Because there exists no rigorous proof for the one-to-one correspondence of the ground state and excitation structure, one needs to verify in ground-state quantities to settle the highly controversial issue. As is detailed below, we employ the RBM+PP method, which offers a unique way of calculating ground state and momentum-space excitation dispersion in a systematically improvable and tractable way, to satisfy the conditions 1 and 2. The high accuracy and tractable computational cost of the RBM+PP enable comprehensive correlation ratio (ground-state property) and level spectroscopy (excited-state property) analyses with small finite-size effects. To fulfill the condition 3, a crosscheck from the two independent analyses is essential. Physical properties of many-body systems are governed by the eigenstates of the many-body Hamiltonian. Therefore, once the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, we employ a newly developed machine learning method, RBM+PP The RBM+PP wave function Ψ(σ) = σ|Ψ with |σ = i c † iσ |0 is given by (we neglect normalization factor) for each spin configuration σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , . . . , σ Nsite ) with The number of sites is given by N site = L × L and the periodic boundary condition is assumed. The RBM part is given by (we omit irrelevant bias term on the physical spins) with the spin state of hidden units h k = ±1, the interaction between physical and hidden variables W ik , and the bias on the hidden variables b k . The number of hidden units is taken to be 16. The sum over hidden variables can be evaluated analytically and Eq. ( To make it possible to express the sign change of the wave function, we take the b k and W ik variational parameters to be complex. The PP state mapped onto spin systems reads with real variational parameters f ↑↓ ij . ψ PP (σ) in Eq. ( We optimize the variational parameters {b k , W ik , f ↑↓ ij } to minimize the energy E = Ψ|H|Ψ Ψ|Ψ . The energy is a highly nonlinear function with respect to the parameters {b k , W ik , f ↑↓ ij }. Therefore, by interpreting the energy as a loss function, the task of obtaining the lowest-energy state can be recast as a machine-learning task, namely a high-dimensional optimization problem of the highly nonlinear function (RBM+PP) using the highly nonlinear loss function (energy) Various competing controversial scenarios have been proposed for the phase diagram and the nature of possible QSL as we mentioned above. The machine learning only is, despite its crucial importance, not enough to resolve these controversies. In fact, even when we obtain accurate representations of quantum states by the machine learning, (i) another challenge is how to reach quick convergence to the thermodynamic limit from available finite-size results (condition 3 listed in Sec. II). Furthermore, provided that the QSL phase exists, the next challenge is to elucidate its nature; (ii) it is essential to estimate the excitation gap structure and momentum resolved dispersion accurately. To overcome the challenge (i), the present paper employs an unprecedented combination of two methods and one supplementary analysis together and reaches quantitative agreements, which ensures the accuracy because the two methods are originally independent of each other. As a computational method to identify the quantum phases, this is the first attempt to use such combinations, and it successfully establishes a way to obtain the accurate phase diagram, which may serve as the standard method in the future. The first method is the correlation ratio method Correlation ratio R quantifies how sharp the structure factor peak is. R is given by R = 1 -S(Q + δq)/S(Q) We examine R for both spin-spin and dimer-dimer cor-relations to detect Néel-AF and VBS transition points, respectively. The spin-spin correlation is given by C s (r ir j ) = S i • S j . The dimer-dimer correlation is defined as with the dimer operator D α i = S i • S i+ α on the nearest-neighbor bonds for the α-direction (α = x, y). Hereafter, the subscripts "s", "d x ", and "d y " are used for spin-spin, dimer-dimer (α = x and α = y) correlations, respectively. Then, the structure factor is calculated from S γ (q) = 1 Nsite i,j C γ (r ir j )e iq•(ri-rj ) with γ = s, d x , and d y . The two correlation ratios R Néel and R VBS are defined from S s (q) and S dx (q) [or equivalently S dy (q)] to determine the Néel-AF and VBS transition points, respectively. Close to the Néel-AF phase, the peak momentum is Q = (π, π) for S s (q). For VBS, Q = (π, 0) for S dx (q) and Q = (0, π) for S dy (q). Quantum phases are characterized by their unique structure in excitation spectra. At finite sizes, if the phases are different, low-lying excitations will be characterized by different quantum numbers. Therefore, the transition point can be estimated by the size extrapolation of the crossing point of the low-lying excitation energies The eigenstates of the Hamiltonian in finite size systems are labeled by quantum numbers. By optimizing the RBM+PP wave function for each quantum number sector, we can obtain both the ground state and lowlying excited states. We apply total-momentum and spinparity projections to the RBM+PP wave functions to specify the quantum number (double sign in the same order). S + (S -) indicates even (odd) spin parity corresponding to even (odd) values of the total spin S. K is the total momentum. T R is a translation operator shifting all the spins by R. For each quantum number sector, we optimize the RBM+PP wave function to obtain the lowest-energy state. Although the spin-parity projection can only distinguish whether S is even or odd, we always obtain a singlet state for the even S sector and a triplet state for the odd S sector (we confirm it by calculating S expectation value for the obtained states). This is because the singlet (triplet) state is the lowest-energy state for each even (odd) S sector. We note that the quantum number projection is helpful not only to distinguish quantum numbers but also to lower the variational energy Near the quantum critical point, the susceptibility χ at the ordering wave vector Q in finite-sized systems follow the following finite-size scaling form where the universal scaling function f χ appears with the correlation length exponent ν and the susceptibility exponent γ. Here, t assumed to satisfy t ≪ 1 is the dimensionless distance to the critical point. In the present case )/J 1 . Through the relation between χ and the structure factor S(t, Q, L) given by χ(t, Q, L) ∼ S(t, Q, L)L z with the dynamical exponent z, we find that the squared order parameter if the Fisher's scaling relation γ/ν = 2 -η holds for η associated with the anomalous dimension characterized by the power-law decay of the correlation, C(r) ∼ 1/r d+z-2+η for distance r = |r| at the critical point. Then the finite-size scaling plot should exhibit the universal scaling function f χ . First, we check the accuracy of the RBM+PP method in analyzing the J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model (see Appendix B). We have confirmed that the RBM+PP achieves state-of-the-art accuracy not only among machine-learning-based methods but also among all available numerical methods. Indeed, the RBM+PP wave function marks the best precision for the ground state calculations among the compared methods for the 8 × 8 and 10 × 10 lattices (see Fig. Also, in our RBM+PP method, the computationally most demanding part is coming from the PP part, and the neural-network (RBM) part offers an efficient way of improving accuracy without increasing the scaling of computational cost, i.e., as compared to the PP only calculations with the computational cost of O(N 3 site ), the computational cost increases only by O(1). This is in contrast to the Lanczos method, which is also used to improve the variational energy (see Appendix B): if we apply the p-th order Lanczos step to improve the PP only calculations, it increases the computational cost by O(N p site ), and hence the total computational cost of the Lanczos-applied PP calculations scales as O(N p+3 site ). Although we calculated the ground state and various excited states independently, a tractable computationalcost scaling of the RBM+PP method allowed us to perform numerous independent calculations for large system sizes within given computational resources. Thus obtained high-quality data contribute to a reliable determination of the phase diagram consistently from both ground-state and excitation analyses (see below). The RBM+PP method combined with the state-ofthe-art numerical techniques convincingly uncovers the phase diagram of the J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model as shown in Fig. ≈ 0.61, respectively. Whereas VBS breaks lattice symmetry, QSL does not break any. Clearly and notably, QSL is stabilized in a finite region of J 2 around J 2 = 0.5. The phase transition between VBS and stripe-AF at J V-S 2 is of 1st order, which is characterized by the kink in the ground state energy, while the other two transitions are continuous (Fig. Results for the correlation ratios, R Néel and R VBS , are shown in Figs. The level spectroscopy method was applied to the 2D J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model before To critically crosscheck the consistency with the above correlation ratio result, we also reexamine the level spectroscopy analysis as a complementary check. We here enjoy the advantage of the momentum resolution in addition (contrary to Ref. 32). Figure More importantly, our phase boundary estimated by the level spectroscopy has a striking quantitative agreement with the correlation ratio result described above. It is of great significance to see the one-to-one correspondence between the ground-state phases and the excitation structures. We then safely conclude that a finite QSL region around J 2 = 0.5 emerges (see Supplementary Note 1 in Appendix D for additional noteworthy features found in the level spectroscopy). Figure As we see in Fig. (a) System-size dependence of singlet-quintuplet (red dots) and singlet-triplet (black squares) level crossings indicated by red and black arrows in Fig. (π, 0), (0, π), and (π, π). To confirm this picture, we show in Fig. We find that the excitation gap decreases as L increases at the high-symmetry K points. The exceptional behavior at K = (0, 0) in the singlet sector is presumably an artifact, which arises from numerical difficulty in obtaining excited states in S = 0 and K = (0, 0) sector (π,0) (π,π) (0,0) (0,0) (π,0) (π,π) (0,0) (0,0) Δ FIG. (Supplementary Note 2 in Appendix D). On the other hand, the gap stays nearly constant at the intermediate K points. By combining the gap analysis at the critical points (see above) and the size extrapolation of the gap by the scaling a + b/L at the intermediate K points, we draw dispersion expected in the thermodynamic limit. The excitation spectra in the thermodynamic limit exhibit unconventional behavior in which the gap vanishes at the four high-symmetry momenta. We find only these four points as the gapless excitations suggesting Diractype linear dispersion around these four points. To cor- Weight of lowest branch in the dynamic spin structure factor for q = (π, 0) and (π, π) for J2/J1 = 0.5. At each q point, the weight is normalized by the total spectral weight ∞ 0 dωSs(q, ω). (b) Schematic picture for plausible spinon dispersion around gapless points (±π/2, ±π/2), illustrated both for particle (pink) and hole (green) sides above and below the spinon Fermi energy. Two examples of two spinon excitations (two red and two black circles) are illustrated (see below). (c) The observable spin excitation is constructed from the two spinon excitations, which generates the gapless points at (π, 0), (0, π), (0, 0) and (π, π). For instance, the red circle with the momentum around (-π, 0) is constructed from the two spinon excitations shown as the small red circles with the momenta around (-π/2, π/2) and (-π/2, -π/2) in (b). The black circle is another example of spin excitation originated from the two spinon excitations shown as the small black circles in (b). Continuum incoherent spin excitations inside the cones are generated from the combinations of the two spinon excitations on the pink or green cone surfaces in (b). roborate the conclusion about the four Dirac-type gapless points in the QSL phase, we have also calculated the excitation energies at (mπ/3, nπ/3) with m, n = 0, 1, 2, 3 for 12 × 12 lattice (Fig. In the present QSL phase, one can expect an exotic fractionalization of particles, where a charge-neutral spin-1/2 excitation, called spinon, emerges. Although the spinon excitation cannot be detected experimentally, the evidence of the fractionalization can be detected as an incoherent continuum in the dynamic spin structure factor S s (q, ω) (spin-1 excitation) Figure a nice correspondence between the ground-state and excitation properties. Figures 8(a) and 8(b) show the data of finite-size scaling analysis of the Néel-AF and VBS order parameters, respectively. The squared order parameters for Néel-AF and VBS are given by m 2 Néel = S s (Q)/N site with Q = (π, π) and m 2 VBS = S dx (Q)/N site with Q = (π, 0) [= S dy (Q)/N site with Q = (0, π)], respectively [see Methods for the finite-scaling analysis method and the definition of the structure factor, S s (Q) and S dx (Q)]. For the Néel-AF and VBS orderings, we assume that the critical points are at J Néel 2 = 0.49 and J VBS 2 = 0.54, respectively (see the phase diagram in Fig. As is discussed in Sec. II, to settle the highly controversial situation on the phase diagram, the calculations need to fulfill three conditions: 1. systematic J 2 dependence survey, 2. high accuracy, and 3. reliable estimate of the thermodynamic limit. The RBM+PP data achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy level both for ground-state and excited states, satisfying the condition 2. With the high accuracy, we have performed a systematic investigation on the J 2 dependence both for ground-state and excited-state properties (condition 1). For the condition 3, both the correlation ratio and level spectroscopy have given consistent results, supporting the conclusion of the QSL phase in the region 0.49 J 2 /J 1 0.54. We do not find such quantitative consistency before, and we became convinced of the existence of the QSL phase only after finding their consistency. Nevertheless, we note that, at a qualitative level, an overall consensus on the existence of the QSL is being formed among the best accurate methods (Refs. 23 and 25 and ours) clarified in the benchmark shown in Appendix B (Note that Ref. The real spin excitations measurable in experiments must be made of two-spinon excitations, and thus the singlet and triplet gapless points are (0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π) and (π, π) [Fig. The finite-size scaling analysis shown above suggests that the value for critical exponent z + η is about 1.4 for both of the AF-QSL and QSL-VBS critical points (Fig. Since the excitation structure is isomorphic with the charge and spin excitations of the d-wave superconducting state in the cuprate superconductors, it is suggestive of the connection of the two; the superconducting state could be borne out from the present QSL immediately when carriers are doped. The present accurate estimate of the spinon excitation, especially, incoherent nature of the spin excitations with continuum, will provide us with insights into the unsolved puzzles of the cuprate superconductors including the incoherent transport and charge dynamics. We have studied the 2D J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model using a highly accurate machine-learning method, RBM+PP. Our achievements are summarized into the following points: the quantitative estimate of the phase diagram, useful insights into the QSL property to understand its nature, and the establishment of one-to-one correspondence between ground-state and excitation structure. First, by combining the RBM+PP with the correlation ratio and level spectroscopy methods, we have been able to extrapolate to the thermodynamic limit reliably by two independent analyses. The agreement reached between the two at an unprecedented level has given the firm evidence for a finite QSL region 0.49 J 2 /J 1 0.54. The phase diagram is summarized in Fig. The QSL is characterized as the dual nature of the algebraic and coexisting correlations of the antiferromagnetic (associated with the Néel order) and dimer (associated with the VBS order) correlations, which had been thought incompatible before by the symmetry difference. The elucidated dual nature is also seen consistently in the excitation property: We have identified the Dirac-type dispersion with gapless points (0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π), and (π, π) in both the singlet and triplet excitation sectors (related each to the dimer-dimer and spin-spin correlations, respectively). The excitation structure is consistent with the emergence of the fractionalized spin-1/2 spinons with gapless Dirac dispersion. Interestingly, the power-law decay exponents of these two correlations change as a function of J 2 /J 1 and do not coincide except for a single point around J 2 = 0.52, which imposes a substantial constraint on the gauge structure of the QSL. Finally, our comprehensive calculations have revealed a fundamental "law of correspondence" between the ground-state and excitation structure in the J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model. By establishing the phase diagram, we have demonstrated that the evolution of the ground state indeed maps to the change in the excitation structure induced by the level crossing in a fingerprint fashion with one-to-one correspondence. We have also shown that the coexisting power-law decay of the dimer-dimer and spin-spin correlation functions in the real space in the QSL phase (ground-state property) consistently corroborates the gapless structure of singlet and triplet excitations, respectively. Such one-to-one correspondence has a fundamental significance in physics, as the oneto-one correspondence between the equilibrium and nonequilibrium excited states addressed in the fluctuationdissipation theorem and Kubo formula gives a foundation for the understanding of the linear response. Such accurate, systematic, and comprehensive elucidation of the QSL with insights into the duality of the gapless correlations and the law of correspondence has been enabled by the RBM wave function combined with the PP state and the quantum number projection that offers state-of-the-art accuracy within a tractable computational cost: The high accuracy and the tractable computational-cost scaling of the RBM+PP method [O(N 3 site )] were necessary to prepare comprehensive highquality data for large system sizes to accomplish our achievement. So far, the machine learning methods had been applied mostly to benchmark problems with known solutions. By combining the RBM+PP wave function with cutting-edge methods to reduce finite-size corrections, we have succeeded in uncovering QSL in the long-standing challenging problem. This achievement opens a new avenue of numerical methods applicable to the grand challenges of quantum many-body systems. Monte Carlo sampling with weight p(σ) where the local energy E loc (σ) is given by E loc (σ) = The E value depends on the variational parameters. To optimize the variational parameters to minimize E, we employ the stochastic reconfiguration (SR) method The number of complex variational parameters in the RBM part is N hidden for b k and N hidden × N site for W ik , respectively. As for the real variational parameters f ↑↓ ij in the PP part, to reduce the number of parameters and the computational cost, we impose 4 × 4 sublattice structure for the 8 × 8, 12 × 12, and 16 × 16 lattices, and 6 × 6 sublattice structure for the 18 × 18 lattice, whereas we do not employ sublattice structure for the 6 × 6 lattice. In the case of the 4 × 4 sublattice structure, the number of independent f ↑↓ ij parameters is reduced from N 2 site to 4 × 4 × N site = 16N site , and the other f ↑↓ ij parameters are defined by spatial translation operations. In the presence of the Gutzwiller factor to map the PP state onto the spin system, the onsite f ↑↓ ii parameters become completely redundant, i.e., the wave function does not depend on f ↑↓ ii at all. Then, the number of relevant f ↑↓ ij parameters is 16(N site -1). For the initial values for {b k , W ik , f ↑↓ ij }, we put random numbers in order not to introduce bias in the initial variational state. More specifically, for each real and complex part of b k and W ik parameters, we put small random numbers from the interval [-0.05, 0.05]. In the case of the triplet state calculation, b k parameters are multiplied by 10 (note that if b k is zero, the RBM part is completely symmetric with respect to the global spin inversion). For the initial f ↑↓ ij parameters, we put random numbers from [-f max , f max ] with f max depending on the distance R ij between ith and jth sites. We typically take f max to be proportional to R -a ij with a ∼ 2. Random f ↑↓ ij parameters allow various spin ordering patterns whose period is within the sublattice size. A longer period structure than the system size is beyond the scope of this study, as are all the other earlier finite-systemsize studies. For each J 2 point, we perform at least three independent optimizations of the RBM+PP wave functions from different initial variational parameters. We discuss the initial-parameter dependence in more detail in Appendix B. The computational cost of the RBM+PP wave function employing sublattice structure in the PP part scales with O(N 3 site ). In the RBM+PP method, a computationally demanding part is coming from the calculation of the PP wave function part and the neural network (RBM) part offers an efficient way of improving accuracy. As we describe in Sec. III B 3, we apply the spin-parity projection to distinguish whether the total spin S is even or odd. Because the singlet (triplet) state is the lowest state for each even (odd) S sector in the present study, we obtain a singlet (triplet) state for the even (odd) S sector. Therefore, we can obtain the singlet (S = 0) and triplet (S = 1) excited states with momentum resolution. However, we need special treatment to obtain S = 0 excited state at K = (0, 0) because the lowest-energy state in S = 0 and K = (0, 0) quantum number sector is the ground state. We use additional simplified point-group projection on top of those in Eq. ( where the R π/2 is an operator to rotate the spin configuration by 90 degrees. With this projection, we can distinguish whether the state belongs to A (either A 1 or A 2 ) irreducible representation or B (either B 1 or B 2 ) irreducible representation under the C 4v point group (to distinguish between A 1 and A 2 or between B 1 and B 2 , we need full point group projection with 0, π/2, π, 3π/2 rotations). The ground state corresponds to the former, while the excited state corresponds to the latter. We also need special treatment to obtain S = 2 excited states. To this end, we use the mVMC (many-variable variational Monte Carlo method) In the present study, we fix the number of hidden units N hidden to be 16. We always apply the spin-parity and momentum projections during the optimization of the RBM+PP wave function. The special treatments to obtain S = 0 excited state at K = (0, 0) and S = 2 excited (a) Comparison of the ground state energy for the J1-J2 Heisenberg model. The comparison is made among the variational energies under the periodic boundary condition. The system sizes are (a) 6 × 6 and (b) 8 × 8. Our RBM+PP results are compared with those obtained by the variational Monte Carlo (VMC) method combined with the p-th order Lanczos steps states are described above. To improve the quality of the data for the correlation function in Figs. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, and 16 quantitatively, we apply the simplified pointgroup projection in Eq. (A2) to the optimized ground state RBM+PP wave function for the sector with S = 0 and K = (0, 0). The ground state energy in Fig. By applying the RBM+PP method to the 2D J 1 -J 2 Heisenberg model on the square lattice, we confirm that the RBM+PP achieves state-of-the-art accuracy not only among machine-learning-based methods We have also performed the benchmark calculations for the 10 × 10 lattice because the benchmarks of neuralnetwork wave functions in the literature have mainly been performed using the 10 × lattice. We optimized the RBM+PP wave function with 16 hidden units (as used in the other system sizes) without introducing a sublattice structure in the PP part. We apply the momentum, spinparity, and point-group projections. Table In the actual calculations, we employ the sublattice structure in the f ↑↓ ij parameters for the 8 × 8, 12 × 12, 16 × 16, and 18 × 18 lattices, to reduce the computational cost from O(N 4 site ) to O(N 3 site ) (see Appendix A). The reduction of the computational time enables us to perform systematic calculations for various J 2 values and for different quantum-number sectors. By employing the sublattice structure, the accuracy becomes slightly worse compared to that without sublattice structure. For example, in the case of the 8 × 8 lattice at J 2 = 0.5, the Remarkably, we also find that the RBM+PP accurately represents excited states as well as the ground state. Figure Initial-parameter dependence of the RBM+PP optimization curves for the ground state at (a) J2 = 0.5 and (b) J2 = 0.6 for the 8 × 8 lattice. The results for the four independent optimizations are shown for each J2. In (b), the dotted line indicates the total energy of a local-minimum solution. cause the momentum is ill-defined. In the present study, we can obtain accurate excitation energies with momentum resolution. The accurate estimate of excitation gaps enables us to perform the level spectroscopy to estimate the phase boundary and elucidate the nature of the QSL phase. As we describe in Appendix A, we perform several independent optimizations of the RBM+PP wave functions for each J 2 point. Here, using the 8 × 8 lattice, we show how the difference in initial variational parameters affects the optimization. Figure One of the reasons for the stable optimization is that finite-size systems we have treated [N site is O(100)] have a finite energy level spacing except for level crossing points. The order of the energy level spacing is on the order of 0.1 (see, e.g., Fig. From this benchmark, we notice that it is important to perform several independent optimizations to avoid being trapped in local minima. In the present study, although the optimizations of the RBM+PP wave functions are done independently for different J 2 points, thanks to the several independent optimizations at each J 2 value, all the physical quantities change smoothly and continuously. in Fig. J 2 / J 1 = 0.5 J 2 / J 1 = 0.4 S s (q) S s (q) S s (q) S s (q) q x / π q y / π q y / π q x / π q x / π q x / π q y / π q y / π FIG. in the energy curve at J V-S 2 ≈ 0.61, giving evidence for the 1st-order phase transition. In Sec. IV A 1, we discuss the crossing of the correlation ratio. The correlation ratio quantifies how sharp the structure factor peak is. In Figs. System-size dependence of the crossing J2 points of the AF and VBS correlation ratios As described in Sec. IV A 1, we determine the AF-QSL and QSL-VBS phase boundaries from the correlation ratio analysis. Figure Figure 2. In Fig. 3. The weight of the triplet at (π, π) seems to be scaled naturally to a nonzero value, which might imply the remnant of the pole. This requires fur-ther clarification in larger system sizes in the future. The reason could partly be that the calculation is done close to the AF(Néel)-QSL phase boundary J 2 = J Néel 2 ≈ 0.49. Another origin might be a possible anisotropic (elliptic) Dirac dispersion of spinons with preserved C 4 symmetry, which makes the spinon particle-hole excitation denser for the momentum transfer (π, π) and makes the slow convergence to zero. For the VBS order parameter, z + η = 1.471(8), 1.436(6), 1.400( 