Pseudogap is a ubiquitous phenomenon in strongly correlated systems such as high-Tc superconductors, ultracold atoms and nuclear physics. While pairing fluctuations inducing the pseudogap are known to be enhanced in low-dimensional systems, such effects have not been explored well in one of the most fundamental 1D models, that is, Gaudin-Yang model. In this work, we show that the pseudogap effect can be visible in the single-particle excitation in this system using a diagrammatic approach. Fermionic single-particle spectra exhibit a unique crossover from the double-particle dispersion to pseudogap state with increasing the attractive interaction and the number density at finite temperature. Surprisingly, our results of thermodynamic quantities in unpolarized and polarized gases show an excellent agreement with the recent quantum Monte Carlo and complex Langevin results, even in the region where the pseudogap appears. A pseudogap phenomenon, which is the suppression of the density of states (DOS) around a Fermi level, has been a central issue in strongly-correlated quantum many-body systems such as high-T c superconductors Furthermore, the low-dimensionality tends to induce strong fluctuations While an attractively interacting two-component Fermi gas in 1D, namely, Gaudin-Yang model is known as a solvable model based on the thermodynamic Bethe ansatz (TBA) In this work, we elucidate pairing fluctuation effects in 1D Gaudin-Yang Fermi gas at finite temperature within the diagrammatic approach, which has successfully been applied to higher-dimensional systems We start from the attractive Gaudin-Yang model described by the Hamiltonian where ξ p.σ = p 2 /(2m σ ) -μ σ is the kinetic energy of a fermion with momentum p, spin σ =↑, ↓ and mass m σ measured from the chemical potential μ σ . For simplicity, we consider the mass-balanced case (m ≡ m ↑ = m ↓ ). μ σ is parametrized by the averaged one μ = (μ ↑ + μ ↓ )/2 and a fictitious magnetic field h = (μ ↑ -μ ↓ )/2. c p,σ and c † p,σ are fermionic annihilation/creation operators, respectively. The coupling constant g is related to a 1D scattering length a as g = -2 ma . Following Ref. The important notice is that while in 2D and 3D systems the contact-type interaction becomes zero such that a finite scattering length is reproduced Therefore, the lowest-order diagram, that is, Hartree self-energy Σ H σ is nonzero, in contrast to higher-dimensional systems. To retain it, as shown in Fig. where is the lowest-order particle-particle bubble with the boson Matsubara frequency ν l = 2lπT . The self-energy Σ σ for the fluctuation correction is given by We note that this approximation is equivalent to the socalled T -matrix approach, except for the self-consistent treatment of the Hartree shift. The T -matrix approach successfully reproduces the exact results obtained by TBA for 1D Fermi polaronic excitations realized in spin-polarized limit we obtain the number density n σ for given T and μ σ as n σ = T p,iωn G σ (p, iω n ). Moreover, we can obtain the single-particle spectral function In what follows, we suppress σ in these quantities as n, A(p, ω), and ρ(ω) unless otherwise specified. Figure Figures 3 (a1), (b1), and (c1) show the calculated DOS ρ(ω) at λ = 2, 2.5, and 3. One can see the dip structure around ω = 0 (corresponding to the Fermi level) with the double peaks in the wide parameter region. While the higher-energy peak locates at ω = -μ in the lowdensity regime (μ/T < ∼ 0), the energy of lower one is approximately given by ω = -E b /2. This indicates the existence of two-body bound molecules. With increasing the density (in other words, μ/T or λ), one can find pronounced gap structure even in the high-density regime (μ/T > ∼ 0). It is expected to originate from many-body effects, namely, pairing fluctuations associated with the Cooper instability. While the dip structures in Fig. We also compare the dispersion ξ eff p,σ obtained from the imaginary-time Green's function G σ (p, τ ) as where ∆τ is a small number and β = 1/T is the inverse temperature. We take ∆τ = β/40, which is enough small to extract ξ eff p,σ . We note that a large τ limit (τ → β) is required to obtain the ground-state single-particle energy. Such an extraction of the dispersion has frequently been done to obtain hadronic spectra in lattice QCD simulations with G σ (p, τ ) ∝ e -p 2 2m τ , one can obtain ξ eff p,σ = p 2 /(2m) from Eq. ( We note that our diagrammatic approach has an artificial limitation in the strong-coupling regime. Fig. In 1D systems, Peierls instability may also occur through the density response function χ(q, iν l ) given by It is nothing but the Lindhard function which is topologically equivalent to the first diagram in Fig. The inset of Fig. Finally, in Fig. in the presence of finite fictitious magnetic field h/T . We compare our results with the CL method In conclusion, we have investigated low-dimensional fluctuation effects in an attractive Gaudin-Yang Fermi gas at finite temperature within the diagrammatic approach. The calculated number densities and polarizations in unpolarized and polarized gases shows an excellent agreement with the recent QMC and CL results in the wide ranges of an interaction parameter and chemical potentials. These results indicate the reliability of our approach in the region where we have explored in this work. The single-particle spectral functions exhibit the crossover from the superposition of dressed atomic state and thermal dimers to the pseudogap state with increasing the interaction strength and the number density. Our analysis can be extended to the mass-imbalanced mixtures and the trapped systems. It is also interesting to address photo-emission spectra which can be experimentally measured.