Theory predicts that two-dimensional (2D) materials may only exist in the presence of out-ofplane deformations on atomic length scales, frequently referred to as ripples. While such ripples can be detected via electron microscopy, their direct observation via surface-based techniques and characterization in terms of interaction forces and energies remain limited, preventing an unambiguous study of their effect on mechanical characteristics, including but not limited to friction anisotropy. Here, we employ high-resolution atomic force microscopy to demonstrate the presence of atomic-scale ripples on supported samples of few-layer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). Three-dimensional force / energy spectroscopy is utilized to study the effect of ripples on the interaction landscape. Friction force microscopy reveals multiple symmetries for friction anisotropy, explained by studying rippled sample areas as a function of scan size. Our experiments contribute to the continuing development of a rigorous understanding of the nanoscale mechanics of 2D materials. The discovery that atomically thin sheets can be isolated from bulk crystals and the exciting physical properties exhibited by them, initiated the thriving field of two-dimensional (2D) materials Despite the prevalent scientific interest in 2D materials today, their very existence initially puzzled scientists, based on the idea that a perfectly two-dimensional crystalline sheet of material would be thermodynamically unstable Most prior work related to ripples focused on their effect on the electrical properties of 2D materials. For instance, the presence of ripples was found to suppress weak localization in graphene Here, we employ AFM-based high-resolution imaging, three-dimensional force / energy spectroscopy, and nanoscale friction measurements for a detailed physical characterization of atomic-scale ripples on few-layer MoS2 samples supported on SiO2. Our results directly demonstrate the presence of linearly aligned ripples with heights limited to only a few Å on the samples. Three-dimensional force / energy spectroscopy A Fourier-transform-based analysis of lateral force data derived from three-dimensional potential energy maps as a function of scan size provides clues regarding the observed variety in friction anisotropy. Motivated by the absence of AFM data in the literature demonstrating the presence of atomic-scale ripples on 2D materials, we performed experiments to answer the question of whether the imaging of atomic-scale ripples on MoS2 can be accomplished with an AFM-based approach. Based on the defining role that ripples are thought to play in the friction anisotropy of such materials Considering that FFM necessitates continuous contact between the AFM tip and the sample surface, which invariably results in the averaging of tip-sample interactions over a finite contact area and thus leads to a loss of spatial resolution In order to overcome the limitations of FFM and tapping-mode AFM in terms of spatial resolution, we imaged the topography of exfoliated MoS2 flakes via frequency-modulation atomic force microscopy (FM-AFM) While the presence of atomic-scale ripples on the MoS2 samples (Fig. Considering that the direction dependence, i.e. anisotropy, of friction can be potentially an important design parameter for 2D-material-based solid lubrication in small-scale mechanical systems, we performed FFM measurements to probe friction anisotropy on MoS2 flakes exfoliated onto SiO2. Our work was additionally motivated by previous reports of friction anisotropy on 2D materials including graphene and MoS2, where 2-and 6-fold symmetries have been reported Analysis of multiple FFM experiments performed in our laboratory, aimed at studying anisotropic friction on MoS2 (for technical details, see Methods), revealed that the results fall into three main categories (Fig. Despite the fact that the imaging of linearly aligned ripples on MoS2 via our high-resolution AFM experiments can be utilized to explain the widely-reported observation of 2-fold friction anisotropy, the presence of higher-symmetry anisotropies in smaller scan sizes, as well as the observation of non-periodic friction, highlight the need for a more thorough evaluation of the effect of ripples on friction anisotropy. Motivated as above, we performed a Fourier transform analysis on the two-dimensional lateral force maps derived from the volumetric interaction energy data. In particular, we calculated the relative probability of encountering a type of spatial symmetry (2-, 3-, 4-, 6-fold as well as no symmetry) on areas ranging in size from 16 nm × 16 nm to 250 nm × 250 nm that are scanned over whole lateral force maps (Fig. These results can be understood when one takes the finite lateral size and spacing of the ripples into account, the latter of which is in the range of 100s of Å. As such, in order for the ripples to have a noticeable influence on friction anisotropy, scan sizes need to be relatively larger, a conclusion that is supported by the friction anisotropy experiments reported here, where no experiments performed on scan areas smaller than 1.5 μm × 1.5 μm featured 2-fold anisotropy. This conclusion also shows that the observation of 2-fold friction anisotropy in certain prior reports On the other hand, it needs to be understood that the predication of "no symmetry" for small scans, delivered by the present Fourier-transform-based analysis, is limited by the fact that the lateral force map analyzed here was acquired over an area of 250 nm × 250 nm. As such, the map lacks atomic-scale spatial resolution and thus cannot capture the effect of the hexagonal symmetry of atomic-scale structure on friction anisotropy. In fact, for FFM data acquired over small areas, it is natural to expect that the hexagonal symmetry of the atomic structure will result in an anisotropic behavior closer to 6-fold symmetry. Consequently, the convolution of this effect with the still non-negligible influence of ripples on scan areas of a few tens of nm in lateral size, results in anisotropic behavior with an intermediate level of symmetry (such as the measurement reported in Fig. Despite the fact that the discussion above sheds light on the observation of 2-fold and higher order anisotropic behavior of friction exhibited by 2D materials, the frequent observation of non-periodic friction data (Fig. Finally, it needs to be mentioned that our experiments did not yield any evidence for linearly aligned structures formed by adsorbed molecules as proposed by Gallagher et al. The absence of a discernible contrast in such maps (Supplementary Fig. In summary, we presented high-resolution AFM experiments that led to the direct imaging of atomic-scale ripples on few-layer flakes of MoS2. Three-dimensional force / energy spectroscopy showed the extent to which the presence of the ripples influences the interactions of MoS2 with the probing tip. Our experiments directly revealed the presence of linearly aligned ripples as the fundamental physical mechanism responsible for the direction-dependence of friction on 2D materials, and also allowed the explanation of the wide variety of anisotropic behavior observed on such materials as a function of scan size. Further experiments, potentially performed with probes that are themselves single-or few-layers of 2D materials 29 , need to be performed to more accurately ascertain the impact of ripples on 2D-material-based solid lubrication in micro-and nano-scale mechanical systems. Friction Force Microscopy. FFM experiments reported here were performed with a commercial AFM instrument (Asylum Research, Cypher VRS) under ambient conditions. MoS2 flakes were deposited onto SiO2 substrates by standard mechanical exfoliation from commercially available bulk crystals via adhesive tape. The measurements were conducted using diamond-like-carboncoated and diamond-coated cantilevers (Budget Sensors ContDLC and Nanosensors CDT-CONTR, respectively), with normal spring constant values (0.90 N/m and 0.28 N/m, respectively) as determined by the Sader method in a quite room Three-dimensional Force / Energy Spectroscopy. The experiments were conducted using a customized JSPM-5100 microscope. The microscope was equipped with a custom-made sample stage operating in high vacuum (~ 10 -7 mbar). Ultra-sharp gold-coated tips (Adama Innovations AD-2.8-SS, tip radius, r < 5 nm, stiffness, k = 2.0 N/m) were employed and the microscope was controlled with the GXSM control module Nanosurf® EasyPLL Plus was used for frequency shift detection. The microscope was operated via the standard frequency modulation atomic force microscopy (FM-AFM) technique with selfexcitation Three-dimensional atomic force microscopy (3D-AFM) is a well-established technique, the details of which can be found elsewhere Friction map acquired on a multi-layer (2L: two layers, 3L: three layers, 4L: four layers) MoS2 flake, where brighter colors correspond to higher friction. While decreasing friction with increasing number of layers is observed (whereby, on average, 3L and 4L exhibit %71 and 50% of the friction recorded on 2L, respectively), no evidence of ripples can be detected. (b) Amplitude-modulation (i.e. tapping-mode) atomic force microscopy image of the topography associated with a multi-layer MoS2 flake on a SiO2 substrate (color scale range: 10 nm). No trace of linearly aligned ripples is found on the MoS2 flake. (c) Topography image recorded via frequency-modulation atomic force microscopy on a few-layer MoS2 flake, revealing the presence of linearly aligned, atomic-scale ripples on MoS2, highlighted by black arrows (color scale range: 5 Å; also see Supplementary Fig. 