The discovery that Nd1-xSrxNiO2, with the CaCuO2 infinite-layer structure, superconducts up to 15 K around the hole-doping level x=0.2 raises the crucial question of its fundamental electronic and magnetic processes. The unexplained basic feature that we address is that, for x=0 and as opposed to strongly antiferromagnetic (AFM) CaCuO2, NdNiO2 with the same structure and formal d 9 configuration does not undergo AFM order. We study this issue not in the conventional manner, as energetically unfavored or as frustrated magnetic order, but as an instability of the AFM phase itself. We are able to obtain the static AFM ordered state, but find that a flat-band, one-dimensional-like van Hove singularity (vHs) is pinned to the Fermi level. This situation is unusual in a non-half-filled, effectively two-band system. The vHs makes the AFM phase unstable to spin-density disproportionation, breathing and half-breathing lattice distortions, and (innate or parasitic) charge-density disproportionation. These flat-band instabilities, distant relatives of single band cuprate models, thereby inhibit but do not eliminate incipient AFM tendencies at low temperature. The primary feature is that a pair of active bands (d x 2 -y 2 , d z 2 ) eliminate half-filled physics and, due to instabilities, preclude the AFM phase seen in CaCuO2. This strongly AFM correlated, conducting spin-liquid phase with strong participation of the Ni d z 2 orbital, forms the platform for superconductivity in NdNiO2. A disparate variety of interacting models The electronic structures of the d 9 infinite layer cuprates and nickelates were compared some time ago, with some similarities but substantial differences being noted Here, we focus on this absence of (AFM) ordering of Ni moments in NNO, moments whose ordering has been the overriding hallmark of the undoped phase in cuprates. In closely related layered nickelates In spite of being energetically favored in the absence of fluctuations (i.e. in DFT calculations We should note that the questions we address lie exactly in the broad controversy in this field: Is this nickelate basically similar to the infinite layer cuprates, or essentially different? The similarities have been emphasized by, for example, Botana and Norman, who obtain significant but not defining differences in some of the electronic characteristics of LaNiO 2 and CaCuO 2 , and also offer that doping tends to make them even more similar Our methods are described in Sec. II, followed by a brief discussion of relative energies and magnetic moments in Sec. III. Section IV provides a description of the (experimentally inaccessible) AFM ordered state, pointing out the effects of electronic correlation due to the on-site repulsion U . The Fermi surfaces of this AFM state, and their change with low levels of doping, are described in Sec. V. Sections VI and VII give a description of the magnetic (and charge) and lattice instabilities, respectively, that arise. A short wrap-up of our work is presented in Sec. VIII. To treat the strong intra-atomic Coulomb interactions on Nd and Ni ions, we adopt the generalized gradient approximation For purposes of comparison, we provide comparisons of crystal structures and ionic sizes of NdNiO 2 and CaCuO 2 . For NNO, a=3.92 Å, c=3.37 Å In the GGA+U calculations, for the Nd ions, the Hubbard U N d f = 8.0 eV and the Hund's exchange coupling J N d f = 1.0 eV are fixed in all calculations, which provide the S = 3 2 Nd 3+ spin state In wien2k, the basis size was determined by R mt K max = 8 and the augmented-plane-wave radii R mt of Nd 2.50, Ni 1.95, and O 1.65, in atomic units. The other input parameters of these calculations are the same as in our previous study of NdNiO 2 The (110) AFM state we study, within a √ 2 × √ 2 supercell, has both antialigned Nd and Ni spin layers, with the structure giving no net near neighbor Nd-Ni coupling. This AFM ordering is energetically favored over aligned Ni spins by 95 (62) meV/f.u. at U = 0 (4) eV, both being strongly favored over nonmagnetic Ni Correlation effects are immediate and unexpected. One thing that proceeds as expected is that the Ni d x 2 -y 2 bands are split by the order of U ; in cuprates this opens a gap. In the nearest neighbor tight binding picture these bands are perfectly nested in the diamond-shaped region that becomes the Brillouin zone (BZ) in the AFM zone. From either a perfect nesting perspective or a superexchange spin model, a gap is opened and AFM order is robust. However, including even a small value of U leads to a dramatic change in the Ni d z 2 -derived band initially below but very near the Fermi energy E F . This band shows k z dispersion assisted by the Nd d orbital, but negligible dispersion for k z = π/c (Z -R -A -Z lines), where the bands remain degenerate in spite of being half filled. Figure To probe the geometry of the (nearly) flat band, the AFM Fermi surfaces (FSs) for U = 4 eV versus small (virtual crystal) doping levels are shown in Fig. The flat and thin wafer and button FSs at stoichiometry have a characteristic thickness 2K F z ≤0.06 π c . In addition to the flatness, the very small velocities will lead to strong nesting, at K F z and 2π c -2K F z . The related susceptibility will encourage spin density, charge density, and lattice fluctuations, and possibly instabilities at ∼ 32c and ∼ 2c respectively. The long wavelength instabil- ity would be challenging to study numerically, the short wavelength one corresponds to a dimerization of successive NiO 2 layers -a Peierls instability of the d z 2 band and its associated vHs peak. A flat band generated DOS peak at E F in an AFM metal causes a possible "meta-Stoner" instability of the AFM order (Stoner instability being with respect to the already spin-polarized state). To break the underlying spin symmetry in this already magnetically-ordered AFM state, the spin symmetry must be broken. We have studied this magnetic instability together with lattice instability by imposing breathing and half-breathing types of oxygen distortions, see Fig. For the full-and half-breathing modes, the changes in moments of the two Ni sites, Ni1 and Ni2, are displayed in Fig. The effect of the breathing mode on the band structure is displayed in Fig. To explore the Peierls lattice instability, we plot the energy difference divided by squared amplitude K(u)=∆E(u)/u 2 in Fig. The calculated K(u) is anomalous in two ways. For typical oxygen vibrational amplitudes 0.05-0.10 Å, it would be practically constant; high frequency O modes typically do not show significant anharmonicity. Figure If calculated as often done on a mesh of u such as 0.01, 0.02, 0.03 Å etc., the unstable region would not be sampled carefully, but anharmonicity [non-constancy of K(u)] would be evident; high energy modes around ω = 80 meV and 60 meV for the full-and half-breathing modes respectively would be obtained, similar to our values. Compared with the values for these modes in CaCuO 2 A fully quantum treatment would include also the effects of oxygen zero point fluctuations (ZPFs) on the system and its response. For frequencies of 60-80 meV, the oxygen zero point amplitude u 0 ≈ 0.04-0.05 Å. Within this distance of the oxygen site, the potential becomes strongly anharmonic and finally negative. To what extent ZPFs could temper the static lattice, spin, and charge instabilities might be challenging to determine, because ZPF effects are subtle: the fully quantum metal has zero resistivity at T=0, because ZPFs do not scatter carriers, whereas the simple picture of averaging over displaced atoms would (incorrectly) suggest otherwise. An important dynamical lattice consequence for this AFM system is that the vHs will be renormalized at low temperature -narrowed instead of the naive expectation of broadening We have explored the experimentally inaccessible AFM ordered state of NdNiO 2 with correlated DFT methods. This is the state whose calculated energy indicates it should be the ground state versus nonmagnetic and competing simple magnetic states, and presumably the disordered moment phase as well, seemingly a severe problem for theory. However, we find as well that this state is multiply unstable: lattice, spin, or charge fluctuationsneglected in this static lattice, fixed spin DFT modeling -so further studies would be necessary to progress to a determination and understanding of the ground state. Experiments indicate a conducting state without magnetic order, but likely with fluctuating moments (Ni and Nd) that make it very challenging to model from a DFT viewpoint. Specifically, we have shown that in the (unphysical) AFM ordered phase a Ni d z 2 flat band pinned at the Fermi level arises on the entire k z = ±π/c zone faces, giving rise to a 1D-like van Hove singularity that supports spin, charge, and lattice (both full-and half-breathing mode) instabilities of the ideal infinite-layer lattice. Due to the narrowness of the vHs, these coupled order parameters may be affected by quantum zero point oxygen motion and non-adiabatic electron-lattice coupling in the vHs peak, finally frustrating these types of symmetry breaking. These observations account qualitatively for the stabilization of the observed symmetric (conducting, no spin order) phase. Yet, the AFM ordered state, calculated to be most stable for the static lattice, remains inaccessible by experiment, hence evidently is higher in free energy than the conducting spin-disordered state. We propose that as temperature is lowered, NdNiO 2 approaches the AFM ordered phase but encounters its incipient instabilities with strong spin, charge, and lattice fluctuations that inhibit spin order and lattice distortion, thereby stabilizing the symmetric lattice. The result is to remain spin-disordered but with AFM correlations, i.e., incipient AFM order, that will reduce the spin free energy. This correlated spin liquid phase, the Sachdev-Read MQPM phase that has been proposed in another disordered moment superconductor 