Atomic manipulation and interface engineering techniques have provided a novel approach to custom-designing topological superconductors and the ensuing Majorana zero modes, representing a new paradigm for the realization of topological quantum computing and topologybased devices. Magnet-superconductor hybrid (MSH) systems have proven to be experimentally suitable to engineer topological superconductivity through the control of both the complex structure of its magnetic layer and the interface properties of the superconducting surface. Here, we demonstrate that two-dimensional MSH systems containing a magnetic skyrmion lattice provide an unprecedented ability to control the emergence of topological phases. By changing the skyrmion radius, which can be achieved experimentally through an external magnetic field, one can tune between different topological superconducting phases, allowing one to explore their unique properties and the transitions between them. In these MSH systems, Josephson scanning tunneling spectroscopy spatially visualizes one of the most crucial aspects underlying the emergence of topological superconductivity, the spatial structure of the induced spin-triplet correlations. The ability to create, control and manipulate topological superconducting phases is quintessential for the realization of topological quantum computing using the non-Abelian braiding statistics of Majorana zero modes In the following, we demonstrate that the ability to tune between topological phases can be achieved in 2D MSH systems containing a magnetic skyrmion lattice by varying the skyrmion radius. As the latter can be experimentally controlled through the application of an external magnetic field Theoretical Model. We investigate the emergence of topological superconductivity in a 2D MSH system, in which a magnetic skyrmion lattice (see Fig. where c † rα creates an electron at lattice site r with spin α, and σ is the vector of spin Pauli matrices. We consider a triangular lattice with lattice constant a 0 , chemical potential μ, and hopping amplitude -t rr = -t between nearest-neighbor sites only. ∆ is the superconducting swave order parameter. The spatial spin structure of the skyrmion lattice is encoded in S r [see Supplementary Information (SI) section 1], which represents the direction of an adatom's spin located at site r, and J is its exchange coupling with the conduction electron spin. Note that the creation of Majorana modes in single skyrmions has previously been discussed in Refs. To characterize the topological superconducting phases of the system, we compute the topological invariant -the Chern number C -given by where E n (k) and |Ψ n (k) are the eigenenergies and the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian in Eq.( yielding a skyrmion number n s = r n s (r). The latter, C(r) A crucial aspect for the emergence of topological superconductivity in 2D skyrmion MSH systems is that the magnetic skyrmion lattice induces an effective, spatially varying Rashba spin-orbit interaction. To demonstrate this, we apply a unitary transformation The phase diagram in the (μ, R) plane (see Fig. The inhomogeneous magnetic structure of the MSH system also allows us to reveal an intriguing connection between the Chern number density, C(r), which is a local marker for the topological nature of the system, and the Berry curvature in momentum space. In particular, the spatial structure of C(r) (see Fig. Gap closings can also occur at non-TRI points, e.g., at points along the Γ -M line (see SI section 3), which possess a multiplicity of m = 6, resulting in a change of the Chern number by ∆C = 6. While all of the above gap closings exhibit a Dirac cone (see Fig. MSH system with a skyrmion ribbon To study the emergence of chiral Majorana edge modes in a skyrmion MSH system, we next consider a skyrmion ribbon placed on the surface of an s-wave superconductor (see Fig. In addition to the chiral Majorana edge modes, the magnetic structure of the skyrmion ribbon leads to two unique physical features. The first one is the spatial form of persistent supercurrents that are induced by the broken time-reversal symmetry. While these supercurrents are generally confined to the edges of an MSH system Discussion MSH systems containing a magnetic skyrmion layer are suitable candidate systems to explore a rich topological phase diagram. By varying the skyrmion radius, which can be achieved through the application of an external magnetic field, it is possible to tune these systems between different topological phases, and explore not only their unique properties, but also the transitions between them. The origin of this tunability lies in the spatially inhomogeneous Rashba spin-orbit interaction, which is induced by the magnetic skyrmion lattice and which carries a spatial signature in the zero-energy LDOS that can be observed at a topological phase transition. Skyrmion MSH systems also provide a unique opportunity to employ Josephson scanning tunneling spectroscopy to visualize one of the most fundamental aspects underlying the emergence of topological superconductivity, the existence of induced spin-triplet superconducting correlations. This, in turn, yields a new experimental approach to identifying topological superconducting phases, a possibility that needs to be further explored in future studies. These results demonstrate that the tunability of the magnetic structure in MSH systems opens a new venue for the quantum engineering and exploration of topological superconductivity, and the ability to engineer Majorana zero modes and chiral Majorana edge modes. This raises the intriguing question of whether a tuning of topological phases, similar to the one discussed here, could also be achieved using other non-collinear magnetic structures where the projector P onto the occupied bands is given by P = α=occ. |ψ α ψ α | for a real-space N × N lattice. The c m 's are central finite difference coefficients for approximating the partial derivatives. The coefficients for positive m can be calculated by solving the following linear set of equations for c = (c 1 , . . . , c , i, j ∈ {1, ..., Q}. For negative m, we have c -m = -c m . We have taken the largest possible value of Q = N/2. C(r) as defined above thus represents the real-space analog of the Berry curvature F(k), and was previously introduced to discuss the topological phases of Chern insulators An alternative form of the Chern number density can be derived by realizing that the periodicity of the skyrmion lattice can be employed to rewrite the Hamiltonian of Eq.( Here, the primed sum runs over all locations of the unit cell of the skyrmion lattice, and Ψ † k , Ψ k are spinors in Nambu space, spin space, and positions r in the unit cell. Moreover, RBZ is the reduced Brillouin zone whose wave-vectors are defined via where M i (N i ) is the number of skyrmion unit cells (number of lattice sites) along the lattice vector a i defined via and b i are the reciprocal lattice vectors given by Finally, the fermionic operators are defined via where with N = N 1 N 2 , and L i is the length of the skyrmion unit cell (in units of a 0 ) along a i . In analogy to the calculation of the Chern number in Eq.( where E n (k) and |Ψ n (k) are the eigenenergies and eigenvectors of Ĥ(k), respectively, with n being a band index, and the summation is taken over Nambu and spin-space. In the topological phase diagram of the skyrmion MSH system, we observe two different types of gap closings. The first one occurs via a Dirac cone, with the Dirac point being located at (a) time-reversal invariant (TRI) Γ, M, K, K points in the Brillouin zone (an example of this is shown in Fig. and present the momentum dependence of C(k) in Fig. The second type of gap closing in the phase diagram (see black line labelled c in Fig. Section 4: Supercurrents in the skyrmion lattice The persistent supercurrent associated with the hopping of an electron with spin σ from site r s to a nearest neighbor site r s + δ can be computed via where -t is the spin-independent hopping parameter between sites r and r s + δ, and g r,a,< mn (r, r + δ, ω) are the (m, n) elements in Nambu space of the retarded, advanced, or lesser Green's function matrices. The Green's function matrix in Matsubara time is defined via where the spinors are defined via To obtain the above Greens functions for the system, we diagonalize the real space Hamiltonian in Eq.( Note that the energy eigenvalues come in pairs ±E k , and that the summation in the above equation runs over all eigenvalues. The elements (m, n) of the Greens function matrix used in Eq.(S17) is determined by the spin index σ with n = m = 1 for σ =↑, and n = m = 2 for σ =↓. The total supercurrent between neighboring sites is then given by and is presented in Fig. We are considering superconducting correlations between nearest-neighbor sites only, as would be expected, for example, for a triplet superconductor with a (p x + ip y )-wave symmetry. Similarly, the local spatial correlations in the superconducting spin-singlet channel with s-wave symmetry are obtained via The spatial form of the local superconducting correlations in the s-wave channel are shown in Fig. Here, the sums over r s , r s (r t , r t ) run over all sites in the system (the tip), with a non-zero tunneling amplitude t rt,rs (t r t ,r s ) between sites r s and r t (sites r t and r s ). Thus, the above equations for the critical Josephson currents are valid for an arbitrary number of sites in the tip. Moreover, we take the tunneling amplitude between sites to be the same for all sites, i.e., t rt,rs = t 0 if electrons can tunnel between site r t and r s . Note that all Greens functions in Eq.(S24) are anomalous, non-local Greens functions. Moreover, we assume that the 2-site JSTS tip is always perfectly aligned with the bond connecting two nearest-neighbor sites in the triangular lattice. Finally, the Josephson current is given by I J = I c sin(∆φ) where ∆φ is the spatially-invariant phase difference between the superconducting order parameters in the tip and the system. To compute the Greens function of the 2-site JSTS tip, we consider for simplicity the two cases where the triplet superconducting order parameter in the tip is either completely real or completely imaginary. Note that in an infinitely large square lattice with a (p x + ip y )-wave superconducting order parameter, such a change in the phase of the triplet superconducting order parameter can be achieved by rotating the lattice by π/2. To compute the non-local anomalous Greens function for the two sites at the tip end, we use g r,a nm (r t , r t , ω) = g < nm (r t , r t , ω) = -n F (ω) [g r nm (r t , r t , ω)g a nm (r t , r t , ω)] (S25b) where (k) = -2t(cos k x + cos k y )μ ; ∆(k) = -i ∆ 0 2 (sin k x + i sin k y ) (S26) with μ = -0.3t, ∆ 0 = 0.3t. The indices (n, m) denote the spin structure of the superconducting gap in the JSTS tip. For k i = k x , the superconducting order parameter along the bond of the 2-site tip is real, for k i = k y , it is imaginary. In Figs.4i and 4j of the main text, we denote these two cases by ∆ tip = ∆ p and ∆ tip = i∆ p , respectively. Our results imply that by changing the phase of the superconducting order parameter in the tip, we can probe the real and imaginary parts of the triplet superconducting correlations in the system. These results can be straightforwardly generalized to an arbitrary complex order parameter in the tip. In Figs. S2f and S2g we present the critical Josephson current in the |↓↓ channel for ∆ tip = i∆ p and ∆ tip = ∆ p , respectively, while in Figs. 