We report the fabrication of a low-cost, and highly reproducible large scale surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) substrate using an inkjet-printed Ag nanoparticle-ink (AgNI). The AgNI SERS substrates were evaluated for SERS using trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene (BPY) as a molecular probe. AgNI substrates significantly enhanced the SERS signals with the limit of detection of 1.8 × 10 -7 g/mL for BPY. The printed AgNI dot arrays exhibit an excellent SERS performance and reproducibility. The batch-to-batch and spot-to-spot standard deviation value of less than 10% was obtained. The results reveal the reproducibility of the AgNI SERS dot arrays and its potential application for SERS substrates. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) is the enormous enhancement of the Raman signal of the scattering molecules adsorbed onto metal surfaces under certain conditions. Inkjet printing is suitable for the large-area fabrication of SERS substrates where patterns can be formed in a single step. It is a simple fabrication process in which the ink is used for the printing of plasmonic patterns. Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to developing highly reproducible SERS substrates. Herein, we report a large-scale fabrication method of flexible, and highly reproducible Ag nano-ink (AgNI) SERS dot arrays substrates by employing an inkjet-printing method. The printed AgNI dot arrays exhibit an excellent SERS performance and reproducibility. A batch-to-batch and spot-tospot SD value of less than 10% has been obtained. The results demonstrate the reproducibility of the AgNI SERS dot arrays and its potential application in the field of trace detection. Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) were synthesized using oxalate-bridged silver amine complexes. After inkjet pattering, the PEN film was baked on the hotplate for 30 min at 150oC. The AgNPs are fused with each other by the sintering process, and then, conductive passes are formed in Ag layer. The thickness of the Ag layer was about 100 nm. The optical property of the AgNI dot arrays substrates were investigated using UV-Vis reflectance measurements. The reflectance spectra were collected using an Ocean Optics (USB4000) spectrometer. LambdaVision (RAM200, ) Raman spectrometer was used for the collection of SERS spectra. trans-1,2bis(4-pyridyl) ethylene (BPY, 99.9+%, Sigma) was used as the molecular probe for the SERS study. A 785 nm laser with a 50× objective and 15 mW power on the sample was used for the excitation with a spectral acquisition time of 1 s. The SERS measurements were performed at seven random spots on the substrate. All the measurements were performed at room temperature. A 10 μL droplet of BPY solution was released onto the AgNI substrates and allowed to dry prior to data acquisition. A scanning electron microscope (SEM; Hitachi High Tech. SU3800) with a LaB6 detector in the secondary electron mode operating at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV was used to conduct surface morphology analysis of the baked and unbaked samples. The UV-Vis reflectance spectroscopy shows a reflectance minima at around 420 nm, which is due to LSPR of AgNPs. The unbaked AgNI sample showed higher absorption around the LSPR wavelength and lower reflectance at long wavelengths suggesting a better LSPR performance. The overall reflectance of the AgNI increases after the baking process, and that maybe because of the more uniform distribution of the Ag. The SERS spectrum of the AgNI substrates was taken by dropping 10 μL of 10 -4 aqueous solution of BPY on the substrate. The SERS spectra of the bare PEN substrate, BPY on baked and unbaked AgNI samples are shown in Fig. The better SERS response of the unbaked AgNI is because AgNPs had a quasispherical shape with a high degree of uniformity. The SERS intensity of Raman probe is dependent on the size and shape of the nanoparticles on whicjh they are adsorbed. Batch-batch and spot-spot uniformity on the same sample are critical concerns for large scale SERS substrates fabrication. A common barrier to quantitative detection for the SERS substrates is spot-to-spot reproducibility of the signal. In summary, we fabricated a large scale highly reproducible inkjet-printed Ag nano ink SERS substrate. The minimum detection limit was 1.8 × 10 -7 g/mL for BPY molecules. The inkjet-printed AgNI sample displayed excellent reproducibility with batch-to-batch and spot-to-spot standard deviation of less than 10%. This study can result in large-scale production of flexible SERS substrates. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This work was supported by JST COI Grant Number JPMJCE.1307 and JPMJCE.1312