In this work, we have studied the effects from increasing the strength of the applied electric field on the charge transport of hydrogenated graphitic fibers. Resistivity measurements were carried out for direct currents in the nA -mA range and for temperatures from 1.9 K to 300 K. The high-temperature non-ohmic voltage-current dependence is well described by the nonlinear random resistor network model applied to systems that are disordered at all scales. The temperature-dependent resistivity shows linear, step-like transitions from insulating to metallic states as well as plateau features. As more current is being sourced, the fiber becomes more conductive and thus the current density goes up. The most interesting features is observed in high electric fields. As the fiber is cooled, the resistivity first decreases linearly with the temperature and then enters a plateau region at a temperature T ∼ 260 -280 K that is field-independent. These observations on a system made out of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen atoms suggest possible electric-field induced superconductivity with a high critical temperature that was predicted from studying the role of chirality on the origin of life The role played by pressure on the interlayer coupling effects leading to superconductivity (SC) is by now acknowledged and continues to be intensively explored. For instance, a two-band SC model based on a Ginzburg-Landau free energy with two order parameters can explain how chemical pressure effects can lead to the topological SC in MgB 2 Recently, flat band SC was found in bilayer graphene twisted at the magic angle 1.1 0 . The new method -twistronics -can be extended to other 2D correlated electronic states with potential for discovering similar SC materials Recently, several SC features were found for the O-implanted C fibers 3 A/cm 2 for silver (Ag)-doped graphene fibers 2 and the upper critical fields B c2 (0) are up to 25 T in the former In this study, we explore the effect of gradually increasing the amount of direct current on the transport properties of octane-intercalated PAN-derived carbon (C) fibers. Resistivity measurements are carried out in the temperature range 1.9 -300 K and for direct currents up to 14 mA. The nonlinear nature of the electrical conduction in these C fibers when sourced by high direct currents is analyzed using the Resistor Network (NRRN) model and the Dynamic Random Resistor Network (DRRN) model Temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T ) measurements are carried out using a Gifford-McMahon cryocooler, with the vacuum controlled by a Laser Analytics TCR compressor and a Pfeiffer turbo pump. The temperature stabilization is done by a LakeShore 340 Temperature Controller. Current-voltage (I -V ) measurements are carried out using a Keithley 2430 1 kW PULSE current-source meter and a Keithley 2183A Nanovoltmeter. Cryogenic grease [29] assures good thermal contact between the C fiber and the sapphire substrate. Based on known values for the thermal conductivity . When a few-mm long C fiber is sourced by I ∼ mA, ∆T ∼ 1 K. The effect of a residual resistance is eliminated by using the four-wire Van Der Pauw technique The temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T ) for raw C fibers is shown in Fig. While plateau regions in ρ(T ) were also found in closelypacked CNTs film formed by thermal decomposition on SiC and explained on the basis of the STB model A closer look at the I-dependent ρ(T ) curves in Fig. The transition at T ∼ 230 K is quite interesting, as firstprinciples calculations predict HTS in metallic H The percolative nature of the electrical conduction in the octane-intercalated C fiber is evident from the plot of the nonlocal conductance G dif f at T = 130 K (Fig. The phenomenon known as electrical percolation is wellknown to cause I-M transitions in disordered systems. The charge carriers in a semimetal, electrons and holes, percolate via regions that have a smaller excitation gap ∆E between the carriers ′ energy and the edge of either the valance band (for holes) or conduction band (for electrons) edge. Within the framework of the percolation theory, incremental variation in the number of interconnections present in a random system suddenly causes a long-range connectivity (clustering), resulting in the appearance of a sharp phase transition. The transition from localization to essentially infinite connectivity is similar to a second-order phase transition that can be treated using a scaling (geometrical) construct. Percolation is basically built into a binary system where the two components have occupied and unoccupied bonds, resulting in the extreme values in the electrical conductance. Of great advantage to finding a solution to the percolation model are two limiting cases: one is a M-I mixture corresponding to G 2 = 0 and the other one is a SC-normal conductor mixture corresponding to G 1 = ∞. If p is the volume fraction of either metal or SC, then the composite ′ s macroscopic conductance goes either from zero to a finite value or from a finite value to an infinite value above a percolation threshold p c , respectively. The common framework where the percolation phenomenon can be applied to both the I-M and normal-SC transitions suggests the quite entrancing application of the percolation model to the C fibers in this study. The two models used to quantify the physical processes driving the system to a percolative I-M transition are the Nonlinear Random Resistor Network (NRRN) model and the Dynamic Random Resistor Network (DRRN) model One important quantity characterizing the electronic transport through wires, in this case the C fibers, is the current density J. Solving V (I) = r 1 Ir 2 I α for I, we find that V = 0 (except for I = 0) for I = 0.4 A and I = 0.1 A for the two octane-intercalated C fibers denoted here by S1 and S2, respectively. The observed nonlinear electrical conduction results in decreasing ρ with increasing the sourced current density J = I/S, as Fig. The I(V ) data for T = 130 K plotted as nonlocal differential conductance G dif f = dI/dV (Fig. At larger voltages, G dif f has a monotonic increase due to percolative conduction. As known, G dif f shows minima at voltages Γ/ |e| (e is the electron's charge), where Γ < ∆ < G, with Γ the exciton superconducting gap, ∆ the superconducting gap, and G the overlap band gap In this work, we have studied the effects of stepping up the strength of the applied electric field on the charge transport of hydrogenated graphitic fibers. We have found that the conduction has a percolative nature that is better described by the NRRN model than by the DRRN model, suggesting that the fiber is nonlinear at all scales, possibly benefiting the occurrence of SC fluctuations in this graphitic system. The percolation model was recently applied to cuprates, where it was found that the superconducting precursor is strongly affected by intrinsic inhomogeneity We believe that this work is contributing to the growing evidence of SC located at graphite interfaces, in particular after the samples were brought in contact with alkanes The I-M transition at T ∼ 260 -280 K might be related to chirality, perhaps the most fundamental property in nature. Owning to the presence of spin carrying protons H + introduced by the intercalation with an alkane, it is possible that the octane-intercalated C fiber is a chiral ferromagnetic SC. This leads us to a much relevant connection. The molecules of life, the DNA and RNA, are chiral and their liquid crystal nature has been researched Hydrates-based SC in microtubules could be responsible for quantum processing of information, such that the unprecedented computational power of the brain might actually come from its superconducting nature 