There is renewed interest in using advanced techniques to characterize ancient Roman concrete due to its exceptional durability and low-carbon footprint. In the present work, samples were drilled from the "Hospitium" in Pompeii and were analyzed by synchrotron microtomography (μCT) and neutron radiography to study how the microstructure, including the presence of induced cracks, affects their water adsorption. The water distribution and absorptivity were quantified by neutron radiography. The 3D crack propagation, pore size distribution and orientation, tortuosity, and connectivity were analyzed from μCT results using advanced imaging methods. Porosity was also measured by mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) as a reference. Ductile fracture patterns were observed once cracks were introduced. Compared to Portland cement mortar/concrete, the Pompeii samples had relatively high porosity, low connectivity, and a similar coefficient of capillary penetration. In addition, permeability was predicted from models based on percolation theory and pore structure data to evaluate the fluid transport properties. Understanding the microstructure of ancient Pompeii concrete is important because it could inspire the development of modern concrete with high durability. The desire to extend the life cycle of modern concrete infrastructure and to reduce its lifespan carbon footprint has instigated renewed interest in determining the reasons for the long-term durability of ancient Roman concrete. The production of ancient Roman concrete, which was made of volcanic ash, lime, water and volcanic rocks, has a lower carbon footprint than the production of Portland cement concrete, which is responsible for ~5% of global anthropogenic CO2 emissions State-of-the-art techniques that were developed to study high-performance materials have recently been used to characterize the composition and microstructure of various ancient Roman concrete samples. Synchrotron radiation methods have been especially successful in providing new insights into the complex micro-and nanostructure of ancient Roman concrete. The use of high-pressure X-ray diffraction has provided information about the mechanical behavior of Al-tobermorite, which forms in ancient Roman seawater concrete, while soft X-ray nanotomography has allowed for mathematical morphology quantification of the clusters of Al-tobermorite nanocrystals Using synchrotron high-resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD), Vanorio and Kanitpanyacharoen There is a consensus that the lack of concrete durability is associated with the penetration of water, and concrete often contains deleterious species. This deterioration is exacerbated by the presence of cracks, which provide a faster pathway for the ingress of water. Jackson et al. Currently, approximately 49 of the 66 hectares of Pompeii have been excavated. In 1858, the Archeologist Giuseppe Fiorelli The Hospitium building, excavated in 1872, has an area of approximately 600 square meters and is delimited to the North by a shop (street n.4), to the South by an old "popina" (Roman wine bar/tavern frequented by the lower classes and slaves, where a limited menu of simple foods and wines was available, street n. 2), to the East by "Via Stabiana" and to the West by a nonpaved alley. The ground floor had a large stable and spacious "latrina"; the first floor, most likely accessible through a staircase, was covered and composed of only bedrooms. All mortar samples were carefully collected at a depth of approximately 50 mm on both lateral sides of the building walls and pillars to avoid weathering of any type. A small core drill was employed for extracting larger samples from the walls of the house, and both a hammer and a small chisel were used for collecting the bedding mortars between bricks. A series of experiments (see Fig. Three mortar fragments were investigated with mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP). The porosity measurements were performed using a Thermo-Finnigan Pascal 240 Series Mercury Porosimeter (maximum pressure, 200 MPa) equipped with a low-pressure unit (140 Series) that could generate a high vacuum level Neutron imaging experiments were performed at the Materials and Life Sciences (MLF) Facility at the Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex J-PARC. The pulsed neutron beam at this spallation neutron source operated at 25 Hz neutron pulse frequency and allowed the measurement of neutron transmission spectra in every pixel of the images. More than 250,000 transmission spectra were measured in the experiments simultaneously, each within 55 μm pixels of the 512x512 neutron counting detector. A fast neutron counting detector with microchannel plates (MCPs) and Timepix readout with an active area of 28x28 mm 2 , built at the University of California at Berkeley in collaboration with Nova Scientific, was used for the energy-resolved neutron radiography measurements The analysis of these neutron transmission spectra allowed quantitative mapping of the water distribution in asextracted concrete samples as well as investigation of the dynamics of water penetration in as-extracted and cracked samples. More details on the reconstruction of water concentration in concrete samples are described in Synchrotron μCT was performed at beamline 8.3.2 at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory During a scan, the sample was mounted on the circular holder and was rotated about an axis perpendicular to the horizontal plane over 180°, and 1969 2D radiographs in total were obtained. Each projection was acquired on a 2560 px CCD camera (PCO edge) equipped with an 8.3 mm field of view and a 1x Mitutoyo magnification optical objective lens with a spatial resolution of 9.5 μm. To improve the phase contrast and achieve better image quality, an exposure time of 15 ms per projection was used to keep the transmission ratio of the beam below 40% based on the Beamline 8.3.2 Manual. After each scan, a 3D data volume (tomogram) was reconstructed from the 2D radiographs using the filtered back projection algorithm on TomoPy GB for each stack) were obtained for analysis. To conduct a systematic investigation of the sample microstructure and combine neutron radiography images, we built a new pipeline (Fig. Image preprocessing was performed on Fiji Image segmentation is the most crucial step for the quantitative analysis of 3D μCT. To obtain the morphological representation of specific phase systems (e.g., the porous system in concrete) and conduct further statistical analysis (e.g., pore size distribution), a segmentation process is commonly implemented to separate images into discrete phases (e.g., pore phase, aggregate phase, and matrix phase in concrete). Local and global grayscale thresholding are the most commonly applied approaches for CT of concrete Recently, machine learning (ML) algorithms have been successfully applied to the segmentation of structures with X-ray μCT images of mineralogical samples. Shipman et al. [29] estimated the 2D mineral map and its associated liberation spectrum of a particular chromite sample by using random forest classification. These ML classifiers are robust, automatic, and multifeature based. For the combination of extracting multiple image features from the raw data and applying ML image segmentation algorithms, the Trainable Weka Segmentation Tool After the feature selection, different regions (the most obvious objects that corresponded to the target phases) in the training images were annotated as target phases, which constructed the training data set. Five phases were separated from each other in the μCT of concrete: background, supporting stage for the test, aggregate, matrix, and pore. Cracks were included in the pore phases. Different classifiers were trained using the selected features and training data set as a preliminary step. Based on the initial segmentation results on the training data set, more annotations were added to the misclassified regions, and the classifiers were retrained and tuned until satisfactory segmentation results (testing pixel accuracy above 90% for each phase) were obtained. After evaluating the trained models, the most suitable ML classifier was selected based on the segmentation results. The random forest classifier, proposed by Tin Kam Ho Therefore, the random forest classifier was selected and applied to the μCT dataset of DP and WP. Fig. Separating intrinsic voids and introduced cracks from 3D μCT with high accuracy depends upon image segmentation algorithms In this study, the displacement fields were measured when discretized over a finite element mesh made of 8node cubes (C8) 3D pore network information is essential to assess the physicochemical properties of concrete, such as mechanical strength and permeability. 3D pore morphology and statistical analysis were conducted on segmented pore phase images (binary images). More accurately, the pore size distribution, porosity, pore area distribution along the Z-axis, aspect ratio, pore connectivity, connectivity density, and tortuosity were characterized based on 3D segmented images of the pore phase. The 3D discrete pore size distribution (DPSD) and continuous pore size distribution (CPSD) were computed similarly to the work by Münch et al. for pore analysis Porosity is defined as the percentage of pore voxels in the volume of interest (VOI). The cross-sectional areas of the pores and cracks along the height (Z-axis) were calculated from 3D binary images of the pore phase to associate the water absorption results from neutron radiography. Voxel connectivity analysis was performed based on a 6-connected voxel criterion, which means voxels are considered connected to form the "cluster/object" when the voxels share a common face with each other (pores are usually made of at least two voxels). Then, the pore objects (clusters) were used to characterize the aspect ratio, pore connectivity, and connectivity density. To describe the morphology of pore objects in 3D, the aspect ratio (elongation) of each individual 3D pore object is defined as the ratio between the smallest eigenvalue and the largest eigenvalue for the inertia eigenvectors, where inertia eigenvalues and eigenvectors are calculated from the inertia tensor (equivalent ellipsoid) of the 3D pore object. Therefore, the aspect ratio ranges between 0 and 1, where a value of 1 corresponds to a sphere. Both pore connectivity and connectivity density indicate the degree of connectivity in the pore network, but their definitions are different. Pore connectivity (expressed in %) is defined as the number of void voxels in the largest percolating pore object (cluster) divided by the total number of voxels attributed to pores in the VOI In comparison, the measurement of connectivity density required further computations with the BoneJ plugin The reproducibility of mercury porosimetry measurements among the three replicates was successful; in fact, the greatest total porosity value was 36.2%, while the lowest was 34.5%, which corresponds to a total cumulative intruded Hg volume equal to 248.4 and 217.7 mm 3 /g, respectively. As an example, Fig. The direct 3D renderings of reconstructed tomograms (Fig. Pore radius, nm uncracked DP, (f) pore phase of cracked DP, (g) matrix phase of uncracked DP, (h) matrix phase of cracked DP. Note that all of the scale bars represent the grayscale, and the segmented phase images are binary. DVC analysis provides both a qualitative understanding of the complex 3D fracture patterns and a quantitative evaluation of the damage. The 3D displacement maps, major principal strain field, and residual error field (Fig. From the visualization of the 3D fracture pattern (Fig. A more detailed cracking pattern analysis is conducted through 3D connectivity calculations for the pores and cracks. The segmented images of the pore phase were imported as ROI files into Dragonfly. Object analysis statistics were performed to calculate the volume, volume diameter, porosity, and pore (network) connectivity, as shown in Table [62], the model's result means that the permeability is smaller than 1-2x10 -13 m 2 . The comparison of pore structures between ancient Pompeii concrete and modern Portland cement paste/concrete is discussed in section 3.4. After introducing cracks, both DP and WP samples have only a minor increase (< 0.5%) in porosity and a minor decrease in tortuosity but a significant increase (~10%) in pore connectivity. Because of the low pore connectivity without the largest pore cluster in cracked samples, this result suggests that the volume of the introduced cracks is small. Note that percolating pore networks are observed only after introducing cracks, which suggests that the detected percolating pore networks in the cracked samples are composed of both initial large pores and, most importantly, introduced cracks. Multiple pores that range from 0 to 30 mm 3 (i.e., 0 to 1.9 mm if the pores are assumed to be perfectly spherical) within this area are connected by this macrocrack, which significantly increases the connectivity of the pores (from 9.37% to 21.22% for DP) and the water penetration rate within this area. However, the majority of large pore objects outside this area preserve their volume, and the connectivity is weak because the pore connectivity without the largest pore for the cracked DP sample is very low (only 13.3% of the total porosity). This result means that the water penetration rate outside the fracture zone would not vary significantly when the cracks are introduced. Similar results can be observed for the WP sample when comparing (d) and (c). The difference between DP and WP is that the major macrocrack of WP has a larger volume and connects more pores than that in DP. Therefore, the water penetration in cracked WP should be faster than in cracked DP. Figs. The discrete pore size histograms in DP and WP for both uncracked and cracked states are statistically shown in Fig. samples disappeared as individual objects and were replaced by much larger pores (diameter > 6 mm). The visualization results in Fig. the PSD and usually exaggerates the diameter of the pore volume, especially the large connected pore volume, yet it provides insight on pore volume repartition as a first approach. The 3D CPSD accounts for the ability of a fluid to access a complex pore shape of a given size and avoids the "ink bottle effect", as with MIP volume fraction of the elongated pores with a peak aspect ratio of 0.4 increased from ~2% (23% of the total porosity) to ~3% (35% of the total porosity). The volume fractions of pores that have aspect ratios close to 1 decreased after introducing cracks into both DP and WP. The above results indicate that the pores become connected by the introduced cracks and merge into more elongated pore networks, considering the small variance in the porosity. The range of neutron energies that can be used for water quantification is checked by analyzing narrowwavelength spectra individually (instead of fitting the entire transmission spectrum). Such an analysis, in most cases, cannot be conducted for each individual pixel because neutron statistics per pixel per narrow wavelength range are rather limited. However, to check the linearity of water quantification, the pixels are grouped within a given region, as was done over the ~2x2 mm 2 areas for the results shown in Fig. Neutron images were taken at constant interval times (typically multiple times per second) from the beginning of the water absorption experiments; thus, the process of water absorption of the DP sample before (Fig. , the total areas of the pore phase along the height are calculated based on the μCT image segmentation results. The water level (absorption depth) h, as a function of time t, can be predicted for ideal capillary absorption by means of Eq. 1. (Note the limitation for h: at a certain height, the water column gravity will equalize the capillary force, and the water level will stop rising). where B is the coefficient of capillary penetration (sorptivity). In Fig. The dynamic water absorption experiment on the uncracked WP was not conducted since the sample was originally wet. After a first neutron radiography test (to obtain a reference state), the uncracked WP was scanned using μCT and dried out. Then, cracks were introduced into the WP sample. The dynamic water absorption experiment was conducted on an initially dry cracked WP. X-ray microtomography The porosity of the paste alone for the ancient Pompeii sample was calculated from segmented μCT images. The porosity of ancient Pompeii paste was defined as the volume of pores surrounded by paste (matrix) divided by the sum of the paste (matrix) volume and the volume of pores surrounded by paste (matrix). On the other hand, the aggregate phase and pore phase within the aggregates were not counted for the calculation of paste porosity. To separate the aggregates and pores within the aggregates from the objects of other phases (matrix and pore connected to matrix), the voxels of pores surrounded by the aggregates merged into the voxels of surrounding aggregates using the hole-filling algorithm in Fiji. Then, the voxels of the merged aggregated phase were deleted from the whole segmented dataset, and only the voxels of the paste (matrix) phase and the voxels of the pore connected to the paste (matrix) phase were left to calculate the porosity in the paste. As shown in Table Both MIP and microtomography were used to measure the porosity values in this research, but they are not comparable. MIP measured pores with sizes of 4 nm -10 microns, while microtomography characterized pores with diameters larger than 19 microns (voxel size of 9.5 microns). From the MIP results, the total porosity of ancient Pompeii samples ranged from 34.5% to 36.2%. In comparison, the porosity of the DP sample from microtomography is 8.86%. This result is consistent with other studies in that microtomography provides only partial quantification of the pore system of concrete The capillary penetration coefficient B is related to a critical pore size d $ by the Washburn equation: where γ is the interface surface tension, η is the dynamic viscosity, and φ is the contact angle. For undamaged ancient Pompeii concrete, critical pore sizes d $ , which correspond to the measured penetration coefficients B, are on the order of 2.6-8.2 nm (Table Table Assuming that at room temperature (25 °C), the water/cement/air interface surface tension γ is 66 mN/m the dynamic viscosity η of water is 0.89 mPa.s, and cos (φ) is 1 (water is a perfectly wetting fluid) In a first approach, a 1D Katz-Thompson equation (3) This formula yields the values in Table For cracked Pompeii concrete, however, Poiseuille's law (Eq. 4, where h /,-is the minimum width of the percolating pore/crack) Integrated synchrotron X-ray μCT and neutron radiography with computer vision analysis is a powerful nondestructive testing method for conducting a systematic investigation of the complex concrete microstructure and the dynamics of water penetration. Synchrotron X-ray microtomography provides high-resolution 3D microtomography images with a broad field of view. After the reconstruction of the μCT image, machine learning-based image segmentation methods and DVC analysis acquired both qualitative and quantitative microstructural information from the ancient Pompeii concrete samples. An innovative pipeline was developed to process the associated large datasets autonomously and accurately. Segmented pore and aggregate phases were visualized in 3D rendering. Multiple microcrack and macrocrack propagations, and a wider dispersion of cracks in both dry and wet Pompeii samples were observed, which presented a stable and ductile fracture pattern. 3D morphological and statistical microstructure analysis from the accurate segmented microtomography image provided 3D pore network information, such as porosity, pore size distribution, and pore connectivity, which explain the differences in the water uptake rates at different mesostructural regions in dynamic neutron radiography experiments. The experimental results show that the water penetration rate depends highly on the local microstructure, such as the regional pore connectivity, and the presence of cracks, while it depends less on global microstructural information, such as global porosity. For uncracked ancient Pompeii samples, the water capillary penetration coefficients (1.67 and 3.02 mm/min 1/2 ) in the dry and wet samples, respectively, are both comparable to modern PC paste/concrete (which range from 0.39 to 2.38 mm/min 1/2 ). At the same time, ancient Pompeii concrete (8.86% and 18.22% for dry and wet samples, respectively, based on microtomography and a range of 34.5% to 36.2% based on MIP) is more porous than modern PC paste/concrete (W/C = 0.5, with a range from 1.28% to 6.50% based on microtomography and a range from 27% to 31% based on MIP The high durability of porous ancient Pompeii concrete benefits from the ductile fracture pattern and low connectivity in the pore network. Integrated synchrotron X-ray microtomography and neutron radiography with computer vision analysis is a step forward in the understanding of the durability of ancient Pompeii concrete and other complex cement materials.