The discovery of topological insulators and semimetals has opened up a new perspective to understand materials. Owing to the special band structure and enlarged Berry curvature, the linear responses are strongly enhanced in topological materials. The interplay of topological band structure and symmetries plays a crucial role for designing new materials with strong and exotic new electromagnetic responses and provides promising mechanisms and new materials for the next generation of technological applications. We review the fundamental concept of linear responses in topological materials from the symmetry point of view and discuss their potential applications. After the discovery of topological insulators (TIs) The interplay between electromagnetic response theory and symmetry breaking is another crucial part for the understanding of transport properties in quantum materials. Materials with strong or quantum electromagnetic response have an extensive impact on the development of data storage, information processing, energy conversion, etc. Topological band structures characterized by band inversion, linear band crossings, and band anti-crossings with different topological charges can strongly enhance the electromagnetic responses, and even lead to quantized response effects in some special situations. Since the perturbation from external fields can change the symmetry of a system, the electromagnetic response effects also offer an effective way to manipulate the topological states and, in turn, to control the information processing. The electromagnetic response can be understood from the perturbation approximation with different orders of the perturbation series. In electrical transport, the higher order responses are normally much smaller than the linear response term. Therefore, most of the electromagnetic responses can be understood in the linear response region, especially the different types of the Hall effect in topological materials. However, in some special situations, the linear response term is forbidden by the symmetry of the system. Consequently, the higher order response effect will dominate in these cases, although the signal is normally very weak and not easy to detect experimentally. In this paper, we give a review of electromagnetic responses in topological materials in the linear response region. In the linear response approximation, the change of an observable Â with respect to an external field F = BF can be evaluated via a linear response as with the linear response tensor where n and m are the band indices. In a periodic system, the eigenstates and eigenvalues are labeled by band index and momentum k as |n, k and E n,k , respectively. In electrical transport, we are interested in the linear response with respect to an external electric field, which means F = eE r. By using the commutation relation v = i [ Ĥ, r], one can transform the position operator to the velocity operator and the position operator matrix can be replaced by With this replacement, one arrives at the commonly used form of the linear response tensor The linear response tensor can be further separated into inter-band and intra-band contributions. This separation is essential for the study of topological materials. For the inter-band part, because ε → 0, one can easily get For the intra-band contribution, it becomes the Boltzmann formula with the constant relaxation time approximation (ε = /τ ) [41] The relaxation time for the intra-band contribution is hard to estimate correctly, therefore it is not easy to give an accurate theoretical evaluation. Nevertheless, one can use it to estimate the response qualitatively, which is especially important for the symmetry analysis. In contrast, the inter-band part is easier to deal with in theory and numerical calculations. It can be accurately predicted in real materials as long as the electronic band structure is accurate enough. In particular, when we are interested in electrical current, the intrinsic part is just the Berry phase of the electronic band structure. Hence, the inter-band part plays a crucial role in topological materials. Considering the observable Â as electrical current density Â = -ev/V , the inter-band part of linear response tensor for each separated k-point becomes the so-called Berry curvature and the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) is dependent on the integral of the Berry curvature over the whole Brillouin zone (BZ). Because the Berry curvature is odd with respect to time reversal symmetry, the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) can only exist in magnetic systems in the linear response approximation. The AHE was first observed in 1879 by E. H. Hall in two-dimensional ferromagnetic systems In topological materials, owing to the special band structure, the local Berry curvature is strongly enhanced, and the AHE is dominated by the intrinsic contribution. The extreme example is the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE), where only intrinsic contributions exist, with a quantized transverse anomalous Hall conductance in quanta of e 2 /h and zero longitudinal resistance An effective model for the QAHE can be described by a 2×2 nodal line band structure where σ i are the Pauli matrices and ). Because this model includes a mirror symmetry with respect to x -y plane, the band structure forms a nodal loop in the absence of SOC, as presented in Figure A stack of 2D QAHE systems was proposed to be an effective way to obtain magnetic Weyl semimetals (WSMs) with the QAHE in its 3D version The peak value of the anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) lies at the energy of the pair of Weyl points (Figure From the symmetry point of view, the AHE in ferromagnets is easy to understand due to the net magnetization, and the important insight is that the special topological band structure can enhance the signal dramatically. However, for a long time, it was believed that the AHE cannot exist in antiferromagnets (AFMs), because the measured Hall resistivity normally follows ρ Hall = R 0 μ 0 H + (αρ 2 xx + βρ xx ), where the fist term is the ordinary Hall from the Lorentz force and the second term is the anomalous component from extrinsic scattering and intrinsic contributions. Because the intrinsic contribution can be understood from the integral of the Berry curvature in k space, and the Berry curvature is odd with respect to time reversal symmetry, the AHE can only exist in systems with broken time reversal symmetry. In most collinear AFMs, although the time reversal symmetry T is broken, it is possible to find a combined symmetry of T and a space group operation Ô, which is preserved in the system and still reverses the sign of Berry curvature. Therefore, the AHE is forced to zero in these systems. However, such joint symmetry T Ô does not necessarily exist in all AFM systems. Two counter-examples are non-collinear AFMs and compensated ferrimagnets. The existence of an AHE in AFMs was first proposed by R. Shindou and N. Nagaosa in 2001 by predicting a non-zero AHE in non-coplanar AFM face-centered-cubic lattices via Berry curvature analysis Recently, it was found that the AHE in Mn 3 Ge and Mn 3 Sn is strongly dependent on the symmetry of the magnetic structure and the topological band structure Apart from a non-collinear magnetic structure, the combined symmetry that reverses the sign of the Berry curvature can also be broken in collinear magnetic structure with zero net moment. As presented in Figure In the above sections, we only focus on the AHE in bulk crystals. However, in microelectronic applications, thin films are used most of the time. When discussing thin films from a theory point of view, one has to distinguish between two cases: On the one hand, the film can be above a certain thickness threshold and behave as the bulk system. On the other hand, the film can be of very small thickness. In this case, the bulk picture is not longer valid and extrinsic effects are more pronounced. The thickness threshold is a material dependent value, e.g., ≈80 nm in Co 2 MnGa When the film thickness is below the threshold value, surface effects get stronger compared to the bulk properties. This can lead to a larger extrinsic contribution to the AHE due to enhanced scattering at the surfaces. Depending on the sign of the extrinsic part with respect to the intrinsic one, this can either enhance or decrease the intrinsic AHE Apart from the AHE, there is also the corresponding thermoelectric effect, the anomalous Nernst effect (ANE), which can be utilized for measurements of Berry phase effects in band structures. In the ANE, a transverse electrical current in magnetic materials is generated by an applied longitudinal temperature gradient, instead of an electric field Although AHE and ANE share the same symmetry and both can be understood from the Berry curvature, their dependence on the Berry curvature is different Similar to other thermoelectric signals, the ANE is more sensitive to the first derivative of the electrical characteristics with respect to energy, rather than to the value itself. As discussed above, the AHC shows a peak value at the energy of the Weyl points in high symmetric WSMs due to the big contribution from the Weyl points. In contrast to that, the ANC is zero at the energy of the Weyl points (see Figure Because the Berry curvature is odd with respect to the time reversal operation, the AHE can only exist in magnetic systems. However, although the AHE is forbidden, the spin Hall effect (SHE) is allowed in time reversal symmetric systems. In the SHE, a transversal spin current is generated by an applied longitudinal spin current due to the SOC [91-94] (see Figure The extrinsic SHE was proposed by M. I. Dyakonov and V. I. Perel in 1971 Here, the SHC tensor σ k ij describes a spin current along i with spin polarization along k and an applied field in the j direction. Because the AHC and SHC share a similar formalism, the linear band crossings and anti-crossings can also generate strong local spin Berry curvature in both magnetic and nonmagnetic systems. Additionally, because the SHE originates from the SOC, a strong intrinsic SHE is expected in both TI and topological metals. In SHE experiments, apart from the SHC, there is another important parameter, the spin Hall angle (SHA). It represents the efficiency of conversion from charge current to spin current. Thus far, there are mainly two approaches for SHE materials: one is based on heavy transition metals The relationship between AHE and ANE can also be transferred to spin current generation. In addition to SHE where the driving force is an electric field, a spin current can also be generated by a temperature gradient, which is known as the spin Nernst effect (SNE) , where α k ij is the linear response tensor of the spin Nernst conductivity (SNC). Very recently, the SNE was observed in heavy transition metals in thermoelectric transport measurements Because the SNE shares similar mechanisms with the ANE, only with different symmetry requirements, a strong SNE is also expected in topological materials. Figure Further breaking inversion symmetry in magnetic materials, one can have another linear response effect to control the magnetization orientation by electrical current Utilizing the inverse spin-galvanic effect in a non-centrosymmetric magnetic system, the non-equilibrium spin polarization will interact via exchange-coupling with the magnetization and acts as an effective field. This effective field originates from the spin-orbit coupling and can generate torques on the magnetic moments, which allows the control of the magnetic states by an electric field. Therefore, it is called spin-orbit torque (SOT). Most SOT studies have focused on ferromagnetic systems where the inversion symmetry is broken by either the bulk crystal unit cell CuMnAs can exist in both orthorhombic and tetragonal crystal structures in experiments 