The outstanding demonstration of quantum confinement in Si nanocrystals (Si NC) in a SiC matrix requires the fabrication of Si NC with a narrow size distribution. It is understood without controversy that this fabrication is a difficult exercise and that a multilayer (ML) structure is suitable for such fabrication only in a narrow parameter range. This parameter range is sought by varying both the stoichiometric SiC barrier thickness and the Si-rich SiC well thickness between 3 nm and 9 nm and comparing them to single layers (SL). The samples processed for this investigation were deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and subsequently subjected to thermal annealing at 1000-1100°C for crystal formation. Bulk information about the entire sample area and depth were obtained by structural and optical characterization methods: information about the mean Si NC size was determined from grazing incidence xray diffraction (GIXRD) measurements. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was applied to gain insight into the structure of the Si-C network, and spectrophotometry measurements were performed to investigate the absorption coefficient and to estimate the bandgap E04. All measurements showed that the influence of the ML structure on the Si NC size, on the Si-C network and on the absorption properties is subordinate to the influence of the overall Si content in the samples, which we identified as the key parameter for the structural and optical properties. We attribute this behavior to interdiffusion of the barrier and well layers. Because the produced Si NC are within the target size range of 2-4 nm for all layer thickness variations, we propose to use the Si content to adjust the Si NC size in future experiments. In the field of photovoltaic research and development, much work is devoted to efficiency enhancement and cost reduction. One promising route to address both issues is the development of tandem solar cells that consist of two or more stacked single cells. These single cells must exhibit decreasing bandgaps from the illuminated side to the rear side to convert different wavelength ranges of the solar spectrum, minimizing thermalization and transmission losses Löper et al. Alternating layers of stoichiometric SiC barrier layer (SiC) and Si rich SiC well layer (SRC) with thicknesses in the range of 1-10 nm are deposited. During the subsequent annealing step, phase separation and Si NC formation are expected to occur in the SRC sublayers, while the SiC sublayer should serve as a diffusion barrier. The ML approach is known to work very well for Si NC size control in SiO2 Two types of substrates were used for layer deposition: 250 μm thick p-type FZ silicon, (100)-oriented with a resistivity of 10 Ωcm for GIXRD and FTIR measurements, and 1 mm thick fused silica (Suprasil®1) for spectrophotometry measurements. Both types of substrates were cleaned in hot HNO3 and dilute HF before film deposition. The fused silica was subjected to an additional cleaning step of hot HCl/H2O2 solution followed by a second HF etching step before film deposition. All ML and SL used in this work were deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) conducted in a Roth&Rau AK400 reactor. The pressure during deposition was kept at 0.3 mbar and the substrate temperature at 270°C. The plasma frequency was 13.56 MHz, and the plasma power density was 100 mW/cm2. The variation of the gas fluxes of SiH4, CH4 and H2 allows the deposition of hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbide (a-SixC1-x:H) with varying stoichiometry. The three different layer compositions used in this work were determined by Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry with an accuracy of 1% GIXRD patterns were recorded using a Philips X'Pert MRD system equipped with a CuKα x-ray (λ = 0.154 nm) source. The angle of incidence was set to ω = 0.3° (for maximum intensity), and 2θ was varied between 10° and 90°. All patterns were background-corrected by subtracting an exponential decay function. The Si(111) peak at 28.4° and the SiC(111) peak at 35.7° were fitted by a Lorentz function, and their full width at half maximum FWHM was used to determine the mean grain size L of the Si and SiC NC by means of the Scherrer equation: where θ is the diffraction angle of the analyzed reflection, λ is the x-ray wavelength and K is a form factor, which is 0.9 for spherical crystals in the cubic crystal system FTIR spectroscopy was conducted in the range of 400 cm -1 to 4000 cm -1 with 6 cm -1 resolution using a Bruker IFS 113v instrument on layers processed on Si substrates. To remove the absorbance signal of the Si substrate, a reference substrate was measured under identical optical conditions, and its signal was subtracted from the absorbance of all samples. Then, the absorption coefficient (α(ν)) spectra were calculated from the measured absorbance B(ν) with the help of the sample thickness d by the following relation: The main mode of all FTIR spectra is the Si-C stretching vibration at approximately 800 cm references therein). To gain further information from FTIR measurements beyond the identification of the vibration modes, accurate peak fitting and a careful interpretation of the results is needed. The FTIR peak fitting was performed by the following routine. First the background was fitted by a higher-order polynomial and subtracted manually. Because there is, to the authors' knowledge, no analytical approach to FTIR background correction, this process was deemed more reliable than an automated background correction routine. As a second step, the Si-C mode approximately 800 cm -1 where A L (A G ) is the area of the peak, ν L (ν G ) is the peak position, and w L (w G ) is the FWHM of the Lorentz (Gaussian) peak. The fitting parameters give the following information about the network in the samples. The peak position ν 0 indicates which vibration modes and hence which bonds are present in the network. In contrast to FTIR analysis of gases, there are no free vibrating molecules in solid-state samples, which is why the surrounding network influences every vibration mode. As a result, every change in the bonding network will be detected by a shift of the peak position of the Si-C vibration mode. The peak area A is proportional to the bond density of the corresponding absorption mode The proportionality constant Q i can be determined experimentally. In the literature, the integration over α(ν) ν and the determination of the proportionality constant K Si-C constitute a more common approach, giving the following: Based on a given K Si-C , the corresponding Q Si-C can be estimated by Q Si-C ≈ K Si-C ν 0 ⁄ . In the literature, the ratio is often used to estimate the crystalline fraction of the Si-C phase The reflection and transmission (R&T) of the samples in the UV-Vis wavelength range (250-1000 nm) were measured using a Varian Cary 500i photo spectrometer with an Ulbricht sphere. If the sample thickness d is known, the absorption coefficient α can be calculated from R&T measurements by means of the following relation: For the determination of the absorption coefficient from FTIR and spectrophotometry, it is crucial to know the exact layer thickness. To determine the annealed SRC SL and ML film thicknesses on Si, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was applied on cross section images. The instrument used was a Hitachi SU70 with a cold trap, operated at 5-6 kV accelerating voltage and a working distance of 4-6 mm. (iii) The thickness of annealed SRC SL and ML films on quartz was calculated from R&T measurements using the software OPTICAL The GIXRD patterns of the ML stacks with a thickness variation of SRC and SiC sublayers and an annealing of 1000°C for 60 min are shown in Figure A possible explanation for this behavior is a strong intermixing of the SiC and SRC sublayers, leading to a homogenous distribution of the excess Si throughout the sample. In principle, intermixing seems possible because the estimation of a lower limit for the diffusion coefficient of Si in SiC (DSi) during the growth of SiC by carbonization of Si from Cimalla et al. We checked the assumption of intermixing experimentally by plotting the Si NC size as a function of the overall Si content in at% (Si(at%)) in Figure n Si (ML) + n SiC (ML) . ( In addition to the ML already shown in Figure were also taken into account. The continuous increase in Si NC size with overall Si content, regardless of the precursor layer structure, supports the assumption of strong sublayer intermixing. To obtain further insight into whether the properties of the layers are a function of sublayer thickness variation or of overall Si content or both, a detailed FTIR investigation of the Si-C network was performed. In Figure This FTIR peak fitting was performed for the same samples analyzed by GIXRD in Figure However, such fitting of the ML FTIR spectra was unsuccessful. Instead, Figure The Si-C crystallinity is shown in Figure Thus, the observed overall decrease of crystallinity is an indication of incomplete phase separation and of excess Si hindering the Si-C crystallization. The effect of the sublayer variation on the slope of the decrease is interpreted as the influence of the initial ML structure on the phase separation or the degree of intermixing in the Si-C network. The analysis of the Si-C network by FTIR further supports the assumption of sublayer intermixing but suggests that there is still an influence of the sublayers on the binding behavior in the samples. Furthermore, the results show an incomplete phase separation in the ML and a strong suppression of Si-C crystallization by excess Si. Thus far, we have mainly discussed structural properties of the Si NC layers. Regarding their future use in optoelectronic devices, an investigation of the impact of these structural trends on absorption in the UV-Vis wavelength range is crucial and will be described in the next section. For spectrophotometry measurements, two bulk SL with the compositions of the sublayer in the ML (Si0.77C0.23 and Si0.50C0.50) as upper and lower bound and four ML stacks with varying sublayer thicknesses were used. In Figure Effectively, α(E) of all ML lies between the border cases of bulk SiC and SRC. A reliable determination of the bandgap by the Tauc plots derived from Figure Thus, we estimate the bandgap E04 by taking the energy at α = 10 4 cm -1 . Figure decreases continuously with the Si content. This behavior could be explained by either an intermixing of the ML that leads to absorption behavior of an SixC1-x layer or by a decreasing bandgap with increasing Si NC size, as we know from Figure The previous results showed clearly that strong intermixing of the sublayers in the ML stacks occurs during high-temperature annealing. To finally verify whether there is a difference in crystallization behavior in SL and ML, we took a ML stack and a SL of the same overall Si content, both annealed at 1100°C for 30 min, and compared their XRD patterns and their trend of α(E). The XRD pattern in Figure The simplest explanation for these results could be a slight deviation from the nominal composition in the samples. However, provided that the calculated Si content of 63% (as described in section 3.1) corresponds to the real Si content in the samples, this peak analysis leads to the assumption that Si-crystallization in SL is favored, which is somewhat surprising, as the local Si concentration in the SRC sublayer in the ML stack is much higher than the local Si concentration in the SL. This result suggests that Si diffusion occurs at lower temperatures than Si crystallization and thus is not limited by the question of whether two Si atoms were deposited close to each other. We suggest that the reduced Si crystallization in the ML is a hint toward incomplete intermixing of the sublayers. We know from GIXRD measurements not shown here that SiC crystallization begins at lower temperatures than Si crystallization. We studied ML stacks consisting of SRC/SiC sublayers with a view to achieving Si NC size control and observed strong sublayer intermixing even for the thickest barrier layer of 9 nm (as deposited). The Si NC grain size is a function of the overall Si content in the ML and not only of the SRC well thickness. The IR absorption of the Si-C network in the ML cannot be modeled as a superposition of two sublayer modes but was found to be a continuous function of the Si content, confirming interdiffusion. The trend of Si-C crystalline fraction as a function of sublayer thicknesses and overall Si was interpreted in terms of incomplete Si/SiC phase separation and of excess Si hindering the Si-C crystallization. However, it was shown that there is still an influence of the sublayers on the binding behavior in the samples. Only the optical properties cannot be clearly ascribed to sublayer intermixing, as the decreasing trend of E04 with increasing Si-content can be an effect of either quantum confinement or intermixing. Furthermore, we found hints of greater stress in ML compared with SL by direct comparison of SL and ML with the same overall Si content. Based on these results, we propose the use of SL with varying Si content to control the Si NC grain size instead of using ML with varying SRC thickness. The examined Si NC mean grain sizes between 1 nm and 4 nm lie in the targeted range for Si NC in SiC as a top cell absorber in an all-Si tandem solar cell Furthermore, both the interdot distance and the grain size distribution are less crucial for Si NC in SiC than for Si NC in SiO2 Therefore, we used three different techniques. (i) To measure the annealed SiC SL thicknesses on Si and on quartz substrate, a Woollam M-2000 spectroscopic ellipsometer was used. (ii) Published in: DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.05.153 12 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION n SiC (ML)) were determined as follows: Published in: Applied Surface Science, vol. 351, p. 550-557, 2015. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.05.153