We investigate the possibility to model a metasurface, defined as a zero-thickness sheet of surface polarization currents, by a thin slab, characterized by a subwavelength thickness and usual voluminal medium parameters. First, we elaborate a general equivalence relation between the metasurface and the slab in terms of average electromagnetic fields. Then, we derive exact relations between the metasurface and slab susceptibilities and validate them by full-wave simulations. Finally, we discuss the simple and insightful Average Field Approximation (AFA) formula, illustrate its inappropriate for strong metasurface field transformations, and establish its range of validity. All of these developments are restricted to the simplest case of a uniform isotropic metasurface under normal plane wave incidence. We conclude from the complexity of the equivalence for this case, that a metasurface is generally best modeled in terms of Generalized Sheet Transition Conditions (GSTCs). Metasurfaces Practical metasurfaces have a deeply subwavelength thickness, i.e., a physical thickness, d, that is much smaller than the wavelength of the incident wave, λ, namely d ! λ. Therefore, they do not support any Fabry-Perot type resonances, which would require d ą λ{4, and really behave as polarization current sheets with zero thickness 1 [1]- At the development time of the GSTCs for metasurfacesand this is in fact still the case at the time of this writing! -no commercial software was able to simulate bianisotropic polarization sheets, and a benchmarking model was therefore highly needed. For this reason, and having no better choice, we resorted to the model of the metasurface by a subwavenengthly thin slab, where the local effect of the metasurface sheet was 1 In microwave engineering language, one would say that the structure is lumped in terms of thickness, while being largely distributed in its plane diluted across the slab thickness The paper is organized as follows. Section II states the problem of equivalence between a metasurface and a thin slab, and introduces assumptions holding throughout the document. Section III recalls the basic GSTC equations and writes them explicitly under the assumptions of the previous section. Section IV elaborates a general condition for metasurfaceslab equivalence in terms of corresponding average fields. Section V derives explicit exact relations between the metasurface and slab susceptibilities and validates these relations by full-wave simulations. Section IV examines and discusses the "diluted-slab" approximation, called here the Average Field Approximation (AFA) and establishes its range of validity. Finally, Sec. IV concludes the paper. The problem to solve is depicted in Fig. For simplicity, we make the following assumptions: 1) The metasurface structure is uniform along the ydirection. 2) The excitation is plane wave that normally impinges on the metasurface with polarization pE y , H x q and E z " E x " H y " H z " 0. 3) As a consequence of the previous two assumptions, the problem reduces to a two-dimensional problem, with B{By " 0 and scattering in the pz, xq plane, as shown in Fig. x z y ψ t 5) The metasurface is initially also uniform along the xdirection, i.e., χ ‰ χpx, yq, which implies purely normal scattering. The time-harmonic GSTC equations for the metasurface in Fig. Under the assumptions enunciated in Sec. II, the equations (1) reduce to ∆H m x " jω 0 χ yy ee E m y,av , (2a) with where χ yy ee and χ xx mm are constant, and where we have introduced the superscript 'm', standing for metasurface, for later distinction with the slab fields. Figure The fields in Figs. 2a and 2b must both satisfy the Maxwell equations, and in particular the Maxwell-Ampère law, whose integral form reads where the boldface font indicates vector quantities. We shall next assume that there is no (external) source (J " 0) on the metasurface, as is most often the case in metasurface applications, and hence also in the slab intended to approximate it, which eliminates the second integral in the right-hand side of (4). In a (voluminal) dielectric medium, such as the medium forming the slab in Fig. which simplifies here to In contrast, in a two-dimensional medium, such as the (zerothickness) metasurface in Fig. which simplifies here to which incidentally reveals that rχs " m, since rχδpzqs " rχ v s " 1 and since rδpzqs " 1{rzs " 1{m according to the Dirac distribution definition ş `8 ́8 δpzqdz " 1 (unitless). For the metasurface in Fig. In this relation, the result ş `d{2 ́d{2 δpzqdz " 1 was used in the first equation of the right-hand side term, and the second integral of the right-hand side term represents the free-space contribution of the flux of D (not related to the metasurface per se) across the surface S of the integration rectangle, with the free-space field denoted by the superscript p0q. Given the slab subwavelength thickness assumption, d ! λ 0 , the freespace field E p0q y may be expressed as the average of the field within S, which is here the field on the metasurface, i.e., which reduces For the slab in Fig. where the subscript 'ee' has been added for consistency with Equating the right-hand sides of ( Let us now move the right-hand side of this relation to the left side, and factor out the integral over x. This gives ́p1 `χv,ee q The integrand in the left-hand side of Eq. ( A similar procedure, using now the Maxwell-Faraday law, leads to the dual relation Defining the field averages across the slab as the relations ( whose resolution for the volume susceptibilities yields These relations We shall now follow another approach to find an explicit alternative to the implicit relations The relations between the bianisotropic metasurface susceptibilities and scattering coefficients are available in closedform for most metasurfaces or, inversely, with p " jk 0 χ yy ee {2 and q " jk 0 χ xx mm {2, where T and Γ are the transmission coefficient and the reflection coefficients, respectively, and where k 0 " ω{c. On the other hand, the exact relations between the susceptibilities and scattering coefficients of a slab read The reverse relations are found by solving (19c) and (19d) for ( r , μ r ) in terms of (η r , k), replacing η r in the two resulting equations by p1 ́Rq{p1 `Rq following (19b), and finally using (19e). This yields where R and e ́jkd can be found be inverting (19a) as with τ " T e ́jk0d and γ " Γe ́jk0d . The sought after exact explicit relations are finally obtained by equating the metasurface and slab scattering coefficients, according to the following sequence: Figure We shall now validate the procedure given in which are noted to be purely imaginary, consistently with the specification of absorption Figure x z y λ 0 8 λ 0 4 Fig. Interestingly, for T Ñ 1, Eq. ( The relations (20) between (χ yy ee ,χ xx mm ) and (χ v,ee ,χ v,mm ) are explicit in the sense that the procedure The simplest approximation approach consists in assuming that the field across the slab in Fig. ÝÑ τ, γ ÝÑ χv,ee, χv,mm. small susceptibilities or complete transmission (limit of no metasurface). Therefore, the AFA approximation is expected to be satisfactory only in the range of parameters where the actual equivalent field variation across the slab is negligibly small. Setting the field average across the slab to a constant equal to the average of the fields at the two edges of the slab, which is identical to the field average across the metasurface in (3b), i.e., E s y,av « E m y,av , reduces (16a) to This extremely simple formula is the AFA approximation formula. It may be interpreted as uniformly distributing the effect of the metasurface across the slab. According to the last paragraph of Sec. (V-B), this general approximation tends to be exact in the limit situation where the metasurface vanishes (Γ, T ), as should be the case. The AFA formula [Eq. ( To illustrate the restriction of the AFA approximation, let us come back to the matched metasurface attenuator discussed in Sec. V-B. Inserting. ( Figure Figure Increasing the specified absorption implies increasing the metasurface susceptibility, χ yy ee , since this corresponds to increasing the effect of the metasurface on the incident wave. At the same time, increasing the absorption implies decreasing E s y,av , according to the rationale of Fig. Fig. However, this underestimation of the susceptibility ( The observations of the previous subsections prompts for the determination of a range of validity for the AFA model [Eq. 1) Case of the Matched Metasurface Attenuator: Let us first examine the matched metasurface attenuator, for which the exact voluminal susceptibilities are given by where to A " e ́jpk ́k0qd{2 . However, since the slab is subwavelength (e jk0d{2 « 1), we have A « e ́jkd{2 . On the other hand, the average field across the metasurface is found from (3) with E i y " 1, E r y " 0 and E t y " T , as Since we have from R " 0 that T " e ́jpk ́k0qd , and hence T « e ́jkd , Eq. ( Equating the slab average electric field and similarly equating the average magnetic fields may be easily verified to yield the same relation. Given the subwavelength thickness of the slab, i.e., |kd| ! 1, we may approximate the tangent function by its Taylor series approximation tan xa proxx `1 3 x 3 `. . ., which simplifies (30) to or which implies 1 3 i.e., |kd| ! 2 ? 3 « 3.4841. This relation represents thus the range of validity of the AFA for the case of the matched metasurface attenuator. Taking a marging factor of 5, we therefore expect the AFA to be a good approximation for |kd| ă 2 ? 3{5 « 0.7. We will next show that |kd| « 0.7 corresponds to T « 0.5, which is consistent with the result plotted in Fig. 2) General Case: Let us now consider the general case where T and Γ are both nonzero, i.e., let us determine under which general condition E s y,av « E m y,av and H s x,av « H m x,av in this case. For this purpose, we compare the exact slab average fields by (A.4) from the exact voluminal susceptibilities given by Figure Finally, Fig. We have investigated the possibility to model a metasurface by a thin slab of uniform permittivity and permeability. For the particular case of a uniform homoisotropic metasurface under normal plane wave incidence, we have derived an exact relation between the metasurface surface susceptibilities and the slab voluminal susceptibilities and established the related range of validity of the handy and insightful Average Field Approximation (AFA) formula in terms of the scattering parameters. Generalizing this modeling to more complex situations, where the illumination angle could be oblique, and where the metasurface could be nonuniform and bianisotropic, would require much more complicated developments, generally involving the resolution of coupled nonlinear equations. In such situations, the complexity and non-analycity of the equivalence formulas would make the slab modeling essentially unpractical, and require the resort to metasurface-specific GSTC treatment We need to calculate E s y,av (H s x,av ) to find the χ v,ee (χ v,mm ) in Eqs. ( 