We performed Cu K-edge X-ray absorption fine structure measurements on T'-type La1.8Eu0.2CuO4 (LECO) and Nd2CuO4 (NCO) to investigate the variation in the electronic state associated with the emergence of superconductivity due to annealing. The X-ray absorption nearedge structure spectra of as-sintered (AS) LECO are quite similar to those of AS NCO, indicating that the ground state of AS T'-type LECO is a Mott insulator. We found a significant variation of the electronic state at the Cu sites in LECO due to annealing. The electron density after annealing (nAN) was evaluated for both superconducting LECO and non-superconducting NCO and found to be to be 0.40 and 0.05 electrons per Cu, respectively. In LECO but not in NCO, extended X-ray absorption fine structure analysis revealed a softening in the strength of the Cu-O bond in the CuO2 plane due to annealing, which is consistent with the screening effect on phonons in the metallic state. Since the amounts of oxygen loss due to annealing (δ) for LECO and NCO are comparable with each other, these results suggest distinct electron-doping processes in the two compounds. That electron-doping in NCO approximately follows the relation nAN = 2δ can be understood if electrons are doped through oxygen deficiency, but the anneal-induced metallic nature and large nAN of LECO suggest a variation of the electronic band structure causes self-doping of carriers. The origin of the difference in doping processes due to annealing is discussed in connection with the size of the charge transfer gap. Single-layer cuprate oxides RE 2 CuO 4 (where RE means rare-earth) possess three structural isomers. The T'-type isomer has four oxygens coordinated around the Cu ion, the T*-type has five, and the T-type has six. Historically, all forms of RE 2 CuO 4 , regardless of their oxygen-coordination numbers, have been assumed to be charge transfer (CT) Mott insulators, and the parent compounds of high-transition-temperature superconductors. However, the reported observation of superconductivity in T'-type RE 2 CuO 4 has raised the possibility that the ground states of RE 2 CuO 4 structural isomers are not unique So far, superconductivity in Ce-free (undoped) T'-type RE 2 CuO 4 has been observed in limited samples such as thin films after adequate oxygen reduction annealing Recent studies of photoemission and soft x-ray absorption spectroscopy have shown evidence of anneal-induced electron-doping There are two possible scenarios for electron doping through annealing: (i) Electron doping into the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 upper Hubbard band (UHB) by induced oxygen deficiency and/or by removal of the apical oxygen. (See Fig. (ii) Self-doping associated with the collapse of the CT gap A recent X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) study on high-temperature synthesized Pr 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (PCCO) In this study, we performed Cu K-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements on LECO and high-temperature synthesized Nd 2 CuO 4 (NCO). The latter is non-superconducting even after annealing. By investigating the XANES spectra of LECO, we found significant evolution of the electronic state at Cu sites due to annealing, with a large n AN value of 0.40 electrons per Cu. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EX-AFS) analysis, furthermore, indicated that the strength of the Cu-O bond in the CuO 2 plane had softened due to annealing, which is consistent with the screening effect on phonons in the metallic state. In NCO, on the other hand, n AN and δ were found to be 0.05 electrons per Cu 0.035 per unit formula, respectively, approximately following the n AN = 2δ relation; no evidence of the softening of the Cu-O bond due to annealing was observed. Since the δ values of LECO and NCO are comparable, these results suggest that the variation of the electronic state due to annealing proceeds in a different manner in each compound. As-sintered (AS) polycrystalline samples of LECO were prepared by the low-temperature synthesis method, described previously 3 . Superconducting LECO with a transition temperature (T c ) of 20 K was obtained by annealing the AS samples in vacuum at 700 • C for 24 h. The oxygen loss δ in LECO due to annealing was not determined precisely but a maximum value of 0.05 per unit formula was obtained from neutron diffraction measurements Figure As seen in Fig. To see the spectral change due to annealing more clearly, we subtract the XANES spectrum of AS LECO from that of AN LECO. The difference spectrum of LECO is shown in Fig. Next, we analyzed the EXAFS spectra. Since the amount of removed oxygen is tiny, one may think that the change in the XANES spectra reflects only the local information around the removed oxygens. Thus, we examined that the variation of the electronic state due to annealing is caused throughout the LECO sample, from the structural point of view. Å-2 for visual clarity.) In the figure, the Fourier-transform peaks/shoulders corresponding to Cu-O p , Cu-RE (RE = La, Eu, Nd), Cu-O RE , and Cu-Cu bonds can be seen. For both LECO and NCO, the overall shape of |χ(r)| is the same for AS and AN samples. Thus, the structural change due to annealing is negligible or small. However, the amplitude is smaller at each temperature for LECO than for NCO, meaning that there is considerably more static disorder in the superconducting LECO than in the nonsuperconducting NCO. The amplitude of each peak/shoulder decreases upon warming due to the thermal vibration of the atoms. The intensity of the peak at ∼1.5 Å has been analyzed to obtain the atomic displacement factor C 2 for the Cu-O p bond. Figures Based on the Einstein model, the temperature dependence of C 2 was analyzed using the equation where ω E is the oxygen frequency of Einstein oscillators, and μ is the reduced mass of copper and oxygen atoms. Here, and k B represent the reduced Planck constant and Boltzmann constant, respectively. For all samples, we assumed a temperature-independent σ s , since no evidence of structural transitions was observed in the measured temperature range. The values of ω E evaluated for each sample are summarized in Table The present study has demonstrated for the first time a drastic variation of the electronic state in LECO asso-ciated with the appearance of superconductivity due to annealing. Here, we discuss the possible origin of this variation, as well as the reason that annealing has different effects on the electronic states in LECO and NCO. The focus of our discussion will be on the size of the CT gap. Mott insulators such as T-type La 2 CuO 4 are characterized by the CT gap (with gap energy ∆ CT ) between the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 UHB and the O 2p band We speculate that such a distinct evolution is attributable to the different size of ∆ CT in the AS compound. Figure Although the true ground state of T'-type RE 2 CuO 4 cannot be elucidated due to the lack of information on the oxygen stoichiometry of the samples, the present study provides an important clue for understanding undoped superconductivity in T'-type cuprates. According to the results shown in Fig. Finally, we will briefly discuss static disorder in T'-type RE 2 CuO 4 . In the RE 2 CuO 4 cuprate oxides, the T'-type structure tends to transform into the T-type one as the average radius R AV of the rare-earth ion increases In summary, reduction annealing effects on the electronic states at Cu sites in LECO and NCO have been investigated by Cu K-edge XAFS measurements. The analysis of XANES spectra has revealed a significant evolution of the electronic state in LECO due to annealing with a large induced electron density n AN of 0.40 electrons per Cu. For NCO, the variation is much smaller, with n AN only 0.05 electrons per Cu. The EXAFS analysis showed evidence of phonon softening of the Cu-O bond in the CuO 2 plane due to annealing for LECO but not for NCO. Therefore, the electronic states for the two compounds vary by distinct processes, although δ, the amount of oxygen loss due to annealing, is comparable for the two systems. The distinct evolution of the electronic states for LECO and NCO can be attributed to the difference in size of the charge-transfer energy gap in the AS compounds; the electronic state in LECO, which has a smaller ∆ CT , is more sensitive to the oxygen removal that could introduce the electron-doping and/or variation of the band structure.