Novel devices such as tunneling field-effect transistors (FETs) and ferroelectric FETs have been demonstrated to break the subthreshold swing (SS) limit with sub-60 mV/decade switching for further low voltage/low power applications. In this paper, SS of sub-60 mV/dec was firstly observed in InAlN/GaN high electron mobility transistors (HMETs): an average SS of 30 mV/dec over three orders of magnitude in drain-source (Ids) and a minimum point-by-point SS of 15 mV/dec were achieved in the InAlN/GaN HEMTs with gate length (Lg) of 40 nm. It is found that SS decreases with drain-source voltage (Vds) as well as Lg, and falls below 60 mV/dec when Lg < 100 nm. The decrease of SS as the device dimension scales down is attributed to the tunneling of high energy electrons from channel to the surface. The SS decreasing with the nanoscale gate length shows the great potential of the InAlN/GaN HEMTs to be applied in future logic switches. Boltzmann distribution dictates that, to affect an order of magnitude increase in the drain current, the gate voltage needs to change by at least 60 mV at 300 K. Due to the high electron velocity and large bandgap, gallium nitride high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) have been demonstrated for the high-frequency and highpower applications in the last two decades. 1) gate dielectrics are deposited; 2) gate length (Lg) is 1~3 μm; 3) SS of sub-60 mV/dec was observed with the forward sweep in gate-source voltage (Vgs, from low to high). In this work, we report for the first time that sub-60 mV/dec SS can be achieved in GaN HEMTs without gate dielectric deposition. Different from other InAlN/GaN MISHEMTs, the SS of sub-60 mV/dec was observed with a reverse sweep in Vgs (from high to low). Additionally, it is found that SS decreases with Lg as well as drain-source voltage (Vds), and falls below 60 mV/dec when Lg < 100 nm. As the device dimension scales down, the high energy electrons tunnel from channel to the surface dominates, contributing to the decreasing of SS. shows the fabricated InAlN/GaN HEMT. The lattice-matched In0.17Al0.83-N/GaN heterostructure was grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) on a Si substrate. The epitaxial layer, from the bottom to the top, consists of a 2-μm undoped GaN buffer layer, a 4-nm In0.12Ga0.88N back barrier layer, a 15-nm GaN channel layer, a 1-nm AlN interlayer, an 8-nm lattice-matched In0.17Al0.83N barrier layer, and 2-nm GaN cap layer. The two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) electron density and electron mobility determined using Hall measurement were 2.28 × 10 13 cm -2 and 1205 cm 2 /(V⸱s), respectively. Device fabrication process started with mesa isolation by Cl2-based inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching. Alloyed ohmic contact of Ti/Al/Ni/Au metal stack was then deposited and annealed at 850 ̊C for 30s in forming gas. Subsequently, sample surface was treated with oxygen plasma treatment to form an oxide layer on the surface The device gate lengths are 40, 70, 100, 150, and 300 nm with source-drain distance (Lsd) of 2 μm. The device gate lengths are 1, 2, and 3 μm with Lsd of 6 μm. The DC current-voltage (I-V) measurements were carried out by using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyzer. SS can be expressed as 2,3,11 where ψs is the channel potential, k is the Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, q is the electron charge. m = ∂Vgs/∂ψs = 1+ Cs/Cins is the body factor. Conversely, with the decreased Vgs (reverse, from d to e), the electrons start to release from surface to the channel. SS can be written as SS = ∂Vgs/∂log10(Ids) = (Vgse -(Vgsd + Ve))/(log10(Idse)-log10(Idsd)) = (Vgse -Vgsd -Ve)/(log10(Idse)-log10(Idsd)), where Vgse, Vgsd, Idse, and Idsd are the gate-source voltage and drain-source current at point e and d, respectively. Vgse < Vgsd and Ve is negative, therefore (Vgse -Vgsd -Ve) is smaller than that without electrons release. The electron release increased the channel electron and channel current. log10(Idsd) decreased compared to that without electron injection. The decreased (Vgse -Vgsd -Ve) and increased (log10(Idse)-log10(Idsd)), leading to a steep SS below 60 mV/dec. To confirm this explanation, the transfer curves of the 40-nm InAlN/GaN HEMT at different Vds (from 1 V to 10 V, with 1 V step) were measured and shown in Fig. This shows that the great potential of the InAlN/GaN HEMTs to be applied in future logic switches.