We study the transport properties of junctions of normal and superconducting Weyl semi-metal with tilted dispersion, in the presence of magnetization induced by magnetic strips. The sub gap tunnelling conductance shows robust signatures in the presence of different orientation and strength of magnetization of the magnetic strips. We obtain the analytical results for the normal-magneticsuperconducting junction in the thin barrier limit and demonstrate that these results have no analogues to their conventional counterparts and junctions with Dirac electrons in two-dimensions. We discuss possible experimental setups to test our theoretical predictions. Weyl semimetals (WSM) is the latest addition to the list of materials which have attracted wide interests from theoretical and experimental research alike due to the unique possibility of realization of elusive and sought after relativistic fermions in table-top condensed matter systems. Weyl semimetals are further classified into two groups in terms of Lorentz symmetry; a type-I which respects and the type -II which breaks the Lorentz invariance. In WSM type-II semimetals, a tilted band structure with open constant energy surfaces and symmetry protected pairs of Weyl nodes appears at the contact of co-existing electron and holes pockets External electric and magnetic fields are known to bestow novel features to electronic properties of the Weyl semimetals. Type-II WSM, in contrast to their type-I counterpart, exhibits chiral anomaly only when the magnetic field is placed along the direction of propagation of the particle. Chiral anomaly is absent when magnetic field is perpendicular and the Landau level spectrum is gapped Transport properties in presence of magnetic field has been investigated for WSM type-I normal-superconductor junctions with spin-active interface. In such junctions tunnelling conductance has been shown to depend on the direction of magnetic field and the spin-flip scatterings are shown to influence the conductance spectra In this work, we study the transport properties viz. tunnelling conductance of the Weyl-II semimetal junctions in presence of induced magnetization provided by proximity effect of thin magnetic film strips The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we detail out the model for a heterostructure of normal/magnetic/superconducting Weyl semimetal and calculate the tunnelling properties and subgap conductance for the junction. We proceed with providing analytical calculations of the otherwise complicated Andreev reflection coefficients in the thin barrier limit and for the normal incidence. We discuss possible experiments to test our theoretical predictions in Sec.III. In this section we study the conductance through a N-M-S junction, where N denotes a normal Weyl-II semimetal region, M -a Weyl-II semimetal where the proximity induced field has been induced across a width L, and S denoting Weyl-II region where superconductivity is induced by proximity effect with a conventional s-wave superconductor. The junction is described by the Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian which is of the form: where is the exchange energy and M y(z) is it's magnitude along y(z) axis, Θ(x) denotes the Heaviside step function, v 1 is the spectrum tilt, v 2 is the Fermi velocity and sgn(v 2 ) = ± denotes the chirality of the nodes, σ are the Pauli matrices, μ(x) is the chemical potential such that μ(x) = μ, x < 0 and the pairing potential, ∆(x) = ∆ 0 e iφ for region x > L, μ s is electrostatic potential controlled by an external gate voltage, μ s ∆ 0 , μ(x). For type-II Weyl semimetals, v 1 > v 2 . In the magnetic region, the magnetic strips are placed both at the top and bottom of the region. M(y, z) is analogous to the vector potential arising due to a magnetic field B α = M α /ev 2 [δ(x) -δ(x -L)]α , α = ẑ(α = y), ŷ(α = z). The superconducting pairing potential couples electrons and holes near time-reversed Weyl nodes with same chirality. The BdG Hamiltonian in Eqn. 1 can be diagonalised in the Φ = (c 1,↑ , c 1,↓ , c † 2,↓ , c † 2,↑ ) T basis for different regions as described below. In the normal region, the electron and hole energy dispersions are: with |p| = p 2 x + p 2 , p = p 2 y + p 2 z . At a given incident energy E with conserved transverse momenta p , the eigenstates are : px±x+pyy+pzz) , with, for electrons, for holes, In the magnetic region, are the dispersion of the electron and holes respectively. Here, is the induced magnetization. The eigenstates in the magnetic region at a given incident energy E are: with the longitudinal momenta for the electrons , and holes . The excitation energy for the electron and hole like quasiparticles in the superconductor is: μs (v1±v2) for Ψ S ± . Considering μ s (∆ 0 , μ(x), E), the outgoing eigenstates in the superconducting region are: while the incoming states are: where, respectively, and We consider Ψ e-(+) as the initial incident mode and observe that the initial incident mode can also be a linear superposition of the e ± modes. To compute the tunnelling conductance we assume clean interfaces, match the boundary conditions, and subsequently retrieve the Andreev reflection coefficients. Note that the condition of matching of the derivatives of the wavefunctions at the boundaries is not applicable for this junction. Hence, the limit of thin barrier with barrier width L → 0 and strength of induced magnetization B → ∞ is not applicable at the onset is the wave function in the magnetic region, with c 1(2) and c 3(4) are the amplitudes of the electron(+(-)) and hole (+(-)) modes in the magnetic barrier region. While in the superconducting region the total wavefunction is of the form, where a 1 and a 2 are the amplitudes of the right moving electron and hole like quasiparticles. Matching the wavefunctions at the two different interfaces in the junctions we get, For the finite barrier we note that compact analytical forms of the reflection coefficients indicating the dependence of magnetic field is not easily feasible. However, in the following sections, we show that in the limiting cases for normal incidence on a finite barrier and for the thin barrier limit such analytical forms can be obtained. The retro and specular Andreev reflection coefficients are scaled in terms of the reflected hole current density normalized to the incident electron current density where J x = 1/ [x, H BdG ] is the current density operator along x direction. The differential conductance of the junction can be derived as: where S is the cross sectional area of the junction, j = 1, 2 corresponding to the e+ and e-incident modes for Weyl nodes at K 0 (-K 0 ) (of same chirality) and R j N are the normal electron reflection coefficients. Due to the titled spectrum the electron back scattering channels are absent. Hence the normal reflection coefficient for this junction R j N = 0. G(eV ) receives equal contribution from Weyl nodes of opposite chirality. The differential conductance normalized to G N (eV ) = e 2 S 2πh N (eV ), corresponding to the number of available channels with energy (eV + μ N ) on the normal side is: where is the critical angle of incidence. The cut-off for transverse momenta is bounded by allowed channels p max = N (eV ) on the interface. We plot the differential conductance as expressed in Eqn. We provide an analytical proof for the normal incidence in Sec.II B 2. However, the differential conductance receives contribution from particles incident on the interface from all possible allowed channels. Hence, it is difficult to single out the contribution from the normal incidence in the total conductance. To this end, we look into the spin configuration of the incoming electrons from the conduction (e+) and valence (e-) bands in the normal and magnetic region. The spin expectation values < S >= /2σ are calculated for each of the above branches. The spin expectation value in the normal and magnetic region in units of /2 is given by: where the different momenta of the incoming particles in different region has been defined previously and ) are the normalization of the wavevectors in the normal and magnetic region respectively. The plots of the spin expectation values for different particle branches for a fixed bias voltage on constant energy hyperboloid surfaces both in absence and presence of magnetic field are given in Fig. singlet pairings. The orientation of the spin of the incoming electrons as well as the reflected holes is found to be insensitive to the magnetization amplitude of the magnetic strips, and angle of incidence. In both normal and the magnetic region, the spin orientation (< S x >, < S y >, < S z >) of the incident electrons and reflected holes are same apart from the change in magnitude in the magnetic region. Thus with prefect spin matching, the magnetic barrier becomes transparent to the incident electrons, and there is no suppression of the Andreev reflected holes which contributes to the differential tunnelling conductance of the junction. With the aid of the Andreev reflections from two hole branches, the conductance thus shows robust behaviour in the subgap bias. This is one of the central results of the section. In Fig. B j is the magnetic length, j denotes the y, z axes, v 1 , v 2 are the spectrum tilt and Fermi velocity respective in the magnetic region and L is the barrier width. λ m can be varied in two ways, first by fixing magnetization B y/z (hence l m ) and changing the width of the barrier L or by fixing L and varying the magnetization B y/z . In Fig. The differential conductance is found to be independent of the magnetic field as well of the width of the magnetic barrier. Generally, it is difficult to prove this analytically owing to the complexity of the system of equations involved with the junction. However, we can prove the independence of the conductance for the case of normal incidence. The Andreev reflection coefficients A ± 1(2) corresponding to the different incoming modes satisfy the following relation: for incident modes ψ s=± e and Θ(x) is the Heaviside theta function. The form of f (E, ∆ 0 ) follows from the definition of β for E ≶ ∆ 0 . The summation in Eqn. The reflection parameters r 1,2 defined in the Andreev reflection coefficients (both retro and specular) in Eqn.( in terms of matrix M which is obtained from the boundary conditions in Eqn. where, ) and q 4 = (p m x-+ p m x+ ), u(w) s are complex functions of electron and hole momenta in different regions of the junction. The generic forms of functions u(w) s and the different useful forms of functions of momenta are detailed in Appendix (B). Then for our purpose, it is sufficient to prove that: We now impose the restriction for normal incidence i.e p y = p z = 0. In this limit, Using expressions of different momenta as charted out in Appendix B, it can be shown for any arbitrary width L of the magnetic barrier the summations over the cosines and sine terms for the l.h.s in Eqn. Expanding the terms of the r.h.s and also the rest of the terms of l.h.s of Eqn. where, Substituting different forms of momenta in the additional terms of Eqn.(29), we find that which validates the equality of Eqn. We now consider the limit of thin barrier for which the dimensionless barrier constant λ m = L/l m is defined such that for L → 0, l -1 m → ∞, λ m is finite. Here L is the barrier width, l m is the magnetic length. In this limit, The boundary conditions subsequently modified and a straightforward but cumbersome algebra yields the expressions for r 1 and r 2 in this limit, with, For large magnetization and small barrier width, incoming particles which are incident normally at the interface becomes predominant contributing to the transport properties of the junction. The tilt velocity for these particles v 1 v 2 , for which α → 0. Thus the expressions of the reflection co-efficients in Eqns.(32), (33) becomes identical to those in the absence of any scalar or magnetic barrier and reiterates the numerical results obtained for large magnetization and smaller barrier width which represents the thin barrier limit. In this limit, we show analytically that the retro and specular Andreev reflection coefficients are both independent of magnetic field effect which is also reflected in the conductance plots. For the NMS junction the subgap differential conductance is found to be robust with respect to strength and orientation of magnetizations of the magnetic strips placed along the interfaces with the superconducting region. Both the retro and specular Andreev reflection coefficients are supported in the magnetic region. Analysis of the spin-expectation values reveals that both spin singlet and triplet pairing is induced by proximity effect with a s-wave superconductor. Such observations has been made for topological insulators; however, for the tilted Weyl semimetals this is a first reporting of the co-existence of such spin pairings. We now discuss possible experimental realizations of our proposed heterostructure of Weyl type II semimetals. For WTe 2 superconductivity can be induced on layers of thickness varying from 20 nm-50 nm with the use of proximity effect in a NbSe 2 /WTe 2 hybrid structure. In such structures, ∆ 0 varies from 0.38 meV to 0.07meV In conclusion, we have studied the differential tunnelling conductance in normal-magnetic-superconducting heterostructures of Weyl II semimetal in the presence of magnetization modulated by magnetic strips. We showed that the differential conductance of a normal-magnetic-superconductor junction is robust and independent of the strength and orientation of the induced magnetization. This is in stark contrast to conductance properties of conventional ferromagnetic-superconductor junctions Appendix A: Generic forms for u and w's ) The functions T j 's are obtained by changing p -→ p + , p x-→ -p x+ in the expressions for T j 's and multiplying the expressions by an overall -sign. Appendix B: Useful expressions for momenta 