Magnetically mediated Cooper pairing is generally regarded as a key to establish the unified mechanism of unconventional superconductivity Broadly speaking, there are currently only two families of unconventional superconductors that show high-T c superconductivity, i.e., cuprates and iron-based superconductors (FeSCs). Whether they share a common superconducting mechanism is still an open question at the frontier of modern condensed matter physics In copper-oxide, heavy-fermion, iron-pnictide chalcogenide superconductors, a neutron spin resonance served as the hallmark of a sign-reversed pairing symmetry is intensively observed and it is usually momentum independent, the resonance should reveal an upward magnon-like dispersion instead (Fig. The newly discovered 12442-type FeSC KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 with T c = 33.5 K exhibits many properties strongly resembling those in cuprates. Its crystal structure can be viewed as an inter-growth of 1111-type CaFeAsF and 122-type KFe 2 As 2 , where the asymmetric bilayers of Fe 2 As 2 are separated by the insulating Ca 2 F 2 layers (Fig. Here using inelastic neutron scattering to study the low-energy spin excitations of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 single crystals, we have discovered a spin resonant mode at 16 meV with two incommensurate peaks and downward dispersions along [H, H] direction (Fig. Regardless of the abnormal ratio of E R /∆ tot , the observed spin resonance in KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 at Q = (0.5, 0.5) (or (π, π)) certainly cannot be explained by the Fermi surface nesting picture but basically agrees with the strong coupling picture Neutron scattering experiments were carried out using thermal triple-axis spectrometer Taipan at Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering, ANSTO, Australia, where the final neutron energy was fixed as E f = 14.8 meV, with a pyrolytic graphite filter, a double focusing monochromator and a vertical focusing analyzer. The scattering plane [H, H, 0] × [0, 0, L] was defined by Q = (H, K, L) = (q x a/2π, q y b/2π, q z c/2π) in reciprocal lattice unit (r.l.u.) using the tetragonal lattice: a = b = 5.45 Å, c = 30.02 Å. The total mosaic of our sample mount was about 4.5 • both in [H, H, 0] and [0, 0, L] directions. All raw data for inelastic neutron scattering measurements are given in the supplementary materials Plane wave pseudopotential based DFT calculations were performed using Quantum Espresso numerical code High quality single crystals of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 were grown using self-flux method according to previous reports Figure The x-ray diffraction(XRD) was performed on an x-ray diffractometer SmartLab 9 kW high resolution diffraction system with Cu K α radiation(λ = 1.5406 Å) at room temperature ranged from 5 • to 80 • in reflection mode. Typical XRD patterns are shown in Fig. Neutron scattering experiments were carried out using thermal triple-axis spectrometer Taipan at Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering, ANSTO, Australia, where the final neutron energy was fixed as E f = 14.8 meV, with a pyrolytic graphite filter, a double focusing monochromator and a vertical focusing analyzer. The scattering plane [H, H, 0] × [0, 0, L] was defined by Q = (H, K, L) = (q x a/2π, q y b/2π, q z c/2π) in reciprocal lattice unit (r.l.u.) using the tetragonal lattice: a = b = 5.45 Å, c = 30.02 Å. The resolution of Taipan in the energy range we measured is about 1∼2 meV, and specifically is about 1.8 meV for E = 16 meV. Before the inelastic measurements, we firstly performed elastic neutron scattering measurements to check the sample mosaic and quality. Fig. Figure Figure In order to figure out the momentum dependence of the spin resonant peak, we have carried out measurements over a wide range of E (E = 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, Here we simply suppose the two peaks have same width, but different intensities due to the normalization effect from Fe 2+ form factor and instrument setup. the parameter d is the incommensurability. For those energies where the curves display only one broad peak, we use single peak Gaussian function to fit the data. As E decreases from E = 20 meV to 11 meV, the commensurate resonant peak splits into two incommensurate peaks with larger d at the lower energies. The Full-With-at-Half-Maximum(FWHM) increases when E moves upon energy. When E < 12 meV, the net intensity becomes negative around Q =(0.5, 0.5) first and spread to the entire zone at E = 6 meV. We also check the L-dependence of incommensurability by measuring Q-scans at 12 meV both for L = 3 and L = 6, as shown in Fig. Figure The iron-based superconductors are multiband systems. Multiple hole-like Fermi pockets around Γ point are separated from the electron-like Fermi pockets around M point, and superconducting gaps usually have different magnitudes (probably different signs) on each pocket which also defines the spin-flip continuum energy ( ω c ) of the spin-exciton under s ± -pairing as well In our previous study, high resolution Laser-Angle-Resolved-Photoemission-Spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements were performed on the single crystal samples of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 . The energy resolution was about 1 meV and the angular resolution was about 0.3 • corresponding to 0.004 Å-1 momentum resolution at the photon energy of 6.994 eV. We have observed three dominate hole pockets (α, β, γ) and one tiny electron pocket (δ) with clearly bilayer splitting effects on β and γ bands The superconducting gaps and radii of each Fermi pockets from ARPES measurement and DFT calculation results are summarized in Table * Electronic address: slli@iphy.ac.cn