Cellular elastomeric metamaterials are interesting for various applications, e.g. soft robotics, as they may exhibit multiple microstructural pattern transformations, each with its characteristic mechanical behavior. Numerical literature studies revealed that pattern formation is restricted in (thick) boundary layers causing significant mechanical size effects. This paper aims to experimentally validate these findings on miniaturized specimens, relevant for real applications, and to investigate the effect of increased geometrical and material imperfections resulting from specimen miniaturization. To this end, miniaturized cellular metamaterial specimens are manufactured with different scale ratios, subjected to in-situ micro-compression tests combined with digital image correlation yielding full-field kinematics, and compared to complementary numerical simulations. The specimens global behavior agrees well with the numerical predictions, in terms of pre-buckling stiffness, buckling strain and post-buckling stress. Their local behavior, i.e. pattern transformation and boundary layer formation, is also consistent between experiments and simulations. Comparison of these results with idealized numerical studies from literature reveals the influence of the boundary conditions in real cellular metamaterial applications, e.g. lateral confinement, on the mechanical response in terms of size effects and boundary layer formation. Cellular soft materials have proven to be useful in a variety of applications, and thus have attracted many studies in the past decade Whereas the majority of detailed experimental studies on cellular elastomeric metamaterials has been conducted on large specimens, most of the real applications of such metamaterials require a smaller characteristic size of the microstructure. See e.g. The goal of this paper is to experimentally verify the numerically observed size effects for miniaturized cellular metamaterial specimens suitable for realistic applications. The challenges in manufacturing of miniaturized metamaterial specimens lead to imperfections in the material, thus making it important to verify the numerically observed size effects on such specimens and not only on large scale ones, as typically found in the literature. For instance, There are also many studies in the literature that focused on other aspects of cellular metamaterials such as applications In order to study size effects in miniaturized cellular elastomeric metamaterials, and to learn whether size effects observed on large-scale specimens and in numerical simulations occur also at small scales, different specimens with millimetre sized holes and various numbers of unit cells in loading direction were processed using custom-made moulds. In-situ micro compression tests with optical microscopy in combination with DIC are employed to measure high resolution full-field displacement maps of the specimens with different scale ratios. Such a detailed kinematic assessment is essential in identifying the local boundary layers, and to enable accurate validation of the size effects in the global behaviour of such metamaterials. The novelty of this contribution is therefore in combining (1) a study of size effects on (2) miniaturized cellular elastomeric metamaterials with (3) high kinematic accuracy using DIC. This combined analysis provides a good understanding and predictive capability of the mechanical behaviour of small scale cellular elastomeric metamaterials and a useful tool for better design for dedicated applications. The current experimental study was inspired by the numerical investigation of Thick cellular elastomeric metamaterial specimens with millimetric circular holes have been processed with customised moulds with a rectangular stacking and micrometric spacings. It is important to make thick specimens, and small spacings with respect to the hole diameter to induce local buckling, rather than global buckling, during the in-situ microcompression tests. Note that no out-of-plane constraints can be applied to the surface of the specimens due to the DIC speckle pattern applied on the specimen surface. All specimens have 1.5 mm hole diameter, 1.9 mm center to centre spacing and are 22.5 mm thick, cf. Fig. A speckle pattern was applied on the specimens to generate a contrast as required for DIC. Since Sylgard 184 is translucent and light reflecting, the speckle pattern consists of two layers; first a white powder (HELLING Standard-Check developer Medium Nr. 3) was sprayed to make a fine-grained background, then black India ink was sprayed using an air brush. Spraying at an inclined angle through a short tube, to create a spiral flow, filters out the big particles, resulting in speckles measuring roughly 30 to 80 μm, corresponding to 3 to 8 pixels as shown in Fig. Micro-compression tests are conducted on the patterned specimens using a Kammrath & Weiss micro tensile/compression stage with a 50 N load cell. Two aluminium T-shaped clamps are used to apply the compression uniformly in the axial direction, cf. Fig. The images taken during the in-situ tests are used for local DIC to extract the kinematic fields. Images are typically affected by optical distortions of the objective lens. These spatial distortions are measured using the method proposed by A plane strain finite element model is made for each specimen size, using an in-house nonlinear finite element code developed in the MATLAB ® environment. The code employs the Total Lagrangian formulation Local rotation fields are obtained from displacement fields obtained by local DIC, as described in Section 2.3, and are shown in Fig. In order to accurately measure the applied displacement on the specimens, and thus the nominal strains, the DIC data are used. In order to properly quantify the displacement to achieve the same global strain for specimens of different scale ratios, the exact geometry of the specimens has to be accounted for. To this end, the global displacement is determined at the outside of the first and the last unit cells (i.e. excluding the bulk edges), where the applied displacement on each side is averaged over the width of the specimen. The global nominal strain is then calculated as the ratio of the relative displacement between the two sides and the initial distance, L. The global nominal stress is computed as the ratio of the global compressive force and the initial cross sectional area of each specimen. This approach is used for both experimental and numerical analyses. Fig. The onset of the local buckling, resulting in the pattern transformation, is found based on the maximum curvature of the stress-strain curves of Fig. Fig. The global post-buckling stress in the current study shows a 19% decrease from scale ratio 4 to 12. This value is ower than the 29% observed in the idealized numerical study of The boundary conditions applied to the cellular elastomeric metamaterial specimens obviously influence the buckling-induced pattern close to the edges, which in turn result in the size effects discussed above. Therefore, in order to quantify the size of the boundary layer, the rotation of the islands is exploited as the quantity of interest. To avoid the influence of the free side edges, only the two central unit cell rows are taken into consideration, see Fig. Three more numerical simulations are conducted to analyse larger specimens. At a scale ratio of 18, the boundary layer size almost levels out, showing an asymptotic trend cor- responding to a boundary layer size of roughly 4 unit cells. Extending the simulations to bigger scale ratios is infeasible since global buckling occurs almost immediately after local buckling, preventing analysis of the rotation fields before global buckling. Note that the presented results are all determined at ε b + 0.013, which guarantees that all specimens up to scale ratio 18 are not globally buckled. Results of two additional sets of numerical simulations with different lateral constraints are included in Fig. It is observed that the different levels of lateral confinement directly influence the scale ratio at which the boundary layer size converges, see Fig. The presented results demonstrate that relatively large boundary layers emerge in cellular elastomeric metamaterials, which result in considerable size effects in specimens of finite size. These effects are tunable to a certain degree by changing the constraints put on the specimens in the transverse direction, which can be exploited for customized designs of these metamaterials in various engineering applications. Cellular elastomeric materials exhibit pattern transformations beyond a critical load, entailing internal buckling of their microstructure, which dramatically influences their global mechanical response. Potential applications of cellular elastomers, such as soft robotics, typically require small specimens (millimetre sized microstructural features) and comparable macroscopic sizes, which make them sensitive to the applied boundary conditions, exhibiting considerable size effects. To experimentally analyse the size effects in such materials, as previously observed in a numerical study of The global stress-strain behaviour, local buckling strain and post-buckling stress for different scale ratios adequately agree between numerical and experimental results, taking into account the specimen variations and uncertainties. The global stress shows a trend of the same order of magnitude as the one reported by A staggered approach is used to identify all five material parameters. First, c k are optimized for strains up to 2%, then c k and m k are optimized for the entire strain range, i.e. up to 60%. The bulk modulus is finally found for the whole strain range while keeping the optimized values of c k and m k constant. This approach results in optimized values of κ = 29.6716 MPa, c 1 = 0.0892 MPa, c 2 = 1.2537 MPa, m 1 = 10.0959 and m 2 = 0.0036. Note that a separate numerical investigation revealed only 2% change in initial mechanical response of metamaterial specimens for a change of bulk modulus from 30 to 1000 MPa, thus revealing a very small sensitivity to this material parameter.