We have measured the temperature dependence of resistivity in single-crystalline CeNiGe3 under hydrostatic pressure in order to establish the characteristic pressure-temperature phase diagram. The transition tempearture to AFM-I phase TN1 = 5.5 K at ambient pressure initially increases with increasing pressure and has a maximum at ∼ 3.0 GPa. Above 2.3 GPa, a clear zero-resistivity is observed (SC-I phase) and this superconducting (SC) state coexists with AFM-I phase. The SC-I phase suddenly disappears at 3.7 GPa simultaneously with the appearance of an additional kink anomaly corresponding to the phase transition to AFM-II phase. The AFM-II phase is continuously suppressed with further increasing pressure and disappears at ∼ 6.5 GPa. In the narrow range near the critical pressure, an SC phase reappears (SC-II phase). A large initial slope of upper critical field μ0Hc2 and non-Fermi liquid behavior indicate that the SC-II phase is mediated by antiferromagnetic fluctuations. On the other hand, the robust coexistence of the SC-I phase and AFM-I phase is unusual on the contrary to superconductivity near a quantum critical point on most of heavy-fermion compounds. The interplay between superconductivity and magnetism is one of the hottest topics in condensed matter physics. It has been believed that superconductivity is mediated by antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuations in cuprates and heavy-fermion superconductors since superconductivity is often observed in the vicinity of the AFM quantum critical point at which Néel temperature T N goes down to zero. The residual resistivity ρ 0 strikingly increases with increasing pressure in the previous study: ρ 0 at P c is about 100 times as large as that at ambient pressure. This striking increase is extrinsic and is possibly caused by an increase in micro-crack and/or residual strain in the polycrystalline sample. The large anisotropy of the compressibility in CeNiGe 3 was observed in the XRD measurement under high pressure, which was speculated to cause the micro-cracks along the grain boundary. In this paper, we investigate the unusual SC domes in CeNiGe 3 in further detail with electrical resistivity measurement by using a single-crystalline sample under better hydrostatic conditions and clarify the coexistence state of superconductivity with antiferromagnetism in CeNiGe 3 . A single crystal of CeNiGe 3 is prepared by the Ni-Ge binary self-flux method following Ref. 19. Pressure was applied using two types of pressure cell; an indenter- type pressure cell ∆T sc 0.364 (P ≤ 4 GPa), P = ∆T sc 0.364 + (∆T sc -1.456) where P is in GPa, and ∆T sc = T sc (0) -T sc (P ). Low temperature experiments down to 60 mK were carried out by using a dilution refrigerator. Electrical resistivity was measured with a conventional four terminal method, and the electric current was applied along the c-axis. The results below 4 GPa have already been reported. First, we focus on the experimental results below 4.0 GPa. As shown in Fig. T sc increased with increasing pressure and suddenly disappeared above 3.5 GPa. In addition, the resistivity exhibited an additional kink anomaly at T N2 above 3.5 GPa as shown in Fig. We summarized the P -T phase diagram on CeNiGe 3 in Fig. Here, Φ 0 is the quantum fluxoid, ξ = ħ 2 k F /π∆ 0 m * is the SC coherence length, k F is the Fermi wave vector, ∆ 0 is the SC gap, and m * is the effective mass of electron. The enhancement of the effective mass at the critical pressure was also confirmed by the pressure dependence of A coefficient as shown in Fig. In contrast with the SC-II phase, the SC-I phase in the AFM-I state has some unusual characteristics. The SC-I phase is located in the deep inside of the AFM-I state, which is a rare case on the contrary to superconductivity near a quantum critical point. Although there are some reports of the coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism in the heavy fermion superconductors, most of those appear in the vicinity of AFM quantum critical point. To our best knowledge, it has been reported only in some U-based systems such as UNi 2 Al 3 and UPd 2 Al 3 , Finally, we discuss the possibility of valence crossover in CeNiGe 3 . At ambient pressure, ρ(T ) shows the broad maximum at approximately 100 K originating from the splitting of the CEF and the Kondo temperature was estimated as 4.5 K from the specific heat measurements. In conclusion, we have measured the temperature dependence of resistivity with the single-crystalline CeNiGe 3 sample under high pressure. In order to establish the characteristic P -T phase diagram, the experiments have been performed high-quality single crystal under better hydrostatic conditions. T N1 = 5.5 K at ambient pressure initially increases with increasing pressure and has a maximum at ∼ 3 GPa. Above 2.3 GPa, a clear zero-resistivity was observed and this SC state suddenly disappears at 3.7 GPa simultaneously with the appearance of AFM-II phase. The AFM-II phase is continuously suppressed with further increasing pressure and disappears at ∼ 6.5 GPa. In the narrow range near the critical pressure, the SC-II phase appears. The enhancement of effective mass and non-Fermi liquid behavior at P c indicate that the SC-II phase is mediated by AFM fluctuations. On the other hand, the SC-I phase coexists robustly with the AFM-I phase. The further understanding of the nontrivial P -T phase diagram in CeNiGe 3 should be helpful for the understanding of the relationship between superconductivity and magnetism in heavy-