A displacement-based, geometrically nonlinear finite element model is developed for lattice core sandwich panels modeled as 2-D equivalent single-layer (ESL), first-order shear deformation theory (FSDT) micropolar plates. The nonlinearity is due to the moderate macrorotations of the plate which are modeled by including the von Kármán nonlinear strains in the micropolar strain measures. Weak-form Galerkin formulation with linear Lagrange interpolations is used to develop the displacement finite element model. Selective reduced integration is used to eliminate shear locking and membrane locking. The novel finite element model is used to study the nonlinear bending and linear free vibrations of web-core and pyramid core sandwich panels. Clamped and free edge boundary conditions are considered for the first time for the 2-D micropolar ESL-FSDT plate theory. The present 2-D finite element results are in good agreement with the corresponding detailed 3-D FE results for the lattice core sandwich panels. The 2-D element provides computationally cost-effective solutions; in a nonlinear bending example, the number of elements required for the 2-D micropolar plate is of the order 10 3 , whereas for the corresponding 3-D model the order is 10 5 . The rapid growth of manufacturing technologies has enabled the design and development of materials whose microstructure can be architected to achieve desired functionality, including high stiffness-to-weight ratios Sandwich panels have received a lot of attention because of their superior performance compared to their monolithic counterparts made solely of either the face sheet material or the core material. For example, sandwich panels have found applications in aerospace industry Increase in the applications for lattice core sandwich panels has created a necessity to carry out analytical and computational structural analyses for such panels. Because of the involved geometry of lattice structures, in most cases analytical solutions are very difficult to achieve and even computational methods can quickly get expensive when full geometric details of a lattice core are considered. Hence various techniques have been developed to analyze lattice structures in an effort to cut down the computational costs and achieve a similar level of accuracy as a complete 3-D computational analysis provides. For example, Of the non-classical continuum mechanics theories to model lattice core sandwich panels, we mention the strain gradient theory Micropolar plate theories in the literature usually consider only linearized micropolar strains and wryness tensor components 1. To construct the first finite element model for linear and nonlinear analyses of the 2-D micropolar ESL-FSDT plate theory used to model 3-D sandwich panels 2. To analyse, for different boundary conditions, the nonlinear bending and linear free vibrations of web-core and pyramid core sandwich panels by using the finite elements. There has been a considerable number of finite element formulations for micropolar elasticity in general and micropolar plates in particular. Here we mention a few of the finite element formulations in the literature. Here, we briefly revise the equivalent single-layer first-order shear deformation theory (ESL-FSDT) of micropolar plates presented by The 3-D displacements and microrotations of a plate-like micropolar continuum can be approximated by 2-D midsurface kinematic variables (u 0 , v 0 , w 0 , φ x , φ y , ψ x , ψ y ) so that u 1 (x, y, z, t) = u 0 (x, y, t) + zφ x (x, y, t) u 2 (x, y, z, t) = v 0 (x, y, t) + zφ y (x, y, t) u 3 (x, y, z, t) = w 0 (x, y, t) where t is time, (u 0 , v 0 , w 0 ) denote the displacements of a point on the plane z = 0, and (φ x , φ y ) are the rotations of a transverse normal about the y-and x-axes, respectively, whereas (ψ x , ψ y ) are microrotations about the x-and y-axes, respectively. Finally, the following two assumptions are introduced here for the first-order shear deformation theory (FSDT): (1) the formulation is for plates of constant thickness, which (2) do not possess a drilling degree of freedom [ψ 3 (x, y, z) = 0]. In the micropolar theory, the linearized microstrain and wryness tensors are defined as (2) It follows that for the FSDT plate at hand, the nonzero strains in Cartesian coordinates are With the inclusion of von Kármán type geometric nonlinearities Figure where the symmetric shear strains are defined as and the antisymmetric shear strains are where (ω 1 , ω 2 ) are the macrorotations. The symmetric shear strains (γ s x , γ s y ) take the same forms as the shear strains in the conventional ESL-FSDT (ESL-Mindlin) plate theory founded on classical elasticity. The antisymmetric parts are defined by the macrorotations and the microrotations. The unit cells for the web-core and pyramid core are presented in Fig. where S is the stress resultant vector and C is the constitutive matrix. The explicit matrix form of Eq. ( where the vectors for the membrane N, global bending and twisting M, symmetric and antisymmetric shear Q and local (couple-stress related) bending and twisting P resultants read respectively. The submatrices for the constitutive parameters of the web-core and pyramid core in this study are The matrices include 24 constitutive parameters and are symmetric in all cases in this study. The novel parameter values obtained for the pyramid core from the constitutive modeling process presented by The strain energy for the 2-D micropolar plate takes the form The total kinetic energy of the plate is where and for the web-core and pyramid core we have The mass inertia coefficients of Eq. ( For the web-core the coefficients were given in By substituting expressions ( which we can write in the form where we can use Eq. ( where 3. Geometrically nonlinear micropolar plate finite element In this section, we develop the weak form Galerkin finite element model for the governing equations ( Ψy j (t)L (5) j (x, y), w 5 (x, y) = L (5) i (x, y) Now we write the weak form equations of the micropolar plate governing equations ( Ωe After using the constitutive equations ( where, The non-zero components of the above matrices are given in Appendix A. Although the nonlinear finite element equations ( ∂U (e) (r-1) (41) such that where e) and ∆U (e) = U (e) (r) -U (e) (r-1) The explicit expressions of the components of the element tangent stiffness matrix are given in Appendix A. After the element equations (41) have been computed, they are assembled according to the nodal connectivity of the mesh to obtain global equations. Boundary conditions are imposed on the global equations and subsequent equations are solved to obtain the global incremental generalized displacement vector ∆U at the end of r th iteration. The normalized difference between solution vectors from two consecutive iterations, measured with Euclidean norm, is computed at the end of each iteration. If the value computed is less than a preselected tolerance 'tol' further iterations are terminated and nonlinear convergence is assumed (for all the nonlinear cases considered in the paper tol = 10 -3 ) Once the nonlinear convergence is attained, the final global generalized displacement vector is obtained using (43) In the present study we will only consider the natural frequencies of the lattice plates undergoing linear free vibrations. The natural frequencies can be calculated by solving the eigenvalue problem obtained by substituting U(x, y, t) = U 0 (x, y)e jλt (where j = √ -1) into the assembled linear global equations (i.e., nonlinear terms in coefficient matrices are ignored) after the imposition of boundary conditions. Here U 0 is the global mode shape corresponding to the eigenvalue λ 2 . Once the eigenvalues are obtained the natural frequencies [Hz] are calculated using It should be noted that the number of eigenvalues obtained will be equal to the number of degrees of freedom in the problem. Thus for the convergence of higher mode shapes a finer mesh is required compared to the lower mode shapes. Since linear Lagrange interpolation functions are used in the approximation of all the primary variables, the elements become excessively stiff in the thin plate limit because of spurious constraints imposed on the bending energy due to this inconsistent interpolation, resulting in a phenomenon known as shear locking In the thin plate limit γ (s) x approaches zero and this only possible when the constant terms and coefficients of x, y and xy of γ (s) x are all zero. That is, However, Eq. ( It is worth mentioning that although linear elements and consequently reduced integration techniques are used in this paper to overcome shear and membrane locking, it is by no means a necessity. The developed finite element equations (37) can easily be used in conjunction with higher-order elements which can alleviate locking problems. However, higher-order elements with equally spaced nodes are prone to oscillations near the end points of a standard interval (known as Runge effect). This problem can be eliminated by using higher-order elements with nodes located at Gauss-Lobatto-Legendre (GLL) points 3-D finite element models for web-core and pyramid core sandwich panels are discussed in Section 4.1. These FE models are built using Abaqus 2019 to provide reference solutions to which the 2-D results can be compared. In Section 4.2, we first study the convergence of the finite element calculations by considering the linear static bending of a simply-supported web-core sandwich panel under line and uniformly distributed loads. Second, the nonlinear bending of simply-supported web-core panels is investigated for the same loads. Third, we consider the nonlinear bending of web-core panels that have clamped and free edges as well. The web-core lattice is bending-dominated, whereas the pyramid core is stretch-dominated, meaning that the struts of the core do not essentially bend but carry only axial loads, that is, they behave as axial rods. It has been shown earlier for lattice core beams that stretch-dominated cores do not exhibit global nonlinear bending but rather go straight from linear bending to local buckling where individual unit cells basically collapse near supports or point loads For the web-core plate two different size plates will be considered; the plate planform area is (a • b) m 2 and the studied sizes are (5.4 • 3.6) m 2 for bending and (1.8 • 1.2) m 2 for natural frequency calculations. The other relevant dimensions were given in Fig. The 3-D boundary conditions are imposed in a similar manner as in classical simply-supported, clamped and free edge 3-D solid plate problems. For simply-supported edges, for all nodes i = 1, 2, . . . , n of the shell elements on edges x = (-a/2, a/2) (see Fig. No boundary conditions are set on free edges. For the bending analysis of the 2-D micropolar ESL-FSDT plates the coordinate system is chosen such that the center of the plate coincides with the origin as shown in Fig. 1. Simply-supported on all edges (SSSS). 2. Edges parallel to x-axis are clamped and edges parallel to y-axis are simply supported (CSCS). 3. All edges are clamped (CCCC). 4. Edges parallel to x-axis are free and edges parallel to y-axis are clamped (CFCF). Furthermore, for each boundary condition case the plate is subjected to two different loadings, a uniformly distributed load and a line load along the y-axis at the center of the plate. Since the boundary and loading conditions considered here result in symmetry about x-and y-axes, we consider only the quarter plate lying in the first quadrant as the computational domain (see Fig. To further test the reliability of micropolar ESL-FSDT plate model and the nonlinear finite element formulation based on it, linear and nonlinear transverse deflections of a (5.4 • 3.6) m 2 web-core plate having face thickness t f = 4 mm subjected to CSCS boundary conditions and a (5.4 • 3.6) m 2 web-core plate having face thickness t f = 6 mm subjected to CCCC boundary conditions are presented in Fig. Finally, we consider the (5.4 • 3.6) m 2 web-core plate with CFCF boundary conditions. In Fig. It is worth noting that only 1024 isoparametric linear rectangular elements based on Lagrange interpolation functions are used on the computational domain in the 2-D micropolar bending analysis of the (5.4 • 3.6) m 2 web-core lattice plate, while the complete 3-D FE analysis uses 453600 shell elements of type S8R5 as pointed out earlier. Thus, the present finite element model is computationally very efficient in obtaining the global response of lattice plates. Here we will consider the free linear vibration analysis of both web-core and pyramid core lattice plates subjected to the same boundary conditions listed for the bending analysis. But it should be noted that the argument of symmetry cannot be used for the frequency analysis and, thus, the full plate has to be taken as the computational domain. For the linear free vibration analysis using the present finite element model, we ignore the nonlinear terms and consider only the linear terms in evaluating the element coefficient matrices. In Figure In this paper, a displacement-based geometrically nonlinear finite element model for first-order shear deformation micropolar plates was developed. Linear Lagrange interpolation functions were used for the generalized displacement variables and appropriate reduced integration techniques were used to overcome shear and membrane locking. The finite element model was used to analyze the bending and free vibrations of lattice core sandwich plates. Specifically, web-core lattice plates with various face thicknesses were considered in bending analysis while both web-core and pyramid core lattice plates were considered in linear vibration analysis. Combined with the discussed micropolar constitutive modeling technique for lattice materials, the plate finite element provides efficient means to carry out global bending and vibration analyses for lattice, or architected, core sandwich panels. The micropolar approach is beneficial especially in the case of bending-dominated lattice cores since it considers appropriately both the translations and rotations within 3-D microscale unit cells modeled by classical beam and shell elements when the constitutive modeling for the 2-D macroscale polar plate is carried out. For stretch-dominated cores the micropolar approach becomes relevant especially when a sandwich panel exhibits the thick-face effect Ωe