Quantum materials that host a flat band, such as pseudospin-1 lattices and magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, can exhibit drastically new physical phenomena including unconventional superconductivity, orbital ferromagnetism, and Chern insulating behaviors. We report a surprising class of electronic in-gap edge states in pseudospin-1 materials without the conventional need of bandinversion topological phase transitions or introducing magnetism via an external magnetic type of interactions. In particular, we find that, in two-dimensional gapped (insulating) Dirac systems of massive spin-1 quasiparticles, in-gap edge modes can emerge through only an electrostatic potential applied to a finite domain. Associated with these unconventional edge modes are spontaneous formation of pronounced domain-wall spin textures, which exhibit the feature of out-of-plane spin-angular momentum locking on both sides of the domain boundary and are quite robust against boundary deformations and impurities despite a lack of an explicit topological origin. The in-gap modes are formally three-component evanescent wave solutions, akin to the Jackiw-Rebbi type of bound states. Such modes belong to a distinct class due to the following physical reasons: three-component spinor wave function, unusual boundary conditions, and a shifted flat band induced by the external scalar potential. Not only is the finding of fundamental importance, but it also paves the way for generating highly controllable in-gap edge states with emergent spin textures using the traditional semiconductor gate technology. Results are validated using analytic calculations of a continuum Dirac-Weyl model and tight-binding simulations of realistic materials through characterizations of local density of state spectra and resonant tunneling conductance. The physics of quantum materials hosting a flat band, such as the magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, has become a forefront area of research. These materials can generate surprising physical phenomena such as unconventional superconductivity In modern physics, the emergence of low-dissipation or dissipationless topological surface or edge states in condensed matter systems is a fascinating phenomenon Pseudospin-1 type of low-energy excitations beyond the Dirac-Weyl-Majorana paradigm have recently been realized in electronic lattice systems The subject of our study is pseudospin-1 relativistic quantum systems described by the generalized Dirac-Weyl equation which are fundamentally linear. Specifically, low-energy excitations in condensed matter systems such as graphene Our main finding is that, in pseudospin-1 systems with an energy gap, a surprising class of in-gap edge bound states can arise without band or mass inversion based domain-walls that separate the regions with different kinds of bulk band topology and any external magnetic interaction, but these states are remarkably robust against geometric deformations and impurities. In fact, they are generated through only a local electrostatic potential barrier of the repulsive type in the underlying insulating spin-1 systems. We uncover a number of remarkable, quite unusual spectral properties of these modes. Unlike the topological edge states previously discovered and studied, the states reported here require no established topological restrictions such as interfacing domains/systems of different bulk topological invariants and any particular type of discrete symmetries. In fact, through self-inducing topological spin textures, the uncovered states possess the degree of robustness enjoyed by conventional topological states but they belong to a distinct class due to the following physical reasons: three-component spinor wave function, unusual boundary conditions, and a shifted flat band induced by the external electrical potential. Experimentally, these states can be generated readily through routine electro-static gating within the same material (or within a single device), rendering them promising in applications, e.g., a gate-controlled spin-1 Dirac electron transistor of high on/off ratio. Schematic illustration of the system setting and main finding. (A) A side view of the setting leading to ingap edge modes without magnetism and the conventional band inversion topological phase transition, where a gapped two-dimensional system (thick gray line) hosting Dirac-like low-energy excitations of massive spin-1 is subject to a locally applied electrostatic potential. The energy band diagram in the absence of the potential is shown on left side of the bottom panel [below (A)]. (B) In-gap edge bound modes with an emergent domain-wall like spin ordering/texture (top panel) arise in the presence of a repulsive type of potential, which defines an antidot profile as shown in the bottom panel. The criterion for the stable emergence of the in-gap states is |Vg -∆| ∆/2. Figure , where the first term describes the bulk low-energy excitation of a massive spin-1 particle with quasi-momentum p = (p x , p y ), the second term represents the generalization of the Dirac mass with Ŝz being a component of the spin-1 matrix vector Ŝ, and the last term is the locally applied electrostatic potential of height V g which defines a closed interface at the boundary. As we will establish, this magnetism-free configuration permits in-gap edge states, and the states with higher angular momenta possess highly organized domain-wall like spin textures, as illustrated in Fig. For a circular domain of radius R, the electrostatic potential is given by U (r) = V g Θ(R -r), where Θ is the Heaviside function. The system as governed by H ef f ψ = Eψ can be solved analytically in the polar coordinates r = (r, θ) to yield closed-form solutions of the form where μ = I, O labels the inner and outer regions as defined by the interface, v F k μ = E 2 μ -∆ 2 , and F I j = J j and F O j = H (1) j are the Bessel and the Hankel functions of the first kind with j being the integer angular momentum quantum number. As explained in Appendices A and B, the in-gap modes uncovered take the form of a three-component evanescent edge state. In comparison with known edge states, either topological or nontopological, the states uncovered here belong to a distinct class due to the following physical reasons: threecomponent spinor wave function, unusual boundary conditions, and a shifted flat band induced by the external scalar potential. Particularly, for |j| 1, we calculate the eigenenergy E ≈ V g /2 and the resulting spin textures where with ξ = (V g + 2∆)r/2 v F . Concretely, for a representative parameter setting, e.g., V g = ∆ = 6 v F /R, we calculate the resulting energy spectra as a function of the angular momentum quantum number j, as shown in Fig. A feature of the spin textures is worth mentioning. If we calculate the topological number defined as where n = S/|S|, we get N = -sign(j)/2, signifying vortex-like spin textures that can arise from in-gap excitations of meron-like skyrmions To gain further insights, we characterize the energy spectra using two experimentally relevant quantities: the local density of state (LDOS) and spin-LDOS defined as D(E, r) = ν ν|ν δ(E -E ν ) and D s (E, r) = ν ν|S z |ν δ(E -E ν ), respectively, where ν is the eigenstate label. As shown in Fig. The robustness of the QSH and QAH edge states are known to be protected by the presetting discontinuous change in the associated bulk topological invariants across the interface, such as the Z 2 index and Chern number, all requiring some sort of magnetic interaction. However, for the edge modes demonstrated in Fig. To ascertain the nontrivial feature of the in-gap states, we examine the associated spin properties. In particular, we introduce an effective exchange energy penalty: to identify a domain wall like spin ordering structure between the inner and outer regions. It can be seen from Fig. As in most studies of TIs Our theoretical prediction is general for gapped systems of massive spin-1 particles subject to an electrostatic potential applied to a finite domain. The bandgap associated Dirac-like mass generation can be implemented in alternative ways. For example, for a twodimensional lattice with three sublattices where c † νi (c νi ) with ν = A, B, C are creation (annihilation) operators of the localized states |νi at site i belonging to the sublattice ν, i, j denotes pairs of nearestneighbor sites with the tunneling strength (hopping energy) of t. The last term represents a staggered sublattice potential that is responsible for the Dirac-type mass based gap opening. In the absence of any external field, we obtain the bulk energy band structure and corresponding LDOS spectra, as shown in Fig. We also consider a lead-contacted dice lattice flake with a circular gate-defined quantum dot as schematically illustrated in the top panel of Fig. Remarkably, the emerging in-gap modes acting as "doorway" states can actuate resonant tunneling through the device with large conductance. Because of the east of realizing control with an electrostatic gate potential, the setup can act as a novel quantum switch or transistor of high on/off ratio with spin-1 Dirac electrons. Alternatively, associated with triple point semimetals of bulk massless spin-1 excitations described by a three-band extension of the Weyl Hamiltonian We have also solved a gapped Dice lattice in a semiinfinite geometry in the presence or absence of a locally applied gate potential, which represents a trivial bulk band insulator with low energy, massive, pseudospin-1 excitations. For comparison, we have also included the known case of gapped graphene. The results are shown in Fig. To summarize, we have predicted a class of in-gap edge excitations with spontaneous domain-wall spin textures in insulating Dirac-type systems of massive spin-1 particles with only a locally applied electrostatic potential. Despite the absence of magnetism and any a priori topological origin, these states are extremely robust against boundary deformation and disorders. The remarkable property of these states is the self-induced emergence of domain-wall spin ordering that renders distinct spin-angular momentum locking on different sides of the domain interface. Consequently, the states are stable against impurities and/or geometric deformation. The in-gap modes are formally three-component evanescent wave solutions, bearing certain resemblance with the Jackiw-Rebbi type of bound states. The modes belong to a distinct class due to the following physical reasons: three-component spinor wave function, unusual boundary conditions, and a shifted flat band induced by the external scalar potential. Our findings provide a fully electrostatic based route to generating protected, robust spin ordering edge states without requiring any sort of magnetism, extrinsic or intrinsic. The states can be exploited for spintronics and quantum information processing applications, e.g., realization of a gatecontrolled spin-1 Dirac electron transistor or quantum switch. With rapid advances in generalized Dirac materials, especially those hosting the spin-1 generalization of ordinary Dirac/Weyl fermions, and with the state-ofthe-art measurement technologies, experimental confirmation of the states discovered here is possible. We note a distinct feature of the system studied: the inherent mid-gap flat band hosting macroscopically degenerate states. Without the applied electrostatic potential (V g = 0), we obtain the flat band states, i.e., E(p) = 0, given by (nonnormalized) with the wavevector k = (k x , k y ) ≡ p/ making an angle ζ = arctan(k y /k x ) with the x axis. The states result in a vanishing current and a trivial spin distribution over the space as well as a vanishing Chern number Taken together, the main contributions of this paper are: (1) in-gap edge modes can arise in a topologically trivial spin-1 Dirac insulators with local electrical gating or nonmagnetic doping, (2) the in-gap edge modes possess pseudospin polarized textures akin to localized domain walls of either the hedgehog or the vortex type without requiring any external pseudospin resolved field, (3) the edge modes are robust against boundary deformations and disordered scalar impurities, (4) the edge modes are nearly dispersionless in energy and intrinsically possess the capability of strong charge and spin confinement/localization, and (5) all these features of the ingap edge modes can be electrically controlled within the same material setting. We note that, the existing mechanisms for in-gap bound modes or excitations can be either topological or nontopological. Examples are the extensively studied topological in-gap edge modes Our system thus does not fall into any known category of systems in which in-gap bound modes can arise, and the edge modes uncovered belong to a distinct class due to the three-component spinor wave function and the unusual boundary conditions as well as an electrically induced shift of the flat band. where v F is the Fermi velocity, p is the momentum operator, Ŝ = (S x , S y ) and Ŝz are spin-1 matrices, ∆ denotes a Dirac-type mass, and U (r) is a scalar type of perturbation (e.g., an electrostatic potential). The energy eigenstates Ψ(r) = [ψ 1 (r), ψ 2 (r), ψ 3 (r)] T can be determined by the generalized Dirac-Weyl equation ĤΨ(r) = EΨ(r). (A2) For a spatially homogeneous/constant potential, e.g., U (r) = V 0 , the eigenenergies are E = V 0 and V 0 + s ∆ 2 + v F |k| 2 with s = ± being the dispersion band index. The corresponding plane wave solutions can be written as and where the wavevector k The local current associated with state Ψ(r) = [ψ 1 , ψ 2 , ψ 3 ] T can be calculated from the local expecta-tion value of û as By definition, the local current is the local probability density of spin vector (S x , S y ). Using the plane wave solution (A3), we obtain The effects of the applied scalar potential are to shift the Dirac point (k = 0) in the energy domain, to tune the kinetic energy = (E -V 0 )/ v F , and to alter the particle attributes from hole-to electron-type, and vice versa. The time-reversal symmetry operator is , where K is the operator for complex conjugation. Due to the Dirac-like mass term, the time-reversal symmetry is broken. We obtain the eigensolutions of the spin-1 massive Dirac system where an electrostatic potential is applied to a circular domain: U (r) = V 0 Θ(r -R). This is effectively a type-II quantum (anti-)dot configuration for Dirac-like massive spin-1 particles. Because of the rotational symmetry, it is convenient to use polar coordinates r = (r, θ), where the eigenequation is where Because the total angular momentum operator Ĵz = -i∂ θ + Ŝz commutes with the Hamiltonian Ĥ, the common set of eigenstates has the general form with l ∈ Z. For the dispersive bands, we have where the index μ = I, O labels the inner and outer regions of the circular domain boundary, m (x) are the Bessel and the Hankel functions of the first kind, respectively. Matching the spinor wavefunctions Ψ I l and Ψ O l at the domain boundary (interface) r = R yields the following transcendental equation which can be calculated numerically to yield the eigenenergies and eigenstates with high accuracy. Figure We show analytically that the modes in the band gap possess a unique spectral peculiarity and are in fact edge states with domain-wall like, topologically nontrivial spin textures. In particular, in the gap |E μ | < |∆|, the radial wavenumbers are purely imaginary, which can be redefined as With the substitutions we rewrite the eigenvalue equation Eq. (B4) as with the associated eigenstates given by where ρ = r/R, I l (x) and K l (x) are modified Bessel functions. Making use of asymptotic expansions of high order Bessel functions , we obtain, from the eigenvalue equation Eq. (B4), the following relation lim l→∞ Using the identity lim n→∞ (1 + 1/n) n = e, we arrive at an equation that can be solved to yield the asymptotic eigenenergies: The eigenenergies are independent of the angular momentum and are thus in-gap (energy) dispersionless excitations. The associated eigenstates are approximately given by where So, inside the domain ρ < 1, we have Outside of the domain ρ > 1, we have We thus have that the in-gap excitations are localized edge modes and exhibit domain-wall like spin textures for high angular momentum values. Note that, for a given value of l, in the semiclassical limit p, q 1, we have, approximately, From the eigenvalue equation, we have which leads to the same in-gap spectral properties as those from the large l regime. The associated semiclassical eigenstates are where κ = p ≈ q ∼ δ 2 -v 2 0 /4 1. We obtain the resulting spin textures as which exhibit a Bloch-type of domain wall spin ordering about the domain boundary as a result of the applied electrostatic potential. Semiclassically, the in-gap states are thus exponentially localized edge modes with spontaneously topological spin textures, which are reminiscent of the interfacial Jackiw-Rebbi modes but here the modes have a distinct spectral features and an unconventional physical origin. Appendix C: Effects of smoothly varying electrostatic potential profiles and impurities on in-gap modes in massive spin-1 Dirac systems Realistically, the applied electrostatic potential will not be infinitely sharp at the domain boundary but, rather, the potential file varies smoothly across the boundary. From an experimental standpoint, it is necessary to investigate if the in-gap states can persist when the domain boundary is "smeared." The test would provide further support for the robustness and topological origin of those states. To be concrete, we use the following smoothly varying potential profile: where d (1/d) characterizes the boundary smoothness (sharpness) with d = 0 corresponding to the ideal case of an infinitely sharp boundary. Generally, for a finite value of d, it is not feasible to write down explicit solutions of the spin-1 Dirac equation. We thus exploit the finite difference method (FDM) recently developed for massless spin-1/2 Dirac fermions we obtain the corresponding radial eigenvalue equation of the three-component spinor where When discretizing this equation on a finite lattice/grid, we need to judiciously specify the difference scheme and the boundary conditions at the ends of the lattice so as to preserve the Hermiticity of the Hamiltonian. A feasible procedure is to use the backward-forward-backward (BFB) difference scheme to approximate the derivatives of the three components in Eq. (C3): where h = L/(N + 1) is the discretization step size for the system in the range 0 < r < L with N + 2 lattice points. The boundary conditions can be deduced from the Hermitian constraint of Ĥr : which can be explicitly written as (C5) The specific boundary conditions on R(0) and R(L) then become R 1 (0)+R 3 (0) = 0 and R 2 (L) = 0. Implementing this procedure results in an eigenvalue problem for a 3N × 3N Hermitian matrix H 3N ×3N = [H μν ] with entries given by We use the typical experimental values of the local density of states (DOS) with ν labeling the obtained radial eigenstates for fixed l, and represents a spatial average of the wave function centered at r = r 0 with a Gaussian weight λ. We approximate the delta function by a Lorentzian with the broadening parameter Γ. In our simulations, we use a system of size L/R = 10 and discretize it with a uniform lattice of N = 600 sites. Other parameters are chosen as Γ/E * = 0.2 and λ = 0.01R. Representative results are shown in Figs. 8, 9 and 10, which provide strong support for the persistence of the in-gap modes in massive spin-1 Dirac systems in realistic systems with a smooth potential profile and impurities. To test the robustness and to establish the topological origin of the in-gap states for massive spin-1 Dirac particles analytically predicted from the setting of a circular potential domain, we seek to search for such states in systems with a deformed domain. A difficulty that must be overcome is to calculate the eigenenergies and eigenstates of massive spin-1 Dirac particle in deformed domains of an arbitrarily geometric shape. We have succeeded in generalizing the multiple multipole expansion method originally developed in optics A concrete setting of a single potential domain of arbitrary shape is illustrated in Fig. where δ = ∆/ v F and τ = (E -V τ )/ v F . In polar coordinates r = (r, θ), the spinor cylindrical wave basis of the solutions with angular momentum l is where l (k τ r) (with H (1) l being the Hankel function of the first kind), we have that the Dirac-type expansion basis wavefunctions originated at r mτ for the specific region τ are given by The wavefunction in region I has the form and C m I l . To solve the system numerically, a finite truncation is necessary, which turns out to be feasible in practice by discretizing the boundary to a finite number of points J and setting the number of basis functions M τ in the specific region τ and l ∈ [-L, L] for all the functions. Carrying out the discretization procedure, we arrive at the following finite dimensional matrix equation where N = (2L + 1) × (M I + M II ) = N I + N II and the compact substitutions are and with where As the expansions are generally nonorthogonal, more equations are required than the number of unknowns to enable the deduction of an over-determined matrix system with 2J N , which can be solved by the standard pseudo-inverse algorithm: C = -pinv(M) * Y . In particular, we use the residual error evaluated at the boundary as the criterion to test convergence. We adjust the number, the order and/or positions of the multipoles to ensure Error < tolerance. After the unknown coefficients C have been obtained, the associated wavefunctions and hence the local density of states in the specific region can be calculated accordingly. To validate the method, we exploit the analytically solvable case of circular geometry. Figure 