Defined substoichiometric titanium oxides (TixO2x-1 with 3 ≤ x ≤ 10) called Magnéli phases have been investigated mostly for their unusual high conductivity and metal-like behavior. In photocatalysis, Magnéli phase containing titania particles have been reported to provide favorable charge separation resulting in enhanced reaction efficiency. In the current work we describe a onestep synthesis of Magnéli-containing mixed phase nanoparticles that carry directly integrated minute amounts of Pt. Phase optimized nanoparticles that contain only a few hundred ppm Pt are very effective photocatalysts for H2 evolution (they provide a 50-100 times higher H2 evolution than plain anatase loaded with a similar amount of Pt). These photocatalysts are synthesized in a setup combining a hot-wall reactor that is used for TiOx synthesis with a spark generator producing Pt nanoparticles. Different reactor temperatures result in various phase ratios between anatase and Magnéli phases. The titania nanoparticles (≈ 24 -53 nm) were characterized using XRD, HRTEM, XPS and EPR spectra as well as ICP-OES analysis. The best photocatalyst prepared at 900 oC (which consists of mixed phase particles of 32% anatase, 11% rutile and 57% Magnéli phases loaded with 290 ppm of Pt) can provide a photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of ≈ 5432 μmol h -1 g -1 for UV and ≈ 1670 μmol h -1 g -1 for AM1.5 illumination. For powders converted to higher amounts of Magnéli phases (1000 oC and 1100 oC), a drastic loss of the photocatalytic H2 generation activity is observed. Thus, the high photocatalytic efficiency under best conditions is ascribed to an effective synergy between multi-junctions of Magnéli titania and Pt that enable a much more effective charge separation and reaction than conventional Pt/anatase junctions. Magnéli phases are a set of substoichiometric titanium oxidessuch as Ti3O5, Ti4O7, Ti5O9, with a general chemical formula TinO2n-1 where n varies from 3 to 10; these compounds were firstly described in the 1950s by Magnéli et al. Moreover, theoretical considerations show that e.g., the filled metallic band of Ti4O7 is close below the conduction band edge of TiO2 On the other hand, the combination of anatase with metallic suboxides enables charge separation in analogy with semiconductor/metal junctions. Therefore, mixed phase Magnéli junctions deliver cascades of electronic states, which makes these materials highly interesting as intrindic cocatalysts or sensitizers for titania in photocatalytic applications. In a previous article we described the beneficial effect of Ti4O7 on an anatase nanoparticle photocatalyst for H2 production. We showed that this combination allowed for a significant hydrogen production, without the use of any further co-catalyst Under the conditions given in the Supporting Information, for reactor temperatures in the range of 500 °C up to ≈ 700 °C, nanoparticles are produced that consist of pure anatase (Figure The presence of Magnéli phases in the 900 oC sample can also be detected by HRTEM imaging based on lattice spacing and using SAED analysis (Figure [004] with 0.239 nm, rutile [111] 0.221 nm, Ti4O7 [120] 0.331 nm and Ti5O9 [102] 0.409 nm. It is worth noticing that Figure XPS measurements for the samples prepared at 500 oC, 900 oC and 1000 oC are shown in Figure The largest peak at 530.1 eV can be attributed to lattice oxygen in the anatase TiO2 position. Its intensity decreases with increasing synthesizing temperature (from 88.78% at 500 oC to 53.26% at 1000 oC) while the peak at 532.3 eV that corresponds to "defective" oxygen species typical for Magnéli phases Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopic measurements were carried out with all investigated samples (from 500 °C to 1000 °C) as shown in Figure Figure For either light source, the photocatalytic H2 evolution efficiency is drastically increasing for synthesis temperatures up to 900 oC, while it strongly drops for higher synthesis temperatures. Pt functionalized materials showed a significantly higher H2 yield than Pt free powders (Figure The latter is evident from the fact that a further increase of the share of Magnéli-phases in the powders (> 1000 oC) leads to diminished H2 evolution. At the same time, Pt-free samples show less activity even when compared with the strongest hydrogen evolution for the powder synthesized at 900 oC (237 μmol h -1 g -1 ). Photocatalytic cycling experiments (Figure Reflectance spectra (Figure In stark strong contrast to these absorption measurements are the characteristics obtained from photocurrents spectra Figure From a semi-quantitative assessment of the solid state electric conductivity of the different powders (Figure Clearly, the combination of various types of Magnéli phases, ultrafine Pt domains and anatase in a single particle allows for the creation of divers electronic pathways to fast and effectively transport deliver electrons for the H2 generation reaction. This work shows that single nanoparticles, which consist of nanosized anatase / mixed phase Magnéli /Pt junctions within a single particle, are extremely beneficial for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. In our work the photocatalyst is simply formed by a one-step synthesis in a setup combining a hot-wall reactor with a spark generator. The formed nanoparticles contain junctions that provide unique energy states that are able to very efficiently separate and deliver charge carriers to the interphase between catalyst and solution as well as provide a rapid H2 formation reaction. The anatase phase is mostly responsible for charge carrier formation while the mixed Magnéli phases with metallic bands provides a high electronic conductivity and a cascade of electronic states that ensures a high carrier separation and mobility through the catalyst. It is possible that the latter also takes part in the direct transfer of electrons to the solution, however main contribution to the high efficiency of this process is provided by Pt doping. In such a multiphase particle, using an extremely small amount of noble metal is much more effective than in a plain anatase particle. Among the investigated powders, the optimal mixed phase particles consist of 32% anatase, 11% rutile and 57% Magnéli phases (about 15% Ti3O5, 17% Ti4O7 and