Layered semiconductors, such as MoS2, have attracted interest as channel materials for postsilicon and beyond-CMOS electronics. Much attention has been devoted to the monolayer limit, but the monolayer channel is not necessarily advantageous in terms of the performance of field-effect transistors (FETs). Therefore, it is important to investigate the characteristics of FETs that have multilayer channels. Here, we report the staircase-like transfer characteristics of FETs with exfoliated multilayer MoS2 flakes. Atomic force microscope characterizations reveal that the presence of thinner terraces at the edges of the flakes accompanies the staircase-like characteristics. The anomalous staircase-like characteristics are ascribable to a difference in threshold-voltage shift by charge transfer from surface adsorbates between the channel center and the thinner terrace at the edge. This study reveals the importance of the uniformity of channel thickness. With regard to the continued efforts to realize highperformance electronic devices, miniaturization of field-effect transistors (FETs) incorporated in integrated circuits has been pursued. However, a reduction in FET dimension deteriorates its performance due to the so-called short-channel effect Considerable research on layered semiconductors has been devoted to the monolayer limit. However, a dependence of FET performance on the number of layers has shown that the monolayer channel is not advantageous in terms of field-effect mobilities In this article, we report the anomalous characteristics frequently observed in FETs with exfoliated multilayer MoS2 flakes. Specifically, they display transfer characteristics (dependence of the drain current, ID, on the gate voltage, VG) with a two-tiered staircase-like structure, which is completely different from commonly observed structures. A careful inspection of the flake structure by atomic force microscopy (AFM) shows that the presence of a thinner terrace at the edges of the MoS2 flakes accompanies the staircase-like transfer characteristics. The anomalous characteristics explain that a smaller VG is required to build up a channel in the thinner terraces near the edges than that in the thicker part around the center of the flake. The difference in the threshold voltage, Vth, between the two distinct parts within the flake is ascribable to a difference in Vth shift by charge transfer from surface adsorbates between the two parts. These considerations are further supported by the investigation of the effect of thermal annealing treatment. Our results are based on thick MoS2 flakes, but the conclusions also hold for ultrathin flakes. This study clearly shows the importance of the uniformity in channel thickness. MoS2 flakes obtained by mechanical exfoliation from a natural crystal (SPI Supplies) were transferred to a highly doped silicon substrate (p + -Si) that has a 300-nm-thick thermal oxide layer. Source/drain electrodes of a 50-nm-thick Au film with a 1-nm-thick Cr adhesion layer were fabricated by standard electron-beam lithography processes. Figures The considerations above suggest that the first tier in the anomalous transfer characteristics in figure Figure One possible mechanism that relates the thickness variation to the difference in Vth is the charge transfer from surface adsorbates. In the case of back-gated FETs, such as those investigated in this study, the channel is located away from the surface with the adsorbates by the flake thickness. Charge carriers doped from the adsorbates affect the charge-carrier concentration within the channel, though the change in carrier concentration by surface doping is reduced by a screening effect as the distance from the surface adsorbates becomes longer. The change that remains at the channel should be higher with a smaller flake thickness, as schematically shown in figure If the difference in Vth between the first and second tiers in the staircase-like transfer characteristics, ΔVth, is caused by the influence of the surface adsorbates, the ΔVth value should be reduced by removing the adsorbates. We performed thermal annealing of the devices at 200 °C for 2 h in a N2 environment and measured them again in the same N2 environment after cooling down to room temperature. Figures However, when the film thickness is too large, the carrier concentration in the channel cannot be modulated by the surface charge transfer. Here, the maximum depletion width, Wmax, is considered as an index of the thickness range affected by the charge transfer. Wmax can be expressed as , where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ε MoS 2 is the dielectric constant of MoS2, ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, q is the elementary charge, Nimp is the density of ionized impurities, and ni is the intrinsic carrier density. Among the material parameters, ε MoS 2 ≈ 11 It should be noted that the thickness range of flakes used in this study is not sufficiently thin for suppression of shortchannel effects. However, as schematically indicated in figure 4(a), the effect of the surface charge transfer decays exponentially (or in a similar manner) with increasing thickness. This indicates that the difference in ΔQ between a n-layer flake and a (n + 1)-layer flake becomes larger for smaller n, where n is a natural number. Therefore, ΔVth induced by the thickness inhomogeneity is expected to be significant also for the ultrathin regime. In conclusion, we report a two-tiered staircase-like shape in transfer characteristics of FETs based on an exfoliated multilayer MoS2 flake, which is completely different from the commonly observed one-tiered characteristics. AFM inspections on the flake topography revealed that the presence of a thinner part at the edges of the flake accompanies the staircase-like characteristics. The two-tiered shape of the characteristics, which indicates the presence of two distinct regions with different Vth values, can be explained by the channel formation initially at the thinner part at the edges because a shift in Vth caused by surface charge transfer is larger in a thinner flake. The staircase-like transfer characteristics deteriorate switching performance of FETs, which should be avoided. Thus, the present finding clearly shows the importance of the uniformity in thickness of multilayered channels, which is significant not only for the thick flakes studied here but also for ultrathin flakes. Although research on layered semiconductors has mostly focused on the monolayer limit, the performance of FETs based on layered semiconductors has been reported to be higher in multilayered channels than monolayered channels 