We present here a way to modulate the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) by anomalous Hall signal and thus measure the domain wall (DW) motion velocity at near-coercivity. We study the magnetization relaxation at the constant field in the longitudinal (Rxx) Hall geometry. We observed asymmetric Rxx peaks that appear at the DW pinning fields. This unusual magnetoresistance behavior is explained by considering the AMR modulation by the anomalous Hall voltage. In the proposed method, using the magnetization relaxation, the real-time DW velocity measurement is much easier in comparison to the other microscopy methods. Moreover, the additional signal from anomalous Hall voltage makes this technique simpler and sensitive for DW velocity measurements, which can be useful for various spintronic sensing applications. The materials with low magnetization such as antiferromagnets and ferrimagnets seem promising for the next generation fast and compact spintronic devices where stray field and limited switching speed, as in the case of ferromagnets, can be avoided. Among various ferrimagnets, the rare earth (RE) -transition metal (TM) alloys have been attracted much attention due to their large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The RE-TM ferrimagnetic alloys possess strong antiferromagnetic exchange between the RE and TM magnetic sublattices, therefore, by changing the content of RE or TM the dominance of these magnetic sublattices can be altered, which at certain composition gives the compensation of magnetization i.e. Mnet=0 The non-zero spin polarization and zero magnetic moment at compensation in RE-TM ferrimagnets have the advantages over the antiferromagnets where the magnetic moment, as well as spin polarization, is zero. The easy sensing of magnetization state in these alloys have been investigated for the antiferromagnetic-like ultrafast spintronics applications Recently, the domain wall (DW) motion has been investigated in the thin film of these alloys It has been noticed that the DW velocity is measured by the ratio of DW displacement to the current pulse duration 5 . The current pulse may trigger the DW motion but the pulse duration not necessarily be the real-time taken by the DW to travel the distance over the strip, which could give a false large value of DW velocity. An alternate method for DW velocity measurement from anomalous Hall measurements has also been applied, where the DW is created by an additional transverse writing current pulse in addition to the out-of-plane field in Co/Ni films In the present study, the domain wall propagates at fixed pinning fields whereas in other studies the current pulse with a magnitude of critical value or magnetic field larger than the coercivity is applied that gives higher DW velocity or faster magnetization switching Here we measure the domain wall velocity in the TbFeCo Hall bar pattern from the magnetization relaxation in the longitudinal Hall geometry. In transverse Hall geometry, the measured resistance is perpendicular to the current direction known as anomalous Hall resistance (Rxy), whereas, in longitudinal Hall geometry, resistance is measured parallel to the current direction which typically originates due to the anisotropic magneto-resistance (AMR) and here denoted as Rxx. A constant and perpendicular DW depinning field is applied and then change in longitudinal resistance is measured as a function of time. The origin of asymmetric magneto-resistance in longitudinal Hall geometry is explained and the domain wall motion velocities have been estimated from the magnetization relaxation curves at different magnetic fields. We present here a simple and unique method to obtain the domain wall motion velocity and its distribution over the Hall bar channel. The TbFeCo amorphous alloy film with structure Hf(4nm)/TbFeCo(10nm)/MgO(2nm)/Ta(2nm) was deposited on thermally oxidized Si-substrates using magnetron sputtering (base pressure 2.2 x 10 -7 Torr). The TbFeCo was co-sputtered from the Tb and Fe80Co20 targets so that the composition of the alloys can be changed by changing the Tb target power. The magnetic properties of the deposited film were measured using an Alternating-Gradient Magnetometer (PMC AGM) at room temperature. The Hall bar device for the anomalous Hall measurements was fabricated by electron-beam lithography and Ar-ion milling. The anomalous Hall measurements were carried out using an electromagnet-equipped four-probe station at room temperature. The schematic of multilayer structures and device connections are shown in Fig. For performing magnetization relaxation first a perpendicular saturating field of 1 kOe is applied for a while to generate a single domain state. A perpendicular depinning field in the opposite direction is then applied across the Hall bar. The moment when the depinning field reached to desired value the longitudinal resistance (Rxx) is measured between the two voltage pickup lines by applying a 100 μA dc sensing current along the current channel as shown in Fig. The magnetoresistance anomaly has been observed before in the DyFeCo thin films where the magnetic moment canting between the sublattices and the magnetization divergence at the edges has been accounted for its origin When DW propagates by the driving field it crosses the pickup line B and the voltage at pickup line B is reversed from the initial value in Fig. The AMR is extremely small in comparison to the anomalous Hall resistance and is always symmetric i.e. the AMR peaks are always positive. Therefore, a slight difference in the height of the positive and negative peaks appearing in Rxx vs field or time plot can be seen which is equal to the (Rxy + ∆RAMR) and (-Rxy + ∆RAMR), where, ∆RAMR is the change in resistance due to the AMR. The difference in the height of the peaks for different sensing currents can also be seen in Fig. For analysis of the magnetization relaxation curves, the relaxation time curve can be divided into two parts by a verticle line passing trough the Rxx minima as shown in Fig. The DW velocity distribution indicates the maximum velocity peaks of ~ 0.84 μm/s and ~ 3 μm/s for pickup lines A and B, respectively. It is evident from the velocity distribution curves that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) is larger for the domain motion in the left channel. The distribution of the peak value of domain wall motion velocities with applied perpendicular fields is shown in Fig. In summary, we studied the magnetization switching in the longitudinal i.e. Rxx Hall bar geometry in Hf/TbFeCo Hall bar device. We observed that the asymmetric peaks in Rxx vs field curve appear at the coercivity of anomalous Hall loop. We measured the domain wall motion velocity at various DW pinning fields through the magnetization relaxation while measuring the Rxx. The unusual magnetoresistance behavior is explained as a combined effect of the anomalous Hall effect and the anisotropic magnetoresistance. The peak velocity reached a maximum value of around 13 μm/s in the device. The smaller domain wall motion velocity (~ 10 μm/s) in comparison to the reported large values (~ 10 m/s) attributes to the domain wall propagation at small DW pinning fields and real-time duration taken for the magnetization switching in the present case. This study demonstrates an easy way to measure domain wall motion velocity from the magnetization relaxation in comparison to the other complex methods which could be useful in spintronic sensing applications particularly where MOKE imaging is not possible. 