Spin-flip scattering from magnetic impurities has a strong pair-breaking effect in s-wave superconductors where increasing the concentration of impurities rapidly destroys superconductivity. For small Kondo temperature TK the destruction of superconductivity is preceded by the reentrant superconductivity at finite temperature range Tc2 < T < Tc1, while the normal phase reappears at T < Tc2 ∼ TK . Here we explore the superconducting phase in a periodic system modeled as the Anderson lattice with additional attractive on-site (Hubbard) interaction g acting on the conduction band electrons. We solve the equations using dynamical mean field theory which incorporates Kondo physics, while the pairing interaction is treated on the static mean-field level. For large coupling g we find reentrant superconductivity which resembles the case with diluted impurities. However, we find evidence that reentrant superconductivity is here not a consequence of many-body correlations leading to the Kondo effect, but it rather stems from a competition between the single-particle hybridization and superconducting pairing. An insight into the spectral functions with in-gap structures is obtained from an approximate noninteracting dual model whose solution interpolates between several exact limits. The influence of magnetic impurities on conventional swave superconductors has been intensively explored since early sixties A notable deviation from the AG theory is observed in some alloys, like La 1-x Ce x Al 2 Can the superconductivity and the reentrant behavior persist in the case of periodic impurities, i.e. in the presence of a second band of interacting dispersionless electrons hybridized with the conduction band? The reentrant superconductivity is indeed observed in several ternary In heavy fermion compounds the superconductivity is mediated by spin fluctuations instead of the electron-phonon coupling In this work we explore the effect of periodic magnetic impurities on conventional superconductivity. Our starting point is the Anderson lattice model with the addition of an on-site pairing (attractive Hubbard) interaction acting on the conduction c-electrons. The repulsive interaction U on f -orbitals is treated within dynamical mean field theory The paper is organized as follows. Section II contains the definition of the model and describes the methods of its solution. Numerical results in several parameter regimes are shown in Section III and our conclusions are in Section IV. Some derivations are presented in the Appendix. We solve the periodic Anderson model with an additional attractive Hubbard interaction in the conduction band. The Hamiltonian is given by where t is the hopping parameter, V the hybridization strength, g is the attractive coupling for the conduction band c-electrons, and U is the repulsive coupling constant of the felectrons. f sets the energy level of the f -electrons, and μ is the chemical potential. c † iσ and f † iσ create a c-electron and f -electron at site i with spin σ =↑, ↓. This model reduces to the attractive Hubbard model with decoupled impurities in the limit V → 0, whereas in the limit g → 0 we recover the standard Anderson lattice model. We take as a unit of energy the half-bandwidth D corresponding to the noninteracting c electrons. We will restrict to the paramagnetic solution allowing for s-wave superconductivity. We start with a static mean-field decoupling of the celectron attractive interaction in the Cooper channel, viz. where is the superconducting order parameter. This recasts the problem in the form of a self-consistently determined Hamiltonian H[∆ BCS ], featuring both the pairing terms and the repulsive Hubbard interaction. Without the repulsive Hubbard interaction, this reduces to a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean-field theory, hence the index in the pairing amplitude. We now introduce momentum-dependent fermionic Grassmann fields in orbital-Nambu space: Here τ is the imaginary time variable and overbar indicates the conjugate field. In Grassmann field formalism, the action for the self-consistent Hamiltonian reads β is the inverse temperature and G 0,k is the bare propagator, implicitly dependent on ∆ BCS . In Matsubara frequency domain, the bare propagator reads Here ω n are fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1)π/β, I is the 4-dimensional identity matrix, and H 0,k is the non-interacting Hamiltonian matrix in the orbital-Nambu basis, i.e. where The full (interacting) Green's function in the Matsubara domain is defined component-wise as where we have used , and the lattice inversion symmetry k → -k. The second equivalence states the definitions of the c and f Nambu (two-dimensional) Green's functions in their respective orbital subsectors, and the ω n -dependence is implicit. The full G k is to be determined through the Dyson equation where Σ is the matrix self-energy capturing the on-site correlation effects, viz. S k is the self-energy's anomalous component, and satisfies The superconducting order parameter is determined from the scalar c-electrons' Green's function as Here N k is the total number of momenta in the discretized first Brillouin zone. Henceforth, the local quantities will be indicated by omitting the k index, while the normalization constant N -1 k will be absorbed into the sum-e.g. Eq. ( We solve the self-consistent problem Eq.(4) using the dynamical mean field theory. DMFT assumes the self-energy to be entirely local, i.e. Σ k → Σ. The local self energy is computed from an effective single-impurity problem where G 0 is the so-called Weiss field, and is to be determined self-consistently to satisfy the condition Here, G imp is the Green's function of the single impurity problem ( whereas G f is the local Green's function of the lattice in the f -sector, cf. Eq. ( The lattice self-energy (9) needed to calculate G f,k (iω n ) through Eq. ( We satisfy the DMFT self-consistency condition by the standard iterative forward-substitution algorithm. A single DMFT iteration proceeds as follows: (i) given the Σ imp and ∆ BCS from the previous iteration, get new G using ( given the G 0 solve (11) to calculate Σ imp . The last step is performed using Cthyb QMC impurity solver. We note that steps (ii)-(iii) may be performed in two ways: either determine ∆ BCS self consistently for given Σ imp , or make a single ∆ BCS update and solve the BCS problem in parallel with the DMFT problem. We have opted for the latter approach due to better convergence of the problem in the vicinity of phase boundaries. We will solve the equations on the square and the Bethe lattice. The self-consistency equations slightly simplify on the Bethe lattice and they are shown in Appendix A. We initially considered the Bethe lattice, but then switched to the square lattice in order to make a better connection with the dual model solution. Since we ignore the inter-site correlations the results on the square and Bethe lattice are similar. We note that, on the level of a single impurity in a given SC bath, we benchmarked the Cthyb QMC calculation with the numerical renormalization group (NRG) We also devise and solve a non-interacting model that is approximately dual to model Eq. (4): it exactly reproduces certain limits and interpolates between them. The ability of the dual model to reproduce the reentrant behavior as observed in the DMFT solution, will be a strong indication that the higherorder correlations captured by DMFT do not play an important role. In addition, the dual model solution will give us insight into the spectral functions. To motivate the specific form of our non-interacting dual model, we start by noting that there are several limits in which the self-consistent model H[∆ BCS ] reduces to a clean BCS superconductor with decoupled atomic impurities. Such is the case for V → 0, g → ∞ and/or f → ±∞. In the particlehole symmetric case U → ∞ reproduces this case as well. Next, we observe that for an isolated Hubbard atom one can write down an exactly dual non-interacting model which reproduces the full Green's function of the original model, but not the higher-order correlation functions. This noninteracting dual model features two non-interacting orbitals connected by an appropriate hopping. One of the orbitals is dual to the original Hubbard atom, while the other can be considered a "hidden fermion" state We now perform a straightforward generalization of the Hubbard atom dual model. In simple terms, we take the noninteracting part of H[∆ BCS ] and couple a hidden fermion state F to each f -orbital, so that each pair f -F on their own is the exact dual model to the atomic limit. Then, we introduce a copy C of the c-band and attach it to the F states in such a way that at particle-hole symmetry the hidden states C and F become equivalent to the dual states c and f . This model reproduces exactly the Green's function of the model Eq. (4) in the non-interacting limit (U = 0) as well as in all the aforementioned limits where the f -orbitals remain effectively de-coupled from the c-band. This model reads where H HF 0 [∆ BCS ] is the reduced Hamiltonian introduced previously, without the repulsive interaction term, and with a Hartree-shifted f -level energy f → f + U n f σ . The model is self-consistently solved for the f -level occupation number per spin n f σ ∈ [0, 1]. The problem reduces to a BCS theory in an 8-dimensional orbital/Nambu space. See Appendix B for details. Additionally, the dual model will allow us to gain insight in the band structure at finite U . Our DMFT calculation is performed in Matsubara formalism, thus one needs the ill-defined analytical continuation to obtain the spectral function. We tried the analytical continuation with the Maximum entropy method, but this resulted in the absence of any sharp features from the spectra. Thus we restrict to the dual model results when considering the electronic dispersions and local density of states. We present the results in two distinct cases: for parameters which correspond to the Kondo lattice limit of the Anderson lattice model (n f ≈ 1 and small double occupancy of f orbitals) and away from the Kondo limit where the occupation of f -electrons deviates significantly from half-filling. To understand the result better, we have also solved the non-interacting U = 0 model and the effective dual model. We study first the superconductivity for model parameters which correspond to the local moment regime, i.e to the limit of the Kondo lattice A pronounced feature of this model is the reentrant superconductivity that we find for strong coupling g, Fig. At temperatures T T K the impurity spins are screened and the Fermi liquid is formed from composite heavy quasiparticles. Fig. is the Kondo coupling. One may assume that the formation of coherent quasiparticles will facilitate the superconductivity for smaller coupling g. However, for example for V = 0.26 we have T = 0.0025 T K ∼ 0.05, but the critical g coupling is large. In order to understand better why the superconductivity is so sensitive to the presence of the second band of f -electrons, we consider next the solution of the model in the non-interacting U = 0 case. B. Superconductivity in the U = 0 limit In the non-interacting U = 0 case we have derived an analytical expression for the free energy and the gap equation, see Appendix C. A numerical solution of the gap equation (C6) is shown as a color plot on the V -μ phase diagram at T = 0 in Fig. This phase diagram can be understood from a simple approximate formula for T c (V ) in the weak coupling limit whose derivation we now sketch. We first note that the hybridized band crosses the Fermi level at = V 2 f -μ + μ. Then we look for the contribution of the c and f electrons to the hybridized eigenstate at the Fermi level. It is easy to check that the contribution of the c-electron is equal to Hence, the hybridized eigenstate is predominantly made of celectrons for V | f -μ|, and it has mixed character for V ∼ | f |. Then, from the usual BCS gap equation in the weak coupling limit (with the interaction cutoff set to D = 1), ∆ BCS = 2e -1 gρ 0 , we conclude that where ρ[ V 2 f -μ + μ] is the density of states of the bare celectrons at the shifted Fermi level. This expression for the superconducting gap is in excellent agreement with Fig. In the following we probe the phase diagram of the model away from the Kondo limit at parameters accessible with our numerical methods. We show the results for the square lattice. We set g = 1 while fixing f and μ to 0. In Fig. At small U we are close to the non-interacting solution and we find that the superconducting phase is strongly affected by the hybridization strength, similar as in Section III B. As U increases, the f -orbital occupation number drops and the contribution of f states to the hybridized state diminishes, allowing for pairing to persist. We argue that the reentrant behavior found for U ∼ 1 is caused by thermal excitations which reduce the hybridization at intermediate temperatures, allowing for superconductivity, before destroying the Cooper pairing at higher temperatures. In the weak coupling limit (for small g) we expect the phase diagram to retain these features, however with appropriately scaled T and V . Numerical DMFT results indicate that the reentrant superconductivity that we have observed is mainly the consequence of band physics and not the consequence of physics related directly to the Kondo effect. To strengthen this argument, we consider an approximate non-interacting model which is "dual" to the one given by Eq. (1). The dual Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( In Fig. In Fig. In summary, we have studied how the presence of dispersionless f -electrons hybridized with the conduction band influences superconductivity. We solved the periodic Anderson model with an additional attractive on-site interaction between c-electrons restricting to the paramagnetic phase and s-wave superconductivity. The superconducting pairing is treated at the static mean field level and the correlations on the f orbitals are treated within DMFT using Cthyb QMC impurity solver. The DMFT equations were supplemented by the selfconsistency condition for the superconducting gap. We first solved the model in the Kondo regime (n f ≈ 1 and small double occupancy of f orbitals). We found that a large coupling g was necessary in order to stabilize the superconducting solution even for small Kondo temperature T K . This indicates that the many-body correlations that lead to the Kondo effect are not crucial for understanding the superconducting solution. Suppression of the superconductivity is mainly a consequence of the single-particle physics as can be understood from the noninteracting U = 0 limit of the model. We derived a simple formula that shows that the suppression of the superconducting gap depends on the contribution of the f states to the hybridized eigenstate at the Fermi level. We scanned the phase diagram also away from the Kondo limit where the strength of the hybridization of f -states and appearance of the superconducting phase can be tuned by changing the parameters V , U , and f . Better insight into the band structure is obtained from the approximate dual model whose solution interpolates between several exact limits and semiquantitatively reproduces our main results. The dual model solution features in-gap states of predominantly f character. The most prominent feature of the model is its reentrant superconductivity. Here it is observed for large coupling g at temperatures accessible to Cthyb QMC impurity solver. Though the reentrant superconductivity resembles to what was found previously for diluted magnetic impurities, we were not able to relate its appearance with the ratio of T K and single band T c0 . Interestingly, we found reentrant superconductivity also away from the Kondo limit by tuning the interaction U , which also indicates that the reentrant superconductivity is here not the consequence of higher-order manybody correlations, but rather the consequence of thermal fluctuations which weaken the hybridization of c-electrons making them superconducting at intermediate temperatures. Fi-nally, we note that our conclusions are not directly relevant to heavy-fermion systems, mainly due to unphysically large coupling constant g. Future study would, therefore, need to consider finite concentration of impurities, e.g. by using realspace DMFT and to treat the attractive interaction beyond the simplest mean-field decoupling. such that after some manipulations Writing a hybridization function of the general form where α is some degrees of freedom, we recognize that Σ (HF) has the form of a hybridization function with and (At particle-hole symmetry A σ → ±U/2 and ε σ → 0.) Thus, we can write a non-interacting dual model for the Hubbard atom as follows; where D are the "hidden fermion" operators dual to d, and n σ and μ need to be determined self-consistently. We now establish a correspondence of the Hubbard atom operators (d and D) for the Anderson lattice model with a spin-mixing pairing term in the c-band, i.e. Hamiltonian (1)]. We may identify d with f ↑ , but since we are interested in solutions for any doping, we cannot identify D with f ↓ . However, for n → 1 -n we may identify D with f † ↑ , thus dd † = f ↑ f † ↑ , but DD † = f † ↓ f ↓ for the opposite doping. Therefore the solution is to couple the model (1) to its dual at the opposite doping, where the model has the symmetry that ∆ BCS is the same regardless of the 'sign' of the doping (i.e. n or 1 -n), Thus, whereas (similarly for c and C). Hence, using the spinors T , the Hamiltonian matrix in orbital-Nambu space acquires the form with f,1 = -μ + Σ HF and f,2 = -(spin indices are dropped). If setting V → 0 there are two decoupled copies of the single-band BCS problem with decoupled f electrons at opposite doping. Setting U → 0 results in two separate copies of the non-interacting model. Following Eq. ( We perform the infinite Matsubara sum with the standard method of contour integration. The fraction in (C2) can be factored as with the λ's the eigenenergies of the U = 0 Hamiltonian [Eq. (1)], viz. where Since there are only simple poles to consider, the integration is straightforward and follows by the sum of residues of L k (ω)f (ω) at the four eigenenergies, where f (ω) = β/(e βω + 1) the counting function. After some manipulations the gap equation for the non-interacting model follows as with λ ±,k = √ a k ± b k . In the limit T → 0, tanh βλ ±,k → 1. A. A. Abrikosov and L. P. Gor'kov, "Contribution to the theory of superconducting alloys with paramagnetic impurities," Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.39, 1781 (1960), [Sov. Phys.JETP 12, 1243JETP 12, (1961))]. A. V. Balatsky, I. Vekhter, and Jian-Xin Zhu, "Impurity-induced states in conventional and unconventional superconductors," Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 373-433 (2006). 3 C. T. Wolowiec, B. D. White, and M. B. Maple, "Conventional magnetic superconductors," Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications 514, 113 -129 (2015). 4 J Bauer, A Oguri, and A C Hewson, "Spectral properties of locally correlated electrons in a bardeen-cooper-schrieffer superconductor," Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 19, 486211