A Cm planar photonic material (two-dimensional) including the mirror reflection symmetry is explored where in the Dirac cones appeared at the high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone boundary. By implementing the specific perturbation on the photonic crystal (PC), topological transition can make a bridge between the trivial PC (ordinary insulator) and the topological insulator including zero and non-zero spin Chern number (Cs), respectively. The perturbation can be realized through the rotation of the Cm photonic crystal around the nonzero angle to its initial position. Therefore, breaking the mirror symmetry of the unit cell leads to mismatch of the symmetry planes of the lattice. This modification results in the directional band gap & band inversion which is the signature of the topological transitions. The mentioned PC would be suitable for examination of the unidirectional transport of light at the topological interfaces. The enormous applications of the conception of topology in electronics, phononics and photonics, make it fascinating for studying the robust one-way transport of the edge states against different defects in topological insulators (TIs) Here, the unavoidable band degeneracy of a centered rectangular, Cm planar lattice has been investigated which leads to appearing the two single Dirac cones at the points Y & Y . By breaking the mirror reflection symmetry of the PC, the Dirac cones will be opened. Applying rotations from right to left or left to right induces the inversed mirror reflection symmetries. This closing/opening the Dirac cones and band inversion at the points Y & Y , similar to the valley-like coupling, convince the topological phase transition. The emergence and propagation of the edge states at the topological straight interface has been studied numerically in this paper. The band degeneracy of the centered rectangular PC including the Cm point group symmetry has been explored in this work. Due to the closing of the band gap and then expected the band degeneracy, two single Dirac cones are appeared in the PC. Breaking the mirror-reflection symmetry leads to opening of the bandgaps near the Dirac points. By applying opposite rotations from right to left or left to right, the inversed mirror reflection symmetries have been observed. The closing/opening the Dirac cones and band inversion at the Dirac cones is a signature of a topological transition. Here, transport of the topological edge states in the Cm lattice, has been demonstrated numerically. Indeed, Cm is including the letters "C" and "m" which indicate the centered rectangular lattice with the reflection symmetry (mirror /line), respectively. The group Cm have one mirror reflection symmetry plane, m N N For studying the one-way propagation of the edge states at the topological interfaces, we can design the upper/downer photonic topological insulator composed of two types of PCs including common bandgap but opposite band topology. As found from the previous section, by rotating the Cm PC around the angles θ and -θ, therefore opening, closing and reopening of the Dirac points, the topological phase transition will be understand. In continue, we design an photonic topological insulator (PTI) with the upper/downer supercell which is composed of 10 ( In this paper, we have investigated the Dirac cones of a Cm planar PC along the high-symmetry line in the Brillouin Zone. Besides, we found that breaking of the mirror reflection symmetry lead to removing of the Dirac cones. So an opening-closing and reopening of the Dirac cones have been observed through the rotation around -θ → 0 → θ which is the signature of the topological transitions. Moreover by studying the phase diagram of the structure along the various angles, we found that the bands have inverted at θ = 0. Also the phases of the eigenmodes at θ are inversed from the phases at -θ. Thus, the topological phase transition can be induced through the band switching and eigenmode inverting at θ = 0. By designing the upp/down PTI, we found the robust transport of the topological edge modes at the straight interface.