We study the elastoresistance of the highly correlated material CsFe2As2 in all symmetry channels. Neutralizing its thermal expansion by means of a piezoelectric-based strain cell is demonstrated to be essential. The elastoresistance response in the in-plane symmetric channel is found to be large, while the response in the symmetry-breaking channels is weaker and provides no evidence for a divergent nematic susceptibility. Rather, our results can be interpreted naturally within the framework of a coherence-incoherence crossover, where the low-temperature coherent state is sensitively tuned by the in-plane atomic distances. In recent years, strain has been increasingly recognized as a valuable parameter for tuning the electronic properties of strongly-correlated quantum materials The iron-based superconductor CsFe 2 As 2 hosts a unique strongly-correlated electronic state Recently, a novel electronic nematicity has been proposed in CsFe 2 As 2 and RbFe 2 As 2 These recent results ask for a close examination of the relative effect of strains in all different symmetry channels on equal footing. Furthermore, as a direct consequence of its strain-dependent correlations, CsFe 2 As 2 has an unusually large thermal expansivity Single crystals of CsFe 2 As 2 were grown from solution with a Cs-rich self-flux in an alumina crucible sealed in a stainless steel container. Samples were carefully characterized by single-crystal x-ray refinement The large thermal expansion mismatch between CsFe 2 As 2 and the Titanium body of the strain cell (see inset of Fig. We now extract the elastoresistance coefficients m α , which relate the changes in resistance to strains in the corresponding symmetry channels, (∆R/R 0 ) α = m α ε α . Here, α represents the irreducible representation of the tetragonal D 4h point group, see the schematic illustrations in Fig. ), where we use the simplified notation ε x ≡ ε xx for the diagonal strain components When uniaxial strain is applied along [100] (or [110]), the sample experiences A 1g + B 1g (or A 1g + B 2g ) strain. The sum of the longitudinal and transverse resistance change is proportional to (∆R/R 0 ) A1g , while the difference is proportional to (∆R/R 0 ) B1g [or (∆R/R 0 ) B2g ] [34, 39], see Fig. The sample Poisson ratios were calculated from the elastic constants of the material. Estimates of the elastic constants were extracted from ab-initio calculations via the method of long waves The extracted m A1g , m B1g and m B2g are shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of m A1g compares well with that of the in-plane coefficient of thermal expansion divided by temperature, α a /T , as shown in Fig. Our results differ from previous reports of nematicity in CsFe 2 As 2 and RbFe 2 As 2 , among them elastoresistance and STM results In conclusion, we have shown that the elastoresistance of CsFe 2 As 2 is dominated by the in-plane symmetric A 1g strain component and that A 1g strain sensitively induces modifications of the electronic entropy and correlations, which are reflected in the resistance. Furthermore, the absence of a divergent response in the symmetry-breaking B 1g and B 2g channels shows that CsFe 2 As 2 is not near a nematic instability. Our results shed new light on the physics of the heavily hole-doped iron-based compounds close to an orbital-selective Mott transition. The experiment also highlights the importance of studying elastoresistance in all symmetry channels and demonstrates the method's versatility in the investigation of quantum materials beyond nematicity.