Prototypical three-dimensional (3D) topological Dirac semimetals (DSMs), such as Cd3As2 and Na3Bi, contain electrons that obey a linear momentum-energy dispersion with different Fermi velocities along the three orthogonal momentum dimensions. Despite being extensively studied in recent years, the inherent Fermi velocity anisotropy has often been neglected in the theoretical and numerical studies of 3D DSMs. Although this omission does not qualitatively alter the physics of light-driven massless quasiparticles in 3D DSMs, it does quantitatively change the optical coefficients which can lead to nontrivial implications in terms of nanophotonics and plasmonics applications. Here we study the linear optical response of 3D DSMs for general Fermi velocity values along each direction. Although the signature conductivity-frequency scaling, σ(ω) ∝ ω, of 3D Dirac fermion is well-protected from Fermi velocity anisotropy, the linear optical response exhibits strong linear dichroism as captured by the universal extinction ratio scaling law, Λij = (vi/vj) 2 (where i = j denotes the three spatial coordinates x, y, z, and vi is the i-direction Fermi velocity), which is independent of frequency, temperature, doping, and carrier scattering lifetime. For Cd3As2 and Na3Bi3, an exceptionally strong extinction ratio larger than 15 and covering broad terahertz window is revealed. Our findings shed new light on the role of Fermi velocity anisotropy in the optical response of Dirac semimetals and open up novel polarization-sensitive functionalities, such as photodetection and light modulation. In recent decades, significant effort has been dedicated to the study of topological insulators (TIs) and low-dimension semimetals like graphene. In the lowenergy limit, the electrons occupying these exotic materials obey relativistic, Dirac-like hamiltonians. Their behaviour as pseudo-massless particles confers these materials unique optical properties such as high EM field confinement Recently, a new class of quantum materials which behave like bulk analogues of graphene have also attracted significant attention -3D Dirac semimetals (DSMs). Unlike their TI counterparts which possess only conducting surface states, 3D DSMs are also conducting in the bulk. The dispersion of 3D DSMs are formed from a superposition of two Weyl cones of opposite chirality As the electrons in 3D DSMs also possess linear dispersions, they have been expected to exhibit qualitativelysimilar field response to graphene In this work, we derive the linear interband and intraband conductivities using the Kubo formula. We use a Hamilonian which describes arbitrary Fermi velocity values in each direction, taking us beyond previous works which were restricted by the isotropic dispersion. In obtaining our expressions for the dynamic conductivities in each direction, we find that both the intraband and interband conductivities of 3D DSMs scale as σ ii ∝ v i /(v j v k ), where i, j, k ∈ {x, y, z}, i is the direction parallel to the incident light polarization, and j and k are the directions perpendicular to the incident light polarization. Additionally, we show that the anisotropy between the response of the i and j directions exhibits the analytical universal scaling relation for the optical conductivity, For realistic 3D DSMs such as Cd 3 As 2 and Na 3 Bi, this anisotropy ratio can exceed an order of magnitude, emphasizing the importance of including anisotropy in optical calculations. More intriguingly, the optical extinction ratio reaches 15.8 and 19.2, respectively, for Cd 3 As 2 and Na 3 Bi, which is substantially higher than vast majority of anisotropic optical materials previously reported (see Table Close to the Dirac point, an electron within a 3D Dirac semimetal (DSMs) with momentum p p p = (p x , p y , p z ) obeys the following low-energy effective Hamiltonian: where i ∈ {x, y, z} are the Cartesian components, and σ i and v i are the Pauli matrix and the Fermi velocity aligned along direction i respectively. The Hamiltonian admits eigenenergies , where the positive (negative) branch represents the conduction (valence) band energies. The wavefunction of an electron in band s ∈ {c, v} in the plane wave basis normalized over bulk volume V is: where r r r is the position vector and k k k = p p p/ is the crystal momentum vector. The spinor component for band s, Φ p p p,s , reads: The angles θ = arccos(q z /q r ) and φ = arctan(q y /q x ) are defined in scaled momentum space coordinates q q q = (v x p x , v y p y , v z p z ). Note that the radial component q r = |E p p p |. The "c" ("v") subscripts denote the conduction (valence) band wavefunctions. We compute the i, j element of the linear conductivity tensor using the Kubo-Greenwood formula: where g is the combined spin and valley degeneracy, is the angular frequency of the driving field, and 0 + is a broadening factor about the pole. The primed (unprimed) variables denote the quantities of the final (initial) state. We concentrate only on the longitudinal (i = j) conductivities as the transverse conductivities (i = j) vanish, leaving only the diagonal tensor terms. The group velocity expectation values are computed as: where the † superscript denotes the hermitian conjugate. For the intraband conductivity, we have the general form where the inelastic scattering time is τ . The interband conductivity reads: where we define the difference between the Fermi-Dirac distributions between both bands as G(E) = f D (-E)f D (E) = sinh(βE)/[cosh(βE) + cosh(βμ)] where β = 1/k B T , k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. We can further cast the integral into a form more suitable for numerical calculations: where E c is the cutoff energy beyond which the band dispersion is no longer linear. We take this values to be E c = 3E F Figure Material vx (m/s) vy (m/s) vz (m/s) Λxy Λyz Λxz Cd3As2 1.28 × 10 6 1.30 × 10 6 3.27 × 10 5 0.97 15.8 15.3 Na3Bi 4.17 × 10 5 3.63 × 10 5 0.95 × 10 5 1.32 14.6 19.2 above, it is typical that v x ∼ v y , and v z v x , v y , indicating that for polarization along x or y, the optical response will be the stongest. This is in agreement with our results in Fig. This ratio can be can be as large as Λ yz ≈ 15.8 for Cd 3 As 2 and Λ xz ≈ 19.2 for Na 3 Bi. The extinction ratios for other directions and the experimentally measured values of the Fermi velocities are presented in Table It should be noted that Eq. 10 is independent of the optical frequency, temperature, Fermi level and defect scattering effects. Thus, the strong optical anisotropy of Cd 3 As 2 and Na 3 Bi is expected to persist broadly over the frequency windows as long as the optically excited electrons remained well-described by the 3D Dirac conic band structure. For Cd 3 As 2 , the energy scale of the Dirac cone reaches 200 meV We now turn our attention to the dielectric function of anisotropic DSMs. We computed the diagonal (i.e., longitudinal) elements of the dielectric tensor from the conductivity as where bg,i is the background dielectric constant along the i direction, which depends on the plasma frequency along i ∈ {x, y, z} ω p,i , and the effective background dielectric constant accounting for the interband transitions obtained experimentally ∞ . However, as ∞ for 3D DSMs is typically measured as an isotropic value, we assume the ω p,x = ω p,y = ω p,z = ω p , which we compute DSMs between directions at a given frequency ω/EF. Unless otherwise stated, we consider the same parameters as Fig. where n e = gk 3 F /(6π 2 ) is the electron density per Weyl cone, k F is the Fermi wavevector magnitude, m * is the effective mass, r s = e 2 /(4π 0 vF ) is the fine structure constant calculated using the geometric mean Fermi velocity vF = (v x v y v z ) 1/3 . We then calculate bg,i by finding the zeros of the real part of Eq. 11: bg,i = -Re where σ tot ii (ω p ) is obtained numerically from Eqs. 6 and 8 using a cubic spline. We consider ∞ = 13 We see from Fig. tune the field confinement factor and propagation length of the SPPs. As opposed to isotropic DSMs such as graphene, this provides an additional degree of freedom for tuning the strength of light-matter interaction within 3D DSMs, which can potentially be a useful feature for plasmonic and sensing device applications. In the above analysis, have considered an isotropic value of ∞ which is frequently measured in experiments. We expect that should the measured value of ∞ be significantly different in each direction, the incident light polarization (with ω appropriately chosen) could tune not only parameters like the field confinement factor, but also serve as a switch between dielectric and metallic operation regimes. This arises as the zero-crossing Re( ii ) = 0 occurs at different values of ω p,i for each direction i. Hence anisotropy could additionally as serve a tuning parameter for the nature of light-matter interaction within 3D DSMs. We now calculate the absorption coefficient in the i ∈ {x, y, z} Cartesian direction as For compactness, we have defined ii = Re( ii ) and ii = Im( ii ) , which we compute using Eq. 11 and the numerical solution to the anisotropic linear conductivity σ ii (ω). Figure In the intermediate frequency regime ω p < ω < 2E F / , we see that α i (ω) is strongly quenched since ii (ω) ≈ 0. An inspection of Eq. 14 reveals that the anisotropy ratio of the absorption coefficient between different directions scale as α i /α j = v i /v j for all frequencies -less drastic than the quadratic scaling of σ ii /σ jj and ii / jj . However, despite the less pronounced anisotropy of the absorption coefficient, the linear dichroism of 3D DSMs can still be experimentally detected using the setup which we schematically illustrate in Fig. We have shown, using the Kubo-Greenwood formula, that when anisotropic Fermi velocities in each direction are included, the optical response along each direction varies significantly. While the characteristic optical signatures of 3D Dirac electrons like the σ(ω) ∝ ω scaling is retained, our results show that the magnitude along each direction scales as v i /(v j v k ). This leads to the following universal scaling of the optical anisotropy ratio between the i and j directions: value which exceeds 15 times for Cd 3 As 2 and 19 times for Na 3 Bi, as shown in Table 