Real-time tracking of high-speed objects in cognitive tasks is challenging in the present artificial intelligence techniques because the data processing and computation are time-consuming resulting in impeditive time delays. A brain-inspired continuous attractor neural network (CANN) can be used to track quickly moving targets, where the time delays are intrinsically compensated if the dynamical synapses in the network have the short-term plasticity. Here, we show that synapses with short-term depression can be realized by a magnetic tunnel junction, which perfectly reproduces the dynamics of the synaptic weight in a widely applied mathematical model. Then, these dynamical synapses are incorporated into one-dimensional and two-dimensional CANNs, which are demonstrated to have the ability to predict a moving object via micromagnetic simulations. This portable spintronicsbased hardware for neuromorphic computing needs no training and is therefore very promising for the tracking technology for moving targets. Computations using artificial neural networks have shown tremendous efficiency in applications, such as pattern recognition STD is one of the typical properties of short-term synaptic plasticity and naturally exists in biological neural systems The recently developed Tianjic chips have integrated many CANNs into their architecture and show the ability to track objects in the application In this article, we use the magnetization dynamics of MTJs to realize short-term synaptic plasticity. These dynamical synapses are then plugged into a CANN to achieve anticipative tracking, which is illustrated by micromagnetic simulations. As a proof of concept, we first demonstrate a prediction for a moving signal inside a one-dimensional (1D) ring-like CANN with 20 neurons. The phase space of the network parameters is discussed. Then, we consider a two-dimensional (2D) CANN with arrays of MTJs, which can be used to analyze moving objects in a video. A CANN is a special type of recurrent neural network that has translational invariance. We first use a 1D model as an example to illustrate the structure and functionality of a CANN. As shown in Fig. where U i denotes the population-averaged synaptic current to the ith neuron. The second term on the righthand side I i is the total input, including the external stimuli I ext i and the signals transmitted from other neurons, i.e., The external input has a Gaussian profile, and its center moves inside the network. To avoid the divergence of the network, it is essential to have a global inhibition; here, we consider a normalization of U i for convenience in the implementation. Specifically, we define and the firing rate of the ith neuron is given by r i (t) ≡ u 2 i (t)/k in Eq. ( It is worth noting that we focus on synapses in this work and do not consider the particular hardware implementation of the neuron. This is because a CANN without dynamical synapses was realized based on a mixed digital and analogue silicon circuit The key characteristic of the CANN that we propose is the dynamical synapses; every synapse connects a pair of neurons, as illustrated by the green lines in Fig. with b and a being the parameters for controlling the strength and range of the synaptic connections, respec-tively. The dynamical synapses with STD can be realized by MTJs, and the driving current density injected into the MTJ depends on the firing rate of the neuron. The specific definition of its efficacy will be illustrated below in Eq. ( The eventual performance of the CANN is examined by comparing the instantaneous distributions of the external stimuli I ext i (t) and the firing rate r i (t). Both I ext i (t) and r i (t) form bump-like distributions and move in the CANN. If the center of r i (t) moves ahead of the external stimuli, anticipative tracking is achieved. Otherwise, one has delayed tracking. The distinct feature of a dynamical synapse with STD is the temporarily reduced efficacy right after firing of the associated neuron, which can be gradually recovered over a longer time scale. This dynamical behavior can be found in an MTJ consisting of two thin ferromagnetic layers separated by an insulator. One of the ferromagnetic layers has a fixed magnetization, which is usually pinned by a neighboring antiferromagnetic material via the so-called exchange bias. The magnetization of the other (free) layer can be excited to precess by an electric current via the spin-transfer torque. The precession will not stop immediately after the end of the injected current but will gradually decay due to Gilbert damping. The electrical resistance of the MTJ, which depends on the relative magnetization orientation of the two ferromagnetic layers, therefore exhibits a temporary variation after the excitation. Then, we can implement the STD with the dynamics of MTJs by taking the injected electric current and electric resistance as the input and output, respectively. To explicitly illustrate the functionality, we consider a cylindrical CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB MTJ with a radius of 20 nm In the presence of an electric current density j through the MTJ, the magnetization of the free layer is excited to precess following the generalized Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation characterizes the angular dependence of the torque with the dimensionless parameter Λ = 1.5 used in our simulations. β is the nonadiabaticity of the spin-transfer torque and is usually much smaller than one. The dynamic equation ( where P free and P fixed , representing the spin polarization of the free and fixed layers, respectively, are both set to 0.6 for CoFeB. The resistance R of the MTJ is determined by the instantaneous magnetization m of the free layer A/m 2 , and R is a constant. R increases and decreases gradually with increasing or decreasing j, indicating the short-term memory effect. (c) Synaptic efficacy p obtained from the calculated R using Eq. ( [40]: and the resistance of the MTJ for the parallel configuration R P = 71.6 kΩ To explicitly examine the STD behavior, we artificially apply a time-dependent current density, as shown in Fig. and show p in Fig. Usually, the dynamical synapse with STD is described by the following differential equation: where τ is the time scale of the STD and the parameter η determines the strength of the STD in the synaptic efficacy. For the piecewise firing rate shown by the blue dashed line in Fig. MTJs are promising candidates for synapses in spintronics-based neuromorphic computing, partly because the techniques for fabrication and integration are mature after being extensively studied as a memory device in the past two decades. The electrical and magnetic properties can be flexibly engineered including the in-plane or perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, ferromagnetic resonance frequency, the time scale of dynamical decay, electrical resistance and tunneling magnetoresistance, etc Since we have demonstrated that dynamic synapses with STD can be realized by MTJs, it is possible to implement hardware CANNs to perform the anticipative tracking of moving objects. In this section, two examples are illustrated to show the capability of CANNs with MTJs as the functional dynamic synapses. We first consider a 1D model system with twenty neurons forming a closed chain, as shown in Fig. We first construct a 1D CANN consisting of twenty neurons that are uniformly distributed in the unit circle, as shown in Fig. Here, j max = 2j min = 8×10 7 A/m 2 is defined, and the parameter η = 0.8 for controlling the STD strength. Then, we apply an external stimuli with a Gaussian distribution in the 1D CANN to simulate the received signal of a moving object: where A = 0.5 is the amplitude of the external pulse and ω ext = 0.003 rad/ns is the angular velocity of the external signal. Owing to the STD effect, the CANN sustains traveling waves that are propagating in the network. As a consequence, the bump of the firing rate moves ahead of the external signal, indicating that anticipative tracking is achieved. Figure The global inhibition strength k and the STD strength η are two key parameters that influence the performance of the 1D CANN in addition to the STD time scale τ . In the above computation, we use fixed values k = 1 and η = 0.8. We now examine the prediction functionality of the 1D CANN for a constant ω ext = 0.005 rad/ns and vary the two parameters in a broad range from 0.2 ≤ k ≤ 1.8 to 5 ≤ η ≤ 50. The phase diagram of the CANN is shown in Fig. Figure The 1D CANN presented above is only a simplified model for demonstrating how a CANN combined with STD works in the prediction of a moving object. Here, we switch to a realistic case, where a moving object is recorded in a video. A 2D CANN is then considered, with arrays of neurons associated with MTJs in a square lattice. The particular process is schematically shown in Fig. Tracking and predicting a moving object using CANNs does not require training in advance and prediction can occur for a broad range of speeds with the appropriate network parameters, such as the decay time τ of the STD, the STD strength η and the inhibition strength k. In principle, η and k can be tunable in practice indicating the flexibility of the tracking device. Another advantage is that tracking can be achieved without the prior identification of the object in contrast to other algorithms. Therefore, the main process required for a tracking device is converting the image captured by high-speed cameras into electrical signals and passing the signals to the CANN. This scheme saves lots of computational effort used for image recognition using, e.g., a convolutional neural network and significantly increases the efficiency. Supposing a high-speed camera captures one million of frames per second, one has the time interval 1 μs to deal with every frame. The magnetization dynamics is usually at the time scale of 10-100 ns, so it won't be a bottleneck for the process. A quantitative estimation of the time consumption requires the detailed information of the whole circuit and is beyond the scope of the present work. The network can capture multiple moving elements, as illustrated in the Supplemental Material [42] with a simple example. Here we define a 2D plane, where two continuous signals moving around. We assume that the time step between two frames is 4 ns. One signal has a circular trajectory with the radius 2 and ω = 0.9 rad/ns while the other follows a 3 × 3 square with the speed 0.03 ns -1 . We then set up a CANN with 21×21 neurons with dynamical synapses. The corresponding parameters are a = 0.5, b = 0.656, η = 0.1 and k = 5. The firing rates of the neurons naturally have two local maxima demonstrating that the two moving objects are both well tracked in the simulation. Nevertheless, since the objects are not identified, distinguish different objects need additional effort. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the noisy background does not affect the tracking since CANNs are sensitive to the continuous motion instead of random noise In the above 1D and 2D CANNs, the parameters used in the network, such as k, η, a, and b, are quite different because they are related to the structure and connections of the network. For example, the neurons in the 2D CANN have more neighbors compared with the 1D case and a larger a is hence used in the 2D network to avoid receiving too many signals from the connected neurons. Then the fixed synaptic weights J ij and r i in the 2D CANN have a relatively low values. This is reason why we have used a larger η to ensure the STD effect. Because the overall signal strength is relatively low, a small inhibition parameter k is enough to keep the 2D CANN working. Another reason for the different a we choose is because the distance is 1 between the nearest neighboring neurons in the 2D CANN while that in the 1D case is 0.1π. For a hardware implementation, if η, a and b are fixed, one still can choose different current density j max and j min to optimize the performance of CANNs. We have demonstrated using a micromagnetic simulation that magnetic tunnel junctions can be used as the hardware of dynamic synapses, which have short-term synaptic plasticity. Continuous attractor neural networks with MTJ-based dynamical synapses are shown to have the ability to anticipatively track high-speed moving objects. A 1D CANN consisting of twenty neuron is used to illustrate in detail how the dynamical synapses are implemented and contribute to the modulation of the firing rates of neurons. The latter is used to predict the position of a moving signal. In a realistic example, we show that a rolling table tennis ball in a video can be tracked and its motion predicted using a 2D CANN including 27×40 neurons, where every neuron is associated with an MTJ. Although the tracking task can in principle be accomplished using the CMOS circuits, the hardware implementation of the dynamical synapses with MTJs, utilizing their inherent dynamical properties, is straight-forward and suitable for a portable, energy-saving terminals. The demonstration of the MTJ-based dynamical synapses significantly expands the promising and powerful functionality of spintronic devices for neuromorphic computing 