Many properties of layered materials change as they are thinned from their bulk forms down to single layers, with examples including indirect-to-direct band gap transition in 2H semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides as well as thickness-dependent changes in the valence band structure in post-transition metal monochalcogenides and black phosphorus. Here, we use angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to study the electronic band structure of monolayer ReSe2, a semiconductor with a distorted 1T structure and in-plane anisotropy. By changing the polarization of incoming photons, we demonstrate that for ReSe2, in contrast to the 2H materials, the out-of-plane transition metal dz 2 and chalcogen pz orbitals do not contribute significantly to the top of the valence band which explains the reported weak changes in the electronic structure of this compound as a function of layer number. We estimate a band gap of 1.7 eV in pristine ReSe2 using scanning tunneling spectroscopy and explore the implications on the gap following surface-doping with potassium. A lower bound of 1.4 eV is estimated for the gap in the fully doped case, suggesting that doping-dependent many-body effects significantly affect the electronic properties of ReSe2. Our results, supported by density functional theory calculations, provide insight into the mechanisms behind polarizationdependent optical properties of rhenium dichalcogenides and highlight their place amongst two-dimensional crystals. Among the plethora of two-dimensional (2D) materials entering the spotlight following the discovery of graphene, 1 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) attract huge interest as potential building blocks for innovative electronic and optoelectronic applications. At the same time, rhenium compounds (ReS2 and ReSe2) are expected to undergo very small variations in the electronic band structure as a function of thickness due to weaker interlayer coupling than in other semiconducting TMDs. From ARPES measurements, we obtained the ML ReSe2 valence band structure and used polarization-resolved data as well as DFT calculations to elucidate the orbital contributions of Re to the valence band. We show that the out-of-plane transition metal (Re) d z Figure Because of that, we use the labels K and M to denote any of the corners and centers of a side of a hexagonal BZ, respectively, rather than distinguish between different directions as would be necessary for a single domain. Finally, this explains why the CE maps reveal nearly isotropic electronic states around principal points (K and M), as shown in Fig. It is worth noting that in many layered materials including semiconducting 2H TMDs, posttransition metal monochalcogenides, and black phosphorus, the top valence band states are made of orbitals extending significantly out of the plane and responsible for interlayer interactions (mainly dz 2 and pz). The lack of nearest neighbor layers in the case of ML crystals lowers the energy of such states while parts of the electronic dispersion made of in-plane orbitals remain largely unaffected. In the 2H semiconducting dichalcogenides, the transition metal d z 2 and chalcogen p z orbitals form the top-most valence-band states around Γ while the in-plane orbitals contribute to the states around K. With increasing number of layers, interlayer coupling splits the energies of the states at Γ (which would be degenerate in the case of a stack of non-interacting layers), so that some of them increase in energy and overcome the local VBM at K. This is accompanied by similar changes in the bottom conduction band where electronic states at K, forming the conduction band minimum in the ML, are overtaken in energy by states closer to Γ, resulting in a transition from a direct band gap in the ML to an indirect one in the bulk. As a result of the latter, undistorted 1T ReSe2 would be a metal with several d x 2 -y 2 -and d xycharacter bands close to the EF. In Fig. Since ARPES only measures the occupied electronic states, we deposited potassium onto the sample surface during measurements in order to electron dope the structure and thereby attempt to shift the conduction bands below the EF. The doping effect saturates at large potassium concentrations at which potassium simply accumulates on the surface without further electron donation (see Fig. Ultimately, we do not observe intensity from the ReSe2 conduction band states near the EF during potassium doping, as doping beyond 1.2 ML does not shift the bands of either ReSe2 or BLG any further, but enhances a broad background signal, probably due to the potassium adatoms accumulating on the surface. Our DFT calculation shows quite flat conduction bands, as seen in Fig. In summary, we have successfully grown ML ReSe2 epitaxially on BLG. We confirmed the single-crystalline properties of the ML-thick nanoscale ReSe2 islands by STM and Raman spectroscopy and resolved their valence band structure using ARPES. We also confirmed that, in contrast to many other two-dimensional crystals including the semiconducting 2H phases, i.e. MoX2 and WX2 (X=S, Se), monochalcogenides InSe, GaSe and GaS, and black phosphorus, in ReSe2 the dz 2 transition metal orbital contributes only weakly to the electronic states at the top of the valence band at Γ. Such orbital character as well as the lattice distortion significantly suppress interlayer interaction in this material. Our direct visualization of the orbital content of the valence band of ReSe2 with ARPES highlights the intriguing properties of this anisotropic 2D layered semiconductor with potential for future applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Finally, we provide a lower bound of 1.41 eV on the electronic band gap in doped ML ReSe2 following potassium deposition and also an estimate of 1.7 eV from STS in the pristine state. The different gap sizes highlight the significance of doping induced many-body effects in ReSe2. ReSe2 films were grown by using a home-built MBE chamber with a base pressure of 1 × 10 -10 Torr. We used 6H-SiC (001) single crystal substrates, supplied by the Crystal Bank at Pusan National University. We annealed 6H-SiC substrates at 1300°C in 2 min for 3 times in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) condition followed by the formation of BLG layer on the Si-terminated surface of SiC. We co-evaporated Re (99.97%) and Se (99.999%) by using an e-beam evaporator and an effusion cell, respectively. During film growth, we maintained a substrate temperature of 250°C for 10 min for 1 ML thickness and then annealed the sample at 420°C for 30 min. In case of 2 ML sample, we extend the deposition duration accordingly. We carried out in situ RHEED measurements with a high voltage of 18 kV. For both STM and ARPES measurements, we covered the samples with an amorphous selenium layer at room temperature to protect the pristine surface from air exposure after the film growth. The samples were then annealed at 480 K in UHV to remove the selenium capping layer. Raman spectroscopy. A 532 nm (2.33 eV) DPSS laser was used as an excitation source for Raman measurements. The laser beam was focused on the sample with a ~ 1 μm diameter by a 50 × objective lens (N.A.=0.8) which also collected the scattered light from the sample. The scattered light was dispersed with a Jobin-Yvon Horiba iHR550 spectrometer (2400 grooves/mm) and was detected with a charge-coupled-device (CCD) using liquid nitrogen for cooling. We kept the laser power below 0.1 mW to avoid damages from local heating. The spectral resolution is ~ 1 cm -1 . Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. The experiments were performed in an UHV chamber (3 × 10 -11 mbar) by using a variable-temperature STM (OMICRON GmbH) equipped with home-built software and electronics. Electrochemically etched and Ar-sputtered tungsten tips were used. All STM and STS measurements were conducted at 79 K. The bias voltages (Vsample) stated in the topographic images were applied to the sample. For the STS spectrum, each I(V) spectrum consists of 1024 data points and was Gaussian smoothed maintaining thermally limited energy resolution of E = 28 meV. dI/dV spectrum was acquired by numerical differentiation of the I-V sweep. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy. ARPES measurements were performed in the micro-ARPES end-station (base pressure of ∼3 × 10 -11 Torr) at the MAESTRO facility at beamline 7.0.2 at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, using p-or s-polarized photon. Depending on the polarization, the photoemission matrix element causes the intensity of the measured spectral features to vary strongly. Density functional theory calculations. DFT calculations used the Quantum ESPRESSO Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure 