The families of high-temperature superconductors recently welcomed a new member: hole doped nickelate Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 with a ∼15K transition temperature. To understand its emergent low-energy behaviors and experimental properties, an immediate key question is whether the superconducting hole carriers reside in oxygen as in the cuprates, or in nickel as in most nickelates. We answer this crucial question via a "(LDA+U)+ED" scheme: deriving an effective interacting Hamiltonian of the hole carriers from density functional LDA+U calculation, and studying its local many-body states via exact diagonalization. Surprisingly, distinct from the expected Ni 2+ spin-triplet state found in most nickelates, the local ground state of two holes is actually a Ni-O spin-singlet state with second hole greatly residing in oxygen. The emerged eV-scale model therefore resembles that of the cuprates, advocating further systematic experimental comparisons. Tracing the microscopic origin of this unexpected result to the lack of apical oxygen in this material, we proposed a route to increase superconducting temperature, and a possible quantum phase transition absent in the cuprates. Despite intensive research efforts since its discovery three decades ago in cuprates The challenge to formulate a proper understanding of this atypical state of the matter lies in the strong correlation between the hole carriers in this system, whose complexity grows at lower energy and becomes intractable below 100meV. Nevertheless, rather reasonable understanding has been achieved at the 1eV scale via extensive studies of the charge One immediate key issue is the location of the hole carriers in superconducting Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 nickelate, or more precisely its dominant local many-body state at low energy. In typical nickel oxides, one expects that the large Hund's coupling would favor adding holes to the Ni + ion to form Ni 2+ spin-triplet states d x 2 -y 2 ↑ d 3z 2 -r 2 ↑ of the holes From this perspective, it is essential to address the key question concerning the location of the hole carriers in this material. However, current experimental conclusions are quite confusing. Recent x-ray absorption data Therefore, it is of ultimate importance and timeliness at this stage of the field to settle this key issue of location of hole carriers in this family, both theoretically and experimentally. Only then, would one be able to move on to the following important questions concerning this family: (1) What are the dominant local many-body states associated with the hole carriers? (2) What is the eV-scale effective Hamiltonian of the hole carriers? (3) What are the similarities and differences to the cuprates? (4) Is there possible new physics absent in the cuprates? Here, we address all of these essential questions via a (LDA+U)+ED scheme: examining the energies of the local many-body eigenstates of a realistic high-energy interacting Hamiltonian, extracted from density functional calculation of NdNiO 2 within the LDA+U approximation Let's first consider the most relevant high-energy orbital space of Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 based on our density functional calculation within the LDA+U approximation Interestly, our Wannier orbital analysis [42, where c † imν and n imν ≡ c † imν c imν denote the standard creation and number operator of holes of spin ν in orbital m of site i that experience kinetic hopping t ii mm and orbital energy ε im . Only effective on-site repulsive interactions U dd and Hund's coupling J dd among holes in the Ni-d orbitals are considered, since the O-p orbitals are mostly unoccupied or singly occupied by holes. For completeness, orbital dependent coupling to the large 3/2 spin S F of nearest Nd-f orbitals at location j is included as well, even though its effect is of no significance in our analysis below. (Here S im = ∑ ν,ν c † imν σ ν,ν c imν denotes the orbital-dependent spin operator and σ ν,ν is the vector of Pauli matrices. The use of LDA+U here allows a more accurate orbital space in constructing effective interacting Hamiltonians. All parameters are available in the Supplementary Material [42].) Figure To further investigate the local many-body state, it is convenient to represent the four-orbital space by a set of Nicentered orthonormal orbitals, such that the system is reduced into a simple tetragonal lattice of only Ni sites Table This somewhat unexpected result actually explains qualitatively the recent observation of reduced magnetic moments against doping From a phenomenological consideration of hightemperature superconductivity, our finding also makes strong physical sense. To sustain thermal fluctuation at a temperature comparable to the cuprates, it is necessary to have strong enough kinetic energy to establish correspondingly large phase stiffness. The large in-plane spread of the Ni-O spin-singlet state produces the necessary large kinetic energy (bandwidth ∼ 2.4eV [42]), comparable to that of the cuprates. In contrast, Ni 2+ spin-triplet state hosts a much smaller kinetic energy (∼ 0.7eV in our estimation With these analyses, we can finally proceed to make a crude estimation of a low-energy (∼eV scale) effective oneband Hamiltonian of holes within the many-body subspace in which each site is either singly occupied, |1 i , or doubly occupied, |s i , by holes in the Ni-O spin-singlet state resembles the well-studied t-J model of the cuprates if one ignores the weak coupling to the Nd-f local spins. Here, c † iν creates a dressed hole at site i of spin ν under the constraint that each site must be at least singly occupied. Similarly, the spin operator S i = ∑ ν,ν c † iν σ ν,ν ciν is subject to the same constraint. Table ∆ 2 (2∆+U pp ) using charge transfer gap ∆ ≈ 6eV Our analysis above provides some clear indication of how this high-temperature superconductor family compares with the well-studied but still unsolved cuprates. At the above eV scale, the different chemical nature of Ni and Cu atoms renders this family quite different from the cuprates. An essential aspect is the quantitatively weaker involvement of oxygen orbitals in hosting the hole carriers owing to Ni-d orbitals' higher chemical energy. This would surely be reflected in the spectral distribution of most experimental spectroscopes at the 10eV scale. Interestingly, at sub-eV scale, owing to the strong Coulomb interaction, Table Our further analysis indicates that the lack of apical oxygen above the Ni atoms in this structure has a positive influence on the stability of the spin-singlet state. In the absence of the O (outer-shell) orbitals, the ground state of our local exact diagonalization becomes the Ni 2+ spin-triplet state, as expected from Hund's rule. Therefore, the stability of the Ni-O spin-singlet state benefits greatly from the virtual kinetic coupling between the Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals and the O-P a orbitals. In other words, the lack of apical oxygen in this structure really helps push the energy of the Ni 2+ spin-triplet state higher by (1) raising the crystal-field energy of d 3z 2 -r 2 by ∼0.6eV (in hole picture, c.f. Table On the other hand, owing to the relatively higher chemical energy of d orbitals in Ni, our study suggests rich possibilities of new physics absent in the cuprates. Specifically, we anticipate a local many-body level crossing from the above Ni-O spin-singlet state to the Ni 2+ spin-triplet state, via introduction of apical oxygen or c-axis pressure tuning of the structure. This opens up an exciting possibility of quantum phase transition from a cuprate-like system into a high-spin (likely magnetic) system. Such an additional tunability implies a much richer physics in this nickelate family, careful investigations of which might help clarify the essential underlying physics of the normal and superconducting state of these unconventional superconductors. In conclusion, employing a (LDA+U)+ED scheme, we investigate the timely issue regarding the location (and corresponding local many-body state) of hole carriers in the recently discovered Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 nickelate unconventional superconductors that determines the appropriate modeling of the eV-(and lower) scale physics. We find that the hole carriers reside mostly in the O and spin-majority Ni-d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, as opposed to the expected spin-minority Ni-d 3z 2 -r 2 orbital commonly found in the nickelates. Employing a local many-body calculation of two holes, we find that the second hole forms a local Ni-O spin-singlet with the intrinsic hole, similar to that in the cuprates, while the previously expected Ni 2+ spin-triplet state is located almost an eV higher in energy. This puts this nickelate family in a similar category to the cuprates, but nicely expands the parameter space. Our conclusion is in good agreement with the magnetization measurement and makes perfect sense to the cuprate-like transport properties that demonstrates similarly strange metal and bad metal behaviors. Our analysis also suggests that the sensitivity to influences of apical oxygen allows for the tuning of superconducting temperature. It should also open up additional exciting possibilities of quantum phase transition absent in the cuprates. Altogether, with such a close contrast to the cuprates, studies of this nickelate family are expected to reveal essential clues for the long-standing puzzle of unconventional superconductivity and non-Fermi liquid behavior of the cuprates, two of the most important issues in modern condensed matter physics.