Corona charging a free-standing polymer film can produce a quasi-permanent potential difference across the film thickness, while the absolute amplitude of surface voltage may be highly sensitive to the free charges. To precisely control the voltage distribution, we investigated the flow electrification technology, by exposing corona-charged polyethylene terephthalate films to a variety of sodium salt solutions. The surface voltage and the free charge density were adjusted by the salt concentration, the anion size, and the flow rate. The dipolar component of electric potential remained unchanged. This result has significant scientific interest and technological importance to surface treatment, filtration, energy harvesting, bio-actuation and bio-sensing, among others. Polymer films can be quasi-permanently equipped with electric charges Upon contact with a liquid phase, e.g., an electrolyte solution, surface groups of a polymer may be ionized or dissociated, rendering its surface negatively charged. The surface charge would interrupt the diffuse layer, wherein the thermal disarray of ions balances the electric field When the liquid flows, the surface liquid layer within the shear plane would remain while the bulk liquid phase is removed A triode corona charging system was set up, as shown in Figure The sharp needle and the steel-wire grid were connected to two Glassman FJ Series 120-watt highvoltage power supply units, respectively. The polymer under investigation was 125-μm-thick polyethylene terephthalate (PET) films (McMaster-Carr, Product Number 8567K52). In an ultrasonic cleaner, the PET films were rinsed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 10 min and deionized (DI) water for another 10 min. Then, they were dried at 80 oC for 1 day in a JeioTech ON-01E-120 oven. The films were sectioned into 152 mm or 76 mm large square samples. During corona charging, a PET film sample was attached onto the grounded plate electrode. The steel-wire grid was in between the needle electrode and the film. The needle pointed to the film center. The distance between the needle tip and the grid was 40 mm. The distance between the grid and the polymer film was 4 mm. The voltage between the needle electrode and the grounded electrode (V Needle ) was -10 kV when the voltage on the grid (V Grid ) was -1 or -1.5 kV; V Needle = -12 kV when V Grid =-2, -2.5, or -3 kV. Corona was generated at 22 o C for 1 min. After charging, the dipolar component of electric potential (V d ) was measured by a voltmeter (Trek Model-344 voltmeter), as the PET film rested on the grounded electrode plate (Fig. As the corona charged PET was removed from the grounded plate electrode, a small amount of free electrostatic charges would be produced on its surfaces, which greatly affected the surface voltage of the free-standing film (V f ). Without further treatment, V f could vary from -3 kV to 3 kV seemingly randomly. Flow charging was employed to control the surface density of the free charges (σ f ). Sodium formate (SF) (HCOONa) was provided by Sigma-Aldrich (Product No. 71539). It was dissolved in DI water. The molarity (m) was 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, or 100 mM. One side of a corona-charged 7676 mm PET film was enclosed by a plastic box, with the edges sealed by duct tapes and Teflon tapes. The one-sidedly covered film was immersed in the SF solution, and the uncovered side was exposed to the liquid. The film was lifted out of the solution by a type-5582 Instron machine at a constant speed (ν 0 ) of 4 mm/sec, as depicted in Figure Figure Free triangular mesh was employed. When σ d was 0.446 mC/m 2 , as shown in Figure where z is the direction normal to the film surface. According to the Debye-Huckel approximation and the Poisson equation where ψ 0 represents the electric potential at the polymer surface, κ (3) gives As the electrolyte solution flows across the solid surface, the free-charge density induced by the remnant ions can be calculated as where σ 0 * = σ 0 -σ f,b . The trend of the testing data of σ f in Figure (5) quite well. For Fig. In addition to the salt molarity, to accurately control σ f , we also investigated the effects of the anion size and the flow velocity (v 0 ), as shown in Figure Especially, 10 mM SS led to a near-zero V f,N , suggesting that the voltage generated by the dipolar charges on the negative side was offset by the free charges. The factor of anion size came in by affecting z s . A Ramé-hart Model-200 Contact Angle Goniometer was utilized to measure the contact angles of 100 mM SF, SB, SD, and SS solutions on a flat PET surface. The contact angles were 72°, 67°, 61°, and 55°, respectively. With a larger anion, the solid-liquid surface tension was greater When the corona-charged film was pulled out of the salt solution faster, V f,N was decreased and converged to -0.7 kV when v 0 =10 mm/s, as shown in Figure Corona-charged PET film possesses a stable dipolar component of electric potential (V d ). However, a relatively small surface density of free charges (σ f ) could greatly change the surface voltage of a free-standing film (V f ). We used flow electrification to control σ f , as an aqueous solution of sodium salt flows across one side of a corona-charged PET film. The experimental results suggested that V f and σ f increased with the salt concentration (m) and the anion size, and the reduction in flow rate (v 0 ). This process did not influence V d . When the grid voltage was higher, V f and σ f may either increased or decreased, depending on which side of the film was flow electrified. Equation ( 