Recent experiments have tuned the monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 to be superconducting by electrostatic gating. Here, we theoretically study the phonon-mediated superconductivity in monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 via charge doping. We reveal that the emergence of soft-mode phonons with specific momentum is crucial to give rise to the superconductivity in electron-doping regime, whereas no such soft-mode phonons and no superconductivity emerge in hole-doping regime. We also find a superconducting dome, which can be attributed to the change of Fermi surface nesting condition as electron doping. By taking into account the experimentally established strong anisotropy of temperature-dependent upper critical field H c2 between the in-plane and out-of-plane directions, we show that the superconducting state probably has the unconventional equal-spin-triplet pairing in A u channel of C 2h point group. Our studies provide a promising understanding to the doping dependent superconductivity and strong anisotropy of H c2 in monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 , and can be extended to understand the superconductivity in other gated transition metal dichalcogenides. Tuning the topological materials to be superconducting provides a highly efficient way to search and study the exotic superconductivity such as unconventional and topological superconductivity. Some methods have been developed to achieve the target, including the doping through metal intercalation In this work, we show that the phonon spectrum of 1T ′ -WTe 2 dramatically softens in the electron-doped regime, but slightly stiffens in the hole-doped regime through density functional calculations. According to the phonon-mediated superconductivity theory, we reveal that the softening of the phonons with specific momentum in electron-doped regime is the driving force to give rise to the superconductivity. We also find an optimal electron-doped concentration, beyond which, the T c becomes to decline in accompany with the latent charge density wave (CDW) instability. Furthermore, we reveal the evolution of superconductivity coincides with the change of Fermi surface nesting condition, and predict the CDW order is quasi-one dimensional commensurate with wave vector q CDW =(0, π/b) according to the electronic susceptibility. Thus, there exist a superconducting dome and a new CDW state in the phase diagram. Based on the symmetry classification and linearized gap equations, we find that all the superconducting pairing channels with specific irreducible representations (IRs) are degenerate without external magnetic field. However, only the pairing in A u channel shows the experimentally observed reasonable anisotropy between H c2, and H c2,⊥ . This behavior indicates that the superconductivity in 1T ′ -WTe 2 probably has equal-spintriplet pairing and belongs to unconventional type. The first-principles calculations in this work are performed using the density functional theory (DFT) and the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) The charge doping effect from the electrostatic gating is simulated by adding or removing electrons to the monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 with a compensating uniform charge background. The doped carrier concentrations per 1T ′ -WTe 2 is expressed as n (cm -2 ), with positive and negative values indicating electron and hole doping, respectively. Figure The calculated phonon spectrum ω q,ν with wave vector q and mode index ν in electrondoped 1T ′ -WTe 2 is shown in Fig. The features of phonon spectrum in Fig. The Fermi levels with 0eV correspond to the red-dashed and blue-dashed lines in (a), respectively. play a key role to induce the superconductivity in electron-doped monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 . To prove it, we also plot the linewidth of the phonon spectrum γ q,ν shown in Fig. Here, N 0 is the electronic density of states at the Fermi surface for both spin orientations. From Fig. From Eq. ( Therefore, the α 2 F (ω) and λ(ω) are strongly enhanced by electron doping, as shown in Figs. 2(d), 2(e) and Fig. The Fermi surface nesting is evaluated by the imaginary part χ(q), i.e., χ ′′ (q). In Fig. The evolution of CDW wave vector versus the electron-doped level. become unstable and the system undergoes a possible CDW transition. For the electronic states, the CDW instability is induced by the divergence of χ ′ (q), the real part of electron susceptibility χ(q) with n e = 9.5 × 10 13 cm -2 , whose CDW wave vector is q CDW = (0, 0.75π/b). When the electron doping increases, q CDW is more and more close to the (0, π/b), as shown in Fig. Whereas T c greatly deviates from the experimental value below 0.7 ×10 13 cm -2 . It is because the Coulomb screening effect is strongly reduced in the low density regime. Correspondingly, the constant retarded Coulomb pseudo-potential μ * is not exact and should become large to reduce T c from Eq.( s =↑,↓ is for spin. On the basis of [c k,+,↑ , c k,-,↑ , c k,+,↓ , c k,-,↓ ], the effective Hamiltonian is Here, s and τ are two sets of Pauli matrices for spin and valley degrees of freedom, ε k = ħ 2 k 2 /2m-μ is the dispersion with the chemical potential μ, g and μ B are the Lande g factor and Bohr magneton, respectively, and B = (B x , B y , B z ) is the external magnetic field. Note that we only take into account the Zeeman effect of the external magnetic field, but neglect the orbital effect due to the 2D feature of 1T ′ -WTe 2 . In the superconducting states, the pairings should follow the IRs of the C 2h point group of 1T ′ -WTe 2 . In order to consider the superconductivity for simplicity, we adopt the approximation of Fermi surface average of V ep q,ν to neglect the weak momentum dependence, i.e., Thus, we only consider the momentum-independent s-wave pairings, which are from the constant pairing interaction -V 0 = V ep +U scou with U scou the screened Coulomb interaction. Furthermore, the soft-mode phonons have the momenta connecting the two valleys, which indicates only the inter-valley pairing is possible. Under the mean-field approximation in the Nambu basis, we can classify the pairing symmetry under the constraint of anti-commutation relation between fermion operators. The pairing function can be parameterized by the form ∆ = i ∆ i Γ i , where Γ i is the ith IR matrix product from s and τ . The results are listed in Table To evaluate the possible superconducting pairing in 1T ′ -WTe 2 , we solve the following linearized gap equations for T c where χ i is the finite temperature superconducting susceptibility in ith pairing channel, and can be calculated by Here, G e/h (k, iω n ) = [iω n ∓ H 0 (k)] -1 are the relevant standard electron and hole Matsubara Green functions. The details are shown in Section VII in SM, and we only list the key results here. Note that only the electron-type bands are taken into account in the electron-doped regime. With the approximation that the pairing occurs at the Fermi surface, we can get )/ε is the standard superconducting susceptibility and k B is the Boltzmann constant. When B = 0, one can find that all the pairing channels have the same superconducting susceptibility, i.e., 4χ 0 , likewise, the same T c , i.e., k B T c = 2e γ π ω D exp(-1 2N 0 V 0 ), where γ ≈ 0.5772 is the Euler constant and ω D is the Debye frequency. It indicates that all the pairing channels are degenerate and are the possible candidate for the superconducting ground state. When B = 0, the T c of A g channel is robust against the magnetic field. The T c of B u or A u channel is magnetic-field-direction dependent. Namely, ln ) and ln x/y ). Therefore, the B u channel is robust against the out-of-plane magnetic field B = (0, 0, B z ) and is fragile for the in-plane magnetic field B = (B x , B y , 0). In other words, B u channel has large H c2,⊥ and small H c2, . Similarly, one can find A u channel has small H c2,⊥ and large H c2, . In comparison with the experimental observations, it inidicates the superconducting state should fall into the A u channel with the equal-spintriplet pairing, whose H c2 cannot be restricted by the Pauli paramagnetic limit. These results can be easily understood through the spin structure of the Cooper pairs. The B u and A u channels correspond to the three components S z and S x , S y of the S = 1 spintriplet Cooper pairs, respectively. Therefore, the couplings between them and the magnetic field follow the Zeeman-type to minimize the ground state energy. For a general magnetic field with B = B 0 (cos θ cos φ, cos θ sin φ, sin θ), we can get the exact pairing form as ∆ ∼ e iφ c k,+↑ c -k,-↑ -e -iφ c k,+↓ c -k,-↓ , where the phase φ is determined by the direction of magnetic field. There exist several other mechanisms to result in the anisotropic H c2 including type-I In conclusion, we have determined the soft-mode phonons, the relevant enhanced electronphonon coupling and the Fermi surface nesting are three ingredients to drive the superconductivity in electron-doped monolayer 1T ′ -WTe 2 . We also predict a quasi-one dimensional commensurate 2Q CDW emerges in the heavy electron doping regime, and a superconducting dome in the phase diagram. Furthermore, we propose an unconventional superconducting pairing with equal spin triplet to capture the experimentally observed strong anisotropic upper critical fields. Our studies provide a standard way to understand the gating-dependent superconductivity in 1T ′ -WTe 2 and other transition metal dichalcogenides.