Dedicated to Gerasim Eliashberg's 90-th birthday. We discuss a new mechanism of microwave absorption in s-and d-wave superconductors, which arises in the presence of a dc supercurrent in the system. It produces a contribution to the ac conductivity that is proportional to the inelastic quasiparticle relaxation time. This contribution also determines the supercurrent dependence of the conductivity. It may significantly exceed the conventional contribution because in typical superconductors the inelastic relaxation time is several orders of magnitude longer than the elastic one. We show that the aforementioned contribution to the conductivity may be expressed in terms of the single particle density of states in superconductors in the presence of a dc supercurrent. Our results may enable determination of the inelastic relaxation time in superconductors from microwave absorption measurements. In this article we discuss the theory of microwave absorption in superconductors. In linear response to the microwave field E(t) = E ω cos(ωt), and in the limit of low frequencies ω, the current density in a superconductor may be written as j = e m N s p s + σE. (1) Here N s is the superfluid density, e and m are, respectively, the charge and the mass of the electron, and the superfluid momentum is defined by p s = 2 ∇χ -e c A, with χ being the phase of the order parameter, and A the vector potential. The second term in Eq. ( The microwave absorption coefficient is controlled by the conductivity σ. The value of σ is determined by the quasiparticle scattering processes in the superconductor, which are generally characterized by two relaxation times: elastic, τ el , and inelastic, τ in , ones. In a typical situation, which we assume below, τ in ≫ τ el . The theory of transport phenomena in conventional superconductors was developed long ago, see for example In this article we discuss another contribution to the conductivity, σ DB , that is proportional to the inelastic relaxation time τ in . Since τ in ≫ τ el it may significantly exceed the conventional contribution. This contribution to the linear conductivity exists only in the presence of a dc supercurrent. Furthermore, this contribution is strongly anisotropic and depends on the relative orientation between E ω and the supercurrent. Even in situations where this contribution is small in comparison to the conventional result, it determines the dependence of the conductivity on both the magnitude and direction of the dc supercurrent. This enables determination of τ in from microwave absorption measurements. The physical mechanism of this contribution to the conductivity is similar to the Debye mechanism of microwave absorption in gases The physical origin of this mechanism in superconductors can be qual-itatively understood as follows. Let us separate the superfluid momentum p s (t) = ps + δp s (t) into a dc part ps and an ac part δp s (t), whose time evolution is determined by the microwave field δ ṗs (t) = eE(t). (2) At low frequencies, ω ≪ τ -1 el , the quasiparticle distribution function n(ǫ, t) depends only on the energy ǫ and time, while the density of states per unit energy, ν(ǫ, p s ), depends on the instantaneous value of the superfluid momentum p s . As the value of p s changes with time, individual quasiparticle levels move in energy space. At finite temperature the quasiparticles occupying these levels travel in energy space as well. This motion creates a non-equilibrium quasiparticle distribution, which relaxes due to inelastic scattering causing entropy production and energy dissipation. The corresponding contribution to the conductivity is proportional to τ in . The reason why the Debye contribution to the linear conductivity exists only at ps = 0 is the following. Being invariant under time reversal the density of states must be an even function of the condensate momentum, and thus can depend only on |p s | 2 in an isotropic system. As a result, in the linear in E approximation ν(ǫ) changes in time proportionally to δp s (t) • ps . In this section we show that the Debye contribution to the conductivity can be expressed in terms of the quasiparticle density of states in the presence of a supercurrent. Below we assume the condensate momentum p s to be spatially uniform. This situation is realized in superconducting films with thickness smaller than the penetration length of the magnetic field λ H . We discuss applicability of our results to the case of bulk samples in Sec. 4. We also assume that the frequency of the microwave radiation satisfies the condition ω ≪ ∆, where ∆ is the pairing gap in the superconductor. In this regime we can describe the quasiparticles by an instantaneous energy spectrum, which depends on the value of p s (t). To describe the time evolution of the instantaneous energy levels we note that the number of levels in the system is conserved. Therefore the density of states ν(ǫ, p s (t)) is subject to the continuity equation in energy space where v ν (ǫ, p s ) is the level "velocity" in energy space. Using the condensate acceleration equation (2) the latter can be expressed in the form where characterizes the sensitivity of the energy levels to changes of p s . In the regime ω, τ -1 in ≪ τ -1 el the quasiparticle distribution function n(ǫ, t), which describes the occupancy of the quasiparticle energy levels, depends only on the energy. In the absence of inelastic scattering its time evolution due to the spectral flow is described by the continuity equation ∂ t (νn) + ∂ ǫ (v ν νn) = 0. Combining this with the continuity equation (3) for ν(ǫ, p s ) and allowing for inelastic collisions we obtain the kinetic equation where I in {n} is the collision integral describing inelastic scattering of quasiparticles. The power W of microwave radiation absorbed per unit volume of the superconductor may be obtained by evaluating the rate of work performed by the microwave field on the quasiparticles, which is given by Here . . . denotes time averaging. Below we characterize the absorption power by the dissipative part of the conductivity σ DB defined by In the relaxation time approximation the scattering integral describing the inelastic quasiparticle scattering can be written as where δn(ǫ) = n(ǫ) -n F (ǫ), with n F (ǫ) being the Fermi function, is the nonequilibrium part of the quasiparticle distribution. Using the condensate acceleration equation ( Substituting this expression into Eq. ( Equation ( It follows from Eq. ( In clean superconductors where the mean free path exceeds the superconducting coherence length the nonequilibrium state of the superconductor may be described by the quasiparticle distribution function n p . In this case the current density is expressed in terms of the quasiparticle distribution function as Here N is the electron density and v = p/m is the band velocity of the electron with quasimomentum p. The time evolution of the distribution function is described by the Boltzmann kinetic equation, which in the spatially uniform case takes a simple form Here I el and I in are the collision integrals describing, correspondingly, the elastic and inelastic scattering processes. The reason the conductivity is affected by the inelastic collisions is that in the presence of supercurrent the quasiparticle energy spectrum, contains an odd-in-momentum part described by the second term above. Since we are interested in the regime τ el ≪ τ in , ωτ el ≪ 1 the quasiparticle distribution function depends only on the quasiparticle energy n p = n (ǫ p (p s ), t). Substituting this form into Eq. ( where is the density of states, and Writing the δ-function in the integrand above as a derivative of the stepfunction, and integrating by parts it is easy to show that Eq. ( Finally, in order to obtain the time evolution equation for n(ǫ, t) we substitute the distribution function in the form n p = n (ǫ p (p s ), t) into Eq. ( In this section we use Eq. ( At |T -T c | ≪ T c the density of states is affected by the condensate momentum in a narrow energy window |ǫ-∆| ≪ T . Since the energy transfer in a typical inelastic collision is of order T the relaxation time approximation for the inelastic collision integral Eq. ( We start with a discussion of the Debye contribution to the ac conductivity of s-wave superconductors, see Ref. The density of states is most strongly affected by the supercurrent at energies near the gap ∆. Namely at ps = 0 the peak in the BCS density of states, ν(ǫ, 0) → ν n ∆ 2(ǫ-∆) at ǫ → ∆, is broadened. The width of the broadening and the shape of the peak depend on the magnitude of the condensate momentum ps and the strength of disorder. Ballistic regime.-In the regime v F ps τ 2 el ∆ ≫ 1, (which can be realized only in clean superconductors, ∆τ el ≫ 1) the density of states, ν(ǫ, p s ), can be found using the standard expression Eq. ( where z = (ǫ -∆)/v F p s , and θ(z) is the Heavyside step-function. The width of the broadening of the BCS peak is δǫ ∼ v F ps . Using Eq. ( we obtain for the Debye contribution to the conductivity in the ballistic regime where I b = 8 45 . Eq. ( (see for example Diffusive regime.-In the opposite limit v F ps τ 2 el ∆ ≪ 1 the quasiparticles participating in the Debye absorprtion mechanism move diffusively, and disorder may no longer be ignored. 1 In this case the Debye contribution to the conductivity can be studied using the standard theoretical methods developed in the theory of disordered superconductors where . . . denotes averaging over the Fermi surface, and ǭ and ∆(k) are the disorder-renormalized energy and order parameter respectively. For example, in the case of a white noise disorder in the Born approximation they are given by We have shown in Ref. where y is determined by the following equation Here ζ = v F ps /∆, γ = (τ el ∆) -1 , and w = (ǫ -∆)/∆. The solutions of this equation can be written in the scaling form y = ζ 2/3 γ 1/3 ỹ wγ 2/3 . Therefore in this case the width of the broadening of the BCS peak is δǫ(p s ) ∼ (∆D 2 p4 s ) 1/3 . The explicit form of ỹ wγ 2/3 is given by the Cardano formula, (See Eq. (S.17) in Ref. where I d ≈ 0.0549. This expression is consistent with the result obtained in Ref. The nonanalytic dependences of σ DB on ps in Eqs. ( (26) Let us now apply the general expression (10) to study the Debye contribution to the conductivity of d-wave superconductors. The order parameter in d-wave superconductors ∆(p) changes its sign upon rotation of the momentum by π/2 in the xy plane, and can be modeled by the form where ∆ 0 (T, τ el ) is the gap maximum at the antinode, which generally depends on temperature and τ el . In this article we focus on the limit ∆ 0 τ el ≫ 1. In this case the density of states in the presence of supercurrent may be evaluated with the aid of Eqs. ( Let us begin with the clean limit, τ el → ∞. In this case the density of states may be evaluated using Eq. ( where the summation is performed over all antinodal lines and n i is the unit vector in the direction of the i-th antinodal line. The energy level sensitivity V (ǫ) in the clean limit may be determined from Eq. ( Substituting Eqs. (28), and (29) into Eq. ( To derive this result we neglected the contributions of quasiparticles near the nodal lines to σ DB because they are small in the ratio v F ps /∆ as compared to that in Eq. ( In the Born approximation this result can be obtained from Eqs. ( Low temperature quasiparticle kinetics in s-and d-wave superconductors have common features. In both cases the low energy density of states is suppressed. Therefore, in both cases the quasiparticle concentration decreases with temperature more rapidly than in normal metals. Consequently the electron-electron scattering rate is suppressed and the quasiparticle energy relaxation is controlled by electron-phonon scattering. Furthermore, one needs to distinguish between two different types of inelastic scattering processes in superconductors. The quasiparticle-phonon relaxation processes that conserve the number of quasiparticles are characterized by the rate 1/τ (st) in (T ), which is independent of quasiparticle concentration. 2 The second type of inelastic relaxation processes corresponds to recombination, which changes the total number of quasiparticles. The rate 1/τ r (T ) of such processes is proportional to the quasiparticle concentration x(T ). Therefore at low temperatures it becomes much smaller than 1/τ The Debye contribution to the dissipative kinetic coefficients is proportional to the longest relaxation time in a system (see for example In order to obtain an estimate for σ DB in this regime we note that since the recombination time is the longest time scale in the problem, τ r ≫ τ (st) in , at relatively short time scales of order of τ (st) in the number of quasiparticles is approximately conserved. As a result, at such time scales the system of quasiparticles reaches a quasi-equilibrium form which is characterized by a nonzero chemical potential, while in thermal equilibrium μ = 0. To find the value of μ in the presence of microwave radiation one has to integrate Eq. ( Here ǫ * = ∆ in the case of s-wave superconductors, and ǫ * = 0 for the case of d-wave superconductors. To get σ DB one should substitute δn(ǫ) ∼ μdn F (ǫ)/dǫ into Eqs. ( In s-wave superconductors the dimensionless quasiparticle concentration x s (T ) defined by is exponentially small. Consequently, the conventional contribution to the microwave absorption coefficient is exponentially small as well. On the other hand, since the recombination rate in Eq. ( We note that the value of the conductivity at zero superfluid momentum may be estimated as σ(p s = 0) ∼ x s (T )σ D , and is exponentially small at T ≪ ∆. Thus, in this regime the Debye contribution to the conductivity becomes exponentially enhanced at low temperatures in comparison to the conventional contribution. The low energy density of states in d-wave superconductors is dominated by momenta in the vicinity of the nodal lines, and in the clean limit τ el → ∞ is given by Volovik (1997) where m i denotes the unit vector pointing in the direction of the i-th nodal line. Using Eq. ( Substituting Eqs. ( while τ (0) r in Eq. ( At lower energies, ǫ Γ el it becomes independent of the energy. In the absence of superfluid current it may be estimated as while the correction to due to the presence of supercurrent, δν(ǫ, p s ) = ν(ǫ, p s ) -ν(ǫ, 0) may be estimated at v F p s ≪ Γ el as Using Eqs. ( Using these estimates, in the temperature interval v F ps < Γ el < T we get We note that at ∆ 0 ≫ T ≫ Γ el , the conductivity at zero superfluid momentum, σ(p s = 0) ∼ σ D , is of order the Drude conductivity. Finally, in the regime T, v F ps ≪ Γ el using Eqs. ( We note that in this temperature interval σ(p s = 0) ∼ σ D /∆ 0 τ el ≪ σ D We have shown that supercurrent dependence of the microwave conductivity of superconductors is proportional to the inelastic relaxation time. Therefore in the presence of supercurrent the absorption coefficient can be larger than the conventional contribution, which determines the conductivity at p s = 0 and is generally proportional to the elastic mean free time. We note that such mechanism should exist even in the absence of dc supercurrent in superconductors with broken time-reversal symmetry. For example in topological superconductors with p x + ip y structure of the order parameter where breaking of time reversal symmetry leads to the existence of edge quasiparticle states The situation with a spatially uniform supercurrent density and electric field, which was considered above, can be realized in sufficiently thin superconducting films. In bulk superconductors in the presence of a magnetic field H < H c1 that is parallel to the surface ps is nonzero only within the London penetration depth λ H near the surface. In this case the situation is different for s-and d-wave superconductors. In the s-wave case the mechanism of microwave absorption discussed above will still apply to bulk samples and the presented above results still hold up to a numerical factor of order unity. The reason for this is that the quasiparticles that give the main contribution to microwave absorption have energies that lie in a narrow interval near the gap, |ǫ -∆| δǫ, where δǫ = v F ps in the ballistic regime and δǫ = (∆D 2 p4 s ) 1/3 in the diffusive regime. Roughly half of these quasiparticles have energies below ∆ and therefore they are trapped near the surface within a distance of order λ H . In bulk samples of gapless d-wave superconductors in the presence of a magnetic field parallel to the surface the situation is different. The reason is that the quasiparticles in the relevant energy interval can diffuse into the bulk. Therefore in this case the inelastic relaxation time in corresponding formulas for d-wave superconductors should be substituted by the minimum between the inelastic relaxation time and the time of diffusion from the surface layer of thickness λ H . Finally we would like to note that the considered above mechanism of the microwave absorption is closely related to the mechanism of ac conductivity of SNS junctions discussed in Refs. The It is worth noting that the diffusive regime can be realized in both clean, ∆τ el ≪ 1, and dirty ∆τ el ≫ 1, superconductors. We note that in d-wave superconductors the value of τ (st) in (T ) ∼ Θ 2 D /T is of the same order as that in normal metals