Rigid origami is a branch of origami with great potential in engineering applications to deal with rigid-panel folding. One of the challenges is to compactly fold the polyhedra made from rigid facets with a single degree of freedom. In this paper, we present a new method to design origami cubes with three fundamental characteristics, rigid foldability, flat foldability and one degree of freedom (DOF). A total of four cases of crease patterns that enable origami cubes with distinct folding performances have been proposed with all possible layouts of the diagonal creases on the square facets of origami cubes. Moreover, based on the kinematic equivalence between the rigid origami and the spherical linkages, the corresponding spherical linkage loops are introduced and analysed to reveal the motion properties of the origami cubes. The newly found method can be readily utilized to design deployable structures for various engineering applications including cube-shaped cartons, small satellites, containers, etc. Origami, the oriental art of paper folding, has attracted more and more attention from mathematicians, scientists and engineers Rigid origami is a subset of origami that remains foldable even when its facets and creases are replaced by rigid panels and hinges Meanwhile, flat foldability is another important property for an origami pattern in both theory investigation and practical application, which refers to the capability to fold an origami pattern compactly into a flat overlapped sheet Apart from flat foldability, engineers also work on how to fold a patterned sheet into a box-shaped carton The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 proposes a basic crease pattern of the rigid and flat foldable origami cube and analyses kinematic behavior of the corresponding 4R-5R-4R-5R spherical linkage loop. By exploring the layouts of diagonal creases on the rigid facets of origami cube, Section 3 presents three more effective crease patterns. Finally, the conclusion and further discussion are given in Section 4. The well-known non-rigid but flat foldable crease pattern of the origami cube is shown in Fig. Thus, they form the 4R-5R-4R-5R (from vertex A to vertex D) spherical linkage loop as shown in Fig. Fig. Kinematic analysis of this spherical linkage loop can be carried out based on the matrix method with the Denavit and Hartenberg notations where the transformation matrix ( ( 1) ( 1) cos cos sin sin sin sin cos cos sin cos 0 sin cos and the inverse transformation ( 1) i i+ can be expressed as ( 1) ( 1) ( 1) cos sin 0 cos sin cos cos sin sin sin sin cos cos and the closure equation in Eq. ( where A1 θ is taken as the input kinematic variable for one-DOF S4R linkage. The geometrical parameters of the two S4R linkages at vertices A and C are identical. Hence when C1 θ is the input kinematic variable, the kinematics of the S4R For the two-DOF S5R linkage at vertex B, see Fig. The closure equation (1) can be rewritten as 34 23 54 15 21 Substituting Eq. ( where B1 θ and B4 θ are taken as two needed inputs as S5R linkage is of two-DOF. Hence, if A1 θ is given as only one input kinematic variable of the 4R-5R-4R-5R spherical linkage loop, the other seventeen outputs can be obtained and the motion of the origami cube can be determined, i.e., the origami cube has one DOF and rigid foldability. Generally, in origami study, dihedral angles are preferred to directly represent the folding process. In this origami cube, the relationships between the dihedral angles and kinematic variables are Substituting Eq. ( where A1 φ is the only input dihedral angle. Fig. As for the crease pattern on the top facet of the origami cube, the cut is made Case 1 is, in fact, the 4R-5R-4R-5R spherical linkage loop, which has been analysed in detail in section 2. Although patterns 1 and 2 can both be regarded as the 4R-5R-4R-5R spherical linkage loop, one difference is that the origami cube with pattern 1 has an anti-clockwise folding performance (shown in Section 2, Fig. In case 2, patterns 3 and 4 can be regarded as the same pattern after 180° rotation, so do patterns 5 and 6. The crease pattern 3 is a 4R-4R-5R-5R (from vertex A to vertex D) spherical linkage loop as shown in Fig. As each pair of adjacent spherical linkages share a common joint, we can obtain the following relationships among dihedral angles, In case 3, take pattern 7 as the example, which forms a 4R-4R-4R-6R (from vertex A to vertex D) spherical linkage loop (Fig. φ is given as an input dihedral angle, the kinematic properties of three S4R linkages are determined. Meanwhile, three inputs ( D1 φ , D2 φ and D6 φ ) required by three-DOF S6R linkage can also be obtained from B2 φ , C4 φ , A4 φ respectively. Hence, as expressed in Eq. ( The input-output curves of dihedral angles and motion sequences (Fig. 