We demonstrate acousto-optic phase modulators in X-cut lithium niobate films on sapphire, detailing the dependence of the piezoelectric and optomechanical coupling coefficients on the crystal orientation. This new platform supports highly confined, strongly piezoelectric mechanical waves without suspensions, making it a promising candidate for broadband and efficient integrated acousto-optic devices, circuits, and systems. The demonstration of low-loss nanophotonic waveguides In addition to the large χ While suspended devices are at the forefront of low-power acousto-optics, suspensions add fabrication constraints that inhibit the development of complex photonic and phononic circuits and systems. Another approach to co-localize optical and mechanical waves is to employ the Rayleigh-like surface acoustic wave (SAW) which is confined to the surface in any material platform. These SAWs can modulate a variety of optical structures including resonators Here we explore integrated acousto-optic modulation in Xcut, thin-film LN bonded to sapphire with a focus on verifying the piezoelectric and acousto-optic properties of our film. This new platform enables high-confinement optical waveguides from the near-infrared to the visible and, in addition to Rayleigh-like SAWs, supports guided horizontal shear (SH) waves that exhibit large electromechanical coupling coefficients k 2 eff at GHz-frequencies. Compared to related efforts in other platforms making use of aluminum nitride, silicon, or gallium arsenide, this platform enables strong confinement of the mechanical waves without suspensions, setting the stage for complex phononic circuitry and systems. We demonstrate a surface wave acousto-optic phase modulator (discussed in Section I) utilizing the Rayleigh and SH modes near 700 and 800 MHz, respectively, and characterize them in the telecom C-band. By comparing simulations and measurements of the piezoelectric coupling coefficient k eff (Section II A) and the optomechanical coupling coefficient g (Section II B), we show the degree to which these bonded films retain their piezoelectric and acousto-optic properties. The acousto-optic portion of the study is similar to recent work by Khan et al. which extracted the dominant elasto-optic coefficients for waveguides patterned in sputtered arsenic trisulfide films The surface wave phase modulator shown in Figure The piezoelectric transducer is characterized by two numbers, the effective piezoelectric coupling coefficient k eff and the transmission coefficient t bμ from microwaves incident on arXiv:2005.00916v1 [physics.optics] 2 May 2020 the IDT to phonons in a specific mechanical mode and direction First we consider numerical analyses of the transducer in Figure A 225 nm-thick LN slab on sapphire supports a Rayleigh-like mode and a leaky horizontal shear (SH) mode with a wavelength of 8 μm and frequencies near 750 MHz. The coupling k 2 eff for these modes depends on the orientation of the electrodes with respect to the extraordinary axis as plotted in Fig- The level of confinement of the acoustic wave depends strongly on its wavelength Λ and therefore its frequency. At Λ = 8 μm for the SH mode, three quarters of the mechanical energy is in the sapphire substrate and so k 2 eff only reaches 1.2%. At shorter wavelengths, more energy is confined to the LN film and the coupling increases. We show in Section II A that k 2 eff of the SH waves exceeds 10% for 2 μm-pitch IDTs where 32% of the energy is in the LN (with 39% in the sapphire and 29% in the electrodes). By comparison, the k 2 eff in suspended LN films reaches 30% In order to determine the coupling coefficient g from measurements of the modulation index (Section II B), we need the efficiency of the IDT t bμ . This coefficient can be expressed as the product of two factors 11 The first factor comes from impedance mismatch and captures the fraction of incident microwave power that gets reflected. It can be determined experimentally from measurements of S 11 , the one-port S-parameter of the IDT. It can also be calculated from the admittance of solutions of the inhomogeneous piezoelectric equations of the full IDT and reflector bounded by perfectly matched absorbing layers (Figure E j and u k are the electromagnetic and displacement field distributions for the guided mode solutions, ω is the optical frequency, P j is the time-averaged optical power, and δ u ε is the eff on the order of 1%. Measurements of k 2 eff (points) are overlaid on the simulated curves. c. Bands for the slab (no electrodes) with θ x = 0 • show the Rayleigh mode (red) is guided, i.e. below the sound cone in sapphire (hatched), for all frequencies. At 2.7 GHz, the SH mode (blue) emerges from the sound cone, but even below this frequency, the radiation-limited propagation length is long enough to use the mode for modulation. d. The conductance is computed for a thin cross-section of the transducer. The S 11 , e., and conductance G, f., are plotted for measurements (black) and simulations (red-blue gradient colored by mode). modification of the structure's dielectric constant distribution due to motion, which includes both the shifts in the boundaries and the contribution of the photoelastic tensor. Despite the nontrivial dependence of g on waveguide orientation as plotted in Figure We start our process with 5 × 10 mm chips of 525 nm-thick LN-on-sapphire. The LN is X-cut and the c-axis of the sapphire is normal to the wafer. The a-axis of the sapphire and the Z-axis of the LN are in-plane and parallel. Ridge waveguides and grating couplers are patterned into a hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) mask and transferred to the sample by a 300 nm argon ion etch leaving a 225 nm thick LN slab on the sapphire substrate. The remaining mask is stripped with hydrofluoric acid before the chip is cleaned with piranha. The 200 nm thick aluminum electrodes are patterned by lift-off on the 225 nm LN slab. The IDT is 600 μm wide and has 30 alu-minum finger-pairs. The ridge waveguide is 1.25 μm wide and supports a TE-like and a TM-like optical mode. Below we describe how k eff and g are extracted from measurements of the IDTs' linear response and the modulators' modulation index. In order to characterize the piezoelectric quality of the film, we measure the coupling coefficient k 2 eff and compare it to simulations. The coupling coefficient is extracted from measurements of the one-port microwave response S 11 of the IDT for a range of crystal orientations θ x varying from -90 • to 90 • . We measure the S-parameter of each device on a calibrated probe station (GGB 40-A nickel probes) with an R&S ZNB20 vector network analyzer (Figure where C 0 is the static capacitance computed by fit to the susceptance -ImY (ω) near DC, Ω 0 is the center frequency of the response, and the integral is evaluated about Ω 0 . In addition to the mechanical signature (red-blue curve in Figure We find excellent agreement between the shape of the simulated and measured k 2 eff (θ x ) as shown in Figure eff . An important advantage of the LN-on-sapphire platform is that horizontal shear (SH) waves are strongly piezoelectric at high frequency. To demonstrate this, we repeat the above procedure for 2 μm-pitch IDTs on 200 nm-thick LN-on-sapphire. A typical conductance curve is shown in Figure We investigate the optomechanical properties of the bonded LN film -in particular, the photoelastic coefficients -by b. Angular dependence of the simulated (solid, photoelastic tensor from Ref. measuring the optomechanical coupling coefficient g of a nanophotonic ridge waveguide and comparing it to simulations. As with k 2 eff , g varies with crystal orientation because LN is strongly anisotropic. We determine g by sending light through the device while driving the IDT with a microwave signal, and measuring the modulation index h oa of the transmitted light. The IDT transmission t bμ is used in this calibration to determine the mechanical power incident on the waveguide due to the microwave driving. We measure the modulation index with the apparatus diagrammed in Figure Here S oa and S oe are S-parameters measured on the VNA for an acousto-optic device and the EOM, respectively, at the peak acousto-optic response. The EOM is calibrated independently using a tunable Fabry-Pérot filter (Micron Optics FFP-TF) to filter and measure the power of the pump and sidebands for a given RF drive power P. The modulation index h oa is not a direct measurement of the coupling coefficient. Instead the measured quantity plotted in Figure is the product of g, the square root of the efficiency of the IDT |t bμ |, and the square root of the length of the interaction region L. The numerical values for g|t bμ | are overlaid on the measurements in Figure For the measured coupling coefficients in Figure Lithium niobate-on-sapphire has many bright prospects in optics and, specifically, in acousto-optics. In this platform, the piezoelectric LN film supports both Rayleigh and horizontal shear surface waves which can be generated with interdigital transducers and used to modulate optical waveguides patterned in LN. Here we measure the piezoelectric coupling coefficients of transducers and optomechanical coupling coefficients of ridge waveguides for a range of crystal orientations in X-cut LN, confirming the quality of these bonded films and demonstrating the potential of the material platform. As the mechanical frequency reaches into the GHz regime, k 2 eff of the horiztonal shear waves exceeds 10%, making it possible to make compact, broadband transducers. Future work in pursuit of low-power acousto-optic devices calls for the efficient, mode-selective transduction of wavelength-scale waveguides. Waveguide transducers like those recently developed for horizontal shear waves in suspended LN films can enable a new generation of ultra-low-power phononic devices and acousto-optic modulators where b is the amplitude of the mechanics u = u 0 be -iΩt . The optomechanical coupling can be expressed in terms of the mode profiles where P i is the time-averaged optical power into the waveguide for mode i. If we use a power-orthonormal basis for the optics such that |a i | 2 is the power in mode i, P i becomes 1 for all i and Eq. A4 takes on a more symmetric form for various mode pairs. We have yet to choose a normalization for the displacement u 0 and thereby units for both g and b. For the devices described here, the devices in Sohn et al. Substituting in the efficiency of the IDT, P m = |t bμ | 2 P where P is the RF power incident on the IDT, we arrive at Equation 6. It may be surprising that the modulator's efficiency h 2 oa /4P -the sideband power ratio divided by the RF drive power, which is the square of the expression in Equation Equation A4 is used to compute the g plotted in Figure Finally, our device is at heart an electrically-driven analog of the optomechanical waveguides investigated in the field of guided-wave Brillouin scattering. In those systems with k 0 the free-space optical wavevector and x a coordinate representing the mechanical motion. From previous work with c the speed of light, ω 0 the optical frequency, Q m the mechanical quality factor, ω m the mechanical frequency, m eff = dAρ|u| 2 the effective mechanical mode mass, and ρ the mass density. This shows that the optomechanical coupling coefficient g used here and the Brillouin gain coefficient are rigorously connected. We note that the optomechanical coupling coefficient g ∝ √ G B scales as the square root of the Brillouin gain coefficient, since the latter takes into account both optical driving and optical read-out of the mechanics, whereas in this work only the read-out of the mechanics occurs optically. Our measurements of g in Figure In Appendix A, we outline how the photoelastic tensor p is related to the coupling coefficient g. Since g is proportional to δ ε u and δ ε u is linearly dependent on p, the coupling is a linear function of p which can be expressed In Equation B1, g ∈ R n , p ∈ R d , A ∈ C n×d , and b ∈ C n . Both A and b are computed as described in the main text. They are complex because u, the mechanical field, is complex. The phase of u can be chosen to make g real but this in turn affects the phase of t bμ . Although the phase of gt bμ does factor into the phase of S ao , we restrict our measurements to the magnitude of gt bμ . We repeat the regression setting λ to 0 and removing all other components of p from the fit to find the values in Table We start by solving min p |Ap + b|g + λ pp 0 1 (B2)