We present an innovative experimental set-up that uses Nitrogen-Vacancy centres in diamonds to measure magnetic fields with the sensitivity of η = 59.6 ± 1.3 nT/ √ Hz at demonstrated nanoscale. The presented method of magnetic sensing utilizing the ODMR technique for the optical detection of microwave-driven spin resonances induced in NV centres, which are highly concentrated to a nanoscaled volume probed by focused laser light, is characterized by the excellent magnetic sensitivity at such small scale and the full biocompatibility. As such, this method offers a whole range of research possibilities for biosciences. We also report how the magnetic sensitivity changes for different applied laser power and discuss the limits of the sensitivity sustainable with biosystem at such small volume scale. Magnetometry in biological systems is of the utmost importance for fundamental biological science and medicine. Mapping brain activity by recording magnetic fields produced by the electrical currents which are naturally occurring in the brain is of extreme interest 1,2 , with direct applications in the timely detection and cure of psychic and neurodegenerative disorders 3,5,6 . Measuring the magnetic fields produced by electrical currents in the heart is also of the utmost importance Magnetometers based on Nitrogen-Vacancy(NV) centers in diamond represent a valid alternative to SQUIDbased magnetometry. Firstly, diamond offers the substantial advantage of being fully biocompatible 6, NV magnetometry has already been exploited to detect the action potential in a macroscopic biological sample In this work, we present a NV-magnetometry protocol characterized by a sensing volume of (0.01 × 10 × 10) μm 3 and optical powers from 2.5 mW to 80 mW, values compatible, as we will discuss, with magnetometry at the cellular level. The application of a magnetic field removes the energy degeneracy between the m S = ±1 spin states, and the frequency difference ν + -ν -between the two ODMR dips is proportional to the component B N V of the field along the NV-axis: where g is the Landé factor and μ B the Bohr magneton. A variation δB N V in the applied magnetic field causes a shift δν + = 1 h gμ B δB N V to the higher-frequency ODMR dip and a corresponding δν -= -1 h gμ B δB N V shift for the lower-frequency one. Tracking the ODMR shift δν + allows the measurement of the variation of the applied field δB N V . The simplest way to track the ODMR shift is to collect the photoluminscence signal while scanning the microwave frequency. Adopting a frequency modulation of the microwaves can improve this method: the modulating signal is centered at the resonance dip and has an amplitude equal to the full-width half maximum of the resonance Figure The sensor consisted of a 3 × 3 × 0.3 mm 3 diamond substrate produced by Element Six by CVD deposition, having < 1 ppm and < 0.05 ppm concentrations of substitutional nitrogen and boron, respectively. The substrate incorporates a ∼ 10 nm thick layer of NV centers at a concentration of n N V ∼ 3 • 10 19 cm -3 , see inset of Fig. The excitation light (80 mW optical power) at 532 nm was obtained by the second harmonic of a Nd:YAG laser with high power stability (Coherent Prometheus 100NE) and was focused close to the bottom surface (i.e. the one incorporating the NV layer) of the diamond sample through an air objective (Olympus UPLANFL) with Numerical Aperture NA=0.67. The spot size of the focused laser beam is ∼ (10 × 10) μm 2 . The power of the excitation light is varied using a Neutral Density filter. An Acousto Optic Modulator (not shown in Fig. The microwave control was obtained by a commercial microwave generator (Keysight N5172B) whose central frequency was internally modulated at f mod = 1009 Hz with modulation depth f dev = 0.6 MHz. For simultaneous hyperfine driving, the microwave was mixed via a double-balanced mixer with a ∼ 2.16 MHz sinewave to create two simultaneous driving modulated frequencies near the central frequency. The microwave generator was connected to the lock-in LIA to provide a sinusoidal reference channel modulated at f mod . A permanent magnet fixed on a translation stage, allowing micrometric movement along the three spatial axes, provided the external magnetic field applied to the diamond sample. An additioanl coil (not shown in Fig. The photoluminescence (PL) emission was spectrally filtered with a notch filter and a long-pass filter both centered at 650 nm, then collected and detected with two different acquisition systems. A 4% fraction of the total PL intensity was sent to a single-photon detector (SPD). The signal from the SPD was used for the ODMR spectrum acquisition. The remaining 96% fraction of the emitted PL intensity was collected by NA=0.25 objective (Olympus 10×) and imaged onto a photodetector (Thorlabs DET 10A2). The signal from the photodiode was sent to the input channel of the LIA. The time constant of the LIA was set to τ = 10 ms for the construction of the LIA spectrum. While scanning the microwave, 20 independent measurements of the LIA signal were acquired. In the measurement of the Linear Spectral Density(LSD) of the noise, a time constant of τ = 1 ms was set. For the estimation of LSD, we acquired the LIA signal for 10 minutes with a sampling rate of s = 5000 Hz and subsequently the LIA signal was Fast-Fourier transformed. Figure The figure of merit of the LIA detection method is represented by the slope b of the curve in the linear zone, as reported in in Fig. (2) The minimum detectable field B min is where we have considered N independent measurements and that S LIA is affected by an uncertainty equal to σ S . Increasing the total time of measurement T leads to the usual scaling of the sensitivity η: Fig. We estimated it from ODMR spectrum as follow: where ∆ν = 2.599 MHz is the linewidth, C = 0.006 the contrast for the central dip of the hyperfine spectrum and K = 0.31 is a specific constant of this line. I 0 = 3.03•10 10 s -1 is estimated from the optical power incident onto the photodiode W = 8.5 nW, considering a photon energy E ph = 2.84 • 10 -19 J. Fig. To point out the biocompatibility of this method, we measured the magnetic sensitivity for different applied powers, see Fig. We obtained a sensitivity of η = 59.6±1.3 nT/ √ Hz for an optical power of 80 mW: this value is beyond (or at least well comparable) with the one obtained in previous works if the sensing volume is taken in account This value of sensitivity still needs to be increased to sense neuron (or hearth cells) activity, where we expect a 1-10 nT in proximity of a single channel (a functionalised nanodiamond can in principle be targeted at nanometric distance from the channel) or when considering tissue slices. Furthermore, ion channels clustering can further increase the previous values. This is a reasonable improvement with present techniques: Barry et al. We presented an experimental apparatus and sensing protocol compatible with the measurement of magnetic fields in biological systems at an intracellular/cellular scale, and with a sensitivity beyond previous works. These results indicate a clear strategy for magnetic sensing at cellular level, contributing to paving the way to practical biological applications of these methods. Neverthless, it must be emphasized that due to the small, potentially at nanoscale, volume of our technique, this can find a broad application, beyond the biological example that we have discussed All the experimental data presented are available from the authors upon reasonable request. Jinhu Xiong, Peter T Fox, and Jia-Hong Gao. Directly mapping magnetic field effects of neuronal activity by magnetic resonance imaging. Human brain mapping , 20(1):41-49, 2003. 2 Bingshuo Li, Juha P Virtanen, Axel Oeltermann, Cornelius Schwarz, Martin A Giese, Ulf Ziemann, and Alia Benali. Lifting the veil on the dynamics of neuronal activities evoked by transcranial magnetic stimulation. Elife, 6:e30552, 2017. 3 Dimitri M Kullmann. Neurological channelopathies. Annual review of neuroscience, 33:151-172, 2010. 4 Bernd Kuhn , Federico Picollo , Valentina Carabelli , Giorgio Rispoli Advanced real time recordings of neuronal activity Pflgers Archiv European Journal of Physiology, submitted. 5 Stephen G Waxman. Axonal conduction and injury in multiple sclerosis: the role of sodium channels. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(12):932-941, 2006. 6 Giulia Tomagra, Federico Picollo, Alfio Battiato, Barbara Picconi, Silvia De Marchis, Alberto Pasquarelli, Paolo Olivero, Andrea Marcantoni, Paolo Calabresi, Emilio Carbone, et al. Quantal release of dopamine and action poten-