Using ab initio methods based on density functional theory, the electronic and magnetic structure of layered hexagonal NbSe2 is studied. In the case of single-layer NbSe2 it is found that, for all the functionals considered, the magnetic solution is lower in energy than the non-magnetic solution. The magnetic ground-state is ferrimagnetic with a magnetic moment of 1.09 μB at the Nb atoms and a magnetic moment of 0.05 μB, in the opposite direction, at the Se atoms. Our calculations show that single-layer NbSe2 does not display a charge density wave instability unless a graphene layer is considered as a substrate. Then, two kinds of 3×3 charge density waves are found, which are observed in our STM experiments. This suggest that the driving force of charge instabilities in NbSe2 differ in bulk and in the single-layer limit. Our work sets magnetism into play in this highly-correlated 2D material, which is crucial to understand the formation mechanisms of 2D superconductivity and charge density wave order. Metallic layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have been studied since the early work of Wilson et al. In addition to these collective electronic phases, it has been recently suggested that several TMD materials host magnetic order, thus enriching even more their phase diagrams. Early theoretical works based on first-principles calculations first predicted a ferromagnetic ground state of vanadium-based TMDs -VX 2 (X = S, Se, Te) -and, more recently, in other TMDs -MnSe 2 and CrSe 2 (Te 2 )in the single-layer form Here we report combined density functional calculations and scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements to reveal the geometrical and electronic structure of NbSe 2 . The density functional theory (DFT) calculations The calculations were performed with a stringent convergence criteria. The density matrix tolerance of the self-consistency, 2D Brillouin zone sampling, energy cutoff and force tolerance are 10 -5 , 3000 k-points, 1000 Ry and 1 × 10 -3 eV/ Å, respectively. Due to the rapid variation of the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, we used a polynomial smearing method In some instances, the possibility of non-collinear arrangements was considered, however no stable magnetic ground state was found. The low-temperature STM/STS experiments were carried out in a commercial (Unisoku) low-temperature UHV-STM system. Single-layer NbSe 2 samples were previously grown by molecular beam epitaxy in a UHV system (see SM The situation for the monolayer is different. For all the functionals used, the system is magnetic at the equilibrium lattice constant and for a wide range of lattice constants, the magnetic moment being essentially independent of the lattice constant. The magnetic moment at the Nb atoms is around 1.09 μ B whereas the magnetic moment at the Se atoms, pointing in the opposite direction, is around 0.05 μ B . This magnetic configuration is similar to the family of transition metal dichalcogenides Experimentally, it is well known that bulk 2H-NbSe 2 is non-magnetic. However, our first-principles calculations show, for some exchange correlation functionals, that the system is magnetic. In addition, for those functionals that give a correct non-magnetic solution at the equilibrium lattice constant, the system is close to a magnetic solution. However, single-layer NbSe 2 is magnetic for all the functionals considered in this work and the total magnetic moment is around 1 μ B , which is almost independent of the lattice constant. We note that the possibility of a magnetic solution has been overlooked in the past. For magnetic solutions we find that the phonon spectrum of single-layer NbSe 2 does not show soft modes and therefore no CDW, as well as, no atomic distortions. However, a single-layer NbSe 2 grown on graphene does present two kinds of 3×3 CDW induced by the presence of the underneath graphene layer. Our measurements in single-layer NbSe 2 confirm the existence of these two CDW phases. The presence of magnetism in the 2D limit of NbSe 2 provide new insight about the intrinsic mechanisms responsible for the experimentally observed superconductivity in NbSe 2 . Further experimental work is therefore needed to confirm the magnetic character of free-standing NbSe 2 layers and elucidate its interplay with the CDW and superconducting states. P and MAT2017-83553-P. M.M.U. acknowledges support by the Spanish MINECO under grant no. MAT2017-88377-C2-1-R and by the ERC Starting grant LINKSPM (Grant 758558).