Synthetic diamond has been studied extensively during the last 30 years due to its outstanding chemical/physical properties such as wide bandgap, high thermal conductivity, and extreme hardness. Compared to bulk diamond, diamond materials with micro-and nanostructured surfaces provide a facile way to fine tune diamond properties such as field emission, hydrophilicity, and specific surface. In this chapter, the fabrication and application of microand nanostructured diamond will be discussed. The fabrication method of diamond nanostructures can be divided into two categories: topdown etching and bottom-growth. The early work on 3D micro-structured diamond dates back to mid-1990s, using chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) techniques. In this technology, carbon or carbide fibers were typically used as the growth template. Almost in parallel, reactive ion etching (RIE) was applied to achieve diamond surface nanostructuring. After that the diamond surface nanostructures, typically vertically aligned diamond nanowires (or nanorods) has been mainly fabricated using top-down plasma etching techniques. In recent year, the templated diamond growth has gained increasing attention due to the wide choice of template, mask-free production, and unlimited surface enlargement. In this chapter, the development and main techniques used in these two approaches will be elaborated. Nevertheless, other less common methods, such as catalytic etching by metal particles, steam activation and selective materials removal will also be discussed. As indicated by the title, this chapter will mainly deal with the application of micro-and nanostructured diamond in electrochemistry. In these applications, the advantage of nanostructured diamond can be divided into three aspects: 1) providing enlarged surface area for charge storage and catalyst deposition; 2) tip-enhanced electrochemical reactions used in sensing applications; 3) diamond membranes with micro-or nanopores can be applied in the electrochemistry separation and purification applications. Examples and explanations on these applications will be given in this chapter. Reactive ion etching is a dry etching technique using reactive plasma to remove material from a surface. Schematic illustrations of such techniques are shown in figure 1. The plasma is ignited either capacitively (figure Metal nanoparticles deposited on diamond surface are often used as etching masks. In 2008, Zou et al reported the formation of gold nanoparticle on diamond surface via a thermal dewetting method Alternatively, mask can also be formed using self-organized colloid particles. Periodically organized 2D structures of spherical particles can be obtained using capillary force and water evaporation Besides nanowires, nanoporous materials can also be fabricated using top-down etching method. RIE with shadow mask is a pattern transferring technique in principal. Therefore, more sophisticated nanoporous structures can be obtained if a nanoporous mask is used. For example, porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) has been studied for more than 50 years On the contrary to top-down etching method diamond surface can also be fabricated via templated-growth. In the 1990s in order to enhance the nucleation density, people used porous silicon as the growth substrate Diamond seeds with diameters of ~300 nm were attached to SiC whiskers for further overgrowth. With a coating thickness of ~300 nm, the diamond coating was formed up to a depth of ~50 μm. In 2001, Baranauskas et al reported the templated diamond on natural pyrolized fibers Later developments of the 3D diamond coating follow the similar approach; the focus is mainly on tests on a large variety of materials for the growth template. Si-based materials due to their high melting point, chemical inertness, stable interface with carbon, as well as the suitable thermal expansions are widely applied as the growth template. In 2009, Luo et al reported the growth of diamond on silicon nanowires using hot-filament CVD method Besides wire/fiber templates spherical compact from silica or opal lattice is also often used as the growth template. In 2012, Kurdyukov et al reported the fabrication of porous diamond membranes using templated growth on synthetic opal film consists of SiO2 beads (diameter: 520±30 nm) Currently, the nonuniformity of the diamond coating in a 3D template is one of the most prominent problems for this growth technology. In order to obtain larger surface area in one growth, the diamond coating needs to penetrate as deep as possible. However, there is a contradiction in nature. If the radical chemistry in diamond growth is considered, one would find the following formula Formula ( Beside the optimization of the diamond growth parameters, another way to overcome the penetration problem in the templated growth is the layer-by-layer growth method Diamond can react with H2 at high temperatures with the help of metal catalyst particles. The etching mechanism was reported as early as 1993 by Ralchenko et al In the fabrication of nanoporous structures using catalyzed etching, the density of the etch-pits is dependent on the density of metal nanoparticles. Therefore, particle density is an important parameter to control. Mehedi et al have shown that if the particles are formed by thermal dewetting of a thin Ni metal film, the density of particles is linearly decreasing with the increasing thickness for films thinner than 5 nm A detailed study on the etching mechanism is published recently in ref. Even without metal catalyst diamond can react with H2, water vapor and CO2 at high temperatures. This phenomenon is discovered when researchers tries to understand the surface etch-pits (trigons) on nature diamonds A practical catalyst-free etching or surface roughening method of diamond came in 2011. Ohashi et al reported the diamond surface nanotexturing via the steam-activation method which is normally applied to activated carbon An interesting consequence of the etching is the enhancement of the peak ratio between the diamond peak and the graphitic peak, showing a decreasing amount of sp 2 contentafter the process. Together with the observed fact that It is believed that in highly boron-doped samples, the proportion of ( Other gases such as CO2 and O2 have also shown similar effects. Zhang et al has reported that the activation process with CO2 atmosphere at 800 and 900 °C has a preferential etching on the (100) facets Because O2 is a much stronger oxidant than H2O and CO2, direct annealing in O2 containing atmosphere will have an uncontrollable etching effect on the sample in a relative short period. Therefore, special procedures are needed if O2 is used for diamond etching. Kondo et al shows that if this process is split into two phases, i.e. a high temperature (1000 °C) graphitization process in Ar and a mild (425 °C) oxidation in air, controlled and selective etching will happen on both It has been shown for a long time that diamond is almost nondestructible wet-or electrochemically Electrochemically, diamond has been used in the mixture of 1.0 M HNO3 and 2.0 M NaCl at a current density of 0.5 A cm -2 for up to 12 h with no evidence of damage The most commonly deposited non-diamond material in diamond growth is graphite. In the early research on diamond growth, it was known that graphitic carbon is co-deposited with diamond in CVD process Raman spectroscopy shows a very high G and D band showing the poor quality. By partially removing the sp 2 content in air at ~550 °C nanopores can be generated on the diamond film. In this work, 150 nm thick diamond films were used. As a result, a nanoporous membrane was generated. Similar work was reported by Feng et al The graphite removal can also happen in situ if etching gases are introduced in the growth atmosphere. In this method, diamond growth took place at the edge of no-growth region of C-H-O ternary diagram In some occasions, diamond nanostructures can be co-deposited with sp 2 carbon in some "unusual" deposition conditions. For all these conditions, the sp 2 carbon grows simultaneously with diamond, and the non-diamond carbon acts as the "template" for the diamond growth. In 2004, Sun et al reported the growth of diamond nanorods during the H2 plasma post-treatment of CNT The proposed model for the formation of nanodiamonds, and the growth of diamond nanorods under hydrogen plasma irradiation of MWCNTs at high temperatures. Amorphous carbon clusters are formed in step I. The crystallization of diamond begins in the core of the carbon clusters (step II), followed by the diamond growth and faceting stage (step III). After the diamond nanocrystallites are faceted, diamond nano-rods begin to grow at the nanorod tips (step IV). A similar but more controllable growth method came later in 2010. Hsu et al reported the diamond growth in atmospheric pressure CVD condition which is commonly used for CNT growth In a recent report by Zhang et al the diamond has been "assembled" in side double wall CNT using diamantane dicarboxylic acid (DDA) as the building block Besides the CNT-related growth, a N2 containing deposition gas mixture will also generated wire-shaped morphology of the resulting diamond film. In 2007, Arenal et al carried out a thorough research on ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD) growth under N2 containing plasma Typically, the above mentioned techniques for porous diamond fabrication are based on CVD growth, or based on bulk diamond fabricated by CVD. Meanwhile, HPHT method has also been used to fabricate porous diamond. There are two approaches reported: (1) Starting from porous sp 2 carbon materials and using HPHT treatment to turn sp 2 into sp 3 carbon; in 2011, Zhang et al fabricated monolithic transparent porous diamond crystals from mesoporous carbon CMK-8 via HPHT treatment (21 GPa, 1600 °C) The Biosensors is an important application for diamond-based nanomaterials. The appealing properties of diamond for biosensing include bio-compatibility Besides DNA sensing, diamond nanostrutures are also used in the sensing of a wide varieties of bio-organic chemicals. In 2009, Wei et al reported the diamond grass electrode had an improved sensitivity towards the detection of uric acid and dopamine In some cased, surface nanostructures do not only multiply the signal according to the surfaceenlargement but also enable the electrode to detect substances which are otherwise not detectable. For glucose sensing, the flat BDD electrode is report to be nonreactive, the electroxidation current appear only after nanostructuring It is worth noticing that voltammetric methods have seldom used in these detection. The reason is probably because of the heavily increased background current after the surface nanostructuring (we will come to this point again in the next section). In voltammetry techniques, the signal is limited by diffusion. Therefore, a further increase of the surface only increases the capacitive background proportional to the surface-enlargement but not the signal. Therefore, even if voltammetric method has been used, the background current need to be suppressed with pulse techniques Due to the direct link between the electrical double layer capacitance and the surface enlargement, it is reasonable to use surface enlarged electrodes for energy storage devices. The idea is even more rationalized by the fact that the energy storage in double layer capacitors is proportional to the square of potential window: where E, P, C, V and Rs are the energy, maximum power, capacitance, potential window and series resistance, respectively. As is pointed out, the diamond has so far the widest reported potential window reported in the aqueous electrolytes. Therefore, the attempt to use diamond as a potential supercapacitor material had already been made when the first known boron-doped diamond porous electrode was fabricated: Honda et al reported the investigation of the diamond nanohoneycomb electrode for double layer capacitor applications in 2000 During the last four years (2012 -2015), the topic of diamond-based supercapacitor gained popularity due to a large variety of porous, surface-enlarged diamond electrode has been fabricate, including diamond foam where Qcharging and Qdischarging are the amount of charge during charging and discharging processes, respectively. The result of the window opening test on the diamond device is shown in figure 9 (c). It is clearly seen that the water splitting starts around 1.3 V. However, the current is still small even at a high voltage of 2.5 V due to the slow kinetics of water-splitting at diamond surface. As a result, the columbic efficiency of the device still exceeds 90% at 2.0 V (figure Nanostructured catalyst is constantly of interest for material scientist due to the nanosized effect and large specific surface and On the other hand, diamond is resistive to electrochemical corrosion. Therefore, using diamond as a substitute for traditional porous carbon is a plausible idea. Research on this topic has been carried out during the last decade on planar diamond electrodes In fact, the combination of porous diamond and catalytic nanoparticles has been reported only in very limited cases. The above-mentioned difficulty in uniformly depositing metal or other catalyst on the porous diamond electrode might have caused this situation. According to current results on electrodeposition on diamond electrodes, there are two main problems in achieving a uniform nanoparticle coating. One is the low nucleation density of metal deposition on diamond. Due to the inertness of a diamond surface, the nucleation can only happen on grain boundaries or other local defects In 2015, Gao et al partially solved this problem for vertically aligned structures In recent years, due to the high demanding in robust membranes for separation and purification, researches on polymer including conductive polymers have attracted wide attention The fabrication of electrically conductive diamond membranes dates back to around the year 2000 when the through-hole diamond honeycomb electrode was fabricated More functionality can be realized by further surface-modification via organic linker molecules. The surface grafting of diamond can be realized by photochemistry In this chapter, the fabrication and application of a large variety of porous diamond and diamond nanostructures are introduced. Diamond fabrication techniques, including vertical structures via RIE etching and more complex 3D structures using templated-growth, has been developed in great depth during the last two decades. However, there is still room for improvements. Diamond etching method starts with thick bulk diamond. Therefore, the phase purity (in terms of non-diamond carbon) is easier to control. However, the morphology is limited to vertical structures and to achieve high aspect ratio (>30) is not yet reported. For templated-growth methods, the coatings are normally NCD with a large proportion of grain boundaries. The quality of diamond is difficult to guarantee. One solution is to achieve high density seeding so that the coalescence of nuclei happens earlier during the growth. Hopefully in this way, thinner films with lower sp 2 -rich grain boundary proportions can be achieved. However, the sp 2 carbon growth in the deeper part cannot be easily inhibited. Direct growth of pure, large aspect ratio diamond wires seems to be a good solution. However, it is not yet clear if it is possible to dope these wires. Also, current reports on direct diamond nanowire growth are mainly on the report of the phenomenon; the technology is not readily on the application level. On the other hand, the application of micro-and nanostructured diamond covers almost every aspect of electrochemistry including sensor, energy storage/conversion and separation/purification. However, challenges and chances remain on this topic. The authors would like to particularly emphasize on the diamond membrane fabrication and modification. Nowadays, the fabrication of diamond membrane has already been reported by several groups in the community with methods which are easy to handle and reproduce. By appropriate surface termination, it is expected that diamond membranes can be qualified for the tasks of other polymer membranes such as selective ion permeability and specific adsorption of chemicals. Due to the numerous unique chemical and physical properties, diamond will be a promising material for a new generation of membrane systems. Researches in this direction will lead to a broad range of new applications. On the contrary, the research on sensors based on diamond nanomaterials is less reported in recent years. As is pointed out in this chapter, the diffusion limitation in electrochemistry is a principal problem for surface enlarged electrode for sensing application. In addition, the diamond surface is inert, which means specific adsorption/accumulation of analytes is rare. Therefore, the surface enlargement cannot provide positive influence in the sensing. However, it is still possible that porous diamond can be used as porous substrate for gas sensing where diffusion limitation is not an issue.