Superconducting computing promises enhanced computational power in both classical and quantum approaches. Yet, scalable and fast superconducting memories are not implemented. Here, we propose a fully superconducting memory cell based on the hysteretic phase-slip transition existing in long aluminum nanowire Josephson junctions. Embraced by a superconducting ring, the memory cell codifies the logic state in the direction of the circulating persistent current, as commonly defined in flux-based superconducting memories. But, unlike the latter, the hysteresis here is a consequence of the phase-slip occurring in the long weak link and associated to the topological transition of its superconducting gap. This disentangle our memory scheme from the large-inductance constraint, thus enabling its miniaturization. Moreover, the strong activation energy for phase-slip nucleation provides a robust topological protection against stochastic phase-slips and magnetic-flux noise. These properties make the Josephson phase-slip memory a promising solution for advanced superconducting classical logic architectures or flux qubits. A Josephson junction (JJ) consists of a localized discontinuity (weak link) in the order parameter of two superconducting electrodes The design of a proof-of-concept PSM requires an architecture enabling the tuning of the superconducting phase and the definition of an efficient readout scheme. To finely control φ, the JJ is inserted in a superconducting loop, where an external magnetic field gives rise to a total flux (Φ) piercing the ring area. Stemming from fluxoid quantization The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a representative PSM cell is shown in Fig. To test the PSM transport properties and assess the operation parameters of the memory cell, we first performed a preliminary magneto-electric characterization at bath temperature T = 25 mK. Figure The typical operation cycle of the PSM memory cell is sketched in Fig. , where L K is the kinetic inductance of the JJ The ability of a memory cell to retain the data even when the power is temporarily turned off is called nonvolatility, which, even if not essential for a RAM memory, it is an adding value for energy saving and data storage. The PSM requires two power sources: one to generate the bias flux Φ B and one for the read-out signal. The former was provided by an external superconducting magnetic controlled by a current source, then power dependent. To overcome this limitation Φ B could also be generated by a permanent dissipationless superconducting coil as well as a metallic ferromagnetic layer buried in the semiconducting substrate or by directly employing a ferromagnetic insulator as dielectric substrate 25 fW and P The robustness of the PSM against flux fluctuations is tested by superimposing to the working biasing flux a sizable sinusoidal signal (Φ AC , see Fig. In summary, we have envisioned and demonstrated an original persistent Josephson phase-slip single memory cell which takes advantage of fluxoid quantization to codify two logic states in the topological index of the system, i.e., the parity of the superconducting winding number The hybrid memory cells were realized by shadowmask lithography technique. The suspended resist-mask was defined by electron-beam lithography (EBL) onto a SiO 2 wafer. All metal-to-metal clean interfaces, and metal-to-oxide barriers were realized in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) electron-beam evaporator (EBE) with a base pressure of 10 -11 Torr equipped with a tiltable sample holder suitable for multi-directional depositions. In order to obtain wire/ring transparent interfaces, which is crucial for the device operation, the use of the same material is strongly recommended Magneto-electric characterization. The magneto-electric characterization of the samples was performed at cryogenic temperatures in a 3 He-4 He dilution refrigerator (Triton 200, Oxford Instruments) equipped with RC-filters of resistance ∼ 2kΩ. The outof-plane magnetic field was applied via a superconducting magnet driven by a low-noise current source (Series 2600, Keithley Instruments). The DC measurements were performed in a two-wire voltage-bias configuration through a low-noise voltage DC source (GS200, Yokogawa) coupled with a room-temperature current preamplifier (Model 1211, DL Instruments) (see Fig. Based on the device structure, we estimate the zero-temperature nanowire coherence length ξ w,0 = D/∆ w,0 65 nm, where is the reduced Planck constant, D 18 cm 2 s -1 is the diffusion coefficient, and ∆ w,0 200 μeV is the zero-temperature gap in Al. The nanowire critical temperature is T C,w = ∆ w,0 /1.764k B 1.31 K, where k B is the Boltzmann constant. At low temperature, the ratio L/ξ w,0 6 confirming the frame of the long JJ regime for the PSM. The kinetic inductance (L K ) of a long JJ depends on the geometry and superconducting properties of the nanowire 18 pH where Ω qps 0.85 ∆w L ξw Rq R ξ 75 THz is the quantum phase-slips attempt frequency. With the parameters of our experiment we obtain the negligibly small Γ qps ∼ 2 × 10 -289 Hz. Thermally activated phase-slips rate reads where δF = 2.7 T c-T T U is the free energy difference of the potential barrier and Ω T AP S 5.5 k B T L ξw δF k B T is the attempt frequency. In the temperature range of the experiment T << T c, Γ T AP S is expected to be even smaller then Γ qps . As an example, at T = 100 mK the attempt frequency is Ω T AP S 500 THz and Γ T AP S ∼ 10 -474,257 Hz. From these equations is possible to see that Γ T AP S is relevant only at temperature very close to Tc. In order to find the optimal operating parameters for the PSM, we performed the writing/erasing operations in the continuous read-mode, i.e., when a bias voltage (V) is permanently applied, varying the values of V from 200 μV to 600 μV, as shown in Fig. The PSM shows the typical behavior of a memory cell with distinct current values for [0] and Here, we study the non-volatility of the PSM. Since the quiescent magnetic flux could be provided by a metallic ferromagnet buried in the isolating substrate or by a ferromagnetic insulator dielectric, the only power source relevant for the PSM is the voltage bias (V ). Figure 