The in-plane negative refraction of high-momentum (i.e., high-k) photonic modes could enable many applications such as imaging and hyperlensing in a planar platform at deep-subwavelength scales. However, its practical implementation in experiments remains elusive so far. Here we propose a class of hyperbolic metasurfaces, which is characterized by an anisotropic magnetic sheet conductivity and can support the inplane ultrahigh-k magnetic designer polaritons. Based on such metasurfaces, we report the first experimental observation of the all-angle negative refraction of designer polaritons at extremely deep-subwavelength scales. Moreover, we directly visualize the designer polaritons with hyperbolic dispersions. Importantly, for these hyperbolic polaritons, we find that their squeezing factor is ultra-large and, to be specific, it can be up to 129 in the experiments, a record-breaking value exceeding those in naturally hyperbolic materials. The present scheme for the achievement of negative refraction is also applicable to other natural materials and may enable intriguing applications in nanophotonics. Besides, the proposed metasurfaces are readily tailorable in space and frequency, which could serve as a versatile platform to explore the extremely high confinement and unusual propagation of hyperbolic polaritons. Three-dimensional (3D) hyperbolic media are characterized by the anisotropic permittivity or permeability tensor with a principal component being opposite in sign to the other two principal components. To overcome the above challenges, we propose, design, and fabricate a class of hyperbolic metasurfaces characterized by an anisotropic magnetic sheet conductivity (denoted as σm), Additionally, our metasurfaces are readily tailorable in frequency and space, which form a highly variable platform for exploring the extremely high confinement and unusual propagation of in-plane hyperbolic polaritons. The proposed anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurface is composed of arrays of coiling copper wires patterned on dielectric substrates, as illustrated in Figure To understand the behaviors of the designer polaritons over the metasurface, we model the proposed hyperbolic metasurface as a 2D magnetic sheet conductivity layer surrounded by two vacuum half-spaces. The resulting σm plot is shown in Figure where kx,y are the in-plane wavevectors, and 0 η is the characteristic impedance of vacuum. In the following, we carry out experiments to characterize the proposed hyperbolic metasurface. The experimental sample consists of 20 by 32 unit cells, taking up an area of 304 mm by 288 mm. To excite the designer polaritons efficiently, a port of the vector network analyzer (VNA) is directly connected to a coil unit cell at the edge of the metasurface. Another port of the VNA is connected to a detector that is a compact coil with a magnetic resonance around 0.159 GHz. The coil-like detector that oriented in the z direction, is fixed at a robotic arm of a movement platform and moves on the xy plane 3 mm above the metasurface. By scanning the sample, the complex magnetic patterns of Hz field (including phase and amplitude) are recorded. The size of the scanning region is approximately 250 mm by 250 mm, with a resolution of 15.2 mm by 9 mm. See the details of the experimental set-up in the Supporting Information. The measured field patterns are shown in Figure where the squeezing factor is maximal. Finally, we realize the in-plane negative refraction of the designer polaritons, based on the present anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurface. We first construct an interface consisting of two identical metasurfaces apart from a 90° rotation (see the schematic in Figure We have identified a class of anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurfaces, which supports ultrahigh-k in-plane magnetic designer polaritons featured with hyperbolic dispersions. Based on the proposed metasurface, all-angle in-plane negative refraction of the ultra-squeezed designer polaritons is observed experimentally. Remarkably, a record-breaking squeezing factor of 129 is achieved in the experiments, which exceeds those in the naturally or artificially in-plane hyperbolic materials demonstrated previously. The all-angle in-plane negative refraction of ultrahigh-k hyperbolic designer polaritons proposed here could also be applicable to the optical hyperbolic materials, Finally, by scaling down the unit cell, our design could apply to higher frequencies (see a design in the Supporting Information), such as terahertz and far-infrared frequencies, and may find many applications in flatland optics, 