Metal-based electronics is attractive for fast and radiation-hard electronic circuits and remains one of the longstanding goals for researchers. The emergence of 1T-TaS 2 , a layered material exhibiting strong charge density wave (CDW) driven resistivity switching that can be controlled by an external stimulus such as electric field and optical pulses, has triggered a renewed interest in metal-electronics. Here we demonstrate a negative differential resistor (NDR) using electrically driven CDW phase transition in an asymmetrically designed T-junction made up of 1T-TaS 2 /2H-MoS 2 van der Waals heterostructure. The principle of operation of the proposed device is governed by majority carrier transport and is distinct from usual NDR devices employing tunneling of carriers, thus avoids the bottleneck of weak tunneling efficiency in van der Waals heterojunctions. Consequently, we achieve a peak current density in excess of 10 5 nAμm -2 , which is Metal-based electronics remains one of the longstanding goals of researchers to achieve ultra-fast and radiation-hard electronic circuits. Negative differential resistance (NDR) is an important analog functionality widely used for a variety of applications including high-frequency microwave devices, local oscillators, amplifiers, switching circuits, and multi-valued logic. There have been several attempts of implementation of NDR using two-dimensional layered materials through Esaki diodes In this work, by exploiting electrically driven phase transitions in 1T-TaS 2 , we demonstrate a T-shaped asymmetric 1T-TaS 2 /2H-MoS 2 heterojunction based negative differential resistor with a high peak current density (J p ) among other layered material based NDR implementations. We are also able to effectively tune the peak current (I p ) through both electrical and optical gating. TaS 2 acts as an active material in the device and the working principle relies on the electrically driven phase transition in TaS 2 . On the other hand, the semiconducting MoS 2 component in the device adds the gate voltage and light tunability in the obtained I p . The mechanism does not depend on band-to-band tunneling effect and is extremely robust against interface quality, ambiance, and time induced degradation. at 180 K with V d = -1V . Note that with V T 1 > 0, Ni contact acts as the source and injects electrons into the MoS 2 channel, as explained in the top right inset of figure Phase transition induced resistance switching in 1T-TaS 2 has been extensively studied. If n 1 and n 2 are respectively the factors by which the resistance in TaS 2 changes in the upper (R 1 ) and the lower branches (R 2 ) due to the NC -IC phase transition, the ratio (η) of I M before and after the phase transition can be obtained using Kirchoff's law In Equation Note that the NC -IC phase transition is accompanied by hysteresis (see, for example, figure 1(e)) which manifests as a hysteresis window in the NDR characteristics as well. The hysteresis window can be reduced by introducing fast heat dissipation channels in the device. We fabricate a second device (D 2 ) where the MoS 2 layer underneath is a wide one, facilitating improved heat dissipation, as explained in Supporting Figure This manifests in the reduced hysteresis window when the device is operated in the NDR mode, both for V T 1 > 0 and V T 1 < 0. Note that the two TaS 2 branches are more symmetric in D 2 than in D 1 , which results in a slightly reduced value of the PVCR, further verifying the operation principle described earlier. Light tunable NDR: Before demonstrating the light tunable NDR effect, we first show the efficient phototransistor effect by light gating achieved in the heterojunction. The configuration is shown in figure where I light and I dark are the current with and without light, respectively. The calculated R is plotted as a function of incident optical power for Given the low power of the incident optical excitation, we do not expect any modulation of TaS 2 conductivity with light. The simultaneous control of I p by V g and P op is depicted in the color plot in figure Enhancing the PVCR: An enhanced switching ratio during the TaS 2 phase transition is desirable to further improve the PVCR in the proposed T-junction. In order to do so, we exploit electrically driven phase transition in TaS 2 at low temperature. K and 180 K. The base sample temperature is intentionally kept below the C -T transition temperature to electrically drive the system into metastable state and eventually drive to IC state, which causes an abrupt increase in the current by a factor of ∼ 2.23. In the corresponding four-terminal measurement at 180 K, I M is plotted as a function There is also a third regime of operation for V T 1 < 0 around V g = 0 V, where we obtain a high PVCR of 1.59 (figure We also note a hysteresis associated with the current-voltage characteristics for negative V T 1 . This suggests the role of carrier trapping at the TaS 2 /MoS 2 junction in the increased PVCR. During the TaS 2 phase transition, the local temperature at the junction increases abruptly due to a sudden increase in the current I T 1 . This is supported by the simulation predicted temperature at the junction during the voltage sweep, as shown in figure The above discussion on the enhancement of PVCR using CDW phase transition at low temperature provides key insights about the device functionality, and has important implication on several niche applications (for example, space electronics) where both low temperature operation and radiation hardness are necessary. However, the improved performance at low temperature may have limited impact on applications requiring room temperature operation. In order to increase the PVCR at room temperature, the upper TaS 2 branch (R 1 ) of the T-network in Figure While the additional terminals in the proposed multi-terminal device provide gate control and access to more state variables, from an implementation point of view, it would require some changes in the conventional NDR-based circuit design. For example, to implement an oscillator, where the positive resistance of a tank circuit is compensated by the negative resistance, the top (T 1 ) and right (M) ports (see Figure The heterojunctions studied here are robust against ambience induced degradation and exhibit good repeatability of the data measured over more than a month (see Supporting Figure With further optimization, the proposed device is promising to be comparable with SiGe and III-V semiconductor based complex multi-heterojunctions with highest reported peak current densities Active metal based electronics, such as the current design, is expected to provide radiation hardness. In a conventional tunnel diode, a major cause for performance degradation due to exposure to radiation is an increase in the excess current, and in turn a degradation in the PVCR Equation 1 suggests that the PVCR in the device only depends on the resistance components (and switching ratios) of the TaS 2 branches, and independent of the semiconducting MoS 2 component, and thus the PVCR is inherently radiation hard. Finally, one could, in principle, replace the semiconducting MoS 2 component by a metallic branch of appropriate resistance to make it more radiation hard. The PVCR can still be maintained based on Equation In Ni / 50 nm Au using a DC magnetron sputter coating system in presence of Ar plasma at 6.5 × 10 -3 Torr. Excess metal lift-off is carried out by immersing the substrate in acetone for 15 -30 minutes followed by IPA wash for 30 seconds and blow drying in N 2 . Buffered HF solution is used to etch the back oxide from the substrate and highly conducting silver paste is used for the back gate contact. The electrical measurements are performed in a probe station with a base vacuum level of about 3.45 × 10 -3 Torr at room temperature. The low temperature measurements are performed with liquid N 2 supply at a base vacuum of 6.45 × 10 -6 Torr. Measurements under light illumination are performed using a 532 nm laser, with the spot size being larger than the device area. The optical power is calibrated for the area factor and the loss due to the transmission through the optical window of the probe station. Thermal model Simulation: The temperature variation along the TaS 2 channel resulting from joule heating is obtained by solving the one-dimensional heat equation described below using finite element method: ) Power (mW) -2 K depicting NDR for both V T 1 > 0 (blue traces) and V T 1 < 0 (red traces). Forward and reverse sweeps are indicated by black arrows. Reduced hysteresis in the observed NDR is inherited by phase switching curve in (b). (f) Peak-to-valley current ratio (PVCR) as a function of gate voltage (V g ) for both V T 1 > 0 (blue spheres) and V T 1 < 0 (red spheres). Graphical TOC Entry strate light tunable NDR. As before, during this measurement, bias is applied in the terminal T 1 for different values of the back gate voltage, keeping terminals T 2 and M grounded. The results are shown in figure a Band-to-band tunneling; b Resonant Tunneling; c Resonant Interband Tunneling.