Thin films of uniformly distributed Fe2O3 nanoparticles have been prepared on single crystal silicon and glass substrates by a spray pyrolysis technique in a single step using a mixture of water and ferrocene dissolved in xylene. The size distribution of nanoparticles is found to be in the range of 20 nm to 30 nm. The films have been characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy techniques. The uniformity of the grown film was evident from the electron microscopic images on both the substrates. The crystallinity and band gap were investigated using X-ray diffraction and absorption spectroscopy respectively. Raman measurements of the prepared films have been carried out using two excitation wavelengths of 633 nm and 785 nm to investigate the depth of homogeneity of the films. The wavelength dependent Raman measurements reveal that the film is uniform across the thickness of the film on both the substrates. In recent years, iron oxide (Fe 2 O 3 ) has attracted much attention as its different structural and morphological forms have found several technological applications such as magnetic storag devices, magnetic fluid devices, pigments, catalysis, electromagnetic shielding etc These droplets undergo volume expansion during their flight from the nozzle towards the hot substrate due to a temperature gradient between the two. As the droplets arrive on the hot substrate they further expand and burst into finer droplets which undergo pyrolytic decomposition and pulverization into nano-sized crystallites In this paper, a single step spray pyrolysis method for preparation of thin films of -Fe 2 O 3 , consisting of uniformly distributed nano-particles is reported. The films have been deposited on silicon and glass substrates by using a solution of ferrocene dissolved in xylene mixed with water. The phase identification and microstructure analysis has been carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) Available as arXiv preprint https://arxiv.org/ examine the homogeneity along the film depth. The α-Fe2O3 film deposited on glass substrate was used to estimate the band gap of the film using absorption spectroscopy. Available as arXiv preprint https://arxiv.org/ The films of -Fe 2 O 3 were prepared by spray pyrolysis by an apparatus shown in Figure Ferrocene was dissolved in xylene (solubility ~ 13%) and equal amount of pure water was added into this solution to form a suspension. The suspension (composition : 2.5 gms. of ferrocene dissolved in 125 mL of xylene and 125 mL of pure water ) was continuously stirred and fed into the spray nozzle (orifice diameter ~0.2 mm) and atomizer system to generate very fine droplets which were directed on a number of heated substrates kept on a hot plate maintained at constant temperature. The nozzle to substrate distance was ~25 cm forming a cone of diameter 20 cm on the substrate plate. The solution was sprayed for ~ 20 minutes. Thin films were deposited on both glass (1 mm thick) and silicon single crystal wafers (300 m thick) kept on the same heater plate. The temperature of the substrates was monitored by using a chromel -alumel thermocouple. The measured temperature on the silicon substrate was 500 C and that on the glass substrate surface was 480 C. After the deposition process, the heater was switched off and allowed to cool till room temperature was achieved. The time needed was ~ 2 hours. The films were annealed at gradually decreasing temperatures under ambient conditions. The films (~100 nm thick) were then taken out for SEM, XRD, UV-Visible and Raman spectroscopy analysis. The thin films of Fe 2 O 3 on silicon as well as glass substrates were examined under a Zeiss FE SEM model Supra Z5 in the secondary electron mode with excitation voltage 5 kV and working distance of 3.3 mm. The X-ray diffraction data was recorded using Rigaku Smart Lab monochromatic Cu-K radiation (=1.54 Ȧ) in glancing angle diffraction mode keeping the incidence angle  = 2 (Figure Available as arXiv preprint https://arxiv.org/ Figure XRD patterns do not show any evidence of carbon present in the films. Some of the peaks are identified as due to silicon which is coming from the single crystal silicon substrate. Figure4 shows the Raman spectra from the deposited films on both the substrates recorded using two excitation wavelengths of 633 nm (left panel) and 785 nm (right panel). The peaks observed in Raman spectra in Figure Spray pyrolysis has successfully been used for deposition of dense thin films of uniformly distributed -Fe 2 O 3 nano-particles on crystalline as well as amorphous substrates as revealed from the morphological studies. The single step spray pyrolysis process reported here uses a mixture of water and ferrocene dissolved in xylene. The structural analysis carried out using XRD, shows that Fe 2 O 3 nano-particles have a single phase hematite structure stabilized with trace amount of carbon. Optical absorption spectroscopy was used to estimate the band gap of Available as arXiv preprint https://arxiv.org/ the deposited film on glass substrate which yields band gap of 3.24 eV indicating an insulating behavior. An excitation wavelength dependent Raman spectroscopy was used to check planar and depth homogeneity and to validate phases which were found consistent with the XRD analysis. In brief, the comparison of structural, morphological and spectroscopic results concludes that a uniform film, consisting of -Fe 2 O 3 nanostructures, can be prepared using spray pyrolysis. The films, so prepared, have a relatively high band gap and are homogeneous along the depth of the films. Available as arXiv preprinthttps://arxiv.org/