Highly flexible electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding material with excellent shielding performance is of great significance to practical applications in nextgeneration flexible devices. However, most EMI materials suffer from insufficient flexibility and complicated preparation methods. In this study, we propose a new scheme to fabricate a magnetic Ni particle/Ag matrix composite ultrathin film on a paper surface. For a ~2 μm thick film on paper, the EMI shielding effectiveness (SE) was found to be 46.2 dB at 8.1 GHz after bending 200,000 times over a radius of ~2 mm. The sheet resistance (R□) remained lower than 2.30 Ω after bending 200,000 times. Contrary to the change in R□, the EMI SE of the film generally increased as the weight ratio of Ag to Ni increased, in accordance with the principle that EMI SE is positively related with an increase in electrical conductivity. Desirable EMI shielding ability, 2 ultrahigh flexibility, and simple processing provide this material with excellent application prospects. Flexible electronics have rapidly developed in recent years as an important direction for the future development of electronics and are of great significance to mankind. In traditional non-flexible electronic devices, solving the electromagnetic interference (EMI) problem, which interferes with delicate electronic equipment and poses environmental problems (namely long-term threats to human health), is essential in ensuring normal device operations Metal and carbon materials are commonly used as conductive fillers for the preparation of flexible EMI shielding materials For example, Zongping Chen et al. [1] prepared a graphene/polymer foam composite, where graphene sheets were fabricated by chemical vapor deposition of methane on Ni foam first, and then the Ni foam was etched away after coating a thin layer of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) on the graphene surface. The method provided this material (~0.8 wt% graphene, ~1 mm thick) with approximately 20.0 dB shielding effectiveness (SE) in the X band frequency, and its EMI SE decreased slightly after bending 10,000 times over a radius of 2.5 mm. Besides conductive fillers, magnetic entities are often used to improve the EMI SE of shielding materials due to the material's magnetic dipoles interacting with the radiation [3] obtained a flexible NR/Fe3O4@rGO composite, showing an EMI SE of 42.4 dB at 9.0 GHz (10 phr rGO, 1.8 mm thick) and an SE exhibiting only 3.5% loss after bending to a 60° angle 2000 times. These studies effectively combined flexibility with shielding properties; however, the degree of flexibility for many flexible electronic devices remains insufficient, and these shielding materials are still too thick. In this paper, a new scheme is proposed to fabricate a highly flexible EMI shielding material with a unique composite structure by depositing and sintering Ag and Ag/Ni blends onto the paper surface. Studies have confirmed that much greater strain can be sustained by a metal film that is well bonded to substrates compared with a film that is not Ag (50-70 nm, 99.99%), Ni (20-100 nm, 99.9%), Ni (0.34-1.12 μm, 99.8%), AgNO3 (AR, 99.8%), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Macklin, K29-32), hydrazine (Macklin, 50%), and deionized water were used in experiments. Ag/Ni blends were prepared by chemical reduction. First, 0.68 g of AgNO3 and 0.68 g of PVP were added to 720 mL of deionized water in a beaker wrapped by in aluminum foil, and then stirred until all solvent dissolved. Then, the nano-nickel powder was added to the solvent followed by sonicating sonication of the solvent for one1 min. After adding 18 mL of hydrazine hydrate, the solvent was stirred until it became nearly transparent. The precipitate was then washed and centrifugated several times. An Ag/Ni blend was obtained after drying. Ag/Ni blend or Ag (60 nm [representing 50-70 nm]) particles were first mixed with ethylene glycol at a weight ratio of 1:4. After sonicating and stirring for two min, the mixture was quickly coated on high-temperature resistant paper (a polyimide film coated with TiO2 coating, ~100 μm thick totally) by dropper to prevent silver from depositing in liquids. Then, the paper was placed in a drying oven at 140 °C for 1 h followed by natural cooling in air. Some particles on the paper surface were not connected as a whole layer. These particles were wiped away slightly by tissue paper, and EMI shielding films were obtained. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of shielding film was obtained by D/max 2500pc. The morphology and structure of Ag/Ni blend sintering films were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi S4700, 15 kV) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; FEI Talos F200X). The thickness of the metal layer of the film was measured using a profilometer (Vecco Dektak 150). The R□ was measured with a multifunction digital four-probe tester (ST-2258C). EMI SE was measured using a vector network analyzer (Keysight, E5063A). Magnetic properties were measured by a magnetic property measurement system (Quantum Designed MPMS3). Fig. Our previous work has proved that the presence of TiO2 in the substrate facilitates the sintering of Ag and the formation of high-strength interfaces between the Ag coating and the substrate Using shielding material to block electromagnetic waves is a common and effective way to solve the EMI pollution problem. Generally, reflection (SER), absorption (SEA), multiple reflection (SEM), and transmission are generated while electromagnetic waves encounter shielding material; the sum of the first three factors is calculated as the total EMI SE (SET). The SEA, SER, and SET can be calculated by combining the power coefficients of reflection (R), absorption (A), and transmission (T). The corresponding expressions are as follows: The SEM is generally ignored when SET is larger than 15.0 dB. g EMI SE of shielding films measured in the 13-18 GHz frequency range. Combining Fig. GHz, whereas that of the film made from Ni (60 nm) particles was 46.6 dB at 8 GHz. As mentioned earlier, the R□ of Ag/Ni blend sintering films increased as the weight ratio of Ni to Ag increased. Unsurprisingly, the shielding film with a 2:1 weight ratio of Ag to Ni (560 nm) had a R□ of 1.56 Ω and an EMI SE of 50.9 dB at 8 GHz, whereas the film with a 1:2 weight ratio of Ag to Ni (560 nm) exhibited 8.13 Ω and 37.7 dB at 8 GHz, respectively. The thickness of a shielding material significantly influences its EMI SE (Note 1 in Appendix). To determine the shielding performance of a material more realistically, it is reasonable to use the SSE/t as an evaluation criterion, wherein the specific EMI shielding effectiveness (SSE) is divided by the thickness of the shielding material to yield a normalized value. Surprisingly, when the weight ratio of Ag to Ni (560 nm) was 6:1, the metal layer of the Ag/Ni blend sintering film had a high SSE/t of 65,224 dB cm 2 g -1 , much larger than that of copper foil (7,812 dB cm 2 g -1 ), aluminum foil (30,555 dB cm 2 g -1 ), and a Ti3C2Tx MXene film (30,830 dB cm 2 g -1 ) [2, 29]. Shielding of an electromagnetic wave primarily originates from reflection and absorption mechanisms; reflection results from a mismatch between the absorber and air, whereas absorption occurs from ohmic loss, polarization loss, and magnetic loss To further analyze the shielding mechanism in EMI SE results, SER and SEA were calculated. Fig. Although distinct magnetic properties were identified in the films made from Ni (60 and 560 nm), the differences in R□ primarily distinguished the EMI SE of these films. Generally, the problem of EMI SE declining in the high-frequency band due to stronger penetration of high-frequency electromagnetic waves poses challenges to many shielding materials In summary, we developed a flexible EMI shielding film with a unique composite structure using a simple fabrication method that directly sinters Ag/Ni blend onto paper. The ~2-μm -thick metal layer endowed the shielding material with a high EMI SE of more than 46.7 dB within the 8-12 GHz frequency range and a small R□ of 0.78 Ω. As the content of Ag declined, R□ increased, leading to a reduction in EMI SE. After bending to a radius of ~2 mm 200,000 times, the shielding film with an Ag:Ni (60 nm) weight ratio of 6:1 only exhibited a 4.5% loss in EMI SE and an increase of 1.20 Ω in R□. Such stable shielding performance under mechanical deformation combined with simple processing and small thickness provide this material strong application potential in next-generation flexible electronics. There are no conflicts to declare.