Motivated by the recent discovery of near-room temperature superconductivity in high-pressure superhydrides, we investigate from first-principles the high-pressure superconducting phase diagram of the ternary Ca-B-H system, using ab-initio evolutionary crystal structure prediction, and Density Functional Perturbation Theory. We find that below 100 GPa all stable and weakly metastable phases are insulating. This pressure marks the appearance of several new chemically-forbidden phases on the hull of stability, and the first onset of metalization in CaBH5. Metallization is then gradually achieved at higher pressure at different compositions. Among the metallic phases stable in the Megabar regime, we predict two high-Tc superconducting phases with CaBH6 and Ca2B2H13 compositions, with critical temperatures of 119 and 89 K at 300 GPa, respectively, surviving to lower pressures. Ternary hydrides will most likely play a major role in superconductivity research in the coming years; our study suggests that, in order to reduce the pressure for the onset of metallicity and superconductivity, further explorations of ternary hydrides should focus on elements less electronegative than boron. The search for high-temperature superconductors in hydrogen-rich systems stems from two seminal intuitions of Neil Ashcroft's, i.e. that hydrogen, under sufficiently high pressures, may be turned into a metallic roomtemperature superconductor, and that the same result may be achieved at lower pressures exploiting chemical precompression in hydrides 1,2 . This second intuition, in particular, led to a major breakthrough in 2014, with the experimental discovery that sulfur hydride (SH 3 ), under a pressure of 200 GPa, becomes a superconductor with a critical temperature (T c ) of 203 K High-T c superhydrides belong to the class of conventional superconductors, where the superconducting pairing is mediated by phonons. For this class of materials, Migdal-Eliashberg theory, combined with first-principles calculations of the electron-phonon coupling, permits to make quantitative predictions of superconducting properties. Based on Migdal-Eliashberg theory and experience, the highest T c among conventional superconductors are expected in materials, which: i) contain light elements, exhibit ii) a sizable density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, typical of good metals, and iii) large electron-phonon (e-ph ) matrix elements, characteristic of systems with contain directional (covalent or ionic) Figure bonds In the last five years, many research groups, galvanized by the ground-breaking SH 3 discovery, devoted their ef-forts to the exploration of all possible binary hydrides, i.e. compounds with chemical formula A x H y . The first family is that of covalent hydrides, in which A can be a metalloid or non-metal. At low pressure, covalent hydrides form molecular crystals, which are largegap insulators The second family of high-T c binary hydrides comprises weak hydrogen formers, such as alkaline earths, lanthanoids, actinoids, and early transition metals. Within this family, the highest T c s are usually found in hydrogen clathrate structures, characterized by highly symmetric H cages surrounding a central atom After the binary hydrides have been thoroughly explored, the natural route to improve the superconducting properties of high-pressure hydrides, either by reducing the pressures needed to achieve high T c , or by increasing the maximum T c , is to consider ternary hydrides -materials with A x B y H z composition, where the presence of two different elements, A and B, opens many routes for the optimization of material properties. However, the increased flexibility of ternary hydrides comes at a high price, since accounting for possible decomposition paths requires exploring a much larger compositional space than in the case of binaries. For this reason, only a few out of the six-thousand possible ternary hydrides have been investigated to date In this work, we used first-principles methods for evolutionary structure prediction In this paper, we will analyze the high-pressure phase diagram of Ca-B-H with the precise aim of identifying new hydrogen-rich, covalent metallic structures, analogous to SH 3 , exhibiting high-T c conventional superconductivity. We will show that, although such structures do indeed form, electronic structure features amenable to the chemical properties of calcium and boron limit the maximum T c achievable and their stability range, making calcium borohydrides not competitive with the record binary hydrides, such as SH 3 and LaH 10 . The paper is organized as follows: in section I we will present the phase diagram as a function of pressure, highlighting the evolution of the structural properties of the stable phases. In section II we will present the electronic properties of the stable and metastable phases, focusing in more detail on the new metallic structures that we identify at high pressures. In section III, we will then investigate the electron-phonon properties, and discuss which specific electronic and structural features lead to low or high-T c in the different phases. In section IV we will draw the main conclusions of our work. The Appendixes contain figures of the electronic DOS for all structures, band structure plots for selected highpressure phases, as well as an extensive account of the computational details. The Ca-B-H phase diagram at ambient pressure is wellcharacterized, since it was extensively studied for hydrogen storage applications. The ground state phase Ca(BH 4 ) 2 decomposes above 300 o C through different channels: either towards CaH 2 , H 2 , and CaB 12 H 12 , or towards CaH 2 , CaB 6 and H 2 , through an intermediate Ca(BH 3 ) 2 phase To the best of our knowledge, there are no predictions on the behavior of the ternary phase diagram under pressure, including intermediate Ca-B-H compositions. However, the pressure behavior of the binary systems (Ca-B, Ca-H, B-H), which form the edge of the ternary hull, was studied by ab-initio calculations in recent years, in search for possible superconductors. Superconducting structures were found in all three systems, with a maximum T c of 235 K in CaH 6 and 21 K in BH, both above 150 GPa, and 6 K in CaB at 30 GPa In this study, to obtain the phase diagram as a function of pressure, we sampled the full ternary Ca-B-H phase space with variable-composition structural searches at fixed pressures (0, 50, 100, and 300 GPa) to identify the compositions stable at room, intermediate, and extreme pressures. More than 4000 unique structures were sampled for each pressure. The lowest-enthalpy structures for each composition identified in these runs were then relaxed at intermediate pressures to obtain the phase di-agram. Further details can be found in Appendix B. Fig. At ambient pressure, our predictions agree with previous experiments and calculations At 50 GPa, most compositions stable at ambient pressure remain on the convex hull, with structures which maintain the motifs observed at ambient pressures. In addition, new compositions appear along the Ca(BH x ) 2 and Ca(BH x ) lines, as hydrogen is trapped in the open molecular structures stable at room pressure. In Ca(BH 5 ) 2 interstitial H 2 molecules are trapped between BH 4 tetrahedra, in P 2 1 /m CaBH 3 a single H atom occupies the interstitial sites among Ca tetrahedra, which are sandwiched between BH 2 linear chains, while in F 43m CaBH 5 a single H atom is trapped in the interstitial sites between BH 4 anionic tetrahedra -bottom left panel of Fig. None of the Ca(BH x ) 2 ambient-pressure compositions survives up to 300 GPa, where the pressure is so high that it leads to a complete rearrangement of the bonds: boron and hydrogen now form interconnected, dense networks, and the structures are all metallic. The stable high-pressure crystal structures are shown in the right panel of Fig. CaB 3 H is characterized by buckled triangular boron layers, similar to those predicted in Ref. 64 for pure boron, alternated with CaH planes, so that the Ca atoms fits into the valleys of the B layers. CaBH is constituted by infinite B-H buckled chains in the z direction, parallel to Ca chains. Ca 2 B 2 H 13 exhibits a structure with distorted B-H octahedra and triangular bipyramids, and interstitial H 2 molecules. CaBH 5 undergoes a structural phase transition from the F 4m phase identified at 50 GPa and shown in the left panel of Fig. In addition to these thermodynamically stable phases, among H-rich compositions we also identified a highsymmetry structure with space group P a 3 for CaBH 6 , lying about 100 meV/atom above the hull. This structure comprises BH 6 6-vertex antiprisms, with hydrogen at the vertexes and boron in the middle. The nearestneighbor H-H distance (1.2Å) is close to that of atomic hydrogen, The phase diagram in Fig. There is a rather clear separation of the phase diagram between a low-and a high-pressure regime, setting in at around 100 GPa. The group of low-pressure phases comprises Ca(BH x ) 2 (x = 2, 3, 4) compositions, as well as CaB 12 H 12 ; as shown previously, all these phases form molecular, insulating crystals. A series of structural transitions occurs between 0 and 50 GPa, due to the progressive rearrangement of BH x units in the crystal. At pressures beween 10 and 20 GPa, hydrogen starts to get trapped in molecular or atomic form in these open structures, stabilizing H-rich stoichiometries, such as Ca(BH 5 ) 2 , Ca(BH 3 ) and Ca(BH 5 ). Additional structures along the Ca(BH) x line become stable above 100 GPa: in these phases, the low-P motifs of the B-H sublattice, analogous to hydrocarbons, are replaced by new ones, in which boron is coordinated to five or more hydrogen atoms. This qualitative transition of the B-H sublattice behavior is accompanied by the onset of metallic behavior. In fact, all structures we report at 300 GPa are metallic in their whole stability range. We now discuss the electronic properties of the structures in the Ca-B-H high-pressure phase diagram. Structures which are stable up to 100 GPa are of no interest for superconductivity, since they are insulating. Hence, here we discuss the main features of their electronic structure only briefly, and collect the plots of the relative Densities of States (DOS) in Appendix A. Room pressure structures, characterized by a disconnected lattice of hydrocarbon-like, BH - x anions, exhibit molecular-like DOS's, with sharp peaks of mixed B and H character, and band gaps ranging from 2.6 eV for Ca(BH 2 ) 2 to 5 eV for Ca(BH 4 ) 2 . Ca 4s and 3d states lie at the bottom the conduction band; Ca is fully ionized, as confirmed by a Bader charge analysis, which assigns a total charge of about +1.5 e to it. As pressure is increased to 50 GPa, the peaks of the DOS broaden and merge into a continuous band; the bonding/antibonding gaps decrease to 1.8 eV for Ca(BH 2 ) 2 , and 3.4 eV for Ca(BH 4 ) 2 . The new Ca(BH 5 ) 2 , CaBH 3 and CaBH 5 phases are all insulating, with gaps of 4.1, 1.6, and 2.3 eV, respectively. At 100 GPa the reported phases for Ca(BH 3 ) 2 , Ca(BH 4 ) 2 , Ca(BH 5 ) 2 and CaB 12 H 12 are still insulating, with calculated gaps of 1.6, 0.5, 1.8 and 2.6 eV, respectively, CaBH 3 exhibits a gap of 0.4 eV, CaBH 5 is semimetallic. As shown in Fig. In CaBH 6 and Ca 2 B 2 H 13 , the occupied states mostly have B and H character; the B-and H-projected DOS follow each other rather closely, which indicates that the two are covalently bonded, while the Ca-3d states remain empty, and lie around 2 eV above the Fermi energy. With the exception of CaBH 3 , which is a semimetal with a very small DOS at the Fermi level, all highpressure Ca-B-H phases are metallic, and hence have the potential to be high-T c superconductors. In order to quantitatively assess their superconducting properties, we carried out calculations of their electron-phonon properties, using Density Functional Perturbation theory, as implemented in the plane-waves pseudopotential code Quantum Espresso. The top panels of Fig. For all structures there is a net separation of phonon spectra in three regions: a low-energy one, extending from 0 to 75 meV, dominated by modes of Ca character, an intermediate one, from 75 to 175 meV, with modes of mixed B and H character, and a high-energy region, from 175 up to 300 meV, characterized by B-H stretching modes. Moreover, hydrogen-rich structures exhibit a further high-energy band, above 300 meV, which involves purely H vibrations and is not present in CaB 3 H and CaBH. The bottom panels of the figure show, for each Ca-B-H phase, the calculated Eliashberg (electron-phonon) spectral function, which is essentially a phonon Density of States, weighted by the electron-phonon matrix elements for states at the Fermi level. From the Eliashberg function, we obtained the logarithmic average phonon frequency ω log and the e-ph coupling constant λ, which appear in the Mc-Millan Allen Dynes formula for the critical temperature: (1) and measure respectively the average effective frequency of the phonons participating in the superconducting pairing and the intensity with which they couple to electrons at the Fermi level. These quantities are reported in table I for all five Ca-B-H compounds shown in Fig. For only two out of five structures we predict a T c exceeding liquid nitrogen boiling point: CaBH 6 (T c =119 K), and Ca 2 B 2 H 13 (T c =89 K). Both are hydrogen-rich, high-symmetry phases. In both cases, superconductivity survives up to lower pressures, with sizable T c s. Boron-rich CaB 3 H also exhibits a finite, although much lower T c (7 K). This is not surprising since an inspection of the electronic DOS in fig: However, the value of the parameter λ/N (E F ), is remarkably smaller than in the two high-T c Ca-B-H phases. This parameter essentially measures the intrinsic coupling between electrons at the Fermi level and lattice vibrations. In CaBH, its low value can be explained in terms of a very small fraction of H-derived electronic states at the Fermi level (N H /N tot = 0.06), leading to ineffective e-ph coupling. The same argument cannot be applied in CaBH 5 , where about half of the electronic states at the Fermi level have H orbital character. To understand why in CaBH 5 electrons at the Fermi level couple so little to phonons, despite a strong H orbital character, it is useful to inspect the so-called Local Density of States (LDOS): where ψ n (k)(r) and ε nk are the Kohn-Sham eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the system. The LDOS permits to visualize the real-space distribution of the electronic states at a given energy E. If computed for E = E F , it permits to visualize the real-space distribution of electrons, which participate in the superconducting pairing. In this work, we have studied ab-initio the highpressure superconducting phase diagram of the ternary calcium-boron-hydrogen system, using evolutionary crystal structure prediction and Density Functional Perturbation Theory, with the aim of identifying new high-T c high-pressure hydrides. The original hypothesis of this work was that the combination of hydrogen with a weak (Ca) and a strong (B) hydride former at high pressures could provide a large playground of covalent metallic crystals, to improve the superconducting properties, compared to binary hydrides. Our structural searches have shown that the Ca-B-H phase diagram can be clearly split in two regions: the low-pressure region, extending from room pressure to approximately 100 GPa, is characterized by closed-shell, insulating phases, forming open molecular structures. As pressure is increased, hydrogen is gradually incorporated into the B-H lattice, stabilizing hydrogen-rich compositions. At around 100 GPa, a different high-pressure regime sets in, following the rearrangement of boron and hydrogen bonds into dense sublattices; the new structures that form gradually become metallic at higher pressures. Among these high-pressure structures, we identify two phases, with unusually high H:B ratios: CaBH 6 and Ca 2 B 2 H 13 , characterized by 5 and 6-coordinated boron atoms, surrounded by hydrogen. For these two phases at 300 GPa, we estimate a T c of 119 and 89 K, respectively, which survive to lower pressures. These T c s are higher than those reported for the stable phases of the binary B-H system On one hand, our results confirm that ternary hydrides are a promising venue to search for high-temperature conventional superconductivity; on the other hand, they also highlight that details of electronic structure and chemistry may play a key role in determining the final superconducting T c . In fact, we find that high-pressure ternary Ca-B-H covalent metallic structures are not competitive with the best covalent hydrides, such as SH 3 , for two reasons: 1) since boron is very electronegative, closed-shell, insulating structures survive up to high pressures, and metalization slowly sets in only after 100 GPa; 2) Since the d orbitals of Ca lie close to the valence, at high pressure they may influence the behavior of valence electronic states in unpredictable ways, acting very differently from other alkali metals and alkaline earths. Our study hence suggests that searches for high-T c superconductivity in ternary hydrides should be oriented toward compounds containing elements less electronegative than boron, such as aluminum and silicon, where bonds can be more easily broken and reformed. The authors acknowledge computational resources from the dCluster of the Graz University of Technology and the VSC3 of the Vienna University of Technology, and support through the FWF, Austrian Science Fund, the VASP package. We used a cutoff on the plane waves expansion of 600 eV; for reciprocal-space integration we employed a regular grid in k space with a 0.04 spacing in units of 2π Å , and a gaussian smearing of 0.05 eV. The ternary convex hulls in Fig. and Ca 1-x (BH) x , Ca 1-x B x , Ca 1-x H x , and B 1-x H x , with about 250 structures per line, and a cell size ranging from 8 to 18. This was sufficient to reproduce results from Refs 39, 63, and 64, and represents a good compromise between exploration and sampling. As an example, the convex hull at 0 GPa before refinement including all the compositions sampled in the search is shown in Fig. After these exploratory runs, stable or weaklymetastable structures were further relaxed with tighter constraints, until the individual components of the forces were less than 1 meV/Å; finally, the total energy was computed using the tetrahedron method for k-space integration, with a resolution of 0.03 2π Å , resulting in a refinement on the estimate of the energies. From the enthalpies thus calculated, the convex hulls, and the figures, were constructed using the Pymatgen library 75 . Figure The pressure-dependent phase diagram in Fig. Where α i is the relative fraction of product i in the reaction; whence if ∆H is negative, the phase is stable, as the enthalpy of the reactant is less than the enthalpy of the products, considering as possible decomposition products the phases stable on the convex hull calculated at the closest pressure. Where α i is the relative fraction of product i in the reaction; whence if ∆H is negative, the phase is stable, as the enthalpy of the reactant is less than the enthalpy of the products. All electronic structure and superconductivity calculations in sections II and III were carried out with QUANTUM Espresso (QE) using Norm-conserving (NC) pseudopotentials, and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional. A cutoff of 80 Ry was used for the plane-wave expansion of the wave functions. The structures were prerelaxed in QE until each component of the forces acting on single atoms was less than 2 meV/Å. Calculations of the ground-state charge density were carried out using a 0.06 Ry smearing and a 6 × 6 × 6 grid in reciprocal space for k space integration. Phonon calculations were performed on a 2 × 2 × 2 reciprocal-space grid, and the integration of the electron-phonon matrix element on the Fermi surface was carried out using a 24 × 24 × 24 grid, and a gaussian smearing with a width of 270 meV to describe the zero-width limit of the electronic δ functions. The phonon density of states was obtained by performing Fourier interpolation on a 20 × 20 × 20 grid. The figures of the crystal structures were generated using VESTA (Visualization for Electronic and STructural Analysis) 