Nodal line semimetals (NLSs) have attracted broad interest in current research. In most of existing NLSs, the intrinsic properties of nodal lines are greatly destroyed because nodal lines usually suffer sizable gaps induced by non-negligible spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In this work, we propose the topological nodal line electrides (TNLEs), which achieve electronic structures of nodal lines and electrides simultaneously, provide new insight on designing excellent NLSs nearly immune from SOC. Since the states 1 Topological semimetals have received broad research interest in recent years. To date, several categories of topological semimetals have been well studied, such as Weyl semimetals, where k 2 = k 2 x + k 2 y + k 2 z , τ 0,i acts on the orbital index, s 0,i acts on the spin space with τ 0 and s 0 to be the identity matrices. The symmetries can be represented by P T = K with K representing complex conjugation operator. After considering the spin-orbital coupling (SOC), the nodal line would be gapped out by symmetry-permitted mass terms. For example, with SOC, the symmetry can be represented as P T = is y K, and we can add a mass term with ∆ denoting the effective SOC strength (∆ is generally relative to the atomic weight, due to the presence of Coulomb potential in the SOC Hamiltonian). One can find that nodal lines are gapped under SOC and the size of gap is relative to ∆. Especially when the gap is sizable, the intrinsic properties of nodal lines are greatly destroyed. An investigation on typical NLSs preserving P and T symmetries indeed finds the size of gaps is positively related to ∆ expressed by the average atomic weight ( Ẑ), as shown in Fig. it is found that typical NLSs proposed previously almost statistically distribute in a specific region with 0.5 < R < 2.0 (see Fig. In this work, by combining the electronic properties of electrides, we propose that topological nodal line electrides (TNLEs) can serve as an effective way to realize ideal NLSs with negligible SOC-induced gaps, which can even be applied in heavy-elements containing systems. In electrides, the conduction electrons mostly originate from the so-called excess electrons, being localized in the interstitial sites of the lattice. We carry out first-principles calculations by using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package based on the density functional theory (DFT). The force and energy convergence criteria are set as 0.001 eV/ Å and 10 -7 eV, respectively. The surface states are calculated using the slab model with thickness of 33 unit cells, realized by the OPENMX software package. After an exhaustive material screening, we find the family of A 2 B (A = Ca, Sr, Ba; B= As, Sb, Bi) materials are potential candidates for TNLEs. To be noted, one of the A 2 B materials, namely Sr 2 Bi has been proposed to possess both electride and nodal line characters without considering SOC quite recently. where For NL2, the crossing bands possess irreducible representations B 2 and A 1 at the P point. And the effective Hamiltonian yields to be: where In above Hamiltonian, the parameters including As mentioned above, the nodal lines in Sr 2 Sb are protected by the coexistence of P and T symmetries, and they will be gapped when SOC is taken into account. However, for electride Sr 2 Sb, the nodal lines are mostly contributed by the non-nucleus-constrained electrons, thus the SOC-induced gaps are expected to quite small although both Sr and Sb are heavy elements. This insight has been verified by our computations. In Fig. 