Recent experiments have shown that transition metal oxide heterostructures such as SrTiO3based interfaces, exhibit large, gate tunable, spintronic responses. Our theoretical study showcases key factors controlling the magnitude of the conversion, measured by the inverse Edelstein and Spin Hall effects, and their evolution with respect to an electrostatic doping. The origin of the response can be linked to spin-orbital textures. These stem from the broken inversion symmetry at the interface which produces an unusual form of the interfacial spin-orbit coupling, provided a bulk atomic spin-orbit contribution is present. The amplitudes and variations of these observables are direct consequences of the multi-orbital subband structure of these materials, featuring avoided and topological crossings. Interband contributions to the coefficients lead to enhanced responses and non-monotonic evolution with doping. We highlight these effects using analytical approaches and low energy modeling. Si and GaAs based heterostructures are core elements of our current technology but other approaches are also being pursued. For spintronic devices, one tunes the spin of the carriers to control the charge current Our study of SrTiO 3 -based interfaces shows that the above properties stem from the particular form of the interfacial spin-orbit coupling which we name Multiband Interfacial Spin Orbit (MISO). Breaking of inversion symmetry at the interface triggers bond-angle distortions which allow new hoppings between the d-orbitals of the conduction band and leads to the MISO term. Spin-orbital textures emerging from this term strongly impact the magnitude of the EE and SHE responses and their evolution with the doping. Analytical results obtained near the bottom of the lowest conduction subband reveal that the amplitudes of the EE and SHE responses are governed by the size of the subbands expectation value of the electron spin. The evolution of the EE term with the filling, when the Fermi energy varies between the bottom of the conduction subband manifold and the first higher-up energy subband (so called Lifshitz transition), is dominated by MISO driven transitions between different subbands (interband spin textures), except very close to the center of the Brillouin zone (BZ). Upon further increase of the doping, the anisotropy of the subband dispersions becomes more pronounced and one encounters avoided Following Using the symmetries of the system and Stokes theorem, the EE coefficient κ is expressed as ([28]) is the Fermi momentum of band ν at polar angle θ, S t ν is the component of vector field tangential to the Fermi surface of band ν, f νk (μ) is the Fermi function of band ν and τ 0 is the scattering time (considered to be identical for all the bands). This expression demonstrates the direct connection between the Edelstein effect, the spin textures and their vorticity. The relative windings of the textures between the different occupied bands impact the response. The same formalism yields the Spin Hall Conductivity (SHC), the spin current response to a charge current in the material. For symmetry reasons we only consider the component σ SH = σ z xy , where z is the direction of polarization of the spin current and xy means that the conductivity is transverse and in the plane of the interface. There are several contributions to this conductivity ; a discussion of the extrinsic parts is presented in We diagonalize numerically H T B . The eigenvectors |ν, k and corresponding eigenenergies allow us to compute expectation values of any operator A for subband ν and wavevector k, A(k) ν = ν, k|A|ν, k , and we track their evolution with the chemical potential μ. Note that this procedure assumes a rigid shift of all the bands when applying a voltage bias. This approximation holds for very low doping, but since the screening properties change with the doping, we should include this effect and recalculate the band structure for each filling ; this is done using a Poisson-Schrodinger approach in [28] ; we only find differences in prefactors for the responses, but their variations remain unchanged in the experimentally relevant range of fillings. We now turn to analytical and numerical evaluations of the μ dependence of the transport coefficients in the T = 0 limit. Analytical computations reveal that the EE is proportional to γ OM for the experimentally relevant range of values, while the height of the SHC plateaus is not. We emphasize, however, that the presence of the OM term is critical to observe the two responses because it breaks inversion symmetry. We also find that the variations of the responses depend sensitively on ζ = ∆ λ , the balance between confinement and atomic spin-orbit coupling. Numerical calculations confirm the above statements. The analytical expressions given below are derived in where θ is the angle of the k vector, and from Eq. 1 the EE response for the Kramers partners takes the form : θ is the splitting in k for the Kramers pair ± at k F θ . κ R stands for Rashba-like and κ MB for Multiband. For the L subband as stated before we can ignore the θ dependence as the system is essentially isotropic and we get κ ≈ κ M . κ R is the main contribution very close to A but it is dominated by κ MB upon increasing the filling even slightly, because then δk << k. κ MB is a distinctive signature of the MISO term. The Rashba-like winding textures of S 0 that one gets for subband L can be called intraband, and the textures of δS resulting from matrix elements between subbands L and N , L and U and N and U, interband. Contributions due to the coupling of L to N and U are encoded in κ MB . Within each subband, spin textures of the time reversed Kramers branches wind in opposite direction, as expected. However the winding in each branch is a superposition of two patterns : the intraband described by S 0 , and the interband described by δS. For the two Kramers partners, the intraband pattern gives a winding in opposite directions while the interband pattern gives a winding in the same direction. We stress that this decomposition of the EE response in two parts is valid for all the subbands. For μ between A and B, Eq. 2 can be evaluated analytically using the ΓM approximation and cast in the form τ is the scattering time, m * the effective mass and g(ζ, μ) is a band structure dependent factor taking into account the intraband and interband effects. This gives an accurate estimate of the evolution of the EE response for a wide range of dopings between A and B. Figs. 2 a and 2 b compare the numerically determined variations of κ B with ζ and of κ with μ along with the analytical expression of κ M , for the parameters of STO. Numerical and experimental data agree well. Eq. 3 may be interpreted as the Rashba-Edelstein response of a system with an effective Rashba coefficient α ef f = γ OM ag(ζ, μ) that depends on μ. It is commonly stated that the LAO/STO interface is subject to an effective Rashba coupling the intensity of which varies strongly with the chemical potential in the vicinity of the avoided band gaps of the band structure Eqs. 1 shows that κ is a sum of contributions coming from the different subbands. We now turn to the behavior of the system at higher fillings (Fig. The evolution of the SHC with doping can be discussed in similar terms. With increasing filling, new subbands and spin textures contribute to the spin-to-charge conversion as μ passes through the special points that we identified above. The intensities of the SHE term for the L and U subbands is correctly captured using the same modeling and derivation that we used to compute the EE response (see For subband N, the intraband part is zero if the anisotropic dispersion is not taken into account. Perturbation theory predicts a value -1 for the height of the SHC plateau. The sign is correct and so is the amplitude close to B. The pattern of the energy dispersions becomes complex as μ varies from the Lifshitz transition to the avoided crossings. Other interband contributions emerge and the evolution of the plateaus depends on the parameters of the tight binding Hamiltonians of STO and LAO/STO. Numerical analysis shows that the contributions of the various subbands are additive provided subbands of a given orbital character do not couple ; including a second d xy subbband to the Hamiltonian, as was done in Refs We would like to thank Manuel Bibes and Agnès Barthélémy for insightful discussions. MG gratefully acknowledges support from the French National Research Agency (ANR) as part of the "Investissements d'Avenir program" (Labex NanoSaclay, ANR-10-LABX-0035). 2ζ + 9 is the the energy difference between A and C divided by λ. Both α L and S L vary with ζ and numerics confirms these analytical forms.