Earth's core is composed of iron (Fe) alloyed with light elements, e.g., silicon (Si). Its thermal conductivity critically affects Earth's thermal structure, evolution, and dynamics, as it controls the magnitude of thermal and compositional sources required to sustain a geodynamo over Earth's history. Here we directly measured thermal conductivities of solid Fe and Fe -Si alloys up to 144 GPa and 3300 K. 15 at% Si alloyed in Fe substantially reduces its conductivity by about 2 folds at 132 GPa and 3000 K. An outer core with 15 at% Si would have a conductivity of about 20 W m -1 K -1 , lower than pure Fe at similar pressure-temperature conditions. This suggests a lower minimum heat flow, around 3 TW, across the core-mantle boundary than previously expected, and thus less thermal energy needed to operate the geodynamo. Our results provide key constraints on inner core age that could be older than two billion-years. Thermal conductivity in Earth's core plays a fundamental role in controlling the dynamics and evolution of this region For the generation of most recent magnetic fields, crystallization of the inner core provides a substantial latent heat and compositional source allowing geodynamo to operate even at a high core thermal conductivity Core thermal conductivity, influenced by its exact composition and temperature over its history, thus holds a key to decipher the enigmatic thermal and compositional evolutions of Earth's core, providing important insights into the origin and history of palaeomagnetic fields, available thermal vs. compositional energy sources for driving the geodynamo, and age and growth rate of the inner core In the past decades, geophysical and geochemical observations have revealed density deficits in Earth's inner and outer cores. Comparison between seismic models and the density of pure Fe at relevant core pressure (P)-temperature (T) conditions suggests that a certain amount of light elements alloyed with Fe is present in the core Other light elements such as O, S, C, or H could also exist in the core with Si. Moreover, at high P-T conditions relevant to the core, Fe-Si alloy is stable in hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure as Si is readily dissolved in Fe, and its physical properties, e.g., sound velocities and density, are able to account for the seismic data observed in the core There are two major mechanisms of heat transfer, i.e., thermal conduction and convection, in the core, where the thermal radiation mechanism does not effectively transfer heat in metallic Fe and Fe-rich alloys. Though thermal conduction of Fe alloyed with light elements at core conditions is essential to reconstruct thermal history of the core and geodymano, it has never been directly measured at relevant high P-T conditions. Previous theoretical calculations have predicted a highly thermally conductive core with a thermal conductivity of about 80-200 W m -1 K -1 at the outer core and 150-300 W m -1 K -1 at the inner core, respectively In this paper, we showed that the thermal conductivity of Fe alloyed with 15 at% Si is approximately half of the pure Fe at outer core conditions. This suggests that Earth's geodynamo could be operated by pure thermal convection and that the age of inner core could be older than two billion-years. We combined ultrafast time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) with diamond anvil cell (DAC) technique to precisely measure the thermal conductivity of both single-crystal and powder samples of pure Fe and powder of Fe1-xSix (x=0.04 and 0.15) alloys to 120 GPa at room temperature. TDTR is a well-developed ultrafast metrology that uses sub-picosecond optical pulses to pump and probe thermal transport through the sample, providing highprecision thermal conductivity measurements at pressures over 100 GPa Compared to pure Fe, the thermal conductivity of Fe0.96Si0.04 alloy (blue symbols in Fig. To constrain the combined effects of silicon alloying and high temperature, we employed the transient heating (TH) laser technique to measure the thermal conductivity of Fe1-xSix (x=0.04, 0.07, and 0.15) at high P-T conditions. The TH method is a well-developed pulsed laser technique to measure thermal conductivity at simultaneously high P-T conditions It is worth noting that at the high P-T conditions of our TH experiments, Fe0.96Si0.04 stabilizes in the hcp phase Extrapolation of our room-temperature pure hcp-Fe thermal conductivity data to relevant high temperature conditions confirms the consistency of the TDTR results with the TH results. The TDTR data for pure hcp-Fe at the outermost core pressures and 300 K is about 120 W m -1 K -1 (Fig. We now further compare our results with previous studies to disentangle the Si light element effect from the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity of Fe and Fe-Si alloys at Earth's core pressures. The thermal conductivity of metals is mainly determined by the electronic contribution, which is the case of pure Fe, where the lattice thermal conductivity is negligible Prior studies reported that the electrical resistivity of solid Fe0.84Si0.16 at ~136 GPa and 3750 K, i.e., outermost core conditions, is on the order of ~1 × 10 -6 Ω m Our results on the thermal conductivity of solid Fe0.85Si0.15 at outer core P-T conditions is expected to set an upper bound for that of the liquid outer core, as the extrapolation of our results (Supplementary Fig. Assuming an outer core with 15 at% Si being the major light element, the significant reduction of Fe thermal conductivity by about 2 folds caused by alloying 15 at% Si at outer core conditions, as indicated by our data, provides crucial constraints on the thermal state and geodynamo of the outer core as well as the age of the inner core. Our result for the low thermal conductivity of Fe0.85Si0.15 alloy at outer core conditions, ≈20 W m -1 K -1 , represents the first direct measurement that pins down the outer core thermal conductivity to a low-end value estimated in Ref We computed the thermal evolution of the core for a CMB heat flow always equal to the isentropic value, i.e., the minimum requirement to initiate thermal convection and run a dynamo. The high-end values (>90 W m -1 K -1 , red shaded areas in Fig. Our results further indicate that Earth's dynamo could have been running on the thermal energy alone throughout its history with the additional help from compositional buoyancy when the inner core started to crystallize. The low thermal conductivity (≈20 W m -1 K -1 ) of the outer core enables a purely thermally-driven dynamo with an initial CMB temperature on the order of 4500 K, which is a geochemically acceptable value Single crystals of pure Fe for time-domain thermoreflectance experiments at 300 K were synthesized by Princeton Scientific Corporation, Princeton, NJ. At ambient conditions, the pure Fe is in bcc phase with (100) orientation. Powder samples of pure Fe and chemically homogeneous Fe1-xSix (x=0.04 and 0.15) alloys were from Goodfellow Corporation, and their crystal structures were also in bcc phase characterized by X-ray diffraction. The chemical composition of each alloy was confirmed to be Fe0.96Si0.04 and Fe0.85Si0.15 by an electron microprobe To measure the thermal conductivity at high pressures and 300 K, the samples were then coated with ≈80 nm thick Al film and loaded, together with a ruby ball, into a symmetric DAC with a culet size of 200 or 300 μm and a Re gasket. Silicone oil (CAS No. 63148-62-9 from ACROS ORGANICS) was used as the pressure medium. The pressure was determined by fluorescence spectrum of the ruby In TH experiments to high temperature, the samples thinned down (by squeezing between two diamonds) to approximately 4 m were loaded in a symmetric DAC using KCl as a pressure medium and thermal insulator. The sample position and thickness and the distances between the sample surface and diamond tips were measured at high pressure using optical spectroscopy of the interference fringes recorded in the reflectivity spectra from the cavity without the sample and from the sample surfaces from both sides Thermal conductivity of Fe and Fe-Si alloys at high pressure and room temperature were measured using an ultrafast optical pump-probe method, time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR). In our TDTR measurements, the output of a Ti:sapphire oscillator laser was split into pump and probe beams. The pump beam heated up the Al film coated on the sample and created temperature variations. The resulting optical reflectivity change of the Al film as a function of time was measured by the probe beam that was delayed by passing through a mechanical stage. The in-phase Vin (real part) and out-of-phase Vout (imaginary part) components of the variations of the reflected probe beam intensity, synchronous with the 8.7 MHz modulation frequency of the pump beam, were detected by a Si fast photodiode and an RF lock-in amplifier. Detailed descriptions of the TDTR method are discussed elsewhere, see, for example, Refs. To determine the thermal conductivity of the sample, we compared the ratio -Vin/Vout as a function of delayed time between pump and probe beams to thermal model calculations that take into account heat flow into the sample and into the pressure medium silicone oil Example data for hcp Fe at high pressures along with calculations by the thermal model are shown in Supplementary Fig. We estimated the Al heat capacity at high pressures from literature data for the atomic density and elastic constants at high pressures along with calculations of Debye temperature, see Ref. The volumetric heat capacity of the bcc Fe at ambient pressure and room temperature is 3.54 J cm -3 K -1 , and its pressure dependence is taken from the results of Ref. On the other hand, the volumetric heat capacities of the Fe0.96Si0.04 and Fe0.85Si0.15 alloys at room temperature and high pressures are not known. We first estimate their heat capacities at ambient conditions to be 3.72 and 4.22 J cm -3 K -1 , respectively, by interpolating the ambient heat capacities between pure bcc Fe and FeSi 59 for 4 and 15 at% of Si. We then assume both the Fe0.96Si0.04 and Fe0.85Si0.15 have a similar pressure dependence to that of the FeSi as calculated in Ref. Finally, by evaluating the sensitivity of the thermal model to input parameters, we calculated the uncertainty in the thermal conductivity of Fe and Fe-Si alloys resulting from the uncertainty in each of the parameters used in our thermal model (see, for example, Refs. Importantly, precise determination of the Fe and Fe-Si alloys thermal conductivity requires the model to have higher sensitivity to their thermal conductivity but lower sensitivity to other input parameters. We found that uncertainties in all the parameters propagate to ≈10% error in the measured thermal conductivity before 30 GPa, ≈20% error at 60 GPa, and ≈25% error at 120 GPa. Thermal conductivity at high pressure and high temperature was measured by the transient heating (TH) technique similar to those reported in Refs 18 Method: C: calculation; ERM: electrical resistivity measurement m