In this study, self-optimization of a grinding machine is demonstrated with respect to production costs, while fulfilling quality and safety constraints. The quality requirements of the final workpiece are defined with respect to grinding burn and surface roughness, and the safety constrains are defined with respect to the temperature at the grinding surface. Grinding temperature is measured at the contact zone between grinding wheel and workpiece using a pyrometer and an optical fiber, which is embedded inside the rotating grinding wheel. Constrained Bayesian optimization combined with Gaussian process models is applied to determine the optimal feed rate and cutting speed of a cup wheel grinding machine manufacturing tungsten carbide cutting inserts. The approach results in the determination of optimal parameters for unknown workpiece and tool combinations after only a few grinding trials. It also incorporates the uncertainty of the constraints in the prediction of optimal parameters by using stochastic process models 1 . The selection of optimal grinding parameters is an important task because grinding is often one of the last manufacturing steps where failures lead to high financial losses. Today parameter selection is mainly performed by experienced operators using a trial and error approach. Self-optimization of grinding machines has been the subject of extensive research in industry and academia. The main challenge in grinding process optimization arises from the non-linear, stochastic and transient process properties. Already in 1994, Rowe et al. Current state of the art methods work well for specific tasks and niche applications where extensive training data is available or low model complexity is sufficient. However, industrial applications for general process optimization in grinding are still missing. Grinding processes are very sensitive to environmental conditions, and optimizing a grinding process on one machine does not necessarily result in the same performance on a different machine of the same type. Another obstacle is the lack of information such as physical properties of the grinding wheel and the workpiece because they are trade secrets of the respective manufacturer. Therefore, on-machine experiments are needed for optimization such as done today by experienced operators. Experimental design methods, such as the Taguchi method, can be used to determine on-machine experiments, as presented in In the present study, Gaussian process (GP) regression is used for process modelling. Gaussian process regression is a powerful stochastic model, which is used widely to provide uncertainty estimation when dealing with stochastic data Gaussian process regression is used in combination with Bayesian optimization (BO), where it provides a surrogate model for the unknown objective function. Bayesian optimization is a sequential design strategy for global optimization of an unknown objective function, which is expensive to evaluate In this study, an autonomous process set-up is proposed where the cutting speed and the feed rate in grinding are optimized based on combined measurements of roughness, temperature, and maximum dressing intervals. Constrained Bayesian optimization is applied to enforce quality and safety constraints. This paper is organized as follows: A short introduction to Bayesian optimization and Gaussian process models is provided first, followed by a methodology section explaining the optimization objective, experimental set-up, and algorithm implementation. Afterwards, optimization results performed on a cup wheel grinding process are reported and discussed. A general introduction to Gaussian process models is given in where σ 2 f is the signal variance, r is the distance between the input data points x and x (in this case, the input data are process parameters that have to be optimized), and P is a diagonal matrix containing characteristic length scale parameters l 2 i for each input space dimension up to dimension D. The kernel function specifies the relation between the function values at process parameters x and x , where for a short distance between the process parameters the corresponding function values are similar whereas for larger distances higher variations are observed. A Gaussian process is used as a prior for Gaussian process regression. In this study, the Gaussian process prior mean function m(x) is assumed zero, specifying no expert knowledge. The resulting posterior mean μ t and variance σ 2 t of the Gaussian process regression at an arbitrary location x can be calculated as follows where x t and y t are the vectors containing t pairs of measurements assumed to be corrupted with Gaussian noise N (0, σ 2 N ), I is the identity matrix, K is the covariance matrix, and k(x) is a covariance vector between x and x 1 to x t . The length scales l 2 i in eq. ( Once a GP model of the objective is available, in Bayesian optimization an acquisition function is maximized to determine the candidate parameters where the next experimental trial is conducted. In general the acquisition function provides a trade off between process parameters which are associated with a high uncertainty (exploration), and process parameters with a low predicted value (exploitation) where μ t,co (x) is the predicted mean cost function after t iterations obtained by Gaussian process regression using equation ( )dt, and φ(Z) is the probability density function of a standard normal distribution φ(Z) = 1/ √ 2π exp(-Z 2 /2). A standard normal distribution is a normal distribution with zero mean and standard deviation of one. The acquisition function is displayed exemplarily for a cost minimization problem in Figure Most machining operations require fulfilling constraints such as workpiece quality, process or safety constraints. As proposed in where a EI (x) is the expected improvement without constraints where λ i is the maximum allowed value for constraint i, μ t,ci (x) is the predicted mean of constraint i after t iterations calculated using (4), and σ 2 t,ci (x) is the variance of the constraint i after t iterations calculated using (5). Here, the constraint i is modeled again using Gaussian process regression and the predicted mean and uncertainty are used in the calculation. The next experiment is conducted for process parameters x * , which maximize the constrained expected improvement acquisition function. x * = argmax a EIC (x) Figure The grinding operation is performed on an Agathon DOM Semi grinding machine (see Figure The surface roughness of the workpiece is measured transversal to the grinding direction and orthogonal to the cutting edge using a tactile measurement device (Form Talysurf 120 L from Taylor Hobson) with a measurement tip radius of 2 μm. The evaluation length was reduced to 4 mm because the total thickness of the insert was only 4.76 mm. The wavelength cut-off is set to λ c = 0.8 mm. In general, the roughness of both ground sides per insert is measured and averaged. If grinding burn occurred on a ground side the roughness was not measured on this side. Instead, the roughness measurement was repeated at a different location on the other ground side, where grinding burn did not occur. The roughness measurements change from insert to insert with no clear trend. Therefore, in a conservative approach, the maximum measured roughness value of one optimization run, grinding with a freshly dressed wheel until grinding burn occurred, was considered as a constraint for the optimization. In this study, the roughness was limited to R a,max = 230 nm. The grinding operation cost cannot be measured directly with a single sensor as it is composed of both process-related quantities such as grinding time and grinding wear, and of economic quantities such as machine hourly cost and cost of the grinding wheel. The total cost to grind one insert is calculated based on grinding time cost, dressing time cost, cost of grinding wheel wear during dressing, and cost of dressing wheel wear during dressing. The feed rate f , and the removed workpiece material until the wheel is dull V w depend on the selected input parameters feed rate f and cutting speed v s , which are the process parameters used in Bayesian optimization. The other cost parameters are constants as summarized in Table The objective in this study is to find the process parameters minimizing the total production cost C T and to fulfill the maximum temperature constraint T max and the maximum surface roughness constraint R a,max . In general, the optimization objective in machining is to minimize production costs, as applied in this study. However, other objectives such as energy consumption or environmental impact may also be considered. The algorithm was implemented in MATLAB using the GPML library The optimization domain for the Bayesian optimization was set based on experience to a minimal feed rate of 10 mm/min and a maximum feed rate of 40 mm/min. The minimal cutting speed was set to 12 m/s and the maximum cutting speed was set to 30 m/s. In this way, a typical cutting speed range was covered. After calculating the cost per part at the measured process parameter values and determining the hyperparameters, three Gaussian process regressions are calculated, to model the cost, the temperature, and the roughness. Based on the obtained probabilistic predictions at different (not previously probed) values of the process parameters, the optimal parameters that fulfill (15) can be calculated based on the obtained probability distributions for the cost, temperature and roughness. Using stochastic models allows for probabilistic statements about the fulfillment of the constraint limits. As discussed in detail in where σ t,co is the predicted standard deviation of the cost at predicted optimal parameters x opt after t iterations and is the convergence limit. In this way, convergence is reached when 95% of the predicted cost values at optimal parameters are within μ c (x opt ) ± . The convergence limit must be higher than the combined cost measurement and process uncertainty, otherwise convergence can never be reached. To increase the convergence robustness, full convergence is reached, when the stopping criterion is below 0.04 U over three consecutive iterations, the optimal feed rate change within an interval of 0.4 mm/min, and the optimal cutting speed change within an interval of 0.2 m/s. If convergence is not reached the next experimental parameters will be determined based on maximizing the constrained expected improvement acquisition function and the optimization continues. Figure Figure Figure Table In this study, Bayesian optimization with on-machine measurements was used to obtain optimal parameters for grinding within a few iterations, while fulfilling quality and safety constraints. Gaussian process regression models were successfully applied to model costs, roughness, and temperature of the grinding process. The proposed approach is suitable to consider the probability that the constraints are fulfilled in the calculation of optimal parameters. In future, additional input parameters such as dressing feed rate, dressing wheel speed, and grinding wheel oscillation frequency might be included in the optimization. Furthermore, the optimization will benefit from additional sensor feedback such as grinding wheel wear sensors and integrated cutting edge roughness measurements. Agathon AG filed a patent on parts of this work. 