We study the problem of resonant extraordinary transmission of electromagnetic and acoustic waves through subwavelength slits in an infinite plate, whose thickness is close to a half-multiple of the wavelength. We build on the matched-asymptotics analysis of Holley & Schnitzer (Wave Motion, 91 102381, 2019), who considered a single-slit configuration assuming an idealised formulation where dissipation is neglected and the electromagnetic and acoustic problems are analogous. We here extend that theory to include thin dissipative boundary layers associated with finite conductivity of the plate in the electromagnetic problem and viscous and thermal effects in the acoustic problem, considering both single-slit and slit-array configurations. By considering a distinguished boundary-layer scaling where dissipative and diffractive effects are comparable, we develop accurate analytical approximations that are generally valid near resonance; the electromagnetic-acoustic analogy is preserved up to a single physics-dependent parameter that is provided explicitly for both scenarios. The theory is shown to be in excellent agreement with GHz-microwave and kHz-acoustic experiments in the literature. The phenomenon of extraordinary transmission of wave energy through small openings is key to the operation of numerous structured devices used for wave manipulation, ranging from traditional filters and gratings to modern metasurfaces and metamaterials In the simplest version of this problem, there exists a precise electromagnetic-acoustic analogy in which the wave is represented by a two-dimensional scalar field governed by the Helmholtz equation along with a homogeneous Neumann condition on the plate boundary. There are no dissipative mechanisms in this idealised analogue model. In the electromagnetic scenario, it is valid for transverse-magnetic (TM) polarised waves, assuming that the plate is perfectly conducting. In the acoustic scenario, it is required that the plate is rigid and that viscous and thermal effects are negligible. This analogy naturally extends with appropriate assumptions to other physical scenarios such as water waves For a single-slit configuration, the idealised analogue model predicts enhanced transmission at a set of resonance frequencies, which owing to diffractive effects are slightly lower than the standing-wave frequencies of the slit calculated with end effects ignored The assumptions underlying this idealised model are often unrealistic. Thus, electromagnetic experiments with metallic plates in the GHz-microwave regime, together with numerical simulations, have shown that owing to the finite conductivity of the plate the resonant transmission peaks are diminished and shifted to lower frequencies (on top of the diffractive shifts predicted by the idealised model) Our goal is to analytically investigate the above electromagnetic and acoustic boundary-layer effects, for both single-slit and slit-array configurations. In accordance with the relevant experiments, we shall take the incident field to be a plane wave propagating perpendicular to the plate. Furthermore, in the acoustic scenario we shall assume that the fluid is a viscous and thermally conducting ideal gas and that the plate is rigid and isothermal; in the electromagnetic scenario we shall assume the TM polarisation and that the plate is metallic. Our aim is to derive an asymptotic description based on the subwavelength smallness of the slit width in comparison with the wavelength-scale plate thickness, starting from first principles: the macroscopic Maxwell equations in the electromagnetic scenario and the linearised Navier-Stokes and energy equations in the acoustic scenario. In appearance, these two formulations are very different. Our analysis will show, however, that the physical analogy between the idealised electromagnetic and acoustic problems can be essentially carried over to the corresponding dissipative problems. We shall extensively build on the analysis of Holley and Schnitzer In the idealised problem, these regimes are defined by the smallness of the slit width in comparison to the plate thickness, together with the related proximity of the frequency to one of the standing-wave frequencies of the slit. In the present context, we also require that the boundary layers are thin compared to the slit width, so that the resonances are not strongly damped owing to dissipative effects. Specifically, without loss of generality we shall consider a distinguished limit where boundary-layer and diffractive effects are comparable in order of magnitude. The second important element is the systematic treatment of diffractive end effects via matched asymptotics and conformal mapping techniques. The asymptotic results derived in The rest of the paper is structured as following. In §II we formulate the electromagnetic and acoustic problems for transmission of a normally incident plane wave through a single slit. In §III we asymptotically analyse these problems, jointly for the most part. In §IV we extend the theory to a periodic array of slits. For comparisons with experiments, see §III G and §IV C. We give concluding remarks in §V. The electromagnetic problem is schematically depicted in Fig. In what follows we adopt a dimensionless convention where lengths are normalised by l. In particular, we will employ the dimensionless Cartesian coordinates (x, y) shown in Fig. With this convention, ǫ is restricted to the second quadrant of the complex plane. We shall formulate the problem for the two-dimensional scalar fields H and H, the induction fields (normalised by the amplitude of the incident wave) in the background and plate domains, respectively. We also define the dimensionless frequency in which c is the speed of light in vacuum. Note that Ω is of order unity in the case of interest where the wavelength is commensurate with the plate thickness. The fields H and H satisfy the reduced-wave equations respectively in the background and plate domains. On the plate boundary we have the transmission conditions where ∂/∂n represents the normal derivative. The problem is closed by specifying the incident field along with the condition that the scattered field H -H (i) is outward radiating. An important dimensional length scale is the skin depth l s = 2ρ/ωμ, where ρ is the metal resistivity and μ the metal permeability, which is equal to the vacuum permeability. For a good conductor, l s is the characteristic scale on which electromagnetic fields attenuate inside the metal. For our purposes, it is useful to define the dimensionless skin depth in which ǫ ′′ denotes the imaginary component of ǫ. The relative smallness of the skin depth is determined by the largeness of ǫ ′′ . In particular, for the GHz-microwave frequencies in the experiments in We now formulate a sister acoustic problem, also depicted in Fig. The governing equations are the continuity equation the momentum equation and the energy equation Analogously to (2.5), we define the dimensionless viscous length scale along with the Prandtl number Pr = (l v /l t ) 2 , in which l v = η/ρ 0 ω and l t = κ/ρ 0 ωc p are dimensional viscous and thermal length scales, respectively. The adiabatic index is denoted γ. For air γ ≈ 1.4 and Pr ≈ 0.71. The above equations are supplemented by boundary and far-field conditions. On the plate boundary, the linearised flow field satisfies the no-slip condition while the temperature perturbation satisfies the isothermal boundary condition As in the electromagnetic problem, the acoustic problem is closed by specifying a normally incident pressure plane wave and requiring the corresponding scattered fields to be outward propagating. Strictly speaking, plane-wave solutions of (2.6)-(2.8) attenuate exponentially; thus, we define the reference value p ∞ as the magnitude of the plane wave at y = 0. For small δ, however, sound attenuation in the bulk of the fluid occurs on a length scale large compared to the plate thickness (2.12) This limit is identical to the exact incident field (2.4) in the electromagnetic problem. Following the analysis of the idealised problem in the unperturbed standing-wave, or Fabry-Pérot, frequencies of the slit (i.e., ignoring endcorrection and dissipative effects). For this purpose, it is convenient to write with Ω ′ fixed as h → 0. For this regime, it was shown that the wave field within the slit is approximated by the corresponding one-dimensional standing wave, except close to the slit ends, of magnitude O(1/h) -singularly large compared to the O(1) magnitude of the slit field off-resonance and the O(1) magnitude of the incident wave; concomitantly, the field diffracted from the slit ends was shown to be enhanced from O(h) to O(1). It is clear that dissipative effects can only widen the resonances whilst diminishing the above magnitude scalings. In what follows, we shall specifically consider the distinguished boundary-layer scaling δ = O(h 2 ) where, on the one hand, dissipative effects are important at leading order, while, on the other hand, the near-resonance scalings are the same as in the idealised problem. This distinguished scaling, which we shall see holds for both the electromagnetic and acoustic problems, represents a balance between diffractive energy leakage from the slit and dissipation. In light of the above, we rescale the dimensionless boundary-layer thickness as with δ ′ fixed as h → 0. In the electromagnetic problem, δ is implicit in the problem formulation. Thus, in that problem it will be more convenient to hold fixed the complexvalued parameter where the principal branch of the square-root function is assumed. In this section we study the single-slit problems formulated in §II, considering the nearresonance limit process described in §II C. Following It is constructive to preface the asymptotic analysis by deriving scaling rules describing the effects of the thin boundary layers on wave propagation in the bulk exterior, slit and transition regions. These scaling rules will help to streamline the analysis, motivate a joint where ∆ ⊥ denotes the characteristic length scale of the bulk field normal to the boundary (unity for the exterior regions and h for the slit and transition regions). We assume that, as in the near-resonance lossless analysis With P = h -1 in the slit region and unity in the exterior and transition regions, we find 2 and h in the exterior, slit and transition regions, respectively; for P ′ T we find the same orders as for the induction field in the electromagnetic problem. The relative smallness of these bulk perturbations may appear to contradict our claim that the assumed scaling δ = O(h 2 ) represents a distinguished limit where boundary-layer effects are leading order. While these perturbations are indeed negligible in the exterior and transition bulk regions, we know from the analysis of the idealised problem in Armed with these scaling results, we begin our analysis with the exterior regions, which are defined by the limit process discussed in §II C together with the additional specification that the coordinates (x, y) are held fixed. We shall distinguish between a left exterior region corresponding to the half-space y < -1/2 and a right exterior region corresponding to the half-space y > 1/2. For the sake of considering the electromagnetic and acoustic problems simultaneously, we pose the asymptotic expansions the plus-minus signs indicating the right and left exterior regions, respectively. The leading-order fields φ ± satisfy the Helmholtz equations in the respective half-spaces. In the electromagnetic problem, (3.4) readily follows from a leading-order balance of (2.2a). In the acoustic problem, it follows from combining the leading-order balances of (2.6)-(2.8). Note that the dimensionless frequency is approximated at leading order by Ω in accordance with the frequency rescaling (2.14). The Helmholtz equations (3. for x = 0. The behaviour of φ ± as (x, y) → (0, ±1/2) will be determined by asymptotic matching. As |y| → ∞, the leading-order scattered fields φ ± -φ (i) satisfy an outwardradiation condition with respect to the incident field [cf. Consider the left exterior region. The solution for φ -is obtained by superposing the incident plane wave (3.6), a reflected plane wave, whose phase is adjusted to satisfy condition (3.5a), and the fundamental singular solutions of the Helmholtz equation (3.4) with origin at (x, y) = (0, -1/2). This singular solution, which represents an outward-radiating cylindrical wave, is proportional to H 0 ( Ωr -), wherein H 0 is the zeroth-order Hankel function where γ E = 0.5772 . . . is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Higher-order singular solutions, formed by derivates of this fundamental solution, can be eliminated via matching where R = e -i Ω is a reflection coefficient and Q -is a diffraction coefficient to be determined. Similar considerations applied to the right exterior region give where Q + is a second diffraction coefficient to be determined. Consider now the slit region, where the stretched transverse coordinate X = x/h is held fixed instead of x. With that rescaling, we find the Helmholtz equation O(δ 2 Φ) error terms which are too small to affect the following analysis. The boundary conditions at y = ±1/2 are to be determined by asymptotic matching with the transition and exterior regions. As for the boundary conditions at X = ±1, the scalings derived in §III B imply that the boundary layers at the top and bottom of the slit affect the bulk slit field only at high orders. Specifically, The precise leading-order form of the right-hand side will be derived in §III H for the electromagnetic problem, by analysing the skin layers, and in §III I for the acoustic problem, by analysing the thermoviscous boundary layers. In the present subsection, we will simply quote these results (at a later point, as they depend on properties of Φ yet to be derived). As already mentioned, we anticipate an O(1/h) enhancement of the wave field in the slit. We accordingly pose the expansion The O(1/h 3 ) and O(1/h 2 ) balances of (3.10) give the trivial relations Since we find that Φ -1 and Φ 0 are independent of X, namely Φ -1 = Φ -1 (y) and Φ 0 = Φ 0 (y). Next, the O(1/h) balance of (3.10) gives Integrating with respect to X and using the homogenous Neumann condition we find the one-dimensional Helmholtz equation It follows from (3.15)-(3.17), in turn, that Φ 1 = Φ 1 (y). The Helmholtz equation (3.17) is supplemented by the matching conditions which evidently follow from the relative smallness of the wave field in the exterior regions together with the regularity of solutions to (3.17) where A is a complex-valued prefactor; we also introduce a notation to be used throughout the paper, where the upper element of the array corresponds to odd m (even standing wave) and the lower to even m (odd standing wave). At this stage we need the right-hand side of where C is a complex-valued parameter which is given in the electromagnetic scenario by and in the acoustic scenario by wherein δ is defined in (2.9). In (3.21) and (3.22), ǫ and δ, respectively, can be treated as constant over the near-resonance frequency interval. Consider next the O(1) balance of (3.10), Integrating across the slit and using the boundary condition (3.20) yields We shall not need the detailed solution of (3.24). Rather, we derive relations between the leading-order amplitude A and the end values of Φ 0 , which will be required for asymptotic matching. To this end, we subtract the product of Φ 0 and the complex conjugate of (3.17) from the product of (3.24) and the complex conjugate of Φ -1 ; integrating this difference between the two ends of the slit, we find Substituting (3.19) and using (2.13) gives (3.26) It remains to relate the approximations found in the exterior and slit regions. Given the logarithmic singularity of the leading-order exterior fields, these regions cannot be matched directly. Rather, it is necessary to consider intermediate "transition regions" at O(h) distances from the slit ends. It is clear from the preceding analyses of the slit and exterior regions that H and p are O(1) in these regions. The scaling arguments in §III B show that boundary-layer effects are not important at this order. The leading-order aperture problem is therefore the same as the one formulated and solved in The first result is a relation between the diffraction amplitudes Q ± appearing in the O(1) exterior fields and the rescaled amplitude A of the enhanced O(h -1 ) standing wave in the slit. It can be written as The second result connects the diffraction coefficients Q ± with the O(1) discontinuity in the wave field across the aperture, with the singularity of the exterior field subtracted. This relation can be written as lim where the parameter β depends only on the geometry of the slit opening; for the right-angled aperture considered here, the conformal-mapping analysis in Substituting the external fields φ ± from (3.8) and (3.9), and using the asymptotic relation (3.7), we can solve (3.28) for the end values of the O(1) slit field: Note the logarithmic dependence upon h in A closed-form approximation for the resonance frequencies is readily extracted from (3.31). For the sake of comparison with experimental data, we write this in the form where ∆f m is the dimensional frequency deviation of the mth resonant peak from the respective standing-wave frequency f m = mc/2l. In Figs. It remains to derive the effective boundary conditions (3.20) assumed in the slit-region analysis. We begin with the simpler electromagnetic scenario, where we need to consider the internal field H in the electromagnetic skin layers, namely at distances O(δ) from the slit boundaries. Because of the symmetry of the problem, it suffices to consider the skin layer adjacent to the lower boundary of the slit x = -h. Since δ = O(h 2 ), we define the strained transverse coordinate X ′ = (x + h)/h 2 and consider the domain X ′ < 0 (|y| < 1/2). Recall the slit-field expansion (3.12) for H = Φ. In particular, the O(h -1 ) enhancement of the slit field suggests the skin-layer expansion The equation governing H-1 is obtained from the leading-order balance of (2.2b). This gives where the complex-valued parameter α was defined in (2.16). From the O(1/h) balance of the continuity condition (2.3a), we find the boundary condition .34) subject to (3.35) and the condition that H-1 decays as Consider now the O(h) balance of the transmission condition (2.3b), Substituting (3.36), we obtain the effective boundary condition The corresponding condition at X = 1 follows from symmetry. Using definition (2.16) for α, (3.38) implies the effective boundary condition (3.20) with C given by (3.21). We next consider the acoustic scenario, where we need to match the thermoviscous boundary layers with the bulk slit region. As a preliminary step, it is convenient to expand the description of the bulk slit region from the single field p = Φ to include the normalised flow and temperature fields, u = uê x + vê y and T , respectively. To this end, we rewrite the slit expansion (3.12) in the form Note that the independence of Φ -1 , Φ 0 and Φ 1 upon X was determined in §III D based on the scaling Similarly, the energy equation (2.8) implies the temperature expansion The leading O(h -3 ) balance of the x component of the momentum equation (2.7) gives showing that P-1 is independent of X ′ . With that, straightforward matching of the boundary layer and slit-region pressure fields yields can be written where we remind that δ ′ = δ/h 2 . The no-slip condition (2.10) gives the boundary condition The leading O(h -1 ) balance of the energy equation (2.8), with (3.44), reads (3.52) Consider now the leading O(h -1 ) balance of the continuity equation (2.6), Integrating (3.53) using (3.54), followed by taking the limit X ′ → ∞ using the slit-region Helmholtz equation (3.17), yields Matching the velocity component u then furnishes the effective boundary condition The corresponding condition at X = 1 follows from symmetry. Together these give expression We emphasise that the effective condition (3.56) relies on the one-dimensional nature of the wave propagation in the bulk slit region and the related independence of Φ -1 , Φ 0 and Φ 1 on the transverse coordinate X. When the bulk field is multi-dimensional, the viscous effect gives a contribution to the effective boundary condition proportional to the surface Laplacian of the bulk pressure, rather than the bulk pressure itself Consider now a more complex configuration where the plate is decorated with an infinite array of slits, say of dimensional period 2dl. Fig. We shall extensively build on the near-resonance theory developed in §III for a single slit. Thus, in the exterior regions, the periodicity of the problem suggests that the leading O(1) fields φ ± generalise as [cf. where we define the shifted radial coordinates r ± n = (x -2nd) 2 + (y ∓ 1/2) 2 . We next couple these exterior fields to the bulk slit field, using the matching formulae (3.27) and (3.28). For this purpose, we consider just the slit in the unit-cell |x| < d. The expansion of the wave field in the slit region has exactly the same form as in the single-slit case, with A denoting the complex amplitude of the resonantly excited standing wave at O(1/h). Thus, analogously to (3.30), we find the end values of the slit field at O(1) in the form in which the function σ( Ωd) is formally given by the conditionally convergent lattice sum For computation, this sum is transformed into the absolutely converging sum (see wherein Along the lines of the single-slit analysis, we solve (3.26), (3.27) and (4.2) for the complex amplitude A. We thereby find the generalised near-resonance approximation The corresponding formulae for Q ± follow from (3.27). Comparing (4.6) with (3.31), we see that the generalisation to a periodic array enters through the complex-valued function σ( Ωd). Its real part contributes to radiative damping of the slit mode, while its imaginary part shifts the resonances to lower frequencies. In the above analysis, we tacitly held d fixed; namely, we assumed that the periodicity is comparable with the wall thickness and the wavelength. It can be verified, however, that the theory holds as a leading-order near-resonance approximation for δ ≪ h ≪ d. For large d, σ attenuates and (4.6) reduces to Consider next the field at large distances from the plate. To this end, we shall use the asymptotic relation (see In particular, when the period of the array is smaller than the wavelength ( Ωd < π), the finite sum on the right-hand side of (4.7) reduces to a single plane-wave term. In that case, we find from (4.1) the far-field behaviours φ -∼ e i Ωy + Re -i Ωy as y → -∞, φ + ∼ T e i Ωy as y → ∞, (4.8a, b) where we define the complex-valued reflection and transmission coefficients In Fig. A closed-form approximation for the resonance frequencies can be readily extracted from We have developed an asymptotic theory describing resonant electromagnetic-and acoustic-wave transmission through slitted plates. The theory provides simple scaling rules and analytical approximations that accurately capture both diffractive and dissipative effects, as demonstrated through a comparison with experimental results in the literature. We hope that this work showcases the power of scaling arguments, matched asymptotics and near-resonance expansions for modelling structured-wave devices. Thus, the present theory can be readily adapted to other configurations where resonant slits are used to manipulate or absorb waves We conclude with comments regarding the generalised electromagnetic-acoustic analogy identified in this paper. First, this analogy is asymptotic, in contrast to the exact analogy between the respective lossless problems. Second, the generalised analogy relies on the findings that (i) boundary-layer effects are only appreciable in the slit region and (ii) the propagation within the bulk of the slit is effectively one-dimensional. This suggests that the analogy could be extended to other slit configurations where boundary-layer effects are important. In general, however, thermoviscous boundary layers and electromagnetic skin layers are described by different types of effective boundary conditions. [1] T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and P. A. Wolff, Nature 391, 667 (1998).