The electron-doped cuprates are usually characterized by a more robust antiferromagnetic phase and a much narrower superconducting (SC) dome than those of the hole-doped counterparts. Recently, bulk single crystals of Pr1.3-xLa0.7CexCuO 4-δ (PLCCO) prepared by the protect annealing method have been studied extensively and revealed many intriguing properties that were different from those obtained from samples annealed by the conventional methods. Here, we report on a systematic angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of PLCCO single crystals after protect annealing. The results indicate that the actual electron concentration (nFS) estimated from the Fermi-surface area is significantly larger than the Ce concentration x and the new nFS-based SC dome of PLCCO is more extended towards the overdoped side than the x-based SC dome derived for samples prepared using the conventional annealing method. The discovery of the electron-doped cuprates guides a new way in unveiling the controversial physics of hightemperature superconductivity and motivates extensive experimental and theoretical studies for decades The electron-doped cuprates are characterized by the T -type structure, in which the Cu atom is surrounded by four oxygen atoms in the square-planer manner, instead of octahedral manner by six oxygen atoms in the T-type structure of the hole-doped counterparts La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO). Another hallmark of the electron-doped cuprates is the indispensable role of annealing, i.e., as-grown samples are AFM regardless of dopant concentration and superconductivity emerges only after annealing Since the reduction annealing is crucial for realizing the superconductivity in the electron-doped cuprates, different annealing methods may result in distinct physical properties. For bulk single crystals, conventional annealing procedures Phase diagram of the hole-and electrondoped cuprate superconductors, taking an example of the La2-xSrxCuO4 (LSCO) and R2-xCexCuO4 (R represents a rare earth element) systems SC single crystals of Pr 1.3-x La 0.7 Ce x CuO 4-δ (PLCCO, x = 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15) with T c as high as ∼ 27 K, by utilizing an improved "protect annealing" method In this Letter, we report a systematic ARPES study of PLCCO single crystals after protect annealing [x = 0.10, 0.15, and 0.17 (La1.0)]. The results indicate that the actual doped electron concentration n FS is larger than the Ce doping level x by ∼ 0.08 e/Cu. The improved annealing method dopes the system with more electrons and the new n FS -based SC dome of PLCCO is more extended towards the overdoped side than that of the conventionally annealed samples High-quality single crystals of Pr 1.3-x La 0.7 Ce x CuO 4-δ (x = 0.10, 0.15) with T c varying from 16 K to 28 K and Pr 1.0-x La 1.0 Ce x CuO 4 (x = 0.17) with T c of 6 K were synthesized by the traveling-solvent floating-zone method Ce content, respectively. The annealing consists of three steps, namely, protect annealing (PA) Figures 2(a) -2(c) show the ARPES Fermi-surface intensity plots of the protect-annealed PLCCO samples for x = 0.10 with T c = 28 K, x = 0.15 with T c = 19 K, and x = 0.17 with T c = 6 K (La1.0), respectively. Figure In Fig. Figure PLCCO, supporting the validity of the new phase diagram which employs n FS as the doping axis. Nevertheless, further studies on other electron-doped systems such as Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 are needed to establish the new phase diagram. We note that, as T c drops rapidly on the underdoped side of the n FS -based SC dome, the AFM correlation is found to coexist with superconductivity in the x = 0.05 samples In summary, we have performed ARPES measurements on protect-annealed PLCCO single crystals with Ce concentrations x = 0.10, 0.15, and 0.17 (La1.0). The actual electron concentration n FS estimated from the Fermi-surface area is significantly larger than the nominal Ce doping level by ∼ 0.08 e/Cu. Owing to the improved protect (and dynamic) annealing method, which dopes the system with electrons, the new n FS -based SC dome of PLCCO is more extended on the overdoped side than that based on the conventional annealing method. The reduction of the excess apical oxygen together with those oxygen atoms at the regular sites and the improvement of oxygen homogeneity may be able to account for the significant amount of additional electrons. The present results suggest that employing n FS as the doping axis is a useful way when investigating the temperature-doping phase diagram of electron-doped cuprates. Furthermore, the similar overdoped end points of the SC dome between the new n FS -based phase diagram of the electrondoped cuprates and that of hole-doped LSCO may provide a clue for understanding the electron-hole symmetry/asymmetry of the cuprate phase diagram. ARPES experiments were performed at KEK Photon Factory (proposal nos. 2015S2-003, 2016G096, 2018G049, and 2018S2-001) and UVSOR (proposal nos. 28-813 and 29-821). A part work of sample preparations was conducted at the Advanced Characterization Nanotechnology Platform of the University of Tokyo,