The single-site Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker Coherent Potential Approximation (KKR-CPA) ignores short range ordering present in disordered metallic systems. In this paper, we establish a new technique to fix this shortcoming by embedding an averaged cluster that displays chemical short range order (SRO). The degree of SRO can be tuned by externally defined order parameters. This averaged cluster can be embedded in the single site CPA medium, or a self-consistently obtained effective medium that contains SRO information. The validity of this method is demonstrated by applying it to two alloy systems -the CuZn body centered cubic (BCC) solid solution, and AlCrTiV, a four-element BCC high entropy alloy. A comparison between the non-self-consistent and self-consistent modes is also provided for the two above mentioned systems. We make the code available on the internet. Planned extensions to this work are discussed. The KKR-CPA method More recent methods include the Non-Local Coherent Potential Approximation (NLCPA) In the present work, we introduce the Cluster Averaged Coherent Potential Approximation (CA-CPA), that embeds a single "averaged" cluster containing SRO within the single site CPA medium. SRO is modelled by a set of pre-determined order parameters. Like ECM-CPA, our theory uses the diagonal element of the Green's Function corresponding to the central atom of the cluster to calculate system properties. This approach does not require an ensemble of specific cluster configurations. It can easily be extended to high entropy alloy The paper is organized as follows. First we provide a brief introduction to the KKR method and the equations needed to embed a cluster in the CPA medium. We then introduce the formalism behind CA-CPA and compare it to NLCPA. We derive an iteration scheme that can be used to obtain an SRO effective medium, and the effect of self-consistency is observed by comparing with the nonself-consistent embedding of the averaged cluster in the single-site CPA medium. We apply our method to calculate density of states and total energy of the CuZn binary alloy and the AlCrTiV high entropy alloy. Both systems show B2 (CsCl) type ordering at low temperatures and A2 (BCC) type ordering at higher temperatures. We compare our results with single site CPA calculations to observe the effects of SRO. We will also demonstrate that there is little difference between the self-consistent and non-self-consistent cluster embedding. Finally we conclude with planned extensions to this work. The first principles electronic density functional theory (DFT) approach is based on solving a single electron Schrödinger equation, called the Kohn-Sham equation The Hamiltonian is a functional of the density, given by provided the Kohn-Sham orbital wave functions are orthonormal and the Fermi Energy F is determined by the number of electrons in the system. The effective potential V eff includes the Hartree potential, which describes the electronic Coulomb repulsion, the electron-nucleus interaction, and the exchange-correlation (XC) potential, a functional of the electron density. With the exception of approximations applied to the XC functional, DFT is an exact theory. In the computational treatment of the XC functional, the local density approximation (LDA) In the KKR method where r n = r -R n . Consider each cell as an electron scattering center. The multiple scattering path matrix τ nm31 , defined as the sum of all scattering processes that start from cell n and end at cell m, becomes where t n ( ) represents the single site scattering t-matrix associated with potential v n and g nk ( ) is the free electron propagator matrix that describes the propagation of a free electron with energy from site n to site k. Calculating the multiple scattering path matrix is important because the Green's function in cell n, given by G(r n , r n , ) can be written as where L is a combination of orbital angular momentum quantum number l and magnetic quantum number m. Z n L (r n , ) and J n L (r n , ) represent the regular and irregular local solutions to Schrödinger's equation in cell n with proper boundary conditions near r n = 0 and at the bounding sphere of cell n, respectively. The bullet symbol "•" in Eq. ( This means that calculation of the Kohn-Sham orbital wave functions is unnecessary in the KKR-Green's Function Method. This is advantageous, as time-consuming operations like orthogonalizing and normalizing the wave functions can be avoided. In certain cases, the calculation of the multiple scattering path matrix (Eq. 4) can be simplified. For a single site CPA medium, all the cells have the same t-matrix, given by t CPA ( ). In such a system, the multiple scattering path matrix τ CPA ( ) at a particular site n can be written as where t CPA ( ) represents the single-scattering t-matrix for the CPA medium and g(k, ) is the lattice Fourier transform of free electron propagator g nk ( ). Another special case is a crystal with substitutional impurities. Consider a crystal made of the CPA medium at every site except for an impurity at site n. If the tmatrix at the impurity site is given by t I ( ) , it can be shown that the multiple scattering path matrix τ nn I ( ) at the impurity site is given by (8) This idea can be extended to a cluster impurity in the CPA medium. If we embed a cluster of size N c , τ nn I ( ) at impurity site n is given by Here the double underlined terms represent block matrices of size N c × N c . The (n, m) block of τ CPA ( ) is given by 14 I n refers to the impurity present at site n, and t In ( ) is the corresponding single scattering t-matrix. The ECM-CPA method discussed in the introduction uses the equations defined in the above subsection to embed a cluster of real atoms in single site CPA medium. Using this approach to study SRO would require embedding many real atom clusters, drawn from an ensemble of configurations weighted by the desired SRO. For large cluster sizes, and for systems that have more than two chemical species, this approach is highly inconvenient. Our idea is to embed clusters consisting of central atoms surrounded by "averaged" neighbor atoms. These neighbors atoms are an average of the chemical species present in the system, weighted by the chemical short-ranged order with single scattering t-matrix for a, b in the set of chemical species present. The SRO weights w ab are the fraction of neighbors of species a that are species b. For a system that shows strong short range ordering, i.e unlike neighbors are preferred, w ab approaches 1 -δ ab (taking δ ab small). For the opposite case of short range clustering, where like neighbors are preferred, w ab approaches δ ab . In the limit of complete disorder, w ab = 1 Ns , where N s is the number of chemical species present. For an equiatomic binary system with species a and b, we can transform w ab to the well known Warren-Cowley SRO parameter 34 For w ab > 1/2, α ab becomes negative and approaches -1 as w ab approaches 1 corresponding to short range ordering. For w ab < 1/2, α ab is positive and approaches 1 as w ab approaches 0 corresponding to short range clustering. At w ab = 1/2, α = 0 corresponding to complete disorder. To obtain the multiple scattering path matrix for an average cluster embedded in the CPA medium, we use the cluster impurity equations defined in Section II.B. Consider a lattice for which a particular atom (the central atom) of species a has γ nearest neighbors. Then for n, m ∈ {1, 2, • • • , γ} we define the block-matrix T a ( ) as Here n = 1 is the central atom and the remaining values of n denote the neighbor atoms. Using the definition of T CPA ( ) from Eq. ( (16) The (11) block [τ α ( )] 11 corresponding to the central atom is used to calculate the Green's function (5), similar to the ECM-CPA approach. This method can be thought of as a modified ECM-CPA, where instead of embedding a cluster consisting of real atoms, a carefully constructed averaged cluster is embedded. The computationally intensive steps in CA-CPA are (10), which is the Brillouin zone integration, and (16), which is an O(N 3 ) operation as it involves the inverse of a large block matrix. In the above description the cluster size is limited to nearest neighbors, but the method can easily be extended to include longer ranged ordering. To include next nearest neighbors, a new type of "averaged" atom has to be defined using a new set of SRO parameters. For a central atom a, the next nearest neighbor average atom ta ( ) can be defined as Here w ab represent the next nearest neighbor SRO parameters. The block T a ( ) is now defined as The τ a ( ) matrix can then be obtained from (16) If the neighbor atoms are chosen to be single site CPA i.e, if the block T a ( ) is written as it is easy to verify that equation ( It is possible to extend the CA-CPA method selfconsistently. The single-site approximation for the CPA can be expressed in terms of multiple scattering matrices as where τ a ( ) is calculated by embedding an atom of species a in the medium and employing (8). If an averaged cluster with central atom a at site n is embedded (instead of a single atom), equation ( where τ nn a ( ) is now calculated from (9). Averaging as in (21), we obtain an iteration scheme for τ nn a ( ). Inserting ( Defining , it can be shown that Inserting (23), and using ( Hence, a c a τ CPA ( )∆ a ( )τ a ( ) holds at self-consistency. However, for the initial guess and the first few iterations, this will be not be satisfied. Suppose at the i th and (i + 1) th iteration, the t-matrix for the medium is given by [t CPA ( )] i and [t CPA ( )] i+1 respectively. With significant algebraic manipulation, we re-phrase (25) as At self-consistency (26) reduces to (25). This iteration scheme produces an effective medium containing local behaviour. The scheme has an approximately linear form, which helps convergence. Other methods to include SRO in CPA were briefly discussed in the introduction of this paper. The most promising of these methods is the non-local NL-CPA. This section aims to highlight the difference between our cluster averaged CA-CPA and NL-CPA. a. Effective Medium While both NL-CPA and CA-CPA are self-consistent, NL-CPA also involves calculating a new structure constant which contains non-local behavior. This is not present in CA-CPA. In CA-CPA, there is a choice of calculating a self-consistent medium, or simply using the single-site CPA medium. The advantage of using the single-site CPA medium is simplicity and computational efficiency. b. Cluster Embedding In each NL-CPA iteration, the new effective medium is obtained by embedding and averaging over multiple real atom clusters. In contrast, CA-CPA only requires embedding a single cluster that is parametrized by the degree of SRO that we obtain from model or experiment. In self-consistent CA-CPA, only one cluster needs to be embedded per iteration. This is a significantly simpler approach as it is independent of the number of configurations and can be easily applied to multi-species high entropy alloys which may have a large configuration space. To demonstrate CA-CPA, we apply it to alloy systems with SRO at low temperatures. First we apply it to the Cu-Zn binary, a system whose SRO has been studied using both experimental and numerical techniques, including NL-CPA The CuZn BCC solid solution is a well-known example of a system that has an ordered BCC (B2) structure at low temperatures and transitions to a disordered BCC (A2) structure at approximately 750 K As a first test we compare the energy obtained from single-site CPA with the energy obtained from CA-CPA using different possible SRO parameters. Two different versions of CA-CPA have been used -a fully selfconsistent CA-CPA (black dashed line) and the non-selfconsistent version where the averaged cluster is embedded in single-site CPA medium (red line). Although there are four possible parameters for a binary, forcing the constraints w ab = w ba and b w ab = 1 results in only a single independent SRO parameter w = w CuCu = w ZnZn . Variation of the energy of CuZn with respect to the short range order parameter w = wCuCu = wZnZn (using single site CPA energy as the reference level), calculated using fully self-consistent and non-self-consistent CA-CPA. w = 0 corresponds to complete short range ordering up to nearest neighbors while w = 1 corresponds to short range clustering up to nearest neighbors Figure As a second test we study the effect of SRO on the electronic density of states (DOS). As shown in Figure We can compare our results with the DOS calculated using NL-CPA Density of States for four different cases -the solid lines represent the pure B2 structure calculated using the KKR method, the dashed lines represent short range ordered (w = 0 at nearest neighbor shell and w = 1 at next nearest neighbor) and short range clustered (w = 1) up to next nearest neighbors using CA-CPA, and the dotted lines represent the A2 structure obtained from single site CPA. strated by calculating the cluster component DOS. We have not done pair-cluster calculations, although it can be easily performed using CA-CPA. Instead, in our work, the DOS has been obtained by embedding a 15 atom cluster (central atom, 8 nearest and 6 next nearest neighbors). Due to the larger cluster size, the difference in SRO DOS and single-site CPA DOS is more pronounced in our work. We can also see the effect of varying the size of the averaged cluster in Figure The four-element AlCrTiV high entropy alloy displays B2 type ordering at low temperatures, with (Al, Cr) at one sublattice and (Ti, V) at the other Comparing the DOS obtained using CA-CPA up to nearest (w = 0) and next nearest neighbors (w = 0 for the near neighbor shell and w = 1 for the next nearest shell) against the pure B2 structure obtained using the KKR method, and the completely disordered structure obtained using single-site CPA. to study short range order in such a system. Using CA-CPA opens the door to modelling short range order in high entropy alloys. For a 4-element high entropy alloy, there are 6 independent SRO parameters, and hence it is difficult to study how the energy varies with all of these 6 parameters. Instead we focus on three possible orderings -(a) AlCrtype ordering, where Al and Cr share the same sublattice (and of course, Ti and V share the other). (b) AlV-type ordering, where Al and V share the same sublattice. (c) AlTi-type ordering, where Al and Ti share the same sublattice.. Tables I, II and III contain the SRO parameters used for the three orderings. The two CA-CPA modes have also been compared for all three orderings. The energies of these three structures are presented in Figure The individual stability of the three configurations studied can also be discerned from the density of states a. AlCr-type ordering Figure b. AlTi-type ordering Figure c. AlV-type ordering Figure We have introduced the Cluster Averaged Coherent Potential Approximation (CA-CPA) to include chemical short range order in the framework of KKR-CPA. This approach involves embedding a cluster consisting of "averaged" neighbor atoms constructed according to the SRO present in the system. The approach is independent of the number of configurations. It is simple to implement, and computationally efficient as only a single cluster per species needs to be embedded. The approach has been applied to a binary and a high entropy alloy, and the observations have been compared to existing results. A self-consistent extension to the CA-CPA has also been explored, and an iteration scheme to obtain a new effective medium has been derived. Results obtained using the self-consistent formalism have been compared with the non-self-consistent embedding. The code is part of the MuST package available on GitHub 40 . The order parameters can be obtained in multiple ways. For binaries, there is only one independent SRO parameter. In such a case, it is not impractical to use a trial-and-error approach to find the SRO parameter that corresponds to the energy minimum. For more complex systems, this is less convenient, and experimental knowledge of SRO may be necessary to determine the order parameters. A third approach involves combining CA-CPA with a statistical physical method. Computer simulation in the early stages of code implementation.