This article proposes an optimization framework, based on Genetic Algorithms (GA), to calibrate the constitutive law of von Wolffersdorff. This constitutive law is known as Sand Hypoplasticity (SH), and allows for robust and accurate modeling of the soil behavior but requires a complex calibration involving eight parameters. The proposed optimization can automatically fit these parameters from the results of an oedometric and a triaxial drained compression test, by combining the GA with a numerical solver that integrates the SH in the test conditions. By repeating the same calibration several times, the stochastic nature of the optimizer enables the uncertainty quantification of the calibration parameters and allows studying their relative importance on the model prediction. After validating the numerical solver on the ExCaliber-Laboratory software from the SoilModels' website, the GA calibration is tested on a synthetic dataset to analyze the convergence and the statistics of the results. In particular, a correlation analysis reveals that two couples of the eight model parameters are strongly correlated. Finally, the calibration procedure is tested on the results from von To model the mechanical behavior of the soil, a large variety of constitutive laws have been developed, among which the hypoplasticity Later, combining the contributions of Gudehus For cohesive soils, on the other hand, different kinds of hypoplastic constitutive laws have been developed. Nemunis proposed a visco-hyploplastic approach This article focuses on one of the most delicate aspects in the use of the SH constitutive law: its calibration, which is the identification of the model parameter for a given soil. This model depends on eight interconnected parameters that govern a strongly nonlinear dynamic system. One of the most important contributions to the calibration of the SH model was proposed in 1996 by Herle & Gudehus To calibrate the SH model relying only on the results of these two tests, an optimization procedure is required. A free tool that for such calibration has been developed by T. Kadlíček, T. Janda and M. Šejnoha The scope of this work is to present an approach that returns all the SH parameters with no need for manual adjustments. This approach is based on a Genetic Algorithm (GA) optimizer, which interacts with a fast solver for the SH model to reproduce the results of the eodomeric and triaxial compression tests. A fundamental tool on which GA is based is the generation of pseudorandom numbers. This type of approach is commonly used by the Monte Carlo method which has been also usefully applied in different fields, for example: In this work, the GA optimizer operates on the set of model parameters, comparing the corresponding numerical prediction of the SH model to the experimental results until the best set is identified. The model equations implemented in the SH solver are described in Section 2, including both the general formulation and the simplified forms involved in the specific tests considered in this work. Section 3 describes the calibration methodology, including the integration procedure, the treatment of the different tests, the formulation of the cost function to minimize, and the GA optimizer. The results are presented in Section 4, which is divided into three parts. Section 4.1 presents a validation of the integration procedure. Section 4.2 focuses on the problem of solution uniqueness and its link to the sensitivity of the model and the uncertainty of the identified coefficients. These points are addressed by using the numerical model to construct synthetic experimental data and then testing the capabilities of the optimizer to retrieve the coefficients from which the data is generated. Finally, in Section 4.3, the algorithm is tested on the experimental dataset provided by von Wolffersdorff in The Sand Hypoplasticity (SH) theory considers the soil as a continuous porous media for which it is possible to define a constitutive law in terms of rate-equations e " gpD, eq The objective stress tensor, used to preserve the independence on the frame of reference, is defined following Zaremba-Jaumann where 9 T is the time derivative of the Cauchy effective stress and W " p∇v s ́∇v T s q{2 is the spin tensor. The nonlinear function F depends the set of eight parameters P P R 8ˆ1 . The calibration procedure consists in identifying these parameters so that the solution of the dynamical system in (1) recovers the experimental results from two classical tests: the oedometer and the triaxial drained test. The function g express the mass conservation of the sample during the test. Neglecting the deformability of the grains, this function relates the time evolution of the void ratio to the volumetric deformation as follows 9 e " p1 `eq Tr ́D ̄. ( This section describes how to obtain the dynamical system in (1); section 3 describes the optimization procedure to identify the model parameters. Following the formulation from von Wolffersdorff where Tr denotes the trace of a tensor, } } is the tensor norm }A} " a Tr pAA T q, T ̊" T ́1{3I, with I the identity tensor and T " T{TrpTq. The coefficients pf e , f b , F, a, f d q have a semi-empirical interpretation and depend on the parameters of the model that needs to be tuned during the calibration. The coefficients a and F are linked to the critical yielding surface from Matsuoka-Nakai F " where: In the hydrostatic conditions (i.e., tan ψ " 0) and in axysiymmetric conditions (i.e., 0 ď tan ψ ď ? 2 and cos 3θ " ́1), the equation ( The barotropy ad piknotropy coefficients f b and f e in (4) were originally formulated as: However, f e and f b are usually replaced by their product f s : The coefficient f d is the pyknotropy coefficient defined as The previous equations depends on the maximum (e d ), minimal (e i ) and critical (e c ) void fractions. These are linked, according to Bauer " e d e d0 " e c e c0 " exp For a given mean pressure p " ́trpTq{3, among the possible void ratio e d ă e ă e i , we can identify regions of dilative (for e d ă e ă e c ) and contractive (for e c ă e ă e i ) behavior. Figure Figure Finally, the set of equations ( • e c0 , e d0 e i0 . These are, respectively, the critical the minimal and the maximal void ratios, obtained when p s " TrpTq " 0 (13). The ratios λ d " e d0 {e c0 and λ i " e i0 {e c0 govern the amplitude of the domains of dilatant or contractive behaviour, while e c0 defines the critical state in terms of void ratio. • h s is called granular hardness. This has the dimensions of kP a but should not be confused with the grains rigidity which are considered undeformable. This parameter is linked to the barotropy of the solid skeleton and its increase of the slope of eodometric curve response. • φ c is the well-known critical friction angle and is linked to the shear strength in critical conditions. • n is a parameter influencing the barotropy of the soil. Increasing n produces an increase of the curvature in the response curve in the eodometric tests. • α is the exponent in the calculation of the picnotropy coefficient f d and controls the dependency of peak friction angle on relative density. • β is an coefficient influencing barotropy and piknotropy. Increasing β produce an increase of the stiffness of material and in particular the shear stiffness. The range of these parameters for various granular soil, taken from Finally, it is worth recalling that the SH constitutive law is a classical state-dependent model with the time arbitrarily scaled using a reference deformation ratio D. The general constitutive law is in fact homogeneous and of first order with respect to D, hence: TpT, λD, eq " λ TpT, D, eq for λ ą 0 (14) Following Herle & Gudehus In the case of W " 0, the objective stress tensor reduces to the Cauchy effective stress T " 9 T (see eq. 2) while introducing The response of the soil to the eodometric and triaxial drained tests can obtained by integrating in time the dynamical system in eq.s ( The proposed calibration procedures combines a stochastic optimizer with a numerical solver of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE). For every set of parameters P, the ODE solver integrates the hypoplasticity model in The procedure for integrating the hypoplasticity model is described in Section 3.1 while the stochastic optimization strategy is described in Section 3.2. Section 3.4 reports a note on the search space definition. Assuming that the eodometric and the triaxial drain test simulated in the calibration are in axisymmetric conditions, the hypoplasticity model simplifies to ( The integration of this dynamical system is carried out using the simple explicit Euler scheme. This allows for keeping the computational cost of each integration to a minimum, minimizing the number of function evaluations. Moreover, this formulation allows for an easy check of the solution admissibility (TrpTq ă 0 and e d ď e ď e i ) at every time step. Defining X k " rT k 1 , T k 2 , e k s T the state vector of the ODE system, the time integration scheme reads where F G here includes both F and g in ( while for the triaxial compression test is For the sake of completeness, the deformation along the first principal component remains indicated as D 1 , although all the calculations presented in this work implies D 1 " ́1. Once the integration time r0, t f s is defined, the time step is computed as ∆t " t f {n Step , where the number of time steps is fixed to n Step " 100. The function FpX, Pq in (18) differs in the two tests, as detailed in the following subsections. The oedometer test consists in measuring the vertical displacement of a sample subject to vertical compression and having lateral expansion prevented. The sample for this test must be as loose as possible. A compacted dense sample, which has undergone load cycles with more than one reversal point, would in fact be difficult to model with the SH The procedure to correctly prepare the sample for calibrating the SH model is discussed in A schematic of the test, recalling the main parameters involved is shown in Figure where N 11 " TrpTq{ TrpT 2 q ̈a{3p5T 1 ́2T 2 q (26) The triaxial compression test is performed on a drained and saturated sample, consolidated at a prescribed pressure The test returns the volume change and the deviatoric stress A sketch of the test, with the relevant parameters and an example set of results are shown in Figure The boundary condition for the triaxial drained test is 9 T 2 " 0. Therefore, the set ( This problem is mixed since unknowns are both on RHS ( 9 T 1 and e) and the LHS (D 2 ) and the introduction of x gives: The solution of the resulting quadratic are: , (34) . The positive solution among x I e x II is used to compute D 2 from (32) and finally advance the system The cost function driving the optimization of the parameters P is built by accounting for the discrepancy between the numerical predictions and the set of measurements (see also Concerning the parameter independence, the optimal search must be constrained within the contractive/dilative domains of interest (cf. Figure P ̊" te c0 , h s , φ, n, α, βu . Concerning the weight of the data in the optimization, the experimental points obtained in the oedometric and the triaxial tests are scaled in the dimensionless planes (p ε E , p T 1 ), (p ε a , p q) and (p ε a , p ε v ). This new scaled set reads: p T 1 " ́T1 {minp ́T 1 q (40) This scaling maps the experimental data onto curves that start from the origin (0, 0) and end at (1, 1). For a given set of parameters P, the result of the numerical integration yields the time evolution of the solution vector X k on a uniform temporal grid. The deviation between the set of experimental points and the model prediction is evaluated in terms of root mean square of the Fréchet distance. This measurement of curve similarity has been already used in various applications and provides a measurement which is invariant to the axis orientation where d E pk, r j,j`1 q is the distance between the experimental point k and the segment line r j,j`1 connecting two consecutive experimental points. These distances d E are shown in the p q ́p ε a plane in Figure This calculation is performed for the all curves produced by the tests, each providing a measurements of discrepancy. The final cost function is then where w 1,2,3 are the weights setting the relative importance of each plane. The cost function in Like many other population-based stochastic optimizers, the Genetic Algorithm (GA) starts from an initial population of possible solutions -in this work the model parameters P ̊- and generates new sets by applying statistical operators. In the GA, these operators are designed to mimic the Darwinian theory of survival of the fittest. Borrowing from Biology, the GA terminology refers to each of the possible solutions as individual and the statistical operations are referred to as elitism, mutation, selection and cross-over. As shown in the pseudo-code listed in the Algorithm 1, the genetic algorithm involves three procedures. The first one is INIT.POP, to initialize the population; the second is EVAL.POP, to evaluate the population; the third is UP-DATE.POP, to update the population. A more detailed listing of each of these procedures is provided in the algorithm 2, 3 and 4. A population is a matrix collecting all the individuals, one for each row. This matrix is indicated as Pop. The size of Pop is (N i ,6), were N i is the number of individuals, and 6 is the size of constrained parameters P ̊. The population is initialized randomly within the search space bounded by vectors containing the lowest and the largest possible values of each parameter P min and P max . These are introduced as user inputs. As reported in the INIT.POP procedure, we initialize half of the population with a uniform distribution spanning the entire search space, the other half as a Gaussian distribution centered in the search space with a standard deviation equal to one-sixth of the range. The functions random.uniform and random.normal are the ones available in Numpy Mutation is the fundamental operation that lets the GA explore the solution space: a percentage of the population at each iteration continues to be randomly chosen, in this work from a uniform random distribution in P min ˆPm ax . The fraction of mutated individuals is indicated with n M , and is computed as an exponentially decaying function of the iterations. This allows for balancing exploration and exploitation as the population convergences to its final distribution. The remaining N n " N i p1 ́nE ́nM q elements are generated from the best individual via selection and cross-over. Selection is the operation that defines which of the individual is allowed to mate; cross-over is the operation that defines how the information in mating individuals is combined to produce the new ones, referred to as the offspring. Following the rank weighting approach in rounded to the closest integer, where N f " n f N i is the number of individuals that is allowed to mate and n P r1, N f s is the rank of the individual, namely the index in the sorted list ID. This distribution implies that the fittest individuals (n " 1) have a higher chance of mating while the last (n " N f ) has zero chances. Once the best N f individuals are identified, the cross-over is generated by blending the features in the two parents as where n 1 and n 2 are the indices of the two randomly chosen parents from the triangular distribution in In the methodology proposed thus far, the model calibration is entirely entrusted to the Genetic Algorithm (GA). Indeed, the optimization can identify the correct parameters only if these are within the algorithm's search space. However, the proper definition of such search space requires experience and, in some cases, multiple trials. Increasing the search space increases the risks of encountering a local minimum and decreases the convergence performances of the optimization; decreasing the search space decreases the probability that the best set of parameters is included and hence reachable. While it is not trivial to correctly identify the search space, it is generally easy to see if the chosen one is inappropriate: when this is too narrow, the population tends to clusters on its boundaries; when this is too large, a substantial variance between the solutions obtained in different trials is observed. It is thus essential to run the optimization several times and analyze the statistics of the identified parameters. This analysis is proposed in Section 4.2. The functions random.uniform and random.triangular are the ones available in Numpy It is good practice to build the calibration by using as much as possible well-known results from previous authors. In particular, some coefficients are more easily estimated than others. The coefficient φ c , for example, can be obtained with usual procedures based on the Mohr plane with acceptable uncertainties, if the shear banding is prevented This section is organized in three subsections. In 4.1, the numerical method to integrate presented in the section 3.1 is validated using a free tool. In 4.2, the repeatably and the uncertainty of the calibration parameter is analyzed, along with a correlation analysis of the calibration parameters. Finally, 4.2 compares the calibration results for the Hochstetten sand soil presented in The validation of the numerical model described in 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 was carried out using ExCaliber-Laboratory Test Simulation 1 . This tool is developed by Prof. Mašín and coworkers The hypoplastic parameters chosen for the validation are 1 see https://soilmodels.com/excalibre-en/ those proposed by von Wolffersdorff for the Hochstetten sand in The initial conditions are T 1 " ́300kPa, T 2 " ́300 kPa and e " 0.660 for the triaxial test and T 1 " ́10kPa, T 2 " ́10 kPa and e " 0.730 for the oedometric test. The triaxial test goes up to the maximum deformation ε f in " 0.11 while the eodomeric test proceeds until the void ratio e f in " 0.680 is reached. The results for the three tests are shown in Figure In order to validate the optimizer and analyze the uncertainty of the calibrated parameters, this section reports on the analysis of synthetic data. The scope of these synthetic laboratory experiments, for which the exact set of model parameters is known, is threefold. The first objective is to analyze how quickly and how well the optimizer converges to the final set of parameters. The second objective is to analyze the variance and hence the uncertainty of each parameter. It is worth highlighting that by uncertainty we here refer to a measure of the parameter uniqueness. In other words, given a large set of converged solutions, all equally valid according to the cost function in The parameter chosen for the simulations in this section are φ c " 34 ̋, h s " 3.8 ̈10 6 kP a, n " 0.30, e c0 " 0.886, e d0 " 0.531, e i0 " 1.06, α " 0.144 and β " 1.5. These represent the exact solution for the calibration procedure. A set of M " 15 points is extracted from the numerical simulation of one eodometer test while M " 30 points is extracted from three triaxial drained tests. These tests, one odometer test and three triaxial drained tests, provide the minimal requirement for the model calibration. The initial conditions for these synthetic tests are shown in the Table The parameters of the GA are set to N i " 500 and N I " 20, while the remaining ones are taken as the default in Algorithm 2 and 4. The weights w i i " 1, 2, 3 in the cost function To qualitatively analyze the convergence of the GA, we first focus on the evolution of the distribution of parameters during the iterative search. For the sake of compactness, we here focus on the histograms of the parameters φ c and h s , being the histograms of the others quite similar. The evolution of the population of these two parameters are shown in Figure The rate of convergence largely depends on the sensitivity of the cost function to each parameter: in the figures shown, the parameter φ c appears to have a more important impact, and hence its distribution converges faster than h s . The reader should notice that even if the convergence is reached in both cases after about 15 iterations, a small portion of the histogram remains flat and outside the mean value. This is due to the small percentage of mutations that is maintained through the iterations to continue exploring the search space. To assess the convergence performance of the algorithm and the parameter uncertainties, the calibration is here repeated 1000 times. Figure It thus safe to conclude that the algorithm has converged, and setting the maximum number of iterations to N I " 20 ensures that both the best-case and the worst-case set lead to acceptable results. The Figure Because of this apparently irrelevant difference, the obtained set of parameters does not coincide with the exact one. Moreover, the statistics of the parameters obtained in all the trials lead to a non-negligible variance, which can be associated to the parameter uncertainty. The main statistical results for each of the parameters, obtained over all the tests, are collected in Table In the last simulation, the SH model is calibrated for the Hochstetten sand. The experimental data were obtained from the two oedometric tests and the three triaxial drained tests reported by von Wolfferdorff We consider ratios λ d " 0.60 and λ i " 1.20 and the search interval indicated in table 7. The parameters of the GA are set to N i " 500, N I " 10, while the remaining parameters are taken as the default ones in algorithm 2 and 4. The weights w i i " 1, 2, 3 in the cost function The GA calibration provides the set of parameters shown third column (GA) of Table The response curves calculated with these parameters are compared with the experimental data in the figure The parameters obtained by the GA optimizer do not differ significantly from those proposed by the two authors. However, these yield better agreements in all the response curves, hence enabling better predictive capabilities of the SH model. A novel procedure for the automatic calibration of the von Wolfferdorff's Sand Hypoplasticity (SH) model has been presented. The procedure is based on the solution of a regression problem in which the model parameters are adjusted so that a numerical model match experimental data. This data is pro-vided by triaxial and eodometric tests, and the discrepancy between model prediction and experimental data is measured in dimensionless planes. The cost function is computed from the root mean square of the Fréchet distances in these planes, and the regression is solved via Genetic Algorithms (GA). After briefly reviewing the fundamentals of the SH model and their simplified formulation for the considered tests, the Finally, the GA calibration is compared to the classical results from von Wolffersdorff, To conclude, the Genetic Algorithm calibration proved capable of correctly identifying the set of SH parameters from the experimental results of triaxial drained and eodometric compression tests. Moreover, the calibration allowed us to study the parameter uncertainty and their mutual correlation, paving the way towards data-driven reduction of the model parameters.