Zeeman spectra of the R lines of ruby (Cr 3+ : α-Al 2 O 3 ) were studied in ultrahigh magnetic fields up to 230 T by magneto-photoluminescence measurements. The observed Zeeman patterns exhibit nonlinear behaviors above 100 T, evidencing the breakdown of the previously reported Paschen-Back effect for B ⊥ c geometry. We adopted the crystal-field multiplet theory including the cubic crystal field (H cubic ), the trigonal crystal field (H trig ), the spin-orbit interaction (H SO ), and the Zeeman interaction (H Z ). It is found that the nonlinear splitting of the R lines is owing to the hybridization between the 2 E and 2 T 1 states, which leads to the quantization of these Zeeman levels with the orbital angular momentum. Our results suggest that the exquisite energy balance among H cubic , H trig , H SO , and H Z realized in ruby offers a unique opportunity to observe the onset of the crystal-field Paschen-Back effect toward the high-field extreme. Zeeman effect is categorized into anomalous Zeeman (AZ) effect at the weak-field limit and normal Zeeman (NZ) effect at the high-field limit. When atoms are located in weak magnetic fields, the energy levels split nonlinearly due to the competition between the external magnetic field and the hyperfine or the spin-orbit interactions. Under high magnetic fields where the Zeeman energy far exceeds those interactions, on the other hand, the energy splitting is asymptotically quantized by μ B B, where μ B is the Bohr magneton and B is the magnetic field. Historically, the crossover from the AZ effect to the NZ effect, the so-called Paschen-Back (PB) effect The PB effect can also be observed in solid states This PB effect in ruby can be understood as such, that the Cr 3+ spins initially oriented along the c axis are gradually quantized along the applied magnetic field B ⊥ c. Unlike the case of isolated atoms, the Zeeman levels of the R lines become quantized only with M S in this PB region, while the orbital angular momentum of the 2 E state is still quenched in crystal. Hence, one can naively expect further quantization of these levels with M L toward the high-field limit. In this work, we observe the Zeeman spectra of the R lines of ruby in ultrahigh magnetic fields up to 230 T. For both B c and B ⊥ c geometries, the Zeeman patterns exhibit nonlinear splitting above 100 T, already beyond the previous theory This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the experimental and theoretical methods. In Sec. III, we show the observed and calculated results on the Zeeman patterns of the R lines. In Sec. IV, we discuss the wave functions of the 2 E states in magnetic fields. We also refer to the Zeeman patterns at the high-field extreme. In Sec. V, we end the paper with the conclusive remarks. Figure The sample was cooled down by using 4 He-flow-type cryostats, as shown in Fig. So far, a simple effective Hamiltonian for the 2 E state has been considered to explain the Zeeman patterns of the R lines Here, g 0 = 1.98 As is evident from these formula, this model assumes that the center of the four energy levels remains constant in magnetic fields. In this work, we adopted a Hamiltonian comprised of all the 120 bases in the 3d 3 multiplet, which is more general treatment than the above perturbative one. In this Hamiltonian, the trigonal crystal field (H trig ), the spin-orbit interaction (H SO ), and the Zeeman interaction (H Z ) were involved in together with the cubic crystal field (H cubic ). The bases are expressed as |(αS Γ)M S γ , where α is the electronic configuration, M S the spin quantum number in the spin-S state, and γ the orbital function in the cubic irreducible representation Γ. We take M S and γ quantized along the trigonal c axis (u ± for E, a ± and a 0 for T 1 , and x ± and x 0 for T 2 ) k, and k ′ are the matrix elements between one-electron states, and and k = k ′ = 1 hold for the free ion. Similar theoretical approach focusing on the low-field limit was attempted previously The evolutions of the Zeeman spectra of the R lines are shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. To clarify the origin of the AZ effect above 100 T, we discuss the wave functions of the four Zeeman levels splitting from the 2 E states. The wave functions are expressed by a linear combination of the 120 bases in the 3d 3 state, |φ r = k c k |(αS Γ)M S γ , where c k is a complex number coefficient. Our calculation reveals that |φ 1± (|φ 2± ) at zero field mainly consists of one base (t 3 components and that of the + 1 2 u -and -1 2 u + components approach 0.5 toward high magnetic fields as shown in Figs. 5(e)-5(h). These features signal the tendency of the quantization of the spin along the field direction, i.e. the previously reported PB effect These detailed theoretical analyses enable us to get more insights about the Zeeman patterns in ultrahigh magnetic fields. As previously reported, the Zeeman patterns of the R lines exhibit (almost) linear behaviors around 60 T. This is because of the special energy relations among the initial level splittings and the Zeeman energy, δ < H Z ≪ ∆, where the hybridization between the first and second excited states 2 E and 2 T 1 is negligible. However, their hybridization is already important above 100 T, resulting in the nonlinear behaviors that are experimentally observable. Indeed, our calculation suggests that 2 ∼ 12 % of the 2 T 1 components are contributing to the R lines at 250 T as seen form Figs. 5(a)-5(d) and Figs. 5(i)-5(l). In the field region of 10 3 T, where ∆ < H Z ≪ 10Dq is achieved, the 2 E and 2 T 1 states are completely mixed. Importantly, both of them do not directly interact with the higher excited states 4 T 2 , 2 T 2 , and 4 T 1 shown in Fig. The Zeeman patterns of ruby discussed above can be regarded as a kind of PB effect. However, to the best of our knowledge, such PB effect has not be proposed for describing the crossover from the AZ effect to the NZ effect under the crystal-field splitting, possibly due to the lack of proper situation. The energy scale of the crystal field as well as the complexity of the level splittings make it challenging to clearly observe the crystal-field PB effect. Note that the magnetic field accessible by the current technology is at most 10 2 ∼ 10 3 T In conclusion, the AZ effect was observed for the R lines of ruby above 100 T. The crystal-field multiplet theory with several empirical parameters successfully reproduces the experimental Zeeman patterns up to 230 T, proving that the hybridization with the second excited states are responsible for their nonlinear behaviors. Notably, the observed Zeeman patterns for B ⊥ c signal the crossover from one to another PB effect, characterized by the renormalization of the good quantum number from only M S to both M L and M S . The present work offers a new kind of PB effect, which is distinct from the conventional PB effects describing atomic energy levels, and it could be universally encountered in crystal if the conditions are met. In the calculation, the temperature is fixed to T = 200 K to derive the Boltzmann distribution within the 2 E state. Plots of the calculated intensity ratios for all of the individual peaks for B ⊥ c geometry, which are decomposed from the plots in (d). The population ratio P is estimated by assuming the Boltzmann distribution of electrons among the Zeeman levels of the 2 E state. Note that the measurement temperature in this work could be high enough to achieve the fast spin relaxation, yielding the nearly thermal equilibrium condition during the pulse. Accordingly, P is expressed as As for the transition probability W, the transition from the 2 E to the where |ψ m is the component of the intermediate Here, σ and π are defined as follows (spin terms are omitted): In our experimental setup, only the σ component (E ⊥ c) should be detected in the PL spectra for B c geometry, whereas both the σ and π components are expected to coexist for B ⊥ c geometry. Such an effect might be reflected on the difference in the intensity distribution of the R lines at zero field between the B c and B ⊥ c data; the relative intensity of the R 1 line is a bit weaker in the B ⊥ c data [see Fig. From these preparations, the magnetic-field dependence of the peak intensity ratios for B c and B ⊥ c are calculated as Figs. For B c, the changes in the relative peak intensities up to 250 T mainly originate from the increased population of the lowest Zeeman level of the 2 E state because the transition probabilities W remain constant in this field range. Therefore, the relative peak intensities corresponding to the transitions from the Zeeman level with the |φ 1-or |φ 2-component, i.e. the peaks B, D, E, and G, are expected to get stronger as the magnetic field increases, which is roughly consistent with the experimental results as shown in Fig. For B ⊥ c, in contrast, the field dependences of the relative peak intensities are more complicated because the hybridizations of two components in the Zeeman levels of the 2 E state bring about the changes in the transition probabilities W as shown in Table Polarization E ⊥ c A 2 |φ s ] is the transition probability.