Antennas typically have emission/radiation efficiencies bounded by where A is the emitting area and  is the wavelength of the emitted wavelength. That makes it challenging to miniaturize antennas to extreme sub-wavelength dimensions. One way to overcome this challenge is to actuate an antenna not at the resonance of the emitted wave, but at the resonance of a different excitation that has a much shorter wavelength at the same frequency. We have actuated an electromagnetic (EM) antenna with a surface acoustic wave (SAW) whose wavelength is about five orders of magnitude smaller than the EM wavelength at the same frequency. This allowed us to implement an extreme sub-wavelength EM antenna, radiating an EM wave of wavelength  = 2 m, whose emitting area is ~10 -8 m 2 ( 2 A  = 2.5 10 -9 ), and whose measured radiation efficiency exceeded the 2 A  limit by over 10 5 . The antenna consisted of magnetostrictive nanomagnets deposited on a piezoelectric substrate. A SAW launched in the substrate with an alternating electrical voltage periodically strained the nanomagnets and rotated their magnetizations owing to the Villari effect. The oscillating magnetizations emitted EM waves at the frequency of the SAW. These extreme sub-wavelength antennas, that radiate with efficiencies a few orders of magnitude larger than the 2 A  limit, allow drastic miniaturization of communication systems. Many modern communication systems (cell phones, biologically implanted devices, radio frequency identification systems, wearable electronics) will benefit immensely if antenna dimensions can be reduced to small fractions of the emitting wavelength. Miniaturizing antennas to extreme sub-wavelength dimensions, however, presents a significant challenge because the radiation efficiency is normally limited to where A is the emitting area and  is the wavelength of the emitted radiation to fashion extreme sub-wavelength antennas in the past The efficiency exceeded the 2 EM A  limit by a factor of ~400. This work A  limit by a much larger factor (>10 5 ). Second, our antenna is not limited to a particular frequency (e.g. the resonance frequency of an FBAR). As long as the frequency is lower than the inverse spin rotation time of the nanomagnets, it can radiate at any arbitrary frequency (which would be the frequency of the SAW launched to activate the nanomagnets). Thus, our antenna can radiate over a wide range of frequencies. All of these antennas are, of course, distinct from conventional antennas where oscillating charges (not oscillating magnetic moments) excite electromagnetic waves. In this work, we report the experimental demonstration of an extreme sub-wavelength EM antenna, based on the above principle, whose radiation efficiency exceeds the A  limit by a factor exceeding 10 5 . The antenna's emitting area is more than 8 orders of magnitude smaller than the square of the wavelength, resulting in drastic miniaturization. It consists of an array of elliptical magnetostrictive (Co) nanomagnets of major axis dimension ~360 nm, minor axis dimension ~330 nm and thickness ~6 nm fabricated on a piezoelectric 128 0 Y-cut LiNbO3 substrate. A surface acoustic wave (SAW) is launched in the substrate with electrodes and the SAW periodically strains the nanomagnets, causing their magnetizations to rotate owing to the inverse magnetostriction (Villari) effect. The rotating magnetizations emit EM waves (at the frequency of the SAW), which are detected in the far field by a dipole antenna coupled to a spectrum analyzer. The SAW (excitation) frequency in our experiment was 144 MHz and we were able to detect EM emissions at the same frequency that was 8 dBm above ambient emissions, at a distance > 2 m from the antenna. A control sample (that contained no nanomagnets, but was otherwise identical to the actual sample) was used for background subtraction. We were thus able to measure the EM emission from the nanomagnets at the exclusion of all other emitters (e.g. surface currents in the electrodes that are used to launch the SAW and any other spurious source radiating at or near 144 MHz). Based on the measured detected power and the input power to the SAW, we were able to infer that the electromagnetic radiation efficiency (ratio of power radiated by the nanomagnets to the input power to the SAW) is between 0.01% -0.1%, which exceeds the 2 EM A  limit by more than five orders of magnitude. Figure In order to demonstrate the antenna function and also measure the antenna characteristics, we launched SAW signal in the substrate at two different frequencies (f SAW = 144 MHz and 900 MHz) and measured any detectable EM emission (above the noise floor determined by ambient emissions) at a distance > 2m from the samples. The detector was a dipole antenna calibrated to specific frequencies and these two frequencies belonged to that set, which is why they were chosen. We were able to detect EM emissions at 144 MHz, but not at 900 MHz which was too high a frequency for the magnetization of the nanomagnets to rotate. At 144 MHz, the EM wavelength is 2 m. Since the separation between the detector and the antenna was greater than the EM wavelength, we were measuring the far-field emission. The SAW velocity in the LiNbO3 substrate is about 4100 m/sec We carried out the measurements for both samples A and B containing nanomagnets, as well as control samples that were otherwise identical to the real samples but had no nanomagnets. In Most likely, the nanomagnets do not radiate sufficiently because they are not able to rotate their magnetizations through sufficiently large angles at this high rate (900 MHz). Surface currents induced in the electrodes used to launch the SAW in both samples also radiate electromagnetic waves at 900 MHz and the detected emissions are primarily due to that. Similar (negative) result was obtained with Sample B. Our past simulations have shown that strain induced large angle magnetization rotation in single domain elliptical nanomagnets (of lateral dimension ~100 nm) typically takes place in about 1 ns We also carried out time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect (TR-MOKE) measurements on the nanomagnets at room temperature at various amplitudes of SAW excitation to verify that the launched SAW indeed has an effect on the magnetization rotation. The oscillations in timeresolved Kerr rotations are measured with a micro-focused optical pump-probe set up as shown in Fig. In Fig. Therefore, the maximum actual power fed to the antenna via the SAW is 3.16 0.15 0.474   mW. This is the input power to Sample A, and the input power to Sample B is about the same. The EM power from Sample B that is detected by the receiving dipole antenna is -73 dBm (see Fig. Let us now calculate the , which means that our measured efficiency of 0.014% was able to beat the , which means that our measured efficiency of 0.088% was able to beat the 2 EM A  limit by 140,800 times in Sample B. In this work, we have demonstrated extreme sub-wavelength electromagnetic antennas whose radiation efficiencies greatly exceed the theoretical limit of [where A is the emitting area and   is the wavelength of the emitted electromagnetic wave] by a factor exceeding 10 5 . This allows us to miniaturize electromagnetic antennas. In our case, the emitting areas of the antennas are about This drastic miniaturization was made possible by exciting the antennas at acoustic resonance instead of electromagnetic resonance. The surface acoustic waves were also found to amplify the magnetization response of these nanomagnets resonating in GHz frequencies, which may have different applications of its own. These extreme sub-wavelength antennas will allow dramatic downscaling of communication systems and could open up new high frequency applications. The nanomagnets were fabricated on a 128° Y-cut LiNbO3 substrate. The substrate was spincoated with bilayer polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) e-beam resists of different molecular weights to obtain good undercut: PMMA 495 diluted 4% by volume in Anisole, followed by PMMA 950 also diluted 4% by volume in Anisole. The spin coating was carried out at a spinning rate of 2500 rpm. The resists were subsequently baked at 110° C for 5 min. Next, electron-beam lithography was performed using a Hitachi SU-70 scanning electron microscope (at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and 60 pA beam current) with a Nabity NPGS lithography attachment. Finally, the resists were developed in methyl isobutyl ketone and isopropyl alcohol or MIBK-IPA (1:3) for 270 s followed by a cold IPA rinse. For nanomagnet delineation, a 5-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer was first deposited on the patterned substrate using e-beam evaporation at a base pressure of ∼2 × 10 -7 Torr, followed by the deposition of Co. The lift-off was carried out using Remover PG solution. Supporting information is available free of charge from the ACS Publication Website. It contains two figures: S1: Screenshot of spectrum analyzer when SAW frequency was 900 MHz. S2: Screenshot of spectrum analyzer when SAW frequency was 144 MHz. and an estimation of the minimum coupling efficiency of the magnetic moments to electromagnetic radiation. This is the pre-review version that was submitted to Advanced Materials Technologies (Wiley). The post-review version that contains small amendments made pursuant to reviewer comments is not posted.