Mesoscopic superconductivity deals with various quasiparticle excitation modes, only one of them-the charge-mode-being directly accessible for conductance measurements due to the imbalance in populations of quasi-electron and quasihole excitation branches. Other modes carrying heat or even spin, valley etc. currents populate the branches equally and are charge-neutral, which makes them much harder to control. This noticeable gap in the experimental studies of mesoscopic non-equilibrium superconductivity can be filled by going beyond the conventional DC transport measurements and exploiting spontaneous current fluctuations. Here, we perform such an experiment and investigate the transport of heat in an open hybrid device based on a superconductor proximitized InAs nanowire. Using shot noise measurements, we investigate sub-gap Andreev heat guiding along the superconducting interface and fully characterize it in terms of the thermal conductance on the order of G th ∼ e 2 /h, tunable by a back gate voltage. Understanding of the heat-mode also uncovers its implicit signatures in the non-local charge transport. Our experiments open a direct pathway to probe generic charge-neutral excitations in superconducting hybrids. Conversion of a quasiparticle current to the collective motion of a Cooper pair condensate at the interface of a normal metal and superconductor is known as Andreev reflection (AR) Conservation of both the number of sub-gap quasiparticles and their excitation energy on the normal side manifests AR as a fundamental example of charge-heat separation in the electronic system. Out of thermal equilibrium, the spatial gradient of a charge-neutral quasiparticle distribution conveys the heat flux The retro-character of the AR, that is, the propagation of a reflected hole via the timereversed trajectory of an incident electron, results in a suppression of the heat conduction in the ballistic limit. This obstacle may be overcome by imposing the chirality of the charge carriers in a magnetic field All of this makes the geometry of the Andreev wire In this work, we challenge a thermal conductance (G th ) measurement in an open threeterminal hybrid device based on a diffusive InAs nanowire (NW) proximitized by a superconducting contact, see the image of one of our samples in Figure The outline of our experiment is depicted in Figure For charge-heat separation via AR, the quality of the InAs/Al interface is important, which we verify in transport measurements. In Figure In Figure is a direct consequence of a charge-neutrality of the non-local response in our devices Next, we probe the non-equilibrium electronic populations in both NS junctions using shot noise current fluctuations picked-up in the reflection and transmission configurations sketched in Figure Experimentally, S R represents the spectral density of the auto-correlation noise of current I 2 under the bias applied to the terminal N2, while the terminal N1 is maintained DC floating, that is, S R ≡ S 22 (I 1 = 0, I 2 ). The corresponding experimental layout is depicted in the left sketch of Figure Above the kinks, the diminished slope is the same and it corresponds closely to the universal Fano factor F ≡ 1/3 in a diffusive conductor with normal leads however, in the present experiment, the transmitted heat flux is directly measurable, as we show below. In Figure In the upper part of Figure This difference emphasizes the fact that non-equilibrium populations of quasiholes and quasi-electrons are balanced in the proximity region and transmitted noise directly probes the heat-mode excitation. Figure We proceed with a quantitative description of the Andreev heat guiding by solving the diffusion equation for the electronic energy distribution (EED), inspired by a quasiclassical approach The details of theoretical modeling can be found in the Supplemental Materials. In Figure So far, we have used shot noise measurements to demonstrate sub-gap Andreev heat guiding. In the following, we concentrate on the signatures of this effect in charge transport measurements in the device NSN-II. First, we focus on resistive thermometry based on a weak T -dependence of the mesoscopic conductance fluctuations. In Figure of the floating NS junction as a function of V 2 (see the upper sketch in Figure Finally, we investigate non-local I-V characteristics in the configuration shown in the lower sketch of Figure evolves concurrently to the T * and T N with pronounced sub-gap behavior and kinks at V 1 ≈ ±∆/e, see vertical arrows. The signal is small, in 1 μV range, with both the sign and magnitude demonstrating strong V g -dependent fluctuations, in contrast with T * and T N . We suggest that the finite V symm 2 has a thermoelectric-like origin, analogous to thermopower in Andreev interferometers Our experiment reveals the heat-mode excitation in a proximity superconductor via different experimental signatures. On the one hand, in DC transport, both in the resistive thermometry (Figure Supplemetary. The Supplemental Materials for this article contain Funding. Implementation of resistive thermometry and its comparison to noise thermometry was supported by the Russian Science Foundation Grant No. 18-72-10135. Theoretical modeling was performed under the state task of the ISSP RAS. This file contains supplementary information for the main text, including the following figures: We calibrate our setup using equilibrium noise thermometry. At zero current through the device, we are able to change a value of , where G diff is a differential resistance (zero bias) of the sample shown in Fig. where G is an unknown total gain, Z LC -complex impedance of the LC contour, T r filter (f ) -transmission characteristic of the band-pass filter, S Amp When we apply current through the sample, the crossover from thermal to non-equilibrium shot noise (see solid green curve in Fig. Finalized current spectral density curve is shown in Fig. Following Nagaev and Buttiker First we calculate for energies within the superconducting gap. Since noise temperature gradient is zero at N/S interface, then the correction to the noise temperature due to the finite r is of the second order and we can neglect it. In order to find the energy distributions f * 1 (ε) and f * 1 (ε) at the two ends of the proximitized wire section, one has to fulfill the continuity of the heat fluxes in these points at any given ε. In this way we get the following two equations: where the terms with ε correspond to the particle heat flux and the terms with -ε to the hole heat flux. The equations ( Above-gap (|ε| < ∆) To calculate for energies above the superconducting gap, we need to take into account the fact that now there is a finite gradient of noise temperature near N/S interface. Then correction to T N due to the finite r is of the first order and we can not neglect it. Fortunately, for energies above the gap, S terminal acts as regular normal lead, so we can assume In order to find f * (ε), one has to fulfill current conservation law for each energy: where f 0 (ε) is a Fermi-Dirac distribution in in the normal state of grounded Al terminal and r is the interface resistance. Noise vs. Resistive thermometry Is this section we highlight the difference between noise thermometry and resistive thermometry approaches. To describe numerically the resistive thermometry, we consider NS junction as a twoterminal coherent quasi-1D conductor with n channels and energy-dependent diagonal transmission coefficients T r i (ε) connecting two reservoirs with temperatures T L and T R . We now determine the linear response conductance G 1 in such a system, where a temperature bias across the conductor might be present. If a small voltage bias dV is applied across the conductor, the linear-response current through the nanowire dI is where f (ε, T ) is the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution at temperature T . We note, that the conductance temperature dependence in this model is fully enclosed in the energy dependence of T r i (ε). Now we transform this equation by taking out the small bias from the distribution functions and separating the sum: which leads to the linear response conductance G 1,non-eq in form: where G 1 (T ) is the ordinary equilibrium conductance which can be measured by varying the bath temperature. The (S13) clearly demonstrates, that the temperature, measured via resistive thermometry T * in the main text obeys a relation: We note, that this result is only valid for the case of equilibrium distribution functions at both nanowire terminals. For the triple-step distribution expected for S terminal in our experiment, the conductance depends on the exact form of T r i (ε). We now compare this result for T * with the expected noise temperature T N when one terminal has significantly higher temperature (T R T L ). For this case T N can be expressed in form T N = αT R , with coefficient α depending on the shape of distribution function at the terminal Neglecting the non-linearity of of G 1 (T ), which is present in experiment (see supplemental fig. In experiment, however, the discrepancy between T N and T * is more prominent with T N -T bath ≈ 2(T * -T bath ) (see supplemental fig. In order to describe the symmetric component of the non-local I-V s presented in Fig. where the quasiparticle energy ε is measured with respect to the chemical potential that is the same for the right and left leads of the conductor. Note that in this equation we approximated the energy dependence T r i (ε) with the lowest order non-vanishing term T r i (ε) = T r i (0) + T r i ε, where T r i ≡ dT r i (ε)/dε| ε=0 . It is straightforward to see that eq. (S15) results in a parabolic T-dependence of I TE : Measured thermoelectric voltage that builds up on a floating conductor is simply V TE = -I TE G -1 0 , where G 0 = 2e 2 /h n i T r i (0) is the linear-response conductance. For a small temperature difference ∆T ≡ T R -T L T , the eq. (S16) can be written as: . In other words, in this approximation the thermoelectric response is fully characterized by the T-independent Seebeck parameter S/T . With this notation we obtain the expression for arbitrary thermal biases on the conductor: The temperature dependence of superconducting Al, deposited via the same process as described in "Device Fabrication" was performed separately on the four-terminal Al strips, incorporated in the samples studied in InAs nanowires grown by molecular beam epitaxy on Si substrate 