The creep behaviour and microstructural evolution of a Sn-3Ag-0.5Cu wt.% sample with a columnar microstructure have been investigated through in-situ creep testing under constant stress of 30 MPa at ~298 K. This is important, as 298 K is high temperature within the solder system and in-situ observations of microstructure evolutions confirm the mechanisms involved in deformation and ultimately failure of the material. The sample has been observed in-situ using repeat and automatic forescatter diode and auto electron backscatter diffraction imaging. During deformation, polygonisation and recrystallisation are observed heterogeneously with increasing strain, and these correlate with local lattice rotations near matrix-intermetallic compound interfaces. Recrystallised grains have either twin or special boundary relationships to their parent grains. The combination of these two imaging methods reveal one grain (loading direction, LD, 10.4 ° from [100]) deforms less than the neighbour grain 2 (LD 18.8° from [110]), with slip traces in the strain localised regions. In grain 1, (11 ̅ 0)[001] slip system are observed and in grain 2 (11 ̅ 0)[1 ̅ 1 ̅ 1]/2 and (110)[1 ̅ 11]/2 slip systems are observed. Lattice orientation gradients build up with increasing plastic strain and near fracture recrystallisation is observed concurrent with fracture. For economical and sustainable success of electronic components, estimating the lifetime of solder components is critical. Solders are used to electronically connect components and their structural integrity is important in maintaining this connection. Due to the local geometry of the joint, solders can be subjected to creep deformation. Creep deformation is a time-dependent plastic deformation mode where the stress is below the yield point. Excessive creep can lead to component distortion and can lead to fracture of the solder joint, reducing service lifetime. It is known that Pb-free solders are hot working metals ( T T M ≥ 0.6 In SAC305, three stage creep has been reported Plastic deformation can occur via different slip systems in the β-Sn matrix There are many families of slip systems that have been identified in Sn, but the relative activity of these different families of slip systems is only partially understood. Zhou et al. Furthermore, the dependency of orientation of the solder joint on activation of slip systems is reported in the literature By carrying out a first principle atomistic study and uniaxial tensile tests, Kinoshita et al. Among them only Zhang et al. In previous work the twin nucleated recrystallisation has been suggested To address these complexities, here we perform an in-situ study of creep in controlled SAC305 microstructures, with a focus on when and where grain polygonisation and recrystallisation occur, with respect to grain boundaries and eutectic regions where the β-Sn contains embedded Ag3Sn and Cu6Sn5 IMCs, which can deform differently during creep In this work, electron microscopy is combined with in-situ deformation. This enables us to follow the evolution of slip and recrystallisation, via changes in lattice orientation. Fast imaging with electron channelling contrast imaging (ECCI) enabled us to confirm that recrystallisation occurred during the deformation process, and EBSD enabled us to understand the relationships of new grains with respect to the parent microstructure. The creep tests were performed on SAC305 large scale dog-bone samples that had been solidified directionally to produce columnar grains along the gauge length with controlled orientation and lengthscale similar to ref Since EBSD is a surface sensitive technique, a high-quality surface finish was prepared by mechanical polishing with 0.05 m colloidal silica and then improved using broad ion beam milling at room temperature with 3 keV and 3°and followed by 3 keV and 1° for 3 hours (Gatan PECS II) The creep tests were performed with a 2 kN Gatan Mtest 2000E tensile stage (Figure Two tests were carried out in tensile mode under load control until sample fracture (bi-crystal sample) without interruption and to 3% strain (single crystal sample) with interruption at every 0.5% strain interval. During microstructural mapping, load was held without unloading or reducing and the absolute extension of the samples was recorded to measure the strain (the strain measured is the engineering strain which is determined by extension divided by length). The microstructural deformation of the sample was observed in-situ using ECCI with repeating forescatter diode (FSD) imaging and EBSD-mapping with a Bruker e-Flash HD EBSD detector. The bi-crystal sample was observed in a relatively large region of interest (ROI) which contains grain boundaries and dendrite and eutectic regions. To ensure that deformation was localised to the field of view, the sample was mechanically back thinned by diamond pen for several micrometres in the centre of the gauge as shown in Figure Scripting in Bruker ESPRIT 2.2 was used to create a routine to enable repeat FSD and EBSD mapping, so called "auto-FSD and auto-EBSD". The FSD images were captured with the detector retracted (to reduce topography contrast and increase electron channelling contrast for subtle orientation changes) with a detector distance of 40 mm and a 1.2 μm step size (1200 × 799 pixels), where each image took 1 minute to capture. After the FSD imaging, the detector was moved automatically to the EBSD position (~10 mm) and the EBSD scan started as soon as the detector reached the set position. The EBSD maps were captured at a 5  greater step size than the FSD image, leading to a step size of 6 μm for the bi-crystal sample (larger ROI). This significantly reduces the mapping time to measure the orientation information of the sample. The duration of each auto-FSD and auto-EBSD pair was approximately 7 minutes. Likewise, the EBSD maps for the single crystal sample (smaller ROI) were captured at 0.2 μm step size and each auto-FSD and auto-EBSD pair took approximately 60 minutes. The initial microstructure and orientation of the gauge for the sample were scanned using a large-scale EBSD map before with step size of 12 μm inside the load frame before loading. After that, the creep test was performed together with auto-imaging. The microstructure of the sample was compared before and after deformation. The EBSD data was analysed with post-processed using the "absorb surrounded zero solutions" function in Bruker ESPRIT 2.2. Figure The sample forms a microstructure with -Sn dendrite and intermetallic-containing eutectic regions (Figure The sample has two -Sn domains (grains) with the loading direction aligned 10.4° from a <100> in the upper grain 1 eutectic regions and 18.8° from a <110> in both the upper and lower grain 2 dendritic regions (Figure In the red boxed region, the green eutectic -Sn has a different orientation than the surrounding blue dendritic -Sn, while in the lower blue boxed region, the dendritic and eutectic -Sn have the same orientation. Figure The microstructural evolution of the sample is revealed between primary to early secondary creep in Figure The FSD image at the initial condition shows a large contrast in Figure With increasing strain (Figure (magenta) appears at the boundary between β-Sn dendrite and eutectic regions, where the β-Sn dendrite and eutectic β-Sn have different orientation (indicated with red arrows in Figure With continued deformation (Figure In addition, new subgrain boundaries are formed (Figure In tertiary creep, the creep strain rate increased leading to acceleration of the microstructural deformation and fracture of the sample. There is a significant increase in surface roughness and shear bands are observed in the FSD maps (Figure During the transition from secondary to tertiary creep, shear bands start to progress across the grain boundaries in the strain localised regions to form a microcrack, where high surface roughness is present (Figure Within the region with β-Sn dendrites and eutectic β-Sn in different orientations (red boxed region in Figure A region with high surface roughness (the highlighted region in Figure The microstructural deformation within the eutectic region of the single crystal sample with a near -[110] orientation (deviation angle ~5.5°) in the loading direction is illustrated in Figure (green) and Cu6Sn5 (blue) are identified clearly in the phase map (Figure At the initial stage of deformation (LD = 0%), the scanned region of the sample shows a clear single crystal of -Sn in the IPF-LD map (Figure Recrystallisation happens quite early, at a strain level LD = 1%, and the recrystallised grain is located near the eutectic IMCs as shown in Figure During uniaxial deformation, with single crystals and large grains, we assume that the macroscopic boundary condition controls deformation. This allows the propensity for slip to be assessed using the Schmid's Law, where the relative activity of the slip systems can be determined according to their critical resolved shear stress (τ CRSS ) and Schmid factor (m), as given in Equation (1). where F is the applied load, A the cross-sectional area of the sample, and φ and λ are the angle between the loading direction and the slip plane, and the loading direction and the slip direction respectively. The Schmid factor is m = cosφ  cosλ. Note that within the β-Sn system, the slip system with the highest Schmid factor may not activate first, as τ CRSS varies between slip systems. For the 32 β-Sn reported slip systems, their likelihood of activity was ranked according to prior work using expected ratios of the τ CRSS (CRSS-ratio) [110] and [100] orientations using Matlab with Equation (1). The weighted slip system with minimum τ CRSS and maximum m will be activated first The values of weighted Schmid factor (m W ) for the grain 1 with a near-[110] orientation (Figure The analysis of activated slip systems for the near-[110] orientation (grain 2) in the bi-crystal sample is shown in Figure Dynamic recovery is demonstrated in this work, where the highly polygonised subgrains have been formed in regions which correlate previously with regions with high crystal misorientation (Figure Recrystallisation occurs as the deformation continues, as the stored energy can be further reduced by new grains absorbing the dislocation structures. The interfaces between the recrystalised grains and the previous material are HAGBs (Figure The failure of the samples is observed as propagation of ductile cracks together with polygonisation and recrystallisation in the bulk. During creep, the plastic deformation is firstly localised to form parallel shear bands with high surface roughness because of material flow at beginning of the secondary creep. These shear bands correspond to slip traces associated with highly favoured slip systems that depend on the initial orientation of the grain As the strain increases (tertiary creep in Figure The creep behaviour and microstructural evolution of directionally solidified SAC305 solder with single crystal and bi-crystal structures have been investigated through in-situ creep testing under constant stress of 30 MPa at room temperature (~298 K). The following conclusions can be made. 1. During creep, the microstructural deformation evolves as indicated by the evolution of lattice rotation, which is influenced by the initial microstructural morphology and orientation of the sample. 2. The dendritic β-Sn and eutectic β-Sn deform differently during creep, i.e. the length-scale of recrystallisation is much smaller in eutectic regions than in the dendrite and the deformation is more localised in the eutectic region, while the deformation in the dendritic region is relatively extensive. This is in agreement with our prior work on different samples with mechanisms explained in ref 3. The grain with a near-[110] orientation in the loading direction rotated faster and exhibited more prominent slip traces than the grain with a near-[100] orientation in the loading direction. This indicates that propagation of slip in the near-[110] oriented grain is more favourable. 4. In-situ measurements confirm that recrystallisation develops under load, rather than after the test while the sample is left at room temperature. This in-situ work shows that the interpretations made from previous ex-situ works Localised recrystallisation occurs at the early stage of creep within the β-Sn at the grain boundaries, dendrite-eutectic boundaries and close to IMCs because of large heterogeneity in rotation between the orientations, microstructural regions and phases. The formed recrystallised grains have either twin or special boundaries to their parent grains because twin and CSL boundaries have relatively low energy configuration when misorientation increases locally. This observation is consistent with ref 6. Polygonisation starts to develop increasingly at early stage of secondary creep in the strain localised regions such as the regions close to the IMCs, near the dendrite-eutectic boundaries and grain boundaries due to the continuous dislocation formation and rearrangement locally resulting from high heterogeneity at grain and phase boundaries. Since recovery takes place deformation accumulates as indicated with gradual increase in surface roughness and the formation of shear bands during secondary stage creep 7. The microstructural deformation accelerates in the region with high roughness to generate significant subgrain and recrystallisation, leading to crack formation and fracture of the sample at tertiary creep. This is because that the soft β-Sn phase flowed around the hard IMC phase during creep and caused the formation of a wavy morphology with slip bands resulting from crystal slip generated by gradual lattice rotation 8. Activated slip systems were identified using the observed slip traces to measure the slip plane and calculating the geometrically best aligned slip direction with maximum Schmid factor. The (11 ̅ 0)[001] slip system was observed to be activated for grain 2, which has its Table 