Four different forms of carbon: activated carbon (AC) from human hair, AC from hemp fibers, a carbon fullerene extract consisting of C 60 and C 70 fullerene (CFEx) and Super-P carbon black were tested and compared as cathodes for non-aqueous aluminium-ion batteries (AIBs). These materials differ in their general structure, porosity and morphology. Fullerenes display a crystalline structure, whereas hemp fibers, Super-P and hair are amorphous in nature. Of all materials, AC obtained from hair recorded the highest specific capacity after 50 cycles at 103 mAh g -1 with a Coulombic efficiency of ∼90% at a current rate of 50 mA g -1 . Both hemp fibers and Super-P achieved their highest specific capacities at 56 mAh g -1 and 84 mAh g -1 respectively. CFEx recorded its highest capacity at 78 mAh g -1 and maintained it for 50 cycles. The cells were charged and discharged to 2.45 V and 0.2 V respectively. Non-aqueous aluminium-ion batteries (AIBs) use low-cost, abundant materials, a non-flammable electrolyte and provide a higher theoretical energy density than the prevalent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) Graphite has been repeatedly used as a cathode in AIBs --anions intercalate into graphitic layers during charge, and deintercalate during discharge as shown in Figure The battery system used in this study comprised a cathode, 99% pure Al foil as the anode, and a room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL) as electrolyte. Using a battery analyser, specific capacities and Coulombic efficiencies (CEs) of the cathodes were recorded at various current rates (cf. Figure Figures In Raman spectroscopy, an increased full-width at half maxima (FWHM) suggests an increase in the lattice defects and structural deformities. In Figure To further understand the durability of the CFEx batteries, and the unstable nature of hemp and Super-P, electron microscopy was used. Figure Figure Unfortunately, XRD patterns of hair cathodes were inconclusive (Figure Lastly, to verify whether hair was acting as a pseudocapacitive material that allowed dual charge-storage mechanism, cyclic voltammograms of all cathodes at a scan rate of 10 mV s -1 were compared. Figure In summary, AC derived from hair proved to be the best carbon-based cathode among all the tested materials, with a specific capacity of ∼100 mAh g -1 at a potential of 1.9 V and a CE of ∼90% together with a dual charge-storage mechanism in place. Hemp fibers and Super-P have a highly amorphous structure, and underwent structural degradation after a few cycles, resulting in low capacity values. The presence of functional groups on their surface further deteriorated its capacity retention. In CFEx, AlCl 4 -anions reversibly migrate in and out of the gaps in between the fullerenes. The XRD data suggests that the crystal slightly expands and contracts during charge/discharge. Moreover, fullerenes maintain their structural integrity and CE throughout the cycles. The high performance of the Al/hair battery can be attributed to the high porosity of the material combined with the presence of hetero-atoms on its surface, which enhanced its wettability. The cumulative effect of the non-Faradaic and Faradaic processes lead to the material achieving a higher capacity. The battery metrics of all cathodes tested in this work have been listed in Table Human hair was donated by a colleague from the Nann group. No ethics approval was required. The hair was initially cut into small pieces and washed thoroughly using isopropanol (IPA) to get rid of any chemical residue (from shampoo or conditioners). The samples were then dried at 100 • C for 12 hours. The dried hair was then burnt in Ar atmosphere at 300 • C for 90 minutes. The pre-carbonized sample was then mixed with NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich) in a mass ratio of 1:2. The sample was later carbonized at 750 • C for 3 hours in presence of Ar. The product obtained was repeatedly washed with hot de-ionised water to remove any traces of sodium from the sample, which was then dried at 80 • C for 6 hours to obtain the final product. In this reaction, NaOH was reduced to free metal, Na. These atoms in turn expanded the carbon matrix after intercalating into the carbon structure. Increased temperature (750 • C) forced the atoms out of the carbon matrix, thus creating micropores. Oxidation of carbon from oxygen atoms of the hydroxide group formed carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), providing routes for channeling the sodium atoms into the internal structure, resulting in a well-connected porous structure The material was provided by Carbon Valley and used as received. C 60 / C 70 , approx. 85% C 60 , 14% C 70 , and 1% higher fullerenes, was purchased from SES research and used as received. Super-P conductive carbon, 99+% metals basis was purchased from Alfa Aesar and used as received A slurry was prepared by mixing the active material (85% by wt.), 9% binder (PVDF, MTI Corp.) and 6% Super-P conductive carbon (99+% metals basis, Alfa Aesar) in N-methyl pyrrolidone NMP (anhydrous, 99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich). To form the Super-P slurry, 94% (by weight) of Super-P (active material) and 6% (by weight) of the binder were mixed together in the solvent. The slurries were then doctor-bladed onto molybdenum foil, which was used as the current collector (thickness 0.1 mm, MTI Corp.). The coated sheets were dried in a vacuum oven at 120 • C for 12 hours to adhere the slurry on the substrate and fully evaporate the solvent. The specific loading of the slurry material ranged from 11-12 mg cm -2 on each cathode. Anhydrous AlCl 3 (Sigma-Aldrich) and EMImCl (97%, Sigma-Aldrich) were mixed in a molar ratio of 1.3:1, at room temperature. EMImCl was baked in vacuum for 24 hours at 100 • C to remove residual moisture. Small aliquots of AlCl 3 was added to EMImCl after every few minutes. The ionic liquid was stirred for 2-3 hours until a clear brown liquid was obtained. Since the electrolyte is hygroscopic in nature, it was prepared in a N 2 -filled glove box with <0.1 ppm H 2 O/ O 2 . PEEK (polyether ether ketone) cells were used for electrochemical measurements. Molybdenum rods were used as current collectors. It was seen previously that steel rods reacted with the electrolyte forming a green-colored substance on the cathode. The slurry coated on molybdenum foil was used as the cathode and placed at bottom of the cell. Two glass microfibers (Grade GF/D, Whatman) were used as separators. 80μl of the electrolyte was used to wet the separator. Al foil (thickness 0.1 mm, 99%, GoodFellow) used as an anode and placed on top of the separator. It was assembled in a N 2 -filled glove box. The cell was then sealed and wrapped with a paraffin film to avoid any air or moisture contact. Since this was a two-electrode setup, Al foil was used as both counter and reference electrode. The cell was taken out of the glove box and electrochemical measurements were performed. shows various binding energies for the oxygen 1s orbital. In addition to enhancing the wettability of a material 