Ultraviolet microdisk lasers are integrated monolithically into photonic circuits using a III-nitride on silicon platform with gallium nitride (GaN) as the main waveguiding layer. The photonic circuits consist of a microdisk and a pulley waveguide terminated by outcoupling gratings. We measure quality factors up to 3500 under continuous-wave excitation. Lasing is observed from 374 nm to 399 nm under pulsed excitation, achieving low threshold energies of 0.14 mJ/cm 2 per pulse (threshold peak powers of 35 kW/cm 2 ). A large peak to background dynamic of around 200 is observed at the out-coupling grating for small gaps of 50 nm between the disk and waveguide. These devices operate at the limit of what can be achieved with GaN in terms of operation wavelength. http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/ao.XX.XXXXXX In recent years, there has been a significant interest in ultraviolet (UV) emitters, such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) and optically pumped lasers for a variety of applications including germicidal sterilization and gas sensing III-nitride microcavity photonics is a very active field of research Meanwhile, there have been several reports of optically pumped active microlaser photonic circuits in the blue using IIInitrides In this Letter, we report on the demonstration of active microlaser photonic circuits in the UV consisting of a microdisk, a pulley waveguide, and out-coupling gratings terminating the waveguide. The investigated sample was grown by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) on silicon (111). First, a 220 nm AlN buffer layer was grown, followed by 300 nm of GaN. Then the active region containing 5 pairs of 2 nm In x Ga 1-x N/ 9 nm GaN quantum wells (QWs) (nominal indium composition x = 0.1) was grown, followed by a 20 nm GaN cap layer. The total thickness is around 600 nm. We fabricated microdisk photonic circuits using a process similar to the one described in Refs. We can estimate the effective propagation losses of the microdisk using with λ 0 the resonance wavelength, FSR the free spectral range, and r the radius of the disk. We obtain α = 0.08 dB/μm when extrapolating at λ 0 = 380 nm, FSR = 4 nm, Q int = 3500, and r = 1.5 μm, which is two orders of magnitude larger than reported by In analogy to Ref. Lasing is observed at RT under pulsed optical conditions using a laser at 355 nm with 7 kHz repetition rate and 4 ns pulse width. Fig. The lasing modes are rather broad. The mode at 381.2 nm at 2.7E th has a full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of 1 nm. Generally under pulsed pumping, linewidths are broader than under CW pumping since the carrier density changes strongly in the microlaser during one pulse (here 4 ns). We do not observe linewidth narrowing near the threshold, since the modes are not visible below threshold due to the limited signal to noise ratio under these low duty-cycle conditions. Figs. The first-order radial WGMs are visible for both 50 nm and 90 nm gaps (Fig. The threshold peak powers, reported here, for pulsed IIInitride microdisk lasers are lower than what we have found in literature. Simeonov et al. reported 166 kW/cm 2 at 409 nm It is important to take into account that we are very close to the band gap of GaN (365 nm) in this spectral range (374 -399 nm). Our waveguides consist to 58% of GaN and to 42% of AlN with 99% of the TE 0 and 94% of the TE 1 modes confined in the GaN layer. Consequently, there is a non-zero absorption loss that needs to be considered. The precise value of below band gap GaN absorption varies from one growth reactor to another but could be in the range of 1000 cm -1 at 380 nm In conclusion, we have demonstrated active microlaser photonic circuits in the UV-A spectral range using the III-nitride on silicon platform, which is very promising for both active and passive photonic components for next generation photonic integration. Our devices operate at the limit of what can be achieved using GaN as the waveguiding layer. The wavelength can be further reduced by switching from InGaN/GaN to Al x Ga 1-x N/Al y Ga 1-y N (y > x) QWs and the absorption losses can be reduced by using AlN instead of GaN/AlN for the waveguide. Possible applications of such devices could be for gas sensing 