The nature of the interaction between magnetism and topology in magnetic topological semimetals remains mysterious, but may be expected to lead to a variety of novel physics. We present ab initio band calculations, electrical transport and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements on the magnetic semimetal EuAs3, demonstrating a magnetism-induced topological transition from a topological nodal-line semimetal in the paramagnetic or the spin-polarized state to a topological massive Dirac metal in the antiferromagnetic (AFM) ground state at low temperature, featuring a pair of massive Dirac points, inverted bands and topological surface states on the (010) surface. Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations in the AFM state identify nonzero Berry phase and a negative longitudinal magnetoresistance (n-LMR) induced by the chiral anomaly, confirming the topological nature predicted by band calculations. When magnetic moments are fully polarized by an external magnetic field, an unsaturated and extremely large magnetoresistance (XMR) of ∼ 2×10 5 % at 1.8 K and 28.3 T is observed, likely arising from topological protection. Consistent with band calculations for the spin-polarized state, four new bands in quantum oscillations different from those in the AFM state are discerned, of which two are topologically protected. Nodal-line structures at the Y point in the Brillouin zone (BZ) are proposed in both the spin-polarized and paramagnetic states, and the latter is proven by ARPES. Moreover, a temperature-induced Lifshitz transition accompanied by the emergence of a new band below 3 K is revealed. These results indicate that magnetic EuAs3 provides a rich platform to explore exotic physics arising from the interaction of magnetism with topology. Topological semimetals (TSMs) including Dirac, Weyl, nodal-line, and triple-point semimetals, can be divided into two categories-non-magnetic and magnetic TSMs-depending on whether magnetism is involved In this paper, we demonstrate a magnetism-induced topological transition from a TNL semimetal in the paramagnetic or the spin-polarized state to a topological massive Dirac (TMD) metal in the AFM ground state. First, we explore the band structure in the AFM ground state through band calculations and transport measurements, demonstrating that EuAs 3 is a magnetic TMD metal. Second, SdH oscillations and band calculations in the spin-polarized state are displayed, yielding a proposal that EuAs 3 is a TNL semimetal with an XMR of ∼ 2 × 10 5 % at 1.8 K and 28.3 T. Third, our ARPES results in the paramagnetic state verify the nodal-line structure as predicted by band calculations. Ultimately, the origin of the XMR and a temperature-induced Lifshitz transition are revealed. A. Band claculations for the AFM state EuAs 3 crystallizes in a monoclinic structure (space group C2/m, No. 12), and the magnetic moments of Eu 2+ are oriented parallel and antiparallel to the monoclinic b axis Projected band structure analysis shows that the lowenergy states near the Fermi level are dominated by As-4p states (Fig. where ω c = eB/m * is the cyclotron frequency and T D is the Dingle temperature. is the Onsager phase factor, and φ B is a geometrical phase known as the Berry phase. For a topological system with peculiar electron state degeneracy and intraband coupling, a π Berry phase will be observed. 2πδ is an additional phase shift resulting from the curvature of the Fermi surface in the third dimension, where δ varies from 0 to ±1/8 for a quasi-2D cylindrical Fermi surface and a corrugated 3D Fermi surface, respectively By analyzing the oscillatory component (inset to Fig. In TSMs, in addition to nonzero Berry phase, the n-LMR induced by the chiral anomaly can also serve as a smoking gun for nontrivial topology The n-LMR induced by the chiral anomaly in TSMs can be analyzed through the Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) chiral anomaly equation σ(B) = (1+C w B 2 )(σ 0 +a √ B)+ σ N , where σ 0 , C w and σ N = 1/(ρ 0 + AB 2 ) denote the conductivity at zero field, a temperature-dependent positive parameter originating from the chiral anomaly, and the conventional nonlinear band contribution around the Fermi energy, respectively A. Electrical transport measurements in the spin-polarized state We now turn to the exploration of topology in the spinpolarized state, where in Fig. To better reveal the Fermi surface anisotropy and topology of EuAs 3 , angle-dependent MR measurements have been performed at 1.8 K, in the experimental geometry shown in the inset to Fig. Since our band structure calculations identify nodal loops at Y and our quantum oscillation data indicate nontrivial band topology, we also directly investigated the band structure with ARPES. Momentum analysis in this technique is incompatible with magnetic field, so we investigated the paramagnetic rather than the fieldpolarized state; however, as shown in more detail in supplementary Figs. S3 and S4, a closed nodal loop persists at the Y point in the paramagnetic state. In order to visualize the nodal loop in EuAs 3 , the photon energy dependence of the electronic structure along the k y direction was investigated at 18 K within the vertical plane of the (010) cleaved surface, as sketched in Fig. The verification of the nodal-line structure in the paramagnetic state serves as strong evidence for the existence of nodal-line structure in the spin-polarized state, which has closely similar but spin-split band structure, but the similarities may not end there. Very recently, lifted degeneracy of the Bloch bands was observed in the paramagnetic phase of EuCd 2 As 2 , producing a spin-fluctuationinduced Weyl semimetal state It is clear from our transport measurements that the electronic structure in the antiferromagnetically ordered state is very different from that found in the fieldpolarized or paramagnetic states. This is a consequence of the doubling of the unit cell due to antiferromagnetic order and the coupling of this magnetic order to the electronic structure, and is well described by our band calculations. However, we also find evidence for an additional Lifshitz transition within the antiferromagnetic phase. Figure According to the conventional charge-carrier compensation picture for XMR, the ratio n h /n e should be unity In summary, combining band calculations, electrical transport and ARPES measurements on the magnetic compound EuAs 3 , we report a magnetism-induced topological transition from a TNL semimetal in the paramagnetic or the spin-polarized state to a topological massive Dirac metal in the AFM ground state. The paramagnetic and spin-polarized states differ by the splitting of a topological nodal line associated with the spin-splitting of the band structure. An XMR of ∼ 2×10 5 % and an asyet-unexplained temperature-induced Lifshitz transition below 3 K have also been revealed. These results indicate that magnetic EuAs 3 could serve as a unique platform to explore exotic physics at the interface of magnetism and topology. mbar, and data were recorded by a Scienta R4000 analyzer with the sample at 18 K. The energy and momentum resolution were 10 meV and 0.2 • . First-principles calculations were carried out within the framework of the projector augmented wave (PAW) method To check the temperature-induced Lifshitz transition, we analyze the oscillatory component (∆ρ xy ) (displayed in the inset to Fig. To check whether ferromagnetic correlations exist in the paramagnetic state, the Curie-Weiss temperature T CW is extracted by fitting the temperature dependence of the inverse susceptibility to the Curie-Weiss law, as shown in Fig. To exclude the open-orbit effect which may also induce the XMR in EuAs 3 , we performed the MR measurements with electric current I applied along different crystallographic axis, as shown in Fig. According to the open-orbit effect, the unsaturated XMR is only observed for current along the open orbits, which means that changing the current direction will lead to a saturated MR 