For measurements designed to accurately determine layer thickness, there is a natural trade-off between sensitivity to optical thickness and lateral resolution due to the angular ray distribution required for a focused beam. We demonstrate a near-field imaging approach that enables both sub-wavelength lateral resolution and optical thickness sensitivity. We illuminate a sample in a total internal reflection geometry, with a photo-activated spatial modulator in the near-field, which allows optical thickness images to be computationally reconstructed in a few seconds. We demonstrate our approach at 140 GHz (wavelength 2.15 mm), where images are normally severely limited in spatial resolution, and demonstrate mapping of optical thickness variation in inhomogeneous biological tissues. Long wavelength measurements such as Terahertz (THz) time domain spectroscopy are often used as a route to film thickness determination of visibly opaque materials, either using time of flight approaches Malleable and inhomogeneous materials, such as biological tissues, are particularly difficult to characterise by conventional means Emerging computational imaging techniques offer a potential way forward by redefining our understanding of how images can be recorded. Such systems do not form an image directly, but offload aspects of the image formation process to a computer. 'Single-pixel' computational imaging systems circumvent the need for detector arrays, and boost the magnitude of near-field measurements by recording signals from many locations at once. These systems encode spatial information in the temporal dimension, enabling operation at wavelengths where multi-pixel sensors are challenging to fabricate, prohibitively expensive, or simply do not exist In this work we demonstrate a new form of millimetre-wave computational imaging which enables the determination of overlayer optical thickness with significantly sub-wavelength precision, while also retaining sub-wavelength lateral resolution. We refer to our approach as a type of total internal reflection (TIR) imaging: in the absence of sample-induced loss we anticipate perfect reflection of the illuminating beam, while lossy samples reduce reflection in a spatially varying way, producing sample dependent image contrast. Using mm-wave radiation in a TIR geometry, rather than optical frequencies as previously studied Critical to the performance of our imaging system is the mm-wave spatial modulator, and we describe in detail how this has been tuned for use at mm-wavelengths. This optimisation balances the resolution, frame-rate and contrast of the modulator. Due to the TIR geometry, the resulting modulator is highly efficient, circumventing the requirement for high intensity femtosecond-pulse optical pump beams Our TIR imaging system is based on all-optical modulation (known as photo-modulation), where a visible or near-IR light source is used to change the transparency of a photo-active medium to low frequency radiation. This approach is often chosen because it is relatively simple to implement, can be very fast and can operate over a broad range of mm-wave and THz frequencies Figure Before photo-activation, the silicon wafer is largely transparent to mm-wave radiation. When mm-waves are incident at an angle greater than the critical angle, they are totally internally reflected from the silicon-air interface. Upon illumination of the silicon wafer with visible light, electron-hole pair photo-excitation increases the mm-wave absorption and so reduces mm-wave reflection. Therefore, by projecting optical binary intensity patterns at normal incidence onto the silicon wafer using light from a LED pump beam (Thorlabs SOLIS, wavelength 623 ± 5 nm, power 4.7 W) patterned with a digital micro-mirror device (DMD, Vialux), we are able to spatially control which areas of the modulator are more reflective to mm-wave radiation. In this way, the pattern in the optical pump beam is dynamically imprinted onto the mm-wave field bathing the sample, enabling single-pixel imaging to be performed. The projected optical binary patterns are drawn from the Hadamard basis. This basis yields reconstructed images with significantly higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) compared to simple raster scanning of a transparent (or absorbing) window, and the SNR is uniformly distributed over the reconstructed image as the set is orthogonal The penetration length of the evanescent field in air, L (eqn. (S1) in the supplementary material), depends on both the incident angle of the mm-wave beam and its frequency, as shown in Fig. When a layer of material is placed on top of the silicon wafer, the intensity of the mm-wave beam reflected back into the detector depends upon both the complex refractive index and thickness of the layer. If the refractive index of the material is less than that of the prism, one expects evanescent fields at the silicon-sample boundary that are sensitive to the properties of the sample To study these effects we image a step in a polymer sample of known height and permittivity (3.5 + 0.53i), and compare the image to the modulation predicted using the transfer matrix approach, as described in reference We now demonstrate imaging of inhomogeneous biological tissues using our mm-wave TIR imaging system. The sample is a 750 ± 250 μm thick piece of sliced porcine tissue, which exhibits strong spatial variation in properties, varying from fatty to protein rich regions. While one can expect a high degree of variation in the complex permittivities of biological tissues (see section 4.4 of the supplementary material) Our model indicates that materials with high losses, such as protein, do not exhibit strong variation in δr as sample thickness changes, due to the strong absorption of the mm-wave beam. We show the dependency of reflection on incident angle for a single thickness of protein tissue (700 μm, blue plot) in Fig. In Figs. The low absorption of fat also allows us to image objects behind layers of fatty tissue. This is shown experimentally in section 4.6 of the supplementary material, and demonstrates imaging through visibly opaque fatty tissues to yield information on the structure of a sample that would not otherwise be known. There are several inter-related factors that determine the performance of our TIR computational imaging system. Conventional diffraction limited imaging systems can reach resolutions of ∼ λ/2NA, where NA is the numerical aperture defined by the distribution of incident rays. To achieve high depth sensitivity one requires illumination with near-collimated mm-waves: our system has a mm-wave NA = 0.06, similar to NAs used in both time of flight systems There is also scope to achieve lateral resolutions far below our experimental limit by reducing the effective carrier lifetime of the modulator There are other parameters we can tune to ensure that MD is maximised without compromising on the speed and resolution of imaging -namely the incident angle, wafer thickness and frequency. In Fig. It is also clear from Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first computational imaging system in a total internal reflection geometry. This unique combination allows images of sample structure to be reconstructed with sub-wavelength lateral resolution and sub-wavelength optical depth sensitivity, which is not possible with other techniques The penetration depth of the illuminating field is dependent on both incident angle and mm-wave frequency, pointing to an intriguing avenue for future development of the system: by capturing several images at a range of incident angles and frequencies, there is potential to decouple material parameters from layer thickness, and so independently recover these sample properties simultaneously. Section 4.5 of the supplementary material details modelling that demonstrates this principle for some simple cases. In the future it may be possible to extend this approach to recover TIR-based tomographic images of more complex samples that exhibit strong inhomogeneity in all three dimensions. Together, we believe these features point towards many potential applications of mm-wave computational TIR imaging for interrogation of the structure of optically opaque samples in, for example, the medical, art conservation and food industries.