Next generation wound care technology capable of diagnosing wound parameters, promoting healthy cell growth and reducing pathogenic infections noninvasively would provide patients with an improved standard of care and an accelerated wound repair mechanism. Temperature is one of the indicating biomarkers specific to chronic wounds. This work reports a hybrid, multifunctional optical material platform -nanodiamond-silk membranes as bioinspired dressings capable of temperature sensing and wound healing. The hybrid structure was fabricated through electrospinning and formed 3D sub-micron fibrous membranes with high porosity. The silk fibres are capable of compensating for the lack of extracellular matrix at the wound site, supporting the wound healing process. The negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (NV -) color centres in nanodiamonds (NDs) exhibit optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) properties and act as fluorescent nanoscale thermometers, capable of sensing temperature variations associated to the presence of infection or inflammation in a wound, without physically removing the dressing. Our results show that the presence of NDs in the hybrid ND-silk membranes improve the thermal stability of silk fibres. The NV -color centres in NDs embedded in silk fibres exhibit well-retained fluorescent and ODMR properties. Using the NV -centres as fluorescent nanoscale thermometers, we achieved temperature sensing at a range of temperatures, including the biologically relevant temperature window, on cellcultured ND-silk membranes. An enhancement in the temperature sensitivity of the NV -centres was observed for the hybrid materials. The hybrid membranes were further tested in vivo in a murine wound healing model and demonstrated biocompatibility and equivalent wound closure rates as the control wounds. Additionally, the hybrid ND-silk membranes showed selective antifouling and biocidal propensity toward Gram-negative Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli, while no effect was observed on Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus. Sample Peak Position (eV) Conc. (%) ND-Silk (before) C-N 286.25 38.23 C=O 287.87 23.2 C-C (sp 3 ) 285.72 15.06 C-C (sp 2 ) / C-H 284.7 23.51 ND-Silk (after) C-N 286.14 24. A biodegradable dressing capable of both wound healing and monitoring represents a next level multifunctional platform for improved current wound care technologies. Electrospinning of polymers generates a 2D or 3D structure of nano and sub-micron sized fibres, in the form of membranes, with high porosity and high surface area, mimicking the extracellular matrix needed for healing. These fibrous membranes are highly suitable as wound dressings to protect the wound from bacteria while keeping the flow of oxygen and nutrients through them However, the human body can be extremely selective regarding implants, and in many cases will quickly reject or react poorly to most polymers used as electrospun membranes While it is important to keep the wound protected during healing, the diagnosis of any infection and inflammation are equally crucial. Traditional methods involve a check for the presence of redness, heat detected by palpation and swelling Realizing a new technology that can aid clinicians to detect infections non-invasively would be beneficial and cost effective without the painful procedure of dressing removal. A chronically infected wound has a specific elevated thermal gradient range of +4 oC to 5 oC, compared to the normal tissue Electrospinning of silk generated sub-micron thick fibres with high porosity essential for breathable wound dressings. The fluorescent and spin properties of the NV -centre in NDs allow high-precision microscopic thermometry for wound sensing. Silk enables the attachment and growth of healthy cells inside the scaffold, while promoting wound healing. In Section 2.1, we introduce the fabrication of hybrid ND-silk membranes. All samples produced for this work contained ~85% silk-fibroin and 15% polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer by weight. Since the PEO concentration is the same for all the samples, we will refer to them as silk only (without NDs) and ND-silk (with NDs) membranes instead of silk-PEO blend membranes in the rest of the manuscript. Moreover, regenerated silk fibroin is stated as silk in the rest of the manuscript. We have discussed the structural and fluorescence properties as well as thermal stability of ND-silk membranes relative to the silk only membranes (without NDs) in Sections 2.2 and 2.3. We demonstrate the application of ND-silk hybrid membranes for temperature sensing in an in vitro assay in Section 2.4. The in vivo compatibility of the ND-silk hybrid membranes is presented in a murine model of wound healing in Section 2.5. Finally, the antibacterial resistance and bactericidal efficiency of the membranes against common pathogenic bacteria are reported in Section 2.6. Our results indicate a cost-effective combination of materials that can aid clinicians to detect infections remotely without the painful procedure of dressing removal. Regenerated silk fibroin was extracted from Bombyx mori silk cocoons, and the protein purification was performed using the molecular cut off method as reported in literature To compare the properties of ND-silk hybrid membranes with the silk only samples, we produced two different mixtures by PEO to (i) silk only and with (ii) 0.5 mg/mL NDs and silk. The schematic of the setup of the electrospinning process is illustrated in Figure An X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the silk and ND-silk membranes was performed to estimate the surface composition of the membranes before and after methanol treatment step. The XPS spectra with C, N, and O peaks is shown in Figure The peak positions in the XPS data (Figure The XPS spectroscopy revealed that both silk and ND-silk membranes demonstrated similar surface composition. The relative increase in sp 2 /C-H bonding at the surface after the treatment indicates some extra methanol residues. Other than that, no additional impurities were found, and the methanol treatment contributes to enhancing PEO content on the surface. Table The morphology of the electrospun membranes as well as their fluorescence properties, were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal fluorescence microscopy as demonstrated in Figure The addition of NDs had no noticeable difference in the fibre dimeter or membrane pore size, as indicated by SEM images. However, the confocal microscopic images of Figure We performed temperature sensing with the hybrid ND-silk materials in an in vitro assay. Human skin keratinocytes (HaCaT) were grown on the surface of the ND-silk membranes (on glass coverslips) for 48 hours. The growth of healthy cells on the surface of the ND-silk membranes indicates the in vitro compatibility and potential of the membranes for cell regeneration, as indicated in Figure The higher dD/dT value presented of NV -centre in hybrid membrane is an added benefit as it enables more pronounced frequency shift in the detected fluorescence spectrum, making temperature testing and tracking easier for biological measurements. Our hypothesis on the enhanced dD/dT value is that by changing the surrounding temperature, silk will spatially interfere with the diamond lattice of the embedded NDs, increasing the surface pressure. This surface pressure, induced by movement of silk fibres during heating, possibly affects the spin properties of nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond We determined the temperature sensitivity in our hybrid ND-silk membrane by ƞ≈∆ν/C�I PL •(ddD/dddd) -1 21 , where ∆ν is the linewidth of ODMR transition, C is the optical contrast of ODMR dip, and IPL is the NV -fluorescence emission rate, ddD/dddd is the temperature dependence of zero field splitting. As a result, the experimental data shown in Figure Prior to wound testing, the thermal properties of the hybrid ND-silk hybrid membranes were investigated to examine their thermal stability. This was performed using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) as presented in Figure We performed the DSC analysis to check the thermal stability of silk and ND-silk membranes. The silk sample (red) was thermally stable up to 45 oC while ND-silk hybrid (dotted blue) was stable in the whole biologically relevant window of 20-50 °C as shown in the first heating cycle of Figure Silk and ND-silk hybrid membranes were tested in an established murine model of wound healing Laser Doppler imaging was used to determine wound blood flow perfusion, a marker of wound angiogenesis that is essential for healing. Overall, no differences were observed in wound blood flow perfusion between silk or ND-silk membrane treated wounds, when compared to their respective PBS controls as indicated by Figure The wound cellular infiltrate in the granulation site of the wounds was measured using the histological sections represented in Figure To assess the antibacterial properties of the silk and ND-silk hybrid scaffolds, we fabricated electrospun silk fibroin fibres containing low (0.25 mg/mL) and high (0.5 mg/mL) concentrations of NDs. The two ND-silk membranes are denoted as ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk, respectively. The results are shown in Figure The antibacterial properties of the silk membranes with and without NDs were tested against three pathogenic bacteria of clinical relevance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. These bacteria represent the two major prokaryotic taxa, Gram-negative and Gram-positive, respectively, and are major players in skin wound infections In contrast, S. aureus cells appeared to exhibit a healthy morphology and even displayed 3dimensional growth (Figure For CLSM, the fluorescence labelling of bacteria with propidium iodide and Syto 9 ® revealed nonviable bacteria by a red fluorescent signal and healthy, viable bacteria by a green fluorescent signal as shown in Figure In sharp contrast to the extremely high antibacterial efficiency towards Gram-negative bacteria, the silk and ND-silk hybrid membranes did not display antibacterial activity towards Gram-positive S. aureus bacteria, as exhibited in Figure Although Staphylococcus (Gram-Positive bacteria) are responsible for 40-60 % of skin wound infections, however, P. aeruginosa are alarmingly causing multi-drug resistant infections specially in hospital settings In conclusion, the current work reports hybrid ND-silk membranes as multifunctional wound dressings capable of in situ temperature monitoring (as a vital wound biomarker), healthy cell growth and selective antibacterial resistance while providing wound closure and healing. Electrospinning yielded highly porous hybrid ND embedded silk membranes. The NDs were able to fluoresce brightly inside silk fibres and added thermal stability to the silk. The in vitro test revealed that the surface of the hybrid membranes enables eukaryotic cells attachment and promote the growth of healthy cell. Inside silk fibres, the NV -centre in NDs provided a greater shift in the zero field splitting 120±20 kHz/K as compared to NDs. This increased frequency shift will lead to enhanced temperature resolution and sensitivity for biological measurements. When applied to an in vivo model of wound healing, the NDsilk hybrid membranes enabled wound healing and the presence of NDs as foreign agents did not cause any adverse effects on wound healing and closure. Moreover, the addition of NDs elongated the biodegradation of silk by 3-4 days. Both silk only and ND-silk membranes were found to be highly biocidal towards major skin wound infecting bacteria, P. aeruginosa and E. coli, (~91 % non-viable cells on silk-only membranes and ~97% non-viable cells on ND-silk membranes). However, the antibacterial efficacy towards S. aureus bacteria was negligible. In conclusion, hybrid ND-silk can be used as a multifunctional platform for biosensing as well as provide a network of fibres that supports a healthy wound healing process. A variety of other sensing and therapeutic agents can be embedded in the membranes for future research for a therapeutic closed loop system with the potential to provide patients with an improved wound treatment alternative. These smart membranes have a number of advantages over the visual assessment approach that is currently used in clinical practice. Firstly, continual measurement of wound temperature is an accurate way to monitor wound quality, compared to visual assessments that can be highly subjective. Secondly, smart membranes also allow for the detection of early signs of wound inflammation and infection. The advantage of early detection is that wound therapies will be more effective. Furthermore, this can be done without the need to remove the dressing and will continually inform wound care specialists about the need to change dressings earlier or later, more frequently or less frequently. Further work and progresses in fibre optics will allow a successful NDsilk wound monitoring device that will have strong potential in chronic wound diagnosis and treatment. 4.1Materials: Hydroxylated 100 nm NDs irradiated with NV -centre were obtained from ADAMAS as received. . mori silk fibroin solution was prepared according to the reported method [4]. Silk/PEO blends in water were prepared. A 5 w/v% PEO (900,000 g/mol) solution was mixed with 6.5 w/v% silk solution and 0.05-0.1 w/v% NDs. The weight per volume ratio for dry silk fibroin to PEO in the mixture was 6.5:1. To compare the properties of ND-silk hybrid membranes with the silk only samples, we produced two different mixtures by adding 300 μL (13% of the total weight) of PEO in each of (i) 1.5 mL (87% of the total weight) silk with 0.5 mg/mL concentration of NDs and (ii) 1.5 mL silk only. The blended solution was slowly stirred overnight at 4 °C to obtain a homogenous solution. The solutions are then subjected to electrospinning for the formation of silk only and ND-silk hybrid membranes. The silk and PEO blends with or without NDs were transferred to 5 ml syringes. The syringe was connected to an 18-gauge needle and mounted on a motor-controlled syringe pump inside a protected chamber at 25 °C. A high positive voltage was applied to the needle through an alligator clip and a collection surface was placed at 12 cm from the tip of the needle. A conductive aluminium collection plate was used which was electrically grounded. Each of the three mixtures silk, ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk were pumped out of the needle with a flow rate of 0.03 mL/min. An electric potential of 12 kV was applied between the needle and the collection plate to obtain a stable jet. The charged jet travels towards the collection plate and deposits in the form of fibrous membranes. The fibres were collected until a desired thickness of ~ 300 μm was achieved. The membranes deposited on glass cover slips were then left in a 90 v/v% methanol/water solvent for 10 min to induce crystallization of β-sheets, resulting in water insoluble membranes. The membranes were finally washed with Milli-Q water and dried in a fume hood for further characterization. The presence of NDs inside the cell-cultured silk-ND membranes was optically examined via a custom-built scanning fluorescence confocal microscope. A 100× air objective (NA = 0.9) was used to deliver continuous-wave 532 nm laser (Laser Quantum, gem 532) to illuminate the sample. Fluorescence generated from silk embedded NV -centres was collected through a 532 nm dichroic mirror and a 532 nm notch filter to separate the NV fluorescence and the excitation laser, and then coupled into a multimode fibre beam splitter for signal readouts. The collected fluorescence signal was detected by avalanche photo diode (APD, SPCM -AQRH -14) for imaging and temperature sensing. The spectral analysis was implemented through a commercial spectrometer (Princeton Instruments, SpectraPro with a PIXIS CCD camera) Human skin keratinocyte (HaCaT) cell line was used. Cells were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Media (DMEM), supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were grown at 37 °C, in a humidified atmosphere of 95% relative humidity and 5% CO2. For cell viability studies, 1 x 10 5 cells/well were seeded on to the electrospun membranes on glass cover slips contained in 6 well plates. Bare cover slips, without any silk were used as controls. Cells were allowed to grow for 48 h and then treated with a final concentration of 0.05mg/mL of resazurin solution in dye-free DMEM and incubated at 37 °C for 15 minutes. The fluorescence was then measured on a microplate reader by exciting at a wavelength of 560 nm and collecting the emission at 590 nm. For confocal imaging, the cells were grown at the same seeding density, followed by fixing in 4% paraformaldehyde solution in phosphate buffered saline for 10 minutes. The Thermo ScientificTM Verios G4 SEM was used at an accelerating voltage of 3 kV to perform the structural analysis of the membranes. Prior to scanning, the samples were sputter coated with ~5 nm Pt layer. DSC was performed on about 5 mg of material in an open crucible using a TA2920 calorimeter (TA Instrument) under flushing nitrogen (100 ml/min) in the range 20-250 °C. Heating the samples for DSC from 20.00°C to 250.00°C was performed at 10.00°C/min 4.8 In vivo implantation in wound: All animal care and handling procedures were performed in accordance with the Australian Code for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes (2013), as approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), Australia. The C57BL6 mice were bred in-house at the SAHMRI Bio-resources animal facility, fed on a chow diet and water provided ad libitum. The biocompatibility of the silk and silk-nanodiamond scaffolds on wound healing were tested on 8-10-week-old mice, using a previously described murine model of wound healing 4.9 Antibacterial properties: Bacterial suspensions of Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 9721, Escherichia coli ATCC 11775 and Staphylococcus aureus CIP 68.5 T with an optical density (OD600) of 0.1 in nutrient broth (Oxoid) were made up by diluting 1 loopful of freshly subcultured bacteria (grown overnight on nutrient agar from stock at 37 °C). Silk and silk-ND membrane samples were cut to size (~1×1 cm 2 ) and incubated in 1 mL (enough to submerge the samples) of bacterial suspension in sterile 24-well plates for 18 h at 25 °C in dark and static conditions. Samples were then washed gently with distilled water, stained with LIVE/DEAD Baclight containing a mixture of Syto 9 ® and propidium iodide for 30 min and viewed under confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) using an Olympus FV3000 instrument. Syto 9 ® and propidium iodide are membrane permeable and nonmembrane permeable, respectively, nucleic acid stains that differentiate between viable (green) and non-viable (red) cells. Counts of live and dead cells were quantified using Matlab software, CellC. SEM was performed to assess bacterial cell attachment and morphology on silk and silk-ND membranes. Samples were incubated with bacterial suspensions of P. aeruginosa, E. coli and S. aureus, as above. Samples were washed briefly with MilliQ H2O and fixed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde for 30 min before dehydrating in an ethanol series of 30, 50, 70, 90, 95 and 100% concentration for 10 min each. Finally, the samples were sputtered with gold and imaged using the SEM capabilities of a Raith150 Two machine (Raith, GmbH). The setup used for electrospinning hybrid ND-silk membranes is shown in Figure Human skin keratinocytes (HaCaT) were grown on the surface of the membranes for 48 hours before testing viability using resazurin assay. Bare coverslips with no silk were used as the controls. The SEM results in Figure Additionally, cell viability (Figure This suggests that silk provides a good matrix for wound dressing applications. While other polymers such as poly-capralactone (PCL) fibres may offer low cytotoxicity The effect of increasing laser power on the zero-field splitting D was measured, as presented in Figure 