We report detection and coherent control of a single proton nuclear spin using an electronic spin of the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond as a quantum sensor. In addition to determining the NV-proton hyperfine parameters by employing multipulse sequences, we polarize and coherently rotate the single proton spin, and detect an induced free precession. Observation of free induction decays is an essential ingredient for high resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance, and the present work extends it to the atomic scale. We also discuss the origin of the proton as incorporation during chemical vapor deposition growth, which provides an opportunity to use protons in diamond as built-in quantum memories coupled with the NV center. Hydrogen 1 H atoms are ubiquitous in organic compounds and human body. Proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), has established itself as an essential tool for molecular structure analysis and clinical diagnosis. Reducing the sample volume down to the atomic scale is tantalizing technological advance that potentially innovates these fields. A leading candidate to achieve this feat, currently under intensive research, is a quantum sensor based on a single nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond. The diamond sample we examined is a thin layer of diamond CVD-grown on a type-IIa (100) single crystal diamond prepared by the high pressure-high temperature (HPHT) process. The isotopic composition of the substrate is natural abundance ( 12 C : 13 C = 98.9% : 1.1%) a) Electronic mail: kitoh@appi.keio.ac.jp b) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: eisuke.abe@riken.jp with trace amount of nitrogen (< 0.1 ppm). Our measurement setup is a homebuilt confocal microscope using a 515-nm excitation laser and a single-photon counting module for optically initializing and detecting the electronic spin of the NV center. In what follows, we first present a series of data obtained from one particular NV center [labeled as NV1. see the inset of Fig. NMR spectra were recorded by multipulse sequences that periodically invert the NV spin by applying microwave π pulses every τ seconds. More specifically, we applied XY16-N sequences, in which the XY16 sequence, given by τ /2-X-τ -Y-τ -X-τ -Y-τ -Y-τ -X-τ -Y-τ -X-τ -X-τ -Ȳ-τ -X-τ -Ȳ-τ -Ȳ-τ -X-τ -Ȳ-τ -X-τ /2, is repeated N /16 times. The NV-proton coherent coupling can be verified by increasing the number of pulses N (up to 656), with τ . By detecting the proton spin stroboscopically only at the end of the N -pulse sequences, the proton spin is seen to rotate about the A ⊥ axis, when B 0 ≫ A ,⊥ (2π/γ H ). Crucially, the quantum nature of the coupling is evident from the data in which P 0,X goes well below 0.5. In Fig. , where τ pol is the interpluse delay. PolX is PolY in the reverse order, and PolY and PolX have an opposite effect on the sign of the polarization transfer. The degree of polarization transfer can be evaluated quantitatively by the sequence [(PolX) The polarized nucleus can be driven by an rf pulse. Figure At this point, we summarize the property of our sample. From fluorescence images of the sample surface [e.g., the inset of Fig. We interpret the cause of the shifts as due to the nuclear-nuclear interactions. Similar observations have been made recently by Abobeih et al. in a cluster of The form of hydrogen within the diamond matrix remains unidentified, but the splitting observed in Fig. 