Magnetocrystalline anisotropy is a fundamental property of magnetic materials that determines the dynamics of magnetic precession, the frequency of spin waves, the thermal stability of magnetic domains, and the efficiency of spintronic devices. We combine torque magnetometry and density functional theory calculations to determine the magnetocrystalline anisotropy of the metallic antiferromagnet Fe2As. Fe2As has a tetragonal crystal structure with the Néel vector lying in the (001) plane. We report that the four-fold magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the (001)-plane of Fe2As is extremely small, 3 22 150 J/m K =-at T = 4 K, much smaller than perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of ferromagnetic structure widely used in spintronics device. K22 is strongly temperature dependent and close to zero at T > 150 K. The anisotropy 1 K in the (010) plane is too large to be measured by torque magnetometry and we determine 1 K = -830 kJ/m 3 using firstprinciples density functional theory. Our simulations show that the contribution to the anisotropy from classical magnetic dipole-dipole interactions is comparable to the contribution from spinorbit coupling. The calculated four-fold anisotropy in the (001) plane 22 K ranges from 3 290 J/m to 3 280 J/m , the same order of magnitude as the measured value. We used K1 from theory to predict the frequency and polarization of the lowest frequency antiferromagnetic resonance mode and find that the mode is linearly polarized in the (001)-plane with f = 670 GHz. Antiferromagnets (AFs) have potential advantages over ferromagnets for spintronic devices. Collinear AFs are relatively insensitive to external fields because the net magnetization is zero. AFs typically have much higher antiferromagnetic resonance (AFMR) frequency than ferromagnets and therefore processional switching can occur in AFs at a faster rate than in ferromagnets. The recent discovery of electrical manipulation and detection of spin configurations in metallic AFs has led to a rapidly expanding scientific literature on this class of magnetic materials. Tetragonal crystals with easy-plane magnetic anisotropy are preferred because the two degenerate orientations of the Néel vector can store binary information. In crystals with globally centrosymmetric but locally non-centrosymmetric magnetic structures-e.g., CuMnAs and Mn2Au-an electrical current exerts a torque on the Néel vector and the domain structure can potentially be switched electrically A small value of the in-plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy facilitates electrical switching of the domain orientation since a smaller torque is needed to overcome the energetic barrier that separates the two orientations. Thermal stability of the domain requires, however, a large value of the inplane anisotropy. The Néel-Arrhenius law provides an estimate of the rate of thermal fluctuations of a single domain where τ is the average time between thermally-activated changes in the direction of the magnetization, 0 f is the resonance frequency, E  is the energy barrier between two degenerate magnetic states and B kT is the thermal energy. E  is given by the product of an anisotropy parameter K and the volume of the domain V; E KV = . Stable data storage typically requires / 40 to meet the criteria that data must be retained for 10 years For the media of conventional hard drives, the anisotropy parameter K is controlled by the perpendicular magnetocrystalline anisotropy of ordered intermetallic alloys. In the emerging technology of magnetic random access memory (MRAM), K is controlled by the interfacial magnetic anisotropy of a ferromagnetic layer adjacent to the oxide barrier in a magnetic tunnel junction. The perpendicular magnetic anisotropy 1 K of MRAM materials is typically 6 7 -3 1 Magnetocrystalline anisotropy Eani is described by a phenomenological expansion of the energy as a function of direction cosines for the orientation of magnetization of a ferromagnet or the sublattice magnetization of an antiferromagnet (AF). For a tetragonal crystal, the expansion to fourth order gives 3 coefficients 1 K , 2 K and 22 K ( ) / sin sin sin cos 4 where  is the angle of the magnetization relative to the <001> direction and  is the angle of the magnetization relative to the <100> direction (Fig. plane. Because the effect of 2 K is usually much smaller than 1 K , K2 will be neglected in the following discussion. A crystal with an easy-plane anisotropy is described by 1 0 K  . The coefficient 22 K describes the four-fold anisotropy of the (001) plane and determines the thermal stability of an easy-plane domain structure. An external magnetic field applied to an antiferromagnet (AF) produces a small induced magnetic moment. The induced moment is small because tilting of the orientation of sublattice magnetization is constrained by strong exchange interaction between the magnetic sublattices that favors a parallel alignment of the sublattices. In general, however, the induced magnetic moment is not parallel to the applied field because magnetocrystalline anisotropy favors an orientation of the sublattice magnetization along an easy axis The lack of alignment between the induced moment m and the applied field B produces a macroscopic torque on the sample, = τ m B . A torque magnetometer measures this torque. Data for the torque as a function of applied field is sensitive to magnetocrystalline anisotropy as long as the anisotropy is neither too small nor too large. If the anisotropy is small, then the angle between m and B is small and the torque becomes difficult to detect. If the anisotropy is large, then the direction of m is fixed with respect to the crystallographic axis and the torque does not provide information about the magnitude of the anisotropy. We can measure the in-plane four-fold anisotropy of a mm-size bulk crystal of Fe2As by torque magnetometry but the out-of-plane twofold anisotropy is not accessible to this technique because the external field is too small compare to anisotropy field to extract information about the anisotropy in the out-of-plane direction. We instead employ first-principles calculations based on density functional theory to determine K1. When magnetic energy is larger than the anisotropy energy, the amplitude of the torque in the (001)-plane saturates and the four-fold magnetic anisotropy, 22 K can be directly determined from the amplitude of the torque. We measured three samples extracted from the same growth run, and the 22 K value of all three samples is comparable to -150 J/m 3 at 4 K. The magnitude of 22 K drops quickly as temperature increases and reaches a small value above 150 K. The temperature dependence of magnetic anisotropy for antiferromagnets is similar to ferromagnets, following a power law of sublattice magnetization Strikingly, torque data for the applied field rotating in the (010)-plane reveal the motion of domain walls. An applied field in the (010) plane of 1 T is sufficient to orient the Néel vector fully perpendicular to the applied field. Domain wall motion occurs even at T = 4 K and, therefore, is not thermally activated. In the final section, we derive the lowest-frequency, zone-center AFMR frequency for easy-plane AFs, , where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, and E H , 1 H , H are the exchange field, out-of-plane anisotropy field and in-plane anisotropy field, respectively. The anisotropy fields are calculated with anisotropy energy and sublattice magnetization: . With 1 K calculated by DFT as 1 K = -830 kJ/m 3 , the AFMR frequency is f = 670 GHz at 4 K. Fe2As crystallizes in the Cu2Sb tetragonal crystal structure. Based on the corresponding magnetic symmetry (mmm1' magnetic point group), the Néel vector of Fe2As has two degenerate orientations in the (001)-plane The Fe2As crystal was synthesized by mixing Fe and As powders in a 1.95:1 ratio and vacuum sealing inside a quartz tube. The vacuum tube was heated at 1 °C/min up to 600 °C and held for 6 hours in a furnace. The temperature was then ramped to 975 °C at 1 °C/min and held for 1 hour before cooling down slowly to 900 °C at 1 °C/min. Finally, the quartz tube was kept at 900 °C for 1 hour and allowed to cool down to room temperature in the furnace at 10 °C/min. We obtained a large silver-hued crystal ingot of Fe2As and it easily detached from the quartz tube. Part of the ingot was crushed into powder for powder XRD characterization and the data showed phase pure Fe2As. But the sample is slightly off-stochiometry as described in reference We used a wire saw to cut the sample into smaller pieces for magnetic property characterization and torque measurements. One of the pieces was measured on the superconducting quantum interference device vibrating sample magnetometer (SQUID-VSM, see below), the other three pieces were used in torque magnetometry measurements. We name these three samples measured by torque magnetometry sample A, sample B, sample C and the one for SQUID-VSM is named sample D. The temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility was measured with a SQUID-VSM in a Quantum Design Magnetic Properties Measurement System (MPMS). The susceptibility of the sample was measured while cooling from 398 K to 4 K in a 10 mT field. Torque measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). We mounted the sample on a standard torque sensor chip, P109A from Quantum Design with a sensitivity of 1 × 10 -9 N•m. The PPMS horizontal sample rotator was used to control the angle between the crystal and the applied field. During the measurement, the external field rotated in either the (010) plane or the (001) plane, while the field-induced moment resided in the same plane as the rotating applied field. We detected the torque component,  mB , that is perpendicular to this plane. We performed first-principles DFT simulations using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Achieving the extremely high accuracy for total energies that is required to compute the (001) plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy that is on the order of eV  per magnetic unit cell is numerically challenging; the required convergence parameters render it computationally too expensive to perform such calculations fully self-consistently. Instead, we use the convergence parameters quoted above to compute Kohn-Sham states, electron density, and relaxed atomic geometries for collinear magnetism and take non-collinear magnetism and spin-orbit coupling We use data for the magnetic susceptibility as input for modeling the torque magnetometry data and to provide insight into the reorientation of antiferromagnetic domains in an external magnetic field. Figure We fixed the applied field at 10 mT, along the <100> or <001> direction, measured the induced magnetic moment while cooling from T = 398 K, and calculated the susceptibility, / MH  = , where M is the magnetization. The measured susceptibility is similar to that in a prior report When the applied field is along an easy axis, we must take domain wall motion into account. We assume that a 10 mT external field is too weak to significantly affect the domain structure. We further assume that the magnetic moment generated by an applied field along the <100> direction (the a-axis of the crystal) has equal contributions from two types of domains that we label as D1 (Néel vector along <100>) and D2 (Néel vector along <010>) as illustrated in Fig.  is constant for H applied along the c-axis. For H along the a-axis, a  increases with field at low field, and is approximately constant for an applied field > 1 T. We attribute the field dependence of a  to domain wall motion and the consequent evolution of the populations of domains with Néel vectors parallel and perpendicular to the applied field. The populations of the two degenerate domains can be estimated from the M vs H curve in Fig. For an ideal collinear antiferromagnet, we expect  = 0 at low temperatures The field-induced torque is the cross product of the field-induced magnetic moment and the applied field, = mB  . The direction of the induced magnetic moment m is given by the minimum in the total energy: , where m E is the magnetic energy; ani E is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy; and ex E is the exchange energy that couples the two sublattices. We refer to the condition m ani E E as the low field limit and the condition m ani EE  as the intermediate field regime Fig.  is the angle between the c-axis and the applied field. The induced moments are also in the (010)-plane. Thus, the torque is along the <010> direction. In the low temperature limit, || 0  = if the isotropic background is igonored; the induced moment of domain D1 is therefore along <001> and the induced moment of D2 lies in the (010) plane between <001> and <100>. The direction of the induced moment of D2 is determined by  ⊥ and  ⊥  . Fig. In this case, because of the relatively small magnetocrystalline anisotropy, the tilt of the sublattice magnetization away from the crystal axes is significant.  is the angle between the external field and the crystal axes; 1  , 2  are the angles between the directions of the sublattice magnetization of domains D1, D2 and the crystal axes, respectively ( 1  and 2  are not necessarily equal). The torque is zero when the applied field is along the easy or hard axis of a sample, because the induced magnetization is in the same direction as the field. Here, we refer to the easy axis as the lowest energy orientation of the Néel vector, and define orientations of the hard axis as perpendicular to the easy axis. When the applied field is oriented away from an easy or hard axis, the direction of the induced magnetization shifts toward a hard axis because ||  ⊥  . In an AF, the slope of the torque as a function of field orientation has opposite signs when the field passes through the orientation of an easy axis and when it passes through the orientation of a hard axis. In our sign convention, torque with a negative slope as a function of angle indicates a hard axis; torque with a positive slope as a function of angle indicates an easy axis. In a single magnetic domain of Fe2As, there are two hard axes: the c-axis perpendicular to the (001) plane and the axis perpendicular to the Néel vector in the (001) plane. Torque data at 4 K with the field rotating in the (010)-plane are shown in Fig. The slope of torque data when the applied field is along the c-axis ( =  ) is negative because the c-axis is a hard axis. However, when 1  =  and B > 0.5 T, the sign of the torque changes abruptly. This dramatic change in the sign of the torque is periodic; the periodicity indicates that domain wall motion is reversible. When the applied field is aligned along the c-axis, the populations of domain D1 and D2 are equal. As the field rotates away from the c-axis, the projection of the applied field in the (001)-plane changes the domain distribution as described by Fig. To model the torque data, we first calculate the direction and magnitude of the induced magnetization M by describing the susceptibility as a tensor i ij j j MH  =  For domains of type D2, the Néel vector is along the b-axis and the susceptibility tensor is The external field in the (010)-plane is ( ) ) , where ξ is the angle between the c-axis and the external field as depicted in Fig. , the induced magnetization ( ) ) , would be parallel to the applied field H . This would infer that there is no torque signal from D2 domains and the total torque signal would be generated only by D1 domains (Fig. However, the total torque signal we observe is obviously different from what is depicted in Fig. ), Néel vectors start tilting away from crystal axes as shown in Fig. , where  is the angle between the Néel vector and the crystal axis, and () R  is the rotation matrix: cos( ) sin( ) 0 During the rotation, the field component along  are determined by the angle between the applied field and the spin axis, ()  + . The analogous behavior of a uniaxial antiferromagnet (AF) In a uniaxial AF, the critical field for the spin-flop transition is ) / ( ) Fe2As, as shown in Fig. The midpoint of the change in the populations of the D1 and D2 domains as a function of field is, however, close to what is expected for the characteristic field of a spin-flop transition of an ideal single domain easy plane antiferromagnetic crystal. The total energy of D2 when 90 Both anisotropy and magnetic energy are function of 2  but with different periodicity. For an applied field along the <010> direction (ψ = 0o), We attribute our observations that domains begin to move in an applied field smaller than c H and domain wall motion is not complete until the applied field is larger than , we assume that the sample is a single domain and the sublattice magnetization is always nearly perpendicular to the applied field, i.e., /2    + . The "intermediate field" regime refers to an applied field larger than the characteristic field, but not large enough to significantly change the exchange interaction. An important assumption here is that the tilt of the two sublattice magnetizations in the external field is small enough to be neglected. With this approximation, the magnetic energy is nearly . Then, the torque can be easily related to the anisotropy: 22 4 sin( , where  no longer depends on the magnitude of the applied field. A graduation reorientation of domains of an easy-plane antiferromagnet as a function of applied field was also recently observed in 50 nm thick CuMnAs epitaxial layers grown on GaP (CuMnAs and Fe2As have essentially the same crystal structure with Cu and Mn atoms in CuMnAs occupying the same lattice sites as the two crystallographically distinct Fe atoms in Fe2As.) The strength of the field needed to reorient antiferromagnetic domains in CuMnAs epitaxial layers is similar to what we observe in Fe2As bulk crystals. Thinner, 10 nm thick, CuMnAs layers show a pronounced in-plane uniaxial anisotropy and a more abrupt transition in domain structure as a function of field than 50 nm thick layers. X-ray magnetic linear dichroism (XMLD) measurements of CuMnAs epitaxial layers reveals that the domain reorientation is not fully reversible and hysteretic for fields less than 2 T. X-ray photoelectron microscopy (XPEEM) images acquired after applying 7 T fields in orthogonal directions also show that the domain structure does not revert to a fixed configuration in zero field. Based on our observation in T. At higher fields, the tilting of spins caused by the external field cannot be neglected, so exchange interaction is no longer a constant. In our model, however, the torque stays the same after saturation based on our assumption of constant susceptibility and exchange interaction. This assumption is no longer valid in higher field. While induced magnetization is smaller than H  , the torque is also smaller than the saturation value. As our model predicts, the experimentally measured torque amplitude saturates as the applied field approaches 1 T for sample B, and 3 T for samples A and C. Hence, it is safe to select 1 T and 3 T as the "intermediate field" regime for sample B and for samples A and C, respectively. The K in all three samples follow the same trend; however, individual data points do not overlap perfectly. We attribute this discrepancy to variations in the defect microstructures and stoichiometries of the three samples. With a temperature-dependent measurement of torque in the ab-plane at an intermediate field, we obtain the temperature-dependence of 22 K as shown in Fig. Magnetocrystalline anisotropy of Fe2As has two contributions, one from spin-orbit interaction (SOI) and one from classical magnetic dipole-dipole interaction (MDD): anisotropy from SOI is calculated using DFT for noncollinear magnetism with spin-orbit coupling, by rotating the Néel vector both within the easy plane (001) and out of the plane towards the hard axis (010). The corresponding total-energy changes are visualized in Fig. The MDD contribution is computed using a classical model that is parametrized using the chemical and magnetic ground-state structure from DFT. We use the ground-state chemical and magnetic structure from DFT-LDA as well as DFT-PBE, to evaluate the following expression for the classical magnetic dipole-dipole interaction and to compare the influence of exchange and correlation: To obtain the anisotropy energy for bulk Fe2As from this expression, we use an interaction shell boundary ij r of 180 Å, which converges the result to within 7 10 -eV. This leads to a two-fold symmetric MDD contribution to the anisotropy energy in the (010) plane of K 1 = -220 kJ/m 3 for LDA. For PBE, the corresponding value is K 1 = -300 kJ/m 3 . The MDD contribution in the (001) plane is less than 1 neV and, thus, negligible. Therefore, we find a total out-of-plane anisotropy energy of -540 kJ/m 3 and -830 kJ/m 3 from LDA and PBE, respectively. We attribute ~2/3 of the total out-of-plane anisotropy energy to the SOI contribution and ~1/3 to the MDD contribution. Both terms show two-fold symmetry with the hard axis along the <001> direction. Torque magnetometry can only measure a lower bound of 1 K  36 kJ/m 3 for the out-of-plane anisotropy energy and does not contradict our DFT results. The in-plane anisotropy energy is computed as 22 K = -290 J/m 3 (DFT-LDA) and 22 K = 280 J/m 3 (DFT-PBE), while the measured result is 22 K = -150 J/m 3 . Without anisotropy, the magnon dispersion of energy in antiferromagnet is zero at the center of the Brillouin zone. introduces a band gap at the zone center. The antiferromagnetic resonance (AFMR) mode we refer to in this work describes this precessional magnetization motion at the zone center. With the anisotropy values we determined by theory and experiment, we can make an estimation of the AFMR frequency. We start from equations of motion under the 'macrospin' approximation of the two magnetic sublattices in domain D1 Where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, 1 M and 2 M are sublattice magnetizations of domain D1, 1 H and 22 H are out-of-plane and in-plane anisotropy fields, respectively, which can be written as , the AFMR frequency is dominated by the anisotropy in the direction perpendicular to the easy plane. For the exchange field, we use sublattice magnetization For tetragonal like Fe2As, the AFMR is dominated by 1 K because 1 KK . The same relation is also valid for Mn2Au where a previous calculation As discussed in Refs. VV -depends on temperature, current density and the pulse width If the attempt frequency is not high enough and 1 VV -is small, the magnetic state is more susceptible to thermal fluctuations. We performed torque magnetometry measurements on an easy-plane antiferromagnet Fe2As. The measurement results prove that the domain wall motion in the single-crystalline sample is reversible, and allow us to extract the in-plane anisotropy when the magnetic energy m E is comparable to magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy ani E . The in-plane anisotropy of Fe2As is K22 = -150 J/m 3 at 4 K. GHz. Our analysis of torque magnetometry data suggests that the in-plane magnetic anisotropy of some candidate materials for antiferromagnetic spintronic applications, such as Fe2As, can be very small at room temperature. A field smaller than 1 T is sufficient to significantly alter its domain structure. The measurement of 22 K in Fe2As provides a baseline value for further studies of magnetic anisotropy of easy-plane antiferromagnets and the motion of antiferromagnetic domain walls. 