A new phase field crystal model based on the density-field approach incorporating high-order interparticle direct correlations is developed to study vapor-liquid-solid coexistence and transitions within a single continuum description. Conditions for the realization of phase coexistence and transition sequence are systematically analyzed, and shown to be satisfied by a broad range of model parameters, demonstrating the high flexibility and applicability of the model. Both temperaturedensity and temperature-pressure phase diagrams are identified, while structural evolution and coexistence among the three phases are examined through dynamical simulations. The model is also able to produce some temperature and pressure related material properties, including effects of thermal expansion and pressure on equilibrium lattice spacing, and temperature dependence of saturation vapor pressure. This model can be used as an effective approach for investigating a variety of material growth and deposition processes based on vapor-solid, liquid-solid, and vapor-liquid-solid growth. The vapor-based growth techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), vapor-phase epitaxy (VPE), physical vapor deposition (PVD), and vapor-liquidsolid (VLS) growth, have been widely adopted in the fabrication and synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) thin film materials Given its unique capacity in combining atomic-scale spatial resolution with diffusive time-scale dynamics and its intrinsic incorporation of elastoplasticity and multiple orientations, the phase field crystal (PFC) method A limitation of most PFC models is that the modeling is usually restricted to liquid and solid phases and the related transition processes, but not involving vapor phase and its coupling or coexistence with solid or liquid state that are essential in simulating the widely used growth processes (e.g., CVD, VPE, PVD, and VLS growth) for the synthesis of thin films and nanostructures. Schwalbach et al. made the first attempt to incorporate vapor phase into the PFC method In this paper we present a new and efficient vaporliquid-solid PFC model based on the general densityfield approach, with the expansion of three-and fourpoint direct correlations in terms of gradient nonlinearities in the free energy functional. The model efficiency can be viewed from its relatively simple form, serving as a minimal theory for modeling vapor-liquid-solid coexistence and transitions. The advantage of the model can be also seen from its tunability in achieving threephase coexistence and the desired transition sequence across a broad range of model parameter values. The conditions and properties of these phase coexistence and transitions are calculated analytically and numerically, and verified through 2D dynamical simulations. In addition, we demonstrate the ability of this model in obtaining realistic material properties of, e.g., saturation vapor pressure, thermal expansion and pressure-induced contraction of crystalline lattice spacing which are absent in the existing PFC models. Since this model is built on the density-field formulation of Ref. In the original PFC model, the free energy functional is given by where n(r) denotes the order parameter field of atomic number density variation, and the parameters C 0 , C 2 and C 4 can be connected to the two-point direct correlation function in classical density functional theory where the only remaining parameter ǫ reflects the influence of the temperature. The larger the ǫ value, the lower the temperature it corresponds to. The original PFC Eq. ( where E 0 < 0 and E 1122 ≤ 0. The linear term with coefficient B 0 was usually ignored in most PFC studies since its integration over space gives a constant proportional to the average density n and thus does not change the relative stability among different phases and the system dynamics. However, it was demonstrated recently that this term is crucial for the calculation and control of system pressure and elastic constants 54 . As will be shown below, B 0 should be temperature dependent to give a correct behavior of saturation vapor pressure. In this model parameters C 0 , C 2 , and C 4 also depend on temperature. Terms D 11 n 2 ∇ 2 n and E 1122 n 2 (∇ 2 n) 2 , corresponding to the contributions from three-and four-point correlation respectively, are the main new components of our model and are key to achieve the coexistence and transitions between vapor, liquid, and solid phases, as will be proved both analytically and numerically in the next sections. A negative E 1122 is required in the presence of D 11 to prevent the free-energy divergence of ordered phases, as will be explained in Sec. III B. In addition, the C 6 term is introduced to better control the crystalline modes in the presence of those two new nonlinear gradient terms, but not essential for obtaining the vapor-liquid-solid transitions. It is important to note that in contrast to previous PFC models Although in principle more higher-order rotationally invariant terms from three-and four-point correlations can be introduced through the formulation of Ref. A. Vapor-liquid coexistence Both vapor and liquid are uniform phases with constant but different values of density n(r) = n, where n is the average density variation of the system. Substituting it into Eq. (3) yields a simple Landau free energy per volume with a single variable n. In the rescaled original PFC model Eq. ( The vapor-liquid coexistence is affected by the cubic term with nonzero D 0 . Applying the common tangent rule on f u (n) in Eq. ( The spinodal densities are determined by The corresponding results are plotted in Fig. In short, the above analysis indicates that the vaporliquid coexistence can be realized within the PFC framework of a single density order parameter when D 2 0 > 2C 0 E 0 (with E 0 < 0), under either large enough C 0 (or ǫ) or large enough |D 0 |. With the knowledge of vapor-liquid coexistence given above, we now explore the way to realize vapor-liquidsolid transitions. To simplify the problem and facilitate theoretical analysis, we adopt a one-mode approximation for n(r) of periodic solid phases. For a one-dimensional (1D) stripe phase with amplitude A and wave number q, n(r) = n + A e iqx + c.c. . where "c.c." represents complex conjugate. Substituting it into Eq. ( Note that for simplicity, here we assume C 6 = 0 in the free energy as the presence of C 6 term would not affect the basics of vapor-liquid-solid transition sequence. The specific role played by nonzero C 6 will be discussed separately at the beginning of Sec. IV A. Similarly, for a 2D hexagonal or triangular phase the density field is expanded as where the basic wave vectors q = q(1, 0), q(1/2, √ 3/2), and q(1/2, -√ 3/2). The free energy density is then writ-ten by The equilibrium state is determined by minimizing the free energy density, i.e., min q,A f (q, A; n) via ∂f /∂q = 0 and ∂f /∂A = 0. The corresponding results of equilibrium free energy density for stripe and hexagonal phases are plotted in Fig. When α < 0, a uniform liquid or vapor phase is linearly unstable under infinitesimal fluctuations and will crystallize spontaneously. To find the minimum of α with respect to q, we solve ∂α/∂q = 0, leading to where 12C 4 + E 1122 n2 < 0 is required to prevent the divergence at large q as can be obtained from Eq. ( If D 11 = E 1122 = 0 as in the original PFC model, we have q 2 = C 2 /2C 4 which is independent of n, and C 2 < 0 is needed to enable solid phases. Defining the supercooling or supersaturating density for the occurrence of linear instability by α(n) = 0, we have A solid phase would be more stable than a uniform phase (vapor or liquid) when n lies in between the two values of n(o) supercool . Comparing Eq. ( To achieve the usual vapor-liquid-solid transition sequence, we need to consider the effect of nonzero D 11 . When E 1122 = 0, α(n) in Eq. ( Now the midpoint of two nsupercool values does not co-incide with that of ncoexist or nspinodal anymore. More importantly, when the quadratic coefficient of α(n) in Eq. ( The existence of proper vapor-liquid-solid transitions also requires the contribution of the E 1122 term. The reason is that although nonzero D 11 enables the stabilization of solid phase at density n larger than that of vapor and liquid phases, it overstabilizes the solid phase at very large n. Take the stripe phase as an example, for which the free energy density at E 1122 = 0 is when 3C 2 + 2D 11 n < 0. The value of f stripe (n) is dominated by the n4 terms when n ≫ 1. To prevent f stripe → -∞, it is required that which however is incompatible with the condition of -E 0 /2 + D 2 11 /9C 4 < 0 for the occurrence of vapor-liquidsolid transition sequence as discussed above. Therefore, a negative E 1122 is necessary to remedy this, as demonstrated in Fig. In the next section we will conduct numerical calculations beyond one-mode approximation to achieve the three-phase coexistence and transition, based on the above theoretical analyses and the conditions identified for the realization of proper vapor-liquid-solid transitions. which describes the conserved dynamics of density variation field n(r, t). Given Eq. ( It is essentially governed by the diffusive, relaxational dynamics, and the system free energy decreases with time t continuously until it reaches an equilibrium or steady state. Our above analyses have demonstrated that the freeenergy functional Eq. ( obtaining the vapor-liquid-solid transitions under onemode approximation. However, when solving the full PFC model via e.g., the dynamical Eq. ( With the introduction of nonzero C 6 , we can identify a broad range of parameters that lead to vapor-liquidsolid coexistence in the new PFC model developed here. The general procedure for identifying the corresponding model parameters are described in Appendix B, which needs to be combined with some analytic conditions derived above in Sec. III in the absence of C 6 (particularly D 2 0 > 2C 0 E 0 , D 11 < 0, and E 1122 < 0). Numerical calculations are needed even in one-mode approximation, with some results presented in Fig. Eq. ( To obtain accurate values of the solid-phase equilibrium free energy beyond one-mode approximation, we have numerically solved the full dynamical Eq. ( All the model parameters identified and used in the following full-model numerical calculations are summarized in Table For a solid phase, numerical solution of the full PFC model is required to calculate this pressure P through f (n) of the equilibrium state. For uniform vapor or liquid phase, we can obtain the analytic expression of P based on Eq. ( The saturation vapor pressure P (SVP) u at vapor-liquid coexistence can be calculated by substituting Eq. ( decreases with the increase of temperature ∆T , a behavior that is not correct. The correct temperature-increasing behavior of P (SVP) u is obtained only when B 0 is set to be temperature dependent, such as B 0 = -4.5 -3∆T given in Table Based on these information of f and P , we compute the vapor-liquid-solid phase diagrams of the full PFC model using the parameters listed in Table These calculated phase diagrams possess expected properties of vapor-liquid-solid transitions and coexistence. For example, for vapor-solid coexistence at low temperatures (with ∆T < 0) the vapor coexistence density increases with temperature but the solid one decreases, while for liquid-solid coexistence at intermediate and high temperatures (∆T > 0), both liquid and solid coexistence densities increase with temperature [see Fig. A drawback of the previous PFC models is the lack of lattice thermal expansion effect, and also the lack of a study of effects of pressure P and density n on the Results of numerical calculations of equilibrium lattice spacing a eq for 2D hexagonal structure are shown in Fig. We have conducted dynamical simulations based on Eq. ( Figure To further illustrate the phenomenon of vapor-liquidsolid coexistence, we simulate a system of 2D slab configuration at ∆T = 0, starting with half of the slab occupied by solid phase with n = -0.012 while the other half by a homogeneous state with n = -1.5 (at the middle of the spinodal regime), as shown in Fig. We have introduced a new PFC model with high-order correlations featuring three-and four-body interactions to examine the transitions and coexistence among vapor, liquid, and crystalline solid phases within a single continuum density-field description, without making any pre-assumptions other than the basic requirement of system rotational invariance. The advantage of this model has been demonstrated in terms of its simple form, genericness and flexibility of parameter choices in achieving three-phase coexistence and transitions, including both vapor-liquid-solid and the unusual vaporsolid-liquid transition sequence. Through both theoretical analysis and numerical computation, the conditions of phase coexistence are identified, as well as temperaturedensity and temperature-pressure phase diagrams incorporating vapor-liquid-solid triple point and vapor-liquid critical point, which qualitatively agree with the wellknown results of previous experiments and atomistic simulations. Various scenarios of vapor-solid, liquid-solid, and vapor-liquid-solid coexistence, vapor-liquid phase separation, and structural evolution are verified through dynamical simulations of the model. In addition, several material properties missing in the previous PFC models, including temperature dependence of saturation vapor pressure, thermal expansion, and compression effect of pressure on lattice constant, can be well produced in this model, with outcomes consistent with the known results. Thus the approach developed here, which well describes the vapor-liquid-solid phase behaviors and the corresponding material properties, can serve as a valuable tool for modeling the material growth and evolution processes including both vapor-and liquidbased and vapor-liquid-solid growth.