We developed functional surfaces of laser-microstructured silicon coated with blends of polystyrene (PS) and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and we study their switching wetting behavior between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. Large areas of silicon are processed with reproducible surface micromorphology and spin-coated with PS/PNIPAM blends of two blend ratios. The wetting behavior of the surfaces is modified by the combination of surface topography and surface chemistry effects. PS/PNIPAM films are casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates with or without a native SiO 2 layer. All films respond to the stimulus of temperature and films casted on microstructured silicon substrates with a native SiO 2 layer show the highest * Control and switching of the wettability of a solid surface pose a challenge for several applications in the fields of industry and technology, such as waterproof textiles, coatings for boats, self-cleaning surfaces for solar energy panels, metal refining, microfluidics, as well as in the field of biology, such as drug delivery systems, cell encapsulation, immunoassays and biosensors, among others One way to modify the surface chemistry is the deposition/attachment of functional polymer films. A widely known stimuli responsive polymer is poly(Nisopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), which exhibits a reversible phase transition at the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of 32 o C. Below the LCST, the PNIPAM chains are able to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds with water molecules in aqueous solutions, displaying hydrophilicity. Heating above the LCST is accompanied by a compact and collapsed conformational change in the polymer chains, obstructing the interaction of water with the hydrophilic groups C=O and N-H of PNIPAM and resulting in a less hydrophilic behavior of the material Besides the chemical composition of a surface, another factor that affects wettability is surface topography. The angle of contact between water and a surface is affected by inducing roughness on the surface Laser processing is a complementary, cost-effective, and simple method for tailoring micro-and nanostructures over large areas on metals, semiconductors, glasses, polymers, and other materials In this work, we develop functional surfaces of laser-microstructured silicon coated with PS/PNIPAM polymer blends and we study their switching wetting behavior between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity upon heating. Based on our previous work on the wettability of PS/PNIPAM blend systems casted on flat silicon substrates, which showed a tunable, thermoresponsive wetting behavior Additionally, spin coating is a simple and reproducible technique for film development, offering control of the process and avoiding the drawbacks of grafting techniques, such as the use of elaborate equipment 2.1 Materials. Polystyrene (PS 1488 ) homopolymer (M w =155,000, M w /M n =1.05) was synthesized by anionic polymerization and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM 265 ) homopolymer (M w =30,000, M w /M n =1.16) was synthesized by RAFT polymerization. THF solvent of analytical grade (Sigma-Aldrich) was used without further purification. For contact angle measurements, we used freshly distilled water from an all-glass distillation apparatus. 2.2 Microstructured silicon substrates. Silicon wafers ((100), thickness 500 ± 25 μm) were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of acetone and methanol for 15 min before laser microstructuring. Microstructured silicon substrates were fabricated by nanosecond laser processing in a gas environment of sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ). A pulsed Q-switched Nd:YAG laser system was used with 1064 nm wavelength, 5 ns pulse duration, and 10 Hz repetition rate. A silicon wafer was placed in a vacuum chamber, which was filled with 0.6 bar SF 6 . The laser beam was focused on the silicon surface through a quartz window using a lens of 200 mm focal length and the vacuum chamber was raster scanned using a computer-controlled set of xy translation stages. The scanning speed was set so that each spot on the silicon surface was irradiated by 1000 laser pulses. The average fluence was ~1 J/cm 2 on the silicon surface. For the removal of the native silicon oxide (SiO 2 ) layer from silicon surfaces, flat and microstructured silicon substrates were immersed for 5 minutes in an aqueous solution of 5% hydrofluoric acid (HF). After HF etching, silicon surfaces were cleaned with distilled water and methanol and were dried in nitrogen (N 2 ) gas flow. 2.3 Polymer film preparation. Blends of PS 1488 /PNIPAM 265 were prepared in 75/25 and 50/50 blend weight ratios dissolved in THF, consisting of 5 wt% polymer solution, and stayed overnight. Blend films were spin-casted onto clean flat and microstructured silicon substrates, with or without a native SiO 2 layer, at 3000 rpm for 30 sec. After spin coating, the films were dried in ambient conditions at room temperature for one hour. In order to optimize the film quality, we tried other blend ratios as well. PS/PNIPAM films with a lower PNIPAM ratio did not present repeatable thermoresponsivity. Οn the other hand, films with a higher PNIPAM ratio were not mechanically stable, due to the water solubility of PNIPAM. The PS/PNIPAM ratio should be adjusted to provide films with mechanical stability, induced by PS, and a repeatable wetting behavior. Therefore, we choose the 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios in order to obtain high-quality films with reliable wettability. All films were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a field emission microscope, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), micro-Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Also, the film thickness on flat silicon substrates was measured by profilometry and films of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM are 700 -800 and 500 -600 nm thick, respectively. 2.4 Micro-Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra were acquired with a Renishaw inVia Reflex Raman microscope, equipped with a Peltier-cooled charge coupled device (CCD) and a motorized xyz microscope stage with a lens of magnification ×100, in a backscattering geometry. The 514.5 nm line of an argon laser was used for excitation. Together with the rest of the system configuration (grating, slit width, CCD partition) this results in a spectral resolution of ~1 cm -1 . The laser beam was focused on the sample to a spot diameter 1-2 μm and the excitation laser power was 0.10 mW. 2.5 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed using an ESCALABTM XI+ spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a monochromatic Al Kα source at 1486.6 eV. The XPS survey spectra were recorded with a step size of 1 eV and a pass energy of 50 eV, as a result of 5 scans. The high-resolution spectra for the C 1s were recorded with 0.1 eV energy step size and 10.0 eV pass energy. For C 1s , 10 scans were acquired. For depth profile analysis that we used in order to investigate the ratio PNIPAM/PS towards the bottom of the film, between 20 and 25 layers were analyzed, the etching was made using a 300 atoms cluster gun, working at 2000 eV. Each level was etched for 300 seconds. 2.6 Contact angle measurements. A water drop of 5 μL was deposited on the surface of each film to measure the contact angle at room temperature (25 o C) and at 45 o C, using a constant temperature control base. Images of water drops on the surface were obtained by a 2.0MP 500x USB Digital Microscope and analyzed by standard MATLAB functions. In detail, the images were transformed to grayscale and subsequently the drop edge profile was determined. The profile was numerically analyzed in polar coordinates (r, θ). The origin of the coordinates was chosen on the intersection between the apparent perpendicular axis of symmetry of the drop and the solid/liquid interface. The profiles r(θ) obtained this way vary smoothly with θ and were easily modeled by fourth-order polynomials. The contact angles were extracted from the derivatives (transformed back to Cartesian coordinates) on the left and right-side contacts of the drop with the surface. Typically, the deviation between left and right contact angles was less than 2o. The average of the two values is reported as the measured contact angle. For each film, water contact angles were measured three times. SEM micrographs of microstructured silicon surfaces with a native SiO 2 layer and without it are presented in Figs. After laser processing, microstructured silicon substrates are coated with PS/PNIPAM blends of 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios. In Figs. The elements of carbon and nitrogen correspond to the PS/PNIPAM film coating and they are detected spatially on the entire surface, verifying that the film covers the silicon microstructures, as well as the valleys between them. Similar results were observed for a 75/25 PS/PNIPAM film casted onto a microstructured silicon substrate (not shown here). To investigate the topography of the PS/PNIPAM blend films we perform micro-Raman spectroscopy on films casted on microstructured silicon substrates at ~25 o C (below the LCST of PNIPAM). For both blend ratios, Raman spectra on three different locations of the same film show peaks that correspond to the vibrational modes of C-H for PS and PNIPAM chains in the spectral range 2800-3200 cm -1 (Figs. Water contact angle measurements of PS/PNIPAM films casted on flat and microstructured silicon surfaces, with or without a native SiO 2 layer, are presented in Fig. Similarly, films of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM blends casted on microstructured silicon substrates without a native SiO 2 layer show an increase in their water contact angle by ~20 o and ~15 o , respectively, compared to that with a native SiO 2 layer. As we show below, the absence of the native SiO 2 layer from silicon substrates results in PS enrichment of the top part of PS/PNIPAM films, which is hydrophobic, increasing their water contact angle. Comparing the wetting behavior of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM films casted on flat silicon substrates with or without a native SiO 2 layer, we observe that films with a higher PS ratio (75%) present higher contact angles than films with lower PS ratio (50%), because PS is hydrophobic with a water contact angle of ~100 o Figure Figure To better understand the effect of surface chemistry of the silicon substrate on the arrangement of PS and PNIPAM in the films and hence their wetting behavior, we used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The elemental quantification (%) of 50/50 PS/PNIPAM films, casted on flat silicon substrates with or without a native SiO 2 layer, is presented as a function of etching layers in Fig. Figure Furthermore, the slope of the fitting line of the PS ratio is higher in Fig. In summary, all PS/PNIPAM films, casted on microstructured and flat silicon substrates with or without a native SiO 2 layer, respond to the stimulus of temperature. The observed thermoresponsiveness is attributed to the presence of PNIPAM and films with a higher PNIPAM ratio present higher thermoresponsiveness, regardless of the morphology and surface chemistry of the silicon substrate. The removal of SiO 2 from the silicon substrates, either flat or microstructured, increases the room temperature water contact angle of the overlying films but does not enhance their thermoresponsiveness. On the contrary, the presence of the native SiO 2 layer on silicon results in PNIPAM enrichment of the top part of the films (interfacing with air and the water droplet), resulting in higher film thermoresponsiveness. In the presence of the native SiO 2 layer, we observe that films casted on microstructured silicon substrates exhibit high thermoresponsiveness, measuring up to ~34 o increase in water contact angle upon heating, and switch reversibly between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity, while films casted on flat silicon substrates do not undergo switching of their wetting behavior, even though they respond to the stimulus of temperature, measuring up to ~18 o increase in water contact angle upon heating. The latter case agrees with our previous study on spincasted PS/PNIPAM blend films on flat silicon Nevertheless, chain grafting can induce constrains to polymer chain rearrangement/relocalization and conformational changes, which may in turn hinder the response of the formed film to the external stimulus of temperature. In contrast to grafting techniques, the polymer arrangement in blend films deposited by spin coating cannot be controlled, because polymers adopt their thermodynamically favored structure. In this work, we demonstrate that spin-casted PS/PNIPAM films on laser-microstructured silicon substrates with native SiO 2 adopt a favorable structure and present significantly enhanced reversible thermoresponsiveness, which switches their wetting behavior between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. We developed laser-microstructured silicon substrates coated with PS/PNIPAM blend films and we studied their thermoresponsive wetting behavior as a function of substrate micromorphology and surface chemistry. Taking advantage of the scalability that the laser patterning method offers, we can process large areas of silicon with reproducible surface micromorphology in order to use them as substrates for film casting, inducing 3D topography to the casted films and tuning their wetting behavior. PS/PNIPAM films of 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios were spin-casted on microstructured silicon substrates with or without a native SiO 2 layer. We take advantage of the large specific area of the silicon substrates in order to enhance the film thermoresponsiveness. All films show an increase in water contact angle as they respond to the stimulus of temperature, but films with a higher ratio of PNIPAM exhibit higher thermoresponsiveness. The absence of the native SiO 2 layer results in higher water contact angles at 25 o C and 45 o C but the PS/PNIPAM films present lower thermoresponsiveness, compared to the films casted on silicon substrates with a native SiO 2 layer. This is because the presence of the native SiO 2 layer results in PNIPAM enrichment in the top part of the film, which comes into contact with water. Comparing the wetting behavior of films casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates, we note that microstructuring provides a large specific area that extends the contact of PNIPAM chains with water molecules according to the Wenzel model. This enhances the film thermoresponsiveness to achieve switching from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity. We also demonstrate that the transition is reversible and lasts for several heating/cooling cycles. Using simple, rapid, and cost-effective techniques, such as spin coating and laser processing, we combine thermoresponsive polymer systems with micro-patterned substrates for the development of smart functional surfaces with reversibly switchable wettability, able to extend and improve traditional wetting applications. 