We present the electron tunneling transport and its magnetic field modulation of a superconducting (SC) Josephson junction with a barrier of single ferromagnetic (FM) Kitaev layer. We find that at H = 0, the Josephson current I S displays two peaks at K/Δ ≈ 3.4 and 10, which stem from the resonant tunnelings between the SC gap boundaries and the spinon flat bands and between the SC gap edges and the spinon dispersive bands, respectively. With the increasing magnetic field, I S gradually decreases and abruptly drops to a platform at the critical magnetic field h c = gμ B H c /Δ ≈ 0.03K/Δ, since the applied field suppresses the spinon density of states (DOS) once upon the Kitaev layer enters the polarized FM phase. These results pave a new way to measure the spinon or Majorana fermion DOS of the Kitaev and other spin liquid materials. The quantum spin liquid (QSL) phase, which consists of various spin singlet pairings in the spin structure and does not break any constituent symmetries of their underlying lattice, has attracted a great deal of attentions because of its novel nature On the other hand, the Josephson tunneling junctions, consisting of two SC leads separated by an insulating or metallic barrier, provide a well probe to measure the quasiparticle information of the central region through the quantum tunneling transport In this Letter, we would utilize the current feature of the SC-Kitaev layer-SC tunneling junctions to characterize the Majorana fermion modes and its evolutions with increasing magnetic field in the central-zone Kitaev material. These unique behaviors should distinctly differ from the situations with ferromagnetically or antiferromagnetically central barriers. We adopt the non-equilibrium Green's function in the 4×4 Nambu representation are the spin components. Let the SC leads be the s-wave superconductors with order parameters . ( ) where a + nkσ and c + iσ are the creation operators of electrons in the SC leads and Kitaev layer, respectively; v nk,iσ is the hybridization matrix between the SC lead and Kitaev layer, ε 0 nkσ is the single-particle energy and V n (t) is the external electric field; and K is the spin coupling constant in the central Kitaev layer. H z is the external magnetic field in the z-direction (the [001] direction of spin frame) The current from the nth SC lead to the central region is thus a diagonal 4x4 matrix, here σ z is the Pauli matrix. The retarded, advanced, and lesser self-energies in the central region are assumed to be independent of the states i and j and are the retarded, advanced, and lesser Green functions, respectively. ρ n (ε) is the ratio of the SC density of states ρ S n (ε) to the normal one ρ N n (ε). The Fermi distribution function , and the linewidth function is . We are interested at the SC Josephson current generated by the transport of electron Cooper pairs with zero bias voltage. We can obtain the total SC Josephson current terms for spin-up and spin-down channels, Once obtaining the "total" Green functions G r,a,< (ε) in the central region with the Dyson equation and Keldish equation, we could get the zero-biased Josephson currents. Throughout this Letter the SC order parameters Δ L and Δ R in left and right ( ) , , , Since the thickness of the Kitaev region is only single atomic layer, the tunneling probability of holons is assumed to be unity. In contrast, the Majorana fermion modes display fractional collective excitations, the propagation of the spinons will be modulated by the DOS of the Majorana fermions. Once tunneling out of the central Kitaev region, the separated spinons and holons will recombine to SC Cooper pairs. From the DOS plot and supercurrent formula Eq.( Although the spin and charge transports could not be treated completely separately in this study, we separate the spin and charge of quasi-electron or quasi-hole into spinon and holon by employing the slave boson method and assume the tunneling probability of holons to be unity due to the monoatomic Kitaev layer. Thereout, we will realize the tunneling process mainly through the propagation of the spinons or local and itinerant Majorana fermions associated with the Kitaev coupling and modulated by the magnetic field, which is shown in the SC current characteristic. In the absence of external magnetic field, the zero-temperature supercurrent through the Josephson junction as the functions of the Kitaev coupling constant K is shown in Fig. From Fig. Majorana fermion modes in the central Kitaev material. Next, when K > 10Δ the tunneling current I S reaches a maximum, rapidly goes down and becomes negative after K > 12Δ, indicating that the present system transits from a π-junction relation to a general Josephson relation, which stems from the separation of the spinon flat band from the SC gap edge, and the tunneling current of the SC-Kitaev layer-SC junction changes its sign. The equivalent internal "molecular field" characteristic of the spin Kitaev coupling K, namely K<S i >, could have a great influence on the SC phase difference φ when K is large enough and finally result in the current sign reversal. With the further increasing K, the opposite DC Josephson current reaches a minimum about K ≈ 13.5Δ and finally gradually approaches zero in extremely large K >= 30Δ. Therefore, the SC Josephson current in the SC-single Kitaev layer-SC junction with applied magnetic field is very different from the SC-FM-SC In investigating the electron tunneling transport and its magnetic field modulation in a SC-Kitaev layer-SC Josephson junction with the weak link, we assume that the supercurrent majorly depends on the spin tunneling probability of the Cooper pairs. In the absence of magnetic field, due to the resonant tunnelings between the SC gap boundaries and the local Majorana fermion modes and between the SC gap edges and the dispersive itinerant Majorana fermion modes, the Josephson current I S displays two peaks at K/Δ≈ 3.4 and 10, respectively. With the increasing magnetic field, the applied field suppresses the spinon DOS of the Kitaev layer, the Josephson currents I S gradually decrease and abruptly drop to a saturation value at the critical magnetic field h c = gμ B H c /Δ ≈ 0.03K/Δ in the polarized FM phase, which distinctly differs from those of the SC-FM-SC 