Schwarzites are porous crystalline structures with Gaussian negative curvature. In this work, we investigated the mechanical behavior and energy absorption properties of two carbon-based diamond schwarzites (D688 and D8bal). We carried out fully atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The optimized MD atomic models were used to generate macro-scale models for 3D-printing (PolyLactic Acid (PLA) polymer filaments) through Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM). Mechanical properties under uniaxial compression were investigated for both the atomic models and the 3D-printed ones. Mechanical testings were performed on the 3D-printed schwarzites where the deformation mechanisms were found to be similar to those observed in MD 1 First studied by Hermann Schwarz in 1890, Triply-Periodic Minimal Surfaces (TPMS) possess locally minimized surface area under the constraint of periodic boundary conditions. Examples of TPMS families proposed by Schwarz include Primitive (P) and Diamond (D) surfaces. Several other families were obtained almost a century later by Alan Shoen, 2 such as Gyroid (G) and I-graph Wrapped Package-graph (I-WP). Despite being initially a purely mathematical investigation, the subject of TPMS has been explored in materials science as an optimized surface topology with promising mechanical properties. The role of the surface curvature on the mechanical properties of schwarzites and other carbon nanomaterials has been highlighted in recent works that combine Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations with 3D printing techniques. The obtained structures are used to study and contrast the mechanical behavior at different length scales. This approach has been used to study the mechanical properties of P and G schwarzites. In this work, we investigated the role of geometry/topology on the mechanical and energyabsorption properties of atomic and 3D-printed schwarzites belonging to the Diamond (D) family. In Figure The (atomistic and 3D printed) schwarzite structures (D688 and D8bal) were uniaxially compressed beyond the elastic regime until the mechanical failure (fracture). The elastic properties, such as Young's modulus (E) and Poisson's ratio (ν), were obtained from linear regime of the stress-strain curves. Different length scale models show qualitative agreement in the deformation mechanisms, specially on predicting a near-zero Poisson's ratio for one of the structures (D8bal). Also, due to the cellular character of schwarzites we calculated their energy-absorption characteristics and contrasted against other works on the literature regarding TPMS structures. The schwarzites studied in this work are shown in Figures Fully-atomistic MD simulations were carried out using the Adaptive Interatomic Reactive Bond-Order (AIREBO) where L 0 is the initial length along [001] and L is its current value during the compression. Furthermore, from the continuum interpretation of the virial stress where the indices i, j = x, y, z correspond to the Cartesian directions, m k is the atomic mass of the k-th atom, r ki (v ki ) is the atomic position (velocity) of the k-th along the i direction, f kj is the corresponding force on the k-th atom due to its neighbors and V is the volume of the structure. The Young's modulus E defined in the elastic regime is obtained by a linear fitting in the low-strain region (for more details, see the Supporting Information) where the stress-strain relationship can be approximated by In the same way, the Poisson's ration ν is obtained by a linear fitting for low values in the transverse vs longitudinal strain data (see the Supporting Information) as where ε is the normal strain given by and ε T is the strain along any transverse direction ([100] or [010] in Figure The analysis of the local stress concentration was based on the values of the von Mises stress The schwarzite optimized atomic structures from MD simulations were used as input to create macro models that are then 3D printed. The atomic positions were used to build interpolated surfaces like the ones shown on the left panel of Figure Since schwarzites are porous (or cellular) materials, it is interesting to investigate their energy absorption characteristics. which is calculated up to a strain value ε. Another important energy-absorption parameter is the crush force efficiency where σ avg (ε) and σ max (ε) are the average and maximum stress values up to the strain ε, respectively. An ideal energy absorber has CFE = 1. Finally, the stroke efficiency S E , or densification strain ε dens , is the strain value that maximizes the energy absorption efficiency For strain values greater than S E , the material no longer behaves as an energy absorber. At this point, the structure enters in a regime of densification characterized by a rapid increase of the stress values on the stress-strain curve. Previous works have already explored the energy absorption capabilities of TPMS-like materials. 4,34,55-57 In Figure On the other hand, Poisson's ratio values are expected to be mainly geometric-dependent (the trends should be scale and material independent), and they are indeed very close, as indicated in Table as their larger pore sizes result in higher "flatness" and/or lower density values. The smaller pore (atomic) sizes for D688 contributes to the suppression of the observed collapse plateaus (see Figure The energy absorption energy defined in Equation Similarly to the Young's modulus values, as expected, the absolute numbers for the MD and 3D W are of different magnitudes. Again, when we compare the D8bal/D688 ratio values there is a good MD/3D print agreement. Similarly to the mechanical properties (discussed above), the significant differences between the D688 and D8bal can be again attributed to their differences in 'flatness', which helps to structurally stabilize the structures. These results for the absorption energy values of both D688 and D8bal are different from the ones recently reported 4 for 3D-printed PLA Diamond TPMS. This difference is possibly due to the fact that 3D printed structures were obtained using a different approach than standard TPMS. Our 3D printed structures were obtained from models where the rendered surfaces are from energy minimized fully atomistic models, which provide a finer granularity (closer to the atomic models) than one obtained in the TPMS approach. This helps to decrease some structural instabilities that increases the stiffness of the structures as compared with pure TPMS. We investigated the mechanical behavior (deformations under compressive strains) and energy absorption properties of the D688 and D8bal diamond schwarzites. We carried out fully-atomistic reactive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The optimized atomic mod- (12) Pouya, C.; Overvelde, J. T. B.; Kolle, M.; Aizenberg, J.; Bertoldi, K.; Weaver, J. C.; Vukusic, P. Characterization of a mechanically tunable gyroid photonic crystal inspired by the butterflyparides sesostris. Advanced Optical Materials 2016, 4, 99-105. (13) Lai, M.; Kulak, A. N.; Law, D.; Zhang, Z.; Meldrum, F. C.; Riley, D. J. Profiting from nature: macroporous copper with superior mechanical properties. Chem Commun (Camb) 2007, 3547-3549. (M.; Avgeropoulos, A.; Grason, G. M.; Thomas, E. L. Seeing mesoatomic distortions in soft-matter crystals of a double-gyroid block copolymer. Nature 2019,