In this paper, the bounds on the Q-factor, a quantity inversely proportional to bandwidth, are derived and investigated for narrow-band phased array antennas. Arrays in free space and above a ground plane are considered. The Q-factor bound is determined by solving a minimization problem over the electric current density. The support of these current densities is on an element-enclosing region, and the bound holds for lossless antenna elements enclosed in this region. The Q-factor minimization problem is formulated as a quadratically constrained quadratic optimization problem that is solved either by a semidefinite relaxation or an eigenvalue-based method. We illustrate numerically how these bounds can be used to determine trade-off relations between the Q-factor and other design specifications: element form-factor, size, efficiency, scanning capabilities, and polarization purity. One of the most important antenna design parameters is the impedance bandwidth, for which an antenna satisfies its design criteria. Directly optimizing the bandwidth performance of an antenna or an array is difficult as it is closely related to the shape-optimization. In particular, it may be hard to determine if a global optimum has been reached. A class of tools addressing this problem are the fundamental bounds (limitations imposed by physical principles), and they have been instrumental for determining optimal performance for small antennas In this paper, we use the Q-factor The Q-factor approach was used to derive bounds for small antennas contained in a sphere or a cylinder in the works of Wheeler The Q-factor is defined to be proportional to a ratio of energies, stored and dissipated per cycle For periodic structures, Edelberg and Oliner In this paper, we apply optimization methods to the previously derived current-density representations for the array Q-factor As mentioned above, it is known that the Q-factor can be used to estimate the bandwidth both for single-port antennas and for arrays. In The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II defines the array geometries, gives Q-factor expressions for arrays in terms of current density both with and without a ground plane, and provides a matrix form for stored energy kernels in numerical implementation. In Section III two approaches for Q-factor optimization are proposed: semi-definite relaxation and the eigenvalue-type-problem based method. Examples of physical bounds obtained numerically by the optimization methods are provided in Section IV. The paper ends with conclusions in Section V. The Q-factor is proportional to the ratio between the stored energy and the total dissipated power Here, ω is the angular frequency, W e and W m are electric and magnetic stored energies respectively. In the case of radiating systems, the total power P tot is the sum of the radiated power P r and conductive losses P Ohm . The radiation efficiency is where δ = P Ohm /P r is the dissipation factor A tractable Q-factor optimization problem can be obtained by expressing both of the stored energies and the radiated and dissipated powers in terms of the current densities. This process starts in Section II-A for array elements in free space, and for arrays with a ground plane in Section II-B. The optimization is performed over all possible electrical current densities on the surface of an array element (cuboid in this example) within a unit cell. Consider a three-dimensional array of perfectly electricconducting (PEC) elements on a two-dimensional rectangular grid, see Fig. Here r ∈ R 3 is a coordinate vector, ζ mn = am x + bn ŷ; m, n ∈ Z, and k t00 = k sin θ 0 cos φ 0 x + k sin θ 0 sin φ 0 ŷ is a phase shift vector with the polar θ 0 and azimuthal φ 0 angles and the wavenumber k. The unit cell is defined as U = {(x, y, z) ∈ R 3 : x ∈ [0, a], y ∈ [0, b]} with a, b being the respective grid periods. The stored energies in where Ω is the maximal spatial support of current density in a unit cell, and the coordinates r 1 , r 2 are integration variables corresponding to the surface elements dS 1 , dS 2 . The dyadic kernels are where, ∇ 1 is a Jacobi matrix, 1 ∇ i is a gradient with respect to r i , i = 1, 2, 1 is a unit dyadic, k is the wavenumber and μ is permeability of free space. The free-space periodic Green's function G is given by ( The radiated power in terms of the current densities is with the kernel where η is the free space impedance. Dissipation losses are here estimated by a perturbation approach where R s is a surface resistance. The unit-cell geometry for the case with a ground-plane is similar to the unit-cell of the free-space case. The array consists of three-dimensional PEC elements placed on a twodimensional rectangular grid at positions z > 0, with the infinite ground plane placed at z = 0. The unit cell is given by U = {(x, y, z) ∈ R 3 : x ∈ [0, a], y ∈ [0, b], z ∈ [0, ∞)} and the phase shift condition (3) holds. The stored energies for this configuration are derived in The extra terms in ( )dS 1 dS 2 for currents with support inside the unit-cell. The calculation of losses with the ground plane remains an open problem. To incorporate the polarization-related constraints into the Q-factor optimization problem, in this subsection we derive and formulate the polarization in terms of the current density. Starting from the dyadic Green's function representation, the electric field due to a surface electric current density J is The contribution, associated with (m, n):th Floquet mode of the Green's function Here, the wave-vector and the coordinates are separated in the longitudinal and transverse components, see Appendix A. Calculating the expression within {•} in the integrand Here, F mn± is proportional to the polarization of the (m, n):th Floquet mode. The + (-)-sign applies to observation points r 1 above (below) the array, i.e. such that for all r 2 ∈ Ω. These factors have the form The dimensionless dyadics K ± are given by (18) Recall that the wave-vector components k tmn = xk xm + ŷk yn , k zmn depend on the angles φ 0 , θ 0 associated with the direction of propagation of the Floquet modes. Thus, K ± depend both on the electrical sizes ka, kb of the unit cell and the angles φ 0 , θ 0 associated with the propagation direction of the investigated Floquet mode, as specified in k t00 , see the Appendix. The co-and cross-polarized components of a Floquet mode in a given direction are (analogous to the far-field definition where the reference polarizations êco , and êcx are the chosen co-and cross-polarization unit vectors. For the ground-plane case, there is no radiation below the array, that is F mn-= 0. The factor F mn+ of the Floquetmodes above the array with ground plane is Here, K + is given in The co-polarized and cross-polarized components are found similarly to the free-space case from To efficiently determine these electromagnetic quantities numerically, all the above linear and quadratic forms are reduced to finite-dimensional linear and quadratic forms with matrix kernels. To this end, the current density is approximated by a set of surface basis functions {f u (r)} N u=1 over the array element Ω Here, the Rao-Wilton-Glisson basis functions are used for {f u (r)} N u=1 . The stored-energies and radiated-power kernels, in both free-space and ground-plane cases, can be represented as matrices with elements (the upper index u, w ∈ [1, N ] below corresponds to element indices in the corresponding matrix) The stored energies (4)-( with the current density basis coefficients vector I = (I 1 , I 2 , ..., I N ) T , and {.} T and {.} H denote a transpose and a conjugate transpose respectively. The process of computing the stored-energies and radiated-power matrices has a similar structure to the impedance-matrix computation in the Method of Moments (MoM) and can be implemented by marginal modifications of a MoM code The polarizations of the Floquet-modes ( The elements of vectors F co,mn± and F cx,mn± are given by (here demonstrated for co-and cross-polarized waves in the free space) In the previous section, the operator representation of the stored energies and radiated power were reduced to finite-sized matrices. This reduction simplifies the Q-factor representation (1) to a ratio between two finite-dimensional quadratic forms. A Q-factor optimization problem for a given shape and scanning direction can be formulated as: where Q(I) is the Q-factor, expressed in terms of the current coefficients. The optimization is over all currents that can be represented by the coefficients I n in I. The above problem is scaling invariant under the transformation I → aI, a ∈ C\{0} The above Q-factor optimization gives the minimum Q-factor at a preferred scan-direction and enclosing shape, as determined by the support of the set of basis functions. Additional design constraints can now be added to can be added to This can in turn be reformulated as a quadratic constraint The above problem One method to solve QCQP is the semi-definite relaxation (SDR) where X = II H and tr(•) denotes the trace. The Q-factor minimization problem ( where the condition rank X = 1 is dropped, and H denotes the class of N ×N Hermitian matrices. Whenever the solution has rank(X) = 1, one can reconstruct The constraints An alternative and less memory demanding approach is based on a Lagrangian formulation of the optimization problem. An alternative form of ( The maximum of the stored energies is an upper bound for the convex combination (α ∈ [0; 1]) of the electric and magnetic stored energies where The minimization problem The Lagrangian functional associated with this problem is Critical points of the Lagrangian are found as zeros of the variational derivative of the Lagrangian, i.e., the solutions to equation Such critical points provide candidates to the solution of the dual problem. Here, the minimum generalized eigenvalue and eigenvector solution (λ * , I * ) minimizes the ratio I H W α I/I H RI, which with the help of (38) provides a lower bound to the Q-factor. Maximizing over the parameter α give us the maximal lower bound A straightforward solution of the resulting generalized eigenvalue problem ( Here, r = rank R. The currents can be represented as Multiplication of the eigenvalue problem The transformed stored energy matrix is then partitioned according to the eigendecomposition R of the radiated power matrix: The generalized eigenvalue problem is then rewritten as a system of equations The stored energies are positive definite in the considered cases, thus the second equation provides the relation between the parts of Direct substitution in the upper equation of The lowest eigenvalue and its corresponding eigenvector in Additional constraints in the eigenvalue approach are included by adding the constraints with their associated Lagrange multiplier to the Lagrangian Above, all the theory required to obtain the Q-bounds from current density optimization has been discussed. To investigate the Q-factor bounds, the following shapes and scenarios are considered: cuboids and planar rectangular structures of horizontal and vertical orientation and for different aspect ratios with and without a ground plane. All these examples have a square-sized unit-cell with side p, and the array elements are relatively small to focus on the narrow-band regime. Both the broadside case, as well as scanning are discussed. The impact of efficiency and different demands of polarization purity are also considered below. In all the examples, except where otherwise stated, the numerical approximations of the stored energies, radiated power, the Gram matrix and the polarization vectors are computed as described in Section II-D using RWG basis functions on a triangular mesh, representing considered array element geometries. These numerical approximations are then used in conjunction with the optimization methods described in Section III to obtain the Q-factor bounds with different constraints. First, consider a sequence of flat periodically spaced rectangles, x × y , with constant area: x y = p 2 /9, see Fig. Observe in Fig. Next, a ground plane is added at z = 0 to the structure in Sec. IV-A, see the inset in Fig. In all investigated cases, the area p 2 /9 is fixed, and the wavelength at the center frequency is λ = 2p. To convert the Q-factor to bandwidth, the Yaghjian and Best relation The widest Q-factor bandwidth estimate is obtained at h = 1 4 λ for all aspect ratios of the fixed area. This is consistent with the common rule of thumb of locating the antenna at a quarter of a wavelength above the ground plane. The bandwidth for x ∈ Comparing the Fig. From a comparison of the Q-factor predicted bandwidth with the array figure of merit (Sum rule in Fig. With focus on narrow-band arrays, it is therefore interesting to examine how certain realized resonant antenna elements behave as compared with the Q-factor and sum-rule bounds. A partial enlargement of Fig. Here, three dipole-like antenna elements with different aspect ratios, see Fig. C. Ground plane with additional elements. Fig. The Q-factor of the plate with varying height, Fig. The results in this section examine the impact of scanning. The scan-direction (φ 0 , θ 0 ) appears in k t00 , see Figure The lowest curve is the optimized Q-factor bound at each scan angle. The colored curves illustrate the impact on the Q-factor under scanning utilizing a current density associated with the optimal Q-factor for scan angles θ shown in the legend. angle. It is interesting to examine for what range that the localangle-optimized (colored) graph is similar to the dotted black curve. The range of angles where the Q-factor for the scanangle specific optimization remain close to optimal is large, in particular for the locally optimized scans at In the φ = 0 • plane, one can observe that the minimum Q-factor is obtained at broadside, with the Q-factor increasing as the array is steered away. However, at around θ = 53 • the Q-factor begins to decrease again. Fig. In this section, consider the horizontally oriented rectangular plate with x = 2 y = p/9 at height h over a ground-plane at z = 0. In Fig. From the black-dashed curves for the three different heights, it is clear that for the heights 1 8 λ, 1 4 λ and both scan directions, the minimum Q-factors are higher for small h and they tend to increase as the array becomes thinner. In contrast, note that at h = 3 8 λ there is a decrease in the optimal Q-factor away from the broadside scan direction. Indeed, in both planes for scanangles above 40 • , the plate at 3 8 λ outperforms the otherwise superior 1 4 λ-case. This suggests that while the traditional 1 4 λ height is optimal for narrow-band arrays at broadside, a larger height actually provides the possibility for better scanning performance for small narrow-band elements. Despite the different values of the Q-factor when compared between different heights and also the case without the ground plane, the current distributions with the ground plane are similar to those shown in Fig. In this section, the radiation efficiency constraint is added to the optimization problem. The minimum Q rad is obtained from the Q-factor optimization without constraints, with current I * . The efficiency obtained with this current using . Q-factor as a function of scan angle at three different distances from the ground plane, presented in the same way as in Fig. efficiency to e rad 95 % will have negligible effect on the Q-factor, resulting in Q rad ≈ 9.66. The efficiency has an upper bound. For the studied case, this is found at e rad 95.4 %. Attempting to reach this bound imposes a high cost on the Q-factor. A similar sharp increase has also been shown in The insets of Fig. In this section, a polarization constraint (32) is applied to the broadside Q-factor optimization problem. The geometry corresponds to the free-space case, see the inset in Fig. This paper presents two optimization methods to obtain Qfactor-based estimates of bandwidth for phased array antennas. The examples demonstrate the usefulness and the accuracy of such estimates for small narrow-band antenna elements. The paper investigates certain array element form-factors, beamscanning, placement of the element relative to the ground plane, a trade-off between the radiation efficiency and the Qfactor, and a trade-off between the polarization purity and the Q-factor. The proposed optimization methods efficiently solve the originally non-convex problems of Q-factor minimization and determine an optimal current density corresponding to the minimum value. Such optimal currents can provide insight into the physics behind optimal narrow-band radiation, as for example in Fig. Another interesting result is the bandwidth comparison between realized antenna elements and the Q-factor bounds. Here it is shown that, for a family of elements at different heights above the ground, the Q-factor well predicts the available bandwidth of narrow-band elements, e.g., Q 5. For more broadband elements, a single Q-factor resonance tends to underestimate the available bandwidth. These Q-factor bounds and their associated bandwidth estimates are interesting since they are both easy to obtain, and more predictive than the array-figure of merit bound. The latter is useful for wideband multi-resonant antenna elements, where it provides the absolute upper bound for lossless arrays. The Q-factor bound gives information on the required size, scanning impact, and placement within the unit-cell. In this paper, we have also investigated the behavior of optimal Q-factor for any antenna in a given region for a given scan direction, both with and without a ground plane. It was especially interesting to note that for an optimal antenna in these small enclosing regions there exists a different height (above 1 4 λ) that has a better Q-factor performance at large scan ranges. The two constrained Q-factor optimization cases, efficiency and polarization purity show the versatility of the Q-factor approach in estimating the bandwidth. The above examples illustrate that the Q-factor optimization of periodic structures is of significant interest. It is more predictive in estimating the available bandwidth for narrowband structures than e.g. a sum-rule. Indeed, physical insight can be obtained in certain cases, such as the classical quarterwavelength-position for optimal antennas above a ground plane. It is also easy to add constraints to the optimization problem, such as polarization purity. In addition, Q-factor optimization provides trade-off relations where e.g., the height or aspect ratio can be tuned at the expense of the Q-factor. The higher bandwidth robustness of a vertically oriented rectangle in comparison with a horizontally oriented rectangle is clearly visible in the Q-factor of this case. The free-space two-dimensional periodic Green's function in the spectral form is More advanced impedance-tuning naturally results in a wider bandwidth, and such improvement-factors are similar for these elements.