We study spin transport through a suspended Cu channel by an electrical nonlocal 4-terminal measurement for future spin mechanics applications. A magnetoresistance due to spin transport through the suspended Cu channel is observed, and its magnitude is comparable to that of a conventional fixed Cu lateral spin valve. The spin diffusion length in the suspended Cu channel is estimated to be 340 nm at room temperature from the spin signal dependence on the distance between the ferromagnetic injector and detector electrodes. This value is found to be slightly shorter than in a fixed Cu. The decrease in the spin diffusion length in the suspended Cu channel is attributed to an increase in spin scattering originating from naturally oxidized Cu at the bottom of the Cu channel. Spin mechanics, a coupling between spin angular momentum and mechanical motion, has emerged as one of the modern spintronics fields Towards further progress of the Einstein-de Haas effect from a modern spintronics view, a material possessing the following physical properties is promising: electrical conductivity and low stiffness. Electrical conductivity is especially required to replace the spinwave spin current with a conventional spin current, which enables expansion of the material platform for spin mechanics studies. Low stiffness is also required to detect a small mechanical momentum due to the Einstein-de Haas effect. The YIG cantilever exhibits a considerably low frequency (~20 kHz) owing to its very long shape due to the very high elastic constants Hence, it is still quite significant to implement a search for a conductive and soft material in which spin current can be injected to observe the Einstein-de Haas effect. Here, we focus on Cu, which is conductive, is soft, and possesses a significantly long spin diffusion length at room temperature with a suspended channel. Square-shaped holes (2.0 × 1.8 μm 2 in size and 50 nm in depth) were fabricated on a SiO2(300 nm)/Si substrate by using electron-beam (EB) lithography and reactive ion etching using CF4 (the value in brackets indicates the thickness). These holes were filled with Al deposited by thermal heating evaporation prior to removing the resist. LSVs consisting of Cu(100 nm)/Ni80Fe20(25 nm) were fabricated using a lift-off process as the Cu channel was placed on the Al. Before evaporation of the Cu, the top of the Ni80Fe20 (Py) layer was etched with Ar-milling to remove residual resist to improve the quality of the Py/Cu interfaces. This process was performed ex situ of the Cu deposition chamber. Finally, a suspended Cu channel was formed by removing the Al beneath the Cu by using 2.38% tetramethyl-ammonium-hydroxide (TMAH) aq. Here, P is the spin polarization at the Cu/Py interface. The natural logarithm can be taken on both sides of Eq. ( Then, we estimated λCu to be 390 ± 40 nm in the Fix-LSV and 340 ± 40 nm in the Sus-LSV from the slope of the linear relationship between ln(ΔRS) and L, as shown in Fig. The spin diffusion length of the Sus-LSV was slightly shorter than that of the Fix-LSV, and the suspended structure did not seem to influence the spin transport in Cu. Even if we consider the small difference in the spin diffusion lengths, it is attributable to the formation of an oxide layer at the bottom of the Cu channel in the Sus-LSV. The naturally oxidized surface of Cu can be an origin of spin scattering, as experiments on the thickness dependence of the spin diffusion length of a Cu channel have shown. In conclusion, we established a method to fabricate LSVs with suspended Cu channels. This technique is applicable to other spin-current channels. Moreover, we successfully observed spin transport through a channel via non-local 4-terminal measurements. The spin diffusion length was estimated to be 340 nm from the channel-length dependence of the signal amplitude. The small difference between spin diffusion lengths in the fixed and suspended Cu channels is attributed to the oxidization of the Cu on the bottom surface and not to the suspended structure. This result indicates that suspended Cu can be useful for creating cantilevers with a sufficient size to study spin mechanics. Square-shaped holes were formed with electron-beam (EB) lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE). The resist for EB lithography was ZEP-520A (Zeon Corporation). RIE was performed for 3 minutes with CF4, where the gas flow was 50 sccm, the pressure was 5.0 Pa, and the RF power was 50 W. These holes were filled with Al deposited by resistance heating evaporation. Py electrodes were prepared with EB lithography and EB deposition. The Cu channel was also prepared with EB lithography and resistance heating evaporation. Before Cu evaporation, the tops of the Py electrodes were etched with Ar-milling ex situ to remove a residual resist. After fabrication of the LSV structure, the Al was removed from the bottom of the channel by soaking the sample in 2.38% TMAH aq. for 90 seconds (NMD-3, Kanto Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.). Scientific Research (S) "Semiconductor Spincurrentronics" (No. 16H0633).