We propose a method to monitor the progress of laser processing using laser speckle patterns. Laser grooving and percussion drilling were performed using femtosecond laser pulses. The speckle patterns from a processing point were monitored with a high-speed camera and analyzed with a deep neural network. The deep neural network enabled us to extract multiple information from the speckle pattern without a need for analytical formulation. The trained neural network was able to predict the ablation depth with an uncertainty of 2 μm, as well as the material under processing, which will be useful for composite material processing. Laser-based micro-structuring is a powerful tool for precision manufacturing and is considered a key element for future automized manufacturing. The main physical phenomenon behind laser-based micro-structuring is laser ablation: the process of surface material removal by rapid energy injection with laser pulses An important parameter in laser ablation is the rate of material removal, or the ablation rate. The ablation rate depends on various factors, such as material properties, surface morphology, pulse energy, and the laser repetition rate Various methods have been developed to monitor the processing status in a non-contact way, including acoustic and plasma detection Currently, there are two major implementations, differentiated by their choice of reference beam path: cross-interferometry and self-mixing. In cross-interferometry, a separate reference arm is placed in the interferometer, which enables the determination of absolute distance in exchange for a comparatively large installation footprint As an alternative method to optically monitor the laser processing status, we focus on utilizing the spatial coherence of a probe light source instead of only the temporal coherence as in the aforementioned interferometry techniques. When spatially coherent light is scattered by a rough surface and projected onto a screen, the scattered light on the screen exhibits a highly irregular intensity profile, known as a laser speckle pattern. The speckle pattern arises from interference of wavefronts scattered at different positions of the surface. As such, the speckle pattern carries a trove of information on the material surface condition. It has been used for various measurement and diagnostic applications, such as in surface roughness measurements In this study, we demonstrated the successful extraction of multiple information from three sequential frames of speckle patterns measured in situ during laser processing. Figure The experimental setup is shown in Fig. The resolution of the acquired images was 4080 x 480 pixels, which was reduced down to 255 x 25 pixels by box averaging and cropping. The brightness and contrast of each image were normalized between 0 and 1. Due to this normalization, only spatial patterns of the images were taken into account in the following analysis. The neural network consisted of two convolutional layers, five residual convolutional layers, and a max-pooling layer followed by two convolutional layers. The last two-dimensional layer was then flattened and connected to two fully connected layers. The rectified linear unit was used for the activation function. Three sequential image frames were used as input data, and the measurement value and material vectors were used as label data. Here the material vector was represented by a onehot vector of material species. The loss function was composed from the root mean square of the ablated depth and the cross-entropy of the material vector. The neural network was trained with 13,000 datasets which included all three materials. The batch size was 256, and the Adam algorithm was used for optimization. Upon three-sequential image input, the trained neural network predicts the ablation depth and the target material. Figure Validation data were obtained separately from the training data. The 32-34 combination of pulse energies and scan speed for the three materials resulted in 98 datasets. Each dataset consisted of 10 three-sequential images. The net 980 datasets were used for the validation. The estimated ablation depth by the neural network was plotted as a function of the experimentally measured ablation depth. Good correspondence was found between estimated and measured values, with less than 2 μmuncertainty and without material dependence. Most of the dataset showed less than 1 μmuncertainty below an ablation depth of 5 μm. We note that the prediction took 0.09 ms using a standard commercially available GPU; this figure shows that with proper configuration of the camera data acquisition board and GPU memory, real-time feedback of the laser processing should be possible. In addition, the speckle patterns can simultaneously predict the material type being processed. Figure Almost 10 dB separation between the most probable material and the others shows that we can accurately predict the material under processing. The good material separation for various ablation depths suggests the existence of material-specific surface morphology for each groove, that this information is imprinted in the speckle pattern, and that the deep neural network can successfully extract this information. Our method can also be applied for hole drilling. Figure We developed a method to extract the progress of laser processing by in situ speckle pattern analysis using a neural network. The neural network can predict the ablation depth of a groove with an accuracy of 2 μm. Our method is easy to install compared to traditional interferometric monitoring techniques. We also show that as the speckle information utilizes the full surface information, it can predict other properties of the processed material as well, for example, the processed material type. This would be especially useful for composite material processing. Moreover, the prediction time of less than 0.1 ms is promising for real-time feedback for complex processing procedures. Altogether, the simplicity, versatility, and overall accuracy of the method should make it a strong candidate for future integrated monitoring systems.