This letter reports the modification of magnetism in a magnetic insulator Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 thin film by topological surface states (TSS) in an adjacent topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 thin film. Ferromagnetic resonance measurements show that the TSS in Bi 2 Se 3 produces a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, results in a decrease in the gyromagnetic ratio, and enhances the damping in Y 3 Fe 5 O 12 . Such TSS-induced changes become more pronounced as the temperature decreases from 300 K to 50 K. These results suggest a completely new approach for control of magnetism in magnetic thin films. Topological insulators can be characterized by a gap in the bulk band structure and a linear Dirac cone in the bulk gap for the surface states. When a topological insulator (TI) is interfaced with or in proximity to a magnetic insulator (MI) with perpendicular magnetization, the magnetic ordering in the MI can break the time-reversal symmetry of and open a gap at the Dirac point of the topological surface states (TSS) at the MI/TI interface. This can lead to formation of a quantum anomalous Hall insulator and an axion insulator when the Fermi level is within the gap opened by the MI; In contrast, the inverse effect of the TSS in the TI on the magnetism in the MI remain largely unexplored. Theory indicates several interesting phenomena in this context: the TSS in a TI film can induce a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) in an adjacent MI film, Figure The details about the growth and characterization of these films are provided in the Supplementary Materials. Figure To confirm the above-described H FMR shift and H enhancement, FMR measurements were repeated at different frequencies. Figure where denotes the difference between the saturation induction and anisotropy field of the YIG film, namely, . (1750 G), (2) where is the angle of the equilibrium magnetization relative to the film normal that can be found according to The In addition to modifying | | and producing a PMA, the TSS also lead to an enhanced damping in the YIG, as indicated by the H data in Fig. where is the effective damping constant and denotes the inhomogeneity line broadening. The data indicate that the Bi 2 Se 3 growth gives rise to a rather significant increase in H of the YIG. For example, H at f=10 GHz increased from 10.1±0.3 Oe for the bare YIG film to 26.0±0.3 Oe for the YIG/Bi 2 Se 3 bilayer. The data also indicate that the increase of H is mostly due to the increase of the slope of the H vs. f response, namely, due to a rise in , rather than due to an increase in . These results, together with the facts that (i) the Lorentzian function fits better the FMR profiles than the Gaussian function and (ii) after the removal of the Bi 2 Se 3 film H returns to the initial value for the bare YIG film, evidently indicate that the Bi 2 Se 3 film-caused H increase is not due to inhomogeneity line broadening, but is rather due to an enhancement in . The fitting in Fig. , a change in g results in a change in ||. Here, is the Bohr magneton, and is the reduced Planck's constant. Further, the TSS extension at the interface also results in strong coupling between the magnetization in the YIG and the conduction electrons in the Bi 2 Se 3 ; this interfacial coupling produces additional damping, ) increases with a decrease in T, giving rise to more robust TSS at low T. increases with a decrease in T, as expected. In spite of the above-presented consistency, there is a possibility that the Bi 2 Se 3 -induced changes of the YIG properties presented in Figs. Figure Additional control measurements were performed on the bi-layered samples where the 8-nm Bi 2 Se 3 capping layer was replaced by an 8-nm Au film, which is a heavy metal, or an 8-nm (Bi 0.75 In 0.25 ) 2 Se 3 film, 