Helical conductors with spin-momentum locking are promising platforms for Majorana fermions. Here we report observation of two topologically distinct phases supporting helical edge states in charge neutral Bernal-stacked tetralayer graphene in Hall bar and Corbino geometries. As the magnetic field B^ and out-of-plane displacement field D are varied, we observe a phase diagram consisting of an insulating phase and two metallic phases, with 0, 1 and 2 helical edge states, respectively. These phases are accounted for by a theoretical model that relates their conductance to spin-polarization plateaus. Transitions between them arise from a competition among inter-layer hopping, electrostatic and exchange interaction energies. Our work highlights the complex competing symmetries and the rich quantum phases in few-layer graphene. Helical conductors, systems that have no bulk conduction but support dissipationless conducting states at their edges, may be engineered to realize Majorana statistics for quantum computation The advent of few-layer graphene provides an alternative platform to realize helical edge states: as semi-metals, they host electron and hole states coexisting near the charge neutrality point (CNP)[9-15], while affording high mobility transport. Helical edge states are observed in monolayer graphene at the charge neutrality point (CNP) in the presence of large in-plane magnetic fields Here we report observation of quantum phases supporting helical edge states in tetralayer graphene (4LG) at the CNP in a large magnetic field, arising from the competing effects of interlayer coherence, electrostatic polarization and exchange interaction. As the interlayer potential and magnetic field varies, we observe a series of quantum transitions among the phases that host 2, 1 and 0 helical edge states on each edge, with quantum critical phase boundaries that move with parallel magnetic field. Our work highlights the complex competing symmetries in fewlayer graphene and the rich quantum phases in this seemingly simple system. As 4LG is a fewlayer graphite system that is tunable by gate, our observations may also be relevant to the highly resistive state observed in bulk graphite The low energy electron bands of 4LG consist of two bilayer graphene (BLG)-like bands with light (m) and heavy (M) effective masses (Fig. We perform magneto-transport measurement on dual-gated 4LG devices with Hall bar and Corbino geometris[28] (Fig. Fig. To explore the electronic phases of the n=0 QH state, we measure Rxx vs. B^ and D, while maintaining overall charge neutrality. At large magnetic field, a striking phase diagram emerges (Fig. The insulating (metallic) nature of phase I (II and III) is further confirm by their temperature dependence. As T increases, Rxx of phase I decreases from ~80 kΩ to ~40 kΩ; in contrast, in phase II, Rxx rises from ~6 kΩ at base temperature to become nearly as resistive as phase I at 40 K (Fig. A central question in ascertaining the natures of these phases is whether conduction therein occurs via bulk or edge state transport, as Rxx in Hall bar devices contains contributions from both mechanisms. To address this question, we fabricated dual-gated devices with Corbino geometry (Fig. To better visualize the edge conductance, we note that the longitudinal conductance of the Hall bar device is a sum of the edge and bulk conduction, GHall=Gedge+sbulk(W/L), while GCorbino arises sole from the bulk, G !"#$%&" = '( + σ $,)-(here sbulk is the conductivity of the bulk, W/L is the aspect ratio of the Hall bar channel, b is the distance between the two contacts, and a is the radius of the inner contact). Thus, the edge conduction is given by G ./0. = G 12)) - Lastly, we investigate how the phases are affected by an in-plane magnetic field B||. Fig. To understand the phase diagram and the origin of the metallic states, we first calculate the LL spectrum of 4LG using a non-interacting k•p continuum model Of most relevance to our studies are two LLs (M, 0) and (m, -1), between which the CNP of 4LG resides. At low field, the electron-like (m, -1) LL has higher energy than the hole-like (M, 0) LL. Taking Zeeman splitting into account, the n=0 state is an insulator with spin and valley polarization at D=0 (Fig. The insulating phase I, however, can transition into a metallic phase, if the hole-like (M, 0) LL surpasses the electron-like (m, -1) level, thus leading to counter-propagating edge states. Such a "band inversion" can be achieved by tuning either B or D. First, at D=0, the different dispersions of these two LLs in B^ lead to their crossing at sufficiently high magnetic fields. Fig. To examine the effect of D, we calculate the LL spectra at constant B^ while varying the interlayer potential Δ (Fig. Two representative E(Δ) spectra below and above B^cp=30 T are shown in Fig. We reproduce the phase diagram in Fig. To account for interaction effects, we introduce a minimal set of one-body and interaction terms, and perform Hartree-Fock (HF) calculations (see Interestingly, at large B and moderately low D, a phase with Sz=1 appears, followed by the reemergence of phase II with Sz=2 (Fig. Finally, in narrower regions of the phase diagram, the HF analysis yields more complex states formed by a coherent superposition of various states |a; N s⟩. These coherent states are zero temperature insulators; their continuous nature of the transitions into them suggest relatively small stiffnesses associated with the broken U(1) symmetries they host 