Two-dimensional heterostructures with layers of slightly different lattice vectors exhibit a new periodic structure known as moiré lattices. Moiré lattice formation provides a powerful new way to engineer the electronic structure of two-dimensional materials for realizing novel correlated and topological phenomena. In addition, superstructures of moiré lattices can emerge from multiple misaligned lattice vectors or inhomogeneous strain distribution, which offers an extra degree of freedom in the electronic band structure design. High-resolution imaging of the moiré lattices and superstructures is critical for quantitative understanding of emerging moiré physics. Here we report the nanoscale imaging of moiré lattices and superstructures in various graphene-based samples under ambient conditions using an ultra-high-resolution implementation of scanning microwave impedance microscopy. We show that, quite remarkably, although the scanning probe tip has a gross radius of ~100 nm, an ultra-high spatial resolution in local conductivity profiles better than 5 nm can be achieved. This resolution enhancement not only enables to directly visualize the moiré lattices in magic-angle twisted double bilayer graphene and composite super-moiré lattices, but also allows design path toward artificial synthesis of novel moiré superstructures such as the Kagome moiré from the interplay and the supermodulation between twisted graphene and hexagonal boron nitride layers. Moiré lattices with large periodicity can be realized in two-dimensional (2D) heterostructures composed of atomically thin layers with slightly different lattice vectors, either due to a lattice mismatch or a small-angle twist. Such moiré lattices generate a new length and energy scale in stacked 2D materials and provide an exciting new platform to engineer novel correlated phenomena and topological physics in van der Waals heterostructures (1-12). Superstructures of moiré lattices can emerge if multiple layers with similar lattice vectors are stacked together, offering extra flexibility to design novel quantum phenomena. Quantitative characterization of the moiré lattice and superstructure in a device configuration is critical for understanding and controlling the rich moiré physics in 2D heterostructures. Traditionally, the structure of moiré lattices is imaged with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) Relative to other AFM-and TEM-based techniques, scanning microwave impedance microscopy (sMIM) A highly simplified schematic for our measurements is illustrated in Fig. We note that the uMIM-Im signal is informative for a rapid assessment of the local conductivity because it increases monotonically with gg. sMIM-Re and sMIM-Im for the gross (unmodified) tip geometry (scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of Fig. Scanning microwave impedance microscopy can be considered a microwave version of the apertureless near-field optical microscopy. However, unlike typical near field microscopy, our experiments are performed in contact mode where the tip-sample distance is maintained in the repulsive regime. Consequently, the electromagnetic coupling between the tip and sample is highly localized at the tip apex. Previous studies have demonstrated that the resolution of sMIM and other near-field techniques is limited by tip geometry, with the tip radius setting the resolution limit (typically 50-100 nm). To achieve ultra-high-resolution, we use a conventional sMIM instrument in air at room temperature, but specially prepare (i.e., condition) the tip and sample. Briefly, using the same tip throughout, the sample is first pre-scanned over a large area. A detailed small-area datacollecting scan is then performed. We hypothesize that the conditioning step results in: (1) sample surface cleaning, and (2) tip geometry modification. Regarding the latter, both electrically conducting and insulating adsorbates from the sample redistribute onto the tip apex eventually forming a protruding thin conducting chain supported by an insulating matrix. This result in an electromagnetic coupling that is dominated by the metallic chain, while the signal contribution from the remaining part of the bulk recessed tip is suppressed. This scenario, somewhat akin to the enhanced resolution afforded to STM-AFM by tip-adsorbed CO molecules We first demonstrate the capability of uMIM by imaging the moiré superlattice in twisted double bilayer graphene (tDBG). Similar to twisted bilayer graphene (tBG) (2), tDBG contains a continuously varying stacking sequence within the moiré unit cell We clearly resolve three different domains in the tDBG moiré lattice with distinct uMIM signals (Fig. Analogous to the circular AA stacking in tBG However, due to the lattice relaxation with decreasing twist angle at θθ < 1°, the proportion of ABBC domain in the moiré unit cell continually decreases up until it disappears for near-0° twist, leaving only triangular ABAB-ABCA domains (e.g., Fig. The spatial resolution capability of uMIM is further demonstrated in the imaging of "moiré defects", which interrupt the long-range periodicity of the moiré lattice. In Figs. At near-0° twist, the lattice energetically prefers to reconstruct into relaxed triangular domains with an alternating stacking sequence The low Fermi velocity in rhombohedral stacking as compared to Bernal stacking should result in a lower electrical conductivity for the rhombohedral domain. Indeed, in Fig. In addition to the conventional moiré lattices, our ultra-high sensitivity uMIM allows for imaging of moiré superstructures from three underlying lattices with different lattice vectors. Although heterostructures with multiple coexisting moiré has been imaged before with AFM (25), the resulting moiré superstucture has not been observed in ambient conditions previously. Fig. where ∆θθ ss = 14.7° is the misorientation between the moirés. This results in λλ ss of ~45.2 nm, which agrees well with the observed periodicity of 45.7 nm. Fig. A different moiré superstructure can exist when a near-0° tDBG with triangular relaxed domains are intertwined with the commensurate moiré from aligned bottom BG/hBN (Fig. Filtering the uMIM-Im image by selecting only these features (Fig. uMIM imaging allows us to readily explore other moiré superstructures with desirable physical properties. A special example is the Kagome lattice, which has attracted significant attention as a platform to study Hubbard physics due to the presence of flat bands and exotic quantum and magnetic phases with non-trivial ordering Inspired by the artificial Kagome lattice in optical superlattices, we construct a solid state Kagome-like moiré superlattice in BG/BG/hBN systems by superimposing λλ BG/BG : λλ BG/hBN = 2:1 and maintaining azimuthal alignment of the moiré constituents. These are achieved by setting the twist angle of both the BG/BG and BG/hBN interfaces to θθ ≈ 0.6° (Fig. The construction of a solid state Kagome-like lattice based on moiré patterns is an interesting pathway to explore the possibility of generating nearly flat bands and host correlated phases in the vicinity of the Fermi level. While the superlattice miniband structures are susceptible to changes in the details of the atomic and electronic structure models, the band flatness should further be enhanced since the bilayer graphene within the tDBG has less dispersive bands than a Dirac cone at the K points, and since a gap can open through interaction with the substrate. Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated ultra-high-resolution uMIM as a facile, high-throughput, and noninvasive method for characterizing moiré lattices and superstructures, as well as moiré defects and the creation of tailored Kagome superlattices in multilayer stacks of van der Waals heterostructures. The enhanced capability enabled by uMIM should facilitate better understanding and heterostructure design paths for novel correlated quantum phenomena in more advanced moiré superstructures. 