Superparamagnetic colloidal particles can be reversibly assembled into wheel-like structures called microwheels (μwheels) which roll on surfaces due to friction and can be driven at usercontrolled speeds and directions using rotating magnetic fields. Here, we describe the hardware and software to create and control the magnetic fields that assemble and direct μwheel motion and the optics to visualize them. Motivated by portability, adaptability and low-cost, an extruded aluminum heat dissipating frame incorporating open optics and audio speaker coils outfitted with high magnetic permeability cores was constructed. Open-source software was developed to define the magnitude, frequency, and orientation of the magnetic field, allowing for real time joystick control of μwheels through two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) fluidic environments. With this combination of hardware and software, μwheels translate at speeds up to 50 μm/s through sample sizes up to 5 cm x 5 cm x 5 cm using 0.75-2.5 mT magnetic fields with rotation frequencies of 5-40 Hz. Heat dissipation by aluminum coil clamps maintained sample temperatures within 3 ̊C of ambient temperature, a range conducive for biological applications. With this design, μwheels can be manipulated and imaged in 2D and 3D networks at length scales of micrometers to centimeters. Microscale bots have potential for targeted cargo delivery in biological systems and rod-like walkers, wheels, and lassos Their speed is controlled by the magnetic field rotation frequency with maximum velocities determined by field magnitude and slip at the wall. Speed can be enhanced by applying external loads via DC magnetic fields that draw the assemblies closer to the surface thereby reducing slip To use μwheels in complex environments such as the mammalian vasculature, it is necessary to design an apparatus to develop and test μwheel driving strategies in tortuous threedimensional environments. The apparatus described in this article builds upon our prior work Removeable ferrite plugs placed in the center of the coils can increase the field strength in a 3 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm test section. Open source software was developed and used to define the magnitude, frequency, and orientation of the magnetic fields. The apparatus was tested by driving μwheels on a planar surface and through a helical channel. To create suitable magnetic field strengths over larger samples, field amplitudes were increased using designs that included ferrite cores within copper wound coils with higher magnetic permeability than the air-cores used in prior work A custom frame with an open architecture was built to house the apparatus components (Fig. A rotating magnetic field assembles superparamagnetic particles (e.g. 4.5 μm, Life Technologies, Dynabeads M-450 Epoxy, Carlsbad, CA) into μwheels and drives them along surfaces (Fig. A 1 Ω resistor in series with each coil (Fig. Each amplifier outputs to two channels and can supply 650 WRMS of power per 2 Ω channel. Each coil assembly, with winding layers wired in parallel (Sec. II.D), has a resistance of 2.2 Ω. mm. The stack of toroids was centered within the coil and a mixture of 75% iron oxide (by volume) ferrous epoxy material was poured between the coil former and the toroids. The ferrous epoxy was made by mixing iron oxide powder (Alpha Chemicals, Natural Black Iron Oxide, Missouri) with clear epoxy resin (East Coast Resin, Crystal Clear Epoxy Resin). For the x-y coils where optical access is not needed, optional ferrite plugs were designed to fit within the open area of the toroids (Fig. The magnetic field produced by a coil decreases as the coil temperature increases. If resistive heating of the coil becomes severe, the wire windings can melt, disrupting the circuit and causing coil failure. To lengthen the operating time and maintain steady-state within the magnetic field generation system, a coil cooling system was integrated within the apparatus design (Fig. Two interchangeable optics trains were built to allow for visualization of different sample types. The long working distance train was designed to image large 3D samples using an f-theta lens (Fig. Illumination is provided by a 50 watt LED chip (Chanzon, 1DGL-JC-50W-NW, Huaqiang, China) coupled to an aluminum heat sink (TX, H&PC-73411, FXT Technologies, Shenzhen, China). To dissipate heat emanating from the light source, the heat sink is mounted to the aluminum apparatus frame and fit with a small fan (Fig. For μwheel driving tests on planar surfaces, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS; Sylgard 184, Krayden, Denver, CO) test section was fabricated For μwheel driving tests in 3D, a helical tube with elevation change in the z-direction was fabricated using a spring with a circular 2 mm diameter cross section, 21 mm coil diameter, and a 9 ̊ pitch. The spring was secured inside a rectangular Petri dish, creating a mold with planar sides. PDMS was poured into the mold, filling the volume surrounding the spring. To track μwheels within the test section, alternating colors of candle wax dye (Candlewic, Doylestown, PA) were injected into the PDMS, providing visual cues for location within the helical channel. The mold was degassed and cured using the same procedure as the planar test section. Once cured, the spring and Petri dish molds were removed from the PDMS and the test section was trimmed to remove excess material. The helical tube was saturated with 1.4% SDS in DI water from the bottom elevation up using a hypodermic needle. Then, a 50 μL bolus of 0.5% Dynabead suspension of 2 x 10 6 particles/mL in DI water with 1.4% sodium dodecyl sulfate was injected into the bottom elevation of the tube. Finally, the top elevation of the channel was plugged with a modified pipette tip. A multithreaded open-source Python application, MuControl Visualizations and live plots within the application allow for confirmation of the status of the magnetic field during use. Calibration tools enable simple output waveforms for testing and measurement of each individual coil set. MuControl is packaged and compiled into a self-contained executable file, allowing for compatibility with most computer hardware, eliminating the need for up to date Python distributions or coding experience. The user interface was designed using Python PyQt5 A settings window (Fig. Magnetic fields were measured for the five coil system for toroid cores with no ferrite plugs (Fig. Heat generation tests were performed at an AC current of 4 AP and frequency of 40 Hz to determine the temperature of the windings of a single coil. Measurements were taken for aircored coils with no holder, air-cored coils with the heat-dissipating holder, and toroid-core coils with no ferrite plug with the heat-dissipating holder. Temperature measurements were also taken at the center of the test section for the five-coil system to measure sample heating. System measurements were taken for toroid-core coils with either x-y coils only or x-z coils only housed in heat-dissipating coil holders and air-cored x-y coils with no heat-dissipating coil holders. Temperature was measured using a thermistor (Cole-Parmer, Digi-sense 20250-93, Vernon Hills, IL) placed in direct contact with the top of the coil for single coil tests and in the center of the test section for five-coil system tests. To allow coils to reach temperature steady state, measurement durations were in excess of 1 hr. To test μwheel translation on planar surfaces, hexagonal μwheels consisting to seven particles were driven on a planar surface at frequencies of 10 Hz, 20 Hz, and 30 Hz, at qc = 30 ̊. Images were captured using the short focal distance optics train. To test μwheel driving in a 3D environment, a swarm of μwheels were driven through a helical channel at a frequency of 40 Hz at qc = 20 ̊. Images were captured using the long working distance optics train. In both experiments, the toroid-core coils with no ferrite plugs were used (Fig. For the planar surface, μwheel velocity was calculated as the average of two measurements of wheel translation distance over time, using the same 7-mer wheel traveling in opposite directions for each measurement. For all measurements used to study the effect of varied frequencies, the same 7-mer μwheel was driven over an identical planar surface. For the helical channel, images were taken of each section of the channel to record particle concentration. A bolus of particles was first injected into the bottom of a spiral channel, the field was turned on, and wheels were allowed to drive up the spiral for 3.7 min. The field was then removed and channel images were captured. An identical magnetic field was then applied for another 3.3 min with no additional user input. After removing the field and acquiring images, the field was reapplied at qc = 20 ̊ with a single heading-correction of 90 ̊ to accommodate a change in direction dictated by the helical channel geometry. μWheels were then allowed to translate for another 4.5 min. The magnetic field and heat generation were simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4. A 3D geometry was created wherein five coils were defined within a spherical domain of radius 0.5 m FIG. The COMSOL magnetic field (.mf) module was used to estimate the magnetic flux as a function of position using an input of 4 A of current at 40 Hz for each coil to match experimental conditions. For all coils, the direction of current flow was defined around the inner edge. The electrical currents (.ec) and heat transfer in solids (.ht) modules were coupled to calculate the joule heating for each coil. Heat transfer simulations were accomplished using the heat transfer in solids and fluids module (.htsf) by treating the coil surfaces as heat sources with an output equal to their Joule heating. In this, all solid-solid and solid-fluid contacts are conductive boundaries. A Dirichlet boundary condition is used at the edge of the spherical air domain, where the temperature is fixed at 20-25 °C to match experimental room temperature. The size of the spherical domain did not significantly affect results at r > 0.15 m. For simulations with natural convection, a heat loss of q̇ = h(Tc-Ta) was integrated for the coils, where q̇ is the heat dissipated per unit area, h the natural convection heat transfer coefficient (12.45 W/m 2 ), Tc the temperature of the coil surface and Ta the temperature of the surrounding air. A free tetrahedral mesh was defined with a maximum element size of 0.1 cm, a minimum element size of 0.02 cm, a maximum element growth rate of 1.6, a curvature factor of 0.7, and a narrow resolution of 0.4. Convergence tolerance was 10 -4 . The residual root mean square error was of order 10 -31 , and parameter imbalances across the domain were <10 -6 % after double the required iterations to converge, indicating mesh independence of the study. The solution used a domain consisting of 1.5 × 10 6 elements and did not significantly change when using a finer (4.3 × 10 6 elements) or coarser (1.5 × 10 5 elements) mesh (Fig. To compute the electromagnetic and heat transfer physics for the geometry, five parameters were required for each material: relative permeability μ, relative permittivity σ, density ρ, heat capacity CP, and thermal conductivity k (Table Two-dimensional representations of the magnetic field in the x-y plane with toroid-cores and no ferrite plugs indicate that the field is symmetrical, with field magnitudes near 2 mT at the center point and increasing field strength with proximity to the coil (Fig. 6d-e). The x-y plane measurements and simulations both exhibit slight asymmetry across quadrants. Asymmetries between the Northwest/Southeast vs. Northeast/Southwest quadrant pairs are attributable to the magnetic interactions between coils and the direction of current flow within those coils. Centerline measurements show how different coil configurations can be used to enhance field strength (Fig. Toroid-core coils with extended plugs yield the overall greatest field strength in a more focal volume owing to the ability of the plugs to act as a more efficient conduit for magnetic force than air. showed improved heat dissipation compared to clamps where most of the coil surface area is exposed to air (Fig. COMSOL simulations show good agreement with experimental results. For coil temperatures, simulations are within 3 °C of experimental measurements at steady state (Fig. Coil temperature can be used as a predictor for coil failure. Due to impurities in the aluminum wire or irregularities in electrical connections, failure temperature varies. Consequently, simulations that are within a few degrees of the actual temperature serve as a useful model for experimental design. For sample temperatures, simulations are within 1 °C of experimental measurements at steady state (Fig. In this case, simulations that are within a degree of actual temperature serve as a useful model for experimental design. Fig. μWheel driving was tested in a 3D helical tube where a bolus of particles was injected into the bottom of the tube (Fig. During translation, μwheel sizes ranged from single monomers to large aggregates of hundreds of particles. Aggregate sizes tend to increase with time as μwheels collide and combine with each other. Fig. is normalized as N/NVIS, where N is the number of particles within the bin and NVIS is the total number of particles visible throughout the channel at the specified time. Here we present a scaled up design for a microbot manipulation apparatus allowing acceptance of larger, 3D samples than previous studies (a) Simulated magnetic field profile along the x-axis for toroid-cored coils using 4 A of AC current at 40 Hz. We compare the solution for the mesh size used in our studies (black) to finer (red) and coarser (cyan) meshes. Our solution across the domain is on average <0.0002% different from the solution generated using the finer mesh and <1% different from that generated with the coarser mesh, indicating that our solution is mesh-independent. (b) Number of domains in each type of mesh. Microwheel driving velocities on a planar surface at various field strengths, frequencies, and qc.