We simulate a strongly size-disperse hard-sphere fluid confined between two parallel, hard walls. We find that confinement induces crystallization into n-layered hexagonal lattices and a novel honeycomb-shaped structure, facilitated by fractionation. The onset of freezing prevents the formation of a stable glass phase and occurs at much smaller packing fraction than in bulk. Varying the wall separation triggers solid-to-solid transitions and a systematic change of the size-distribution of crystalline particles, which we rationalize using a semi-quantitative theory. We show that the crystallization can be exploited in a wedge geometry to demix particles of different sizes. Confinement occurs naturally in many physical, chemical and biological systems like nanotubes, porous rocks or crowded living cells. Even for the simplest case of monodisperse hard spheres confined between parallel, hard walls one observes spatially inhomogeneous density profiles and diffusivities An important aspect has, however, not yet received much attention, which is the effect of particle sizedispersity on the above phenomenology. In laboratory experiments on colloids a size-dispersity occurs naturally from synthesis. Additionally, for the study of structural relaxation in supercooled liquids and glasses a sizedispersity must be introduced to prevent crystallization even at very small packing fractions In this work we study the crystallization of sizedisperse hard spheres in a slit geometry. We use two complementary approaches: First, we perform exact eventdriven molecular dynamics (EDMD) simulations with enhanced sampling techniques to reveal a complex phase behaviour, displaying amongst others a new phase which is shaped like a honeycomb lattice. Significantly, we find formation of stable crystals at much smaller packing fractions than reported for bulk systems, and show that the crystallization is enabled by a confinement-controlled fractionation. These surprising results show additionally that the multiple-reentrant glass transition reported in Ref. The investigated system consists of two parallel, hard walls separated by a distance H in the z-direction and periodic boundary conditions in the other two dimensions. The slab is filled with size-disperse hard spheres at packing fraction φ. In the spirit of recent simulations in bulk The system is simulated using a hybrid scheme of event-driven molecular dynamics simulations (EDMD) in the NVT ensemble The theoretical approach generalizes the technique proposed for monodisperse particles Here, n i (z) is the local number density, μ i the chemical potential The constant λ i is set to is the density distribution of the disperse mixture in the spirit of Ref. The results for the free energy per particle of a hardsphere mixture in the liquid state are shown in Fig. 1. Free energy per particle, F lq of a hard-sphere fluid in the liquid state, for particles with different diameter a in a slab with wall separation H and packing fraction φ = 0.50. The vertical black line corresponds to the maximum of the host fluid density distribution at a = σ. To determine the free energy of particles in the crystalline phase we employ cell theory Having determined the free energies in the fluid and the crystalline phase, we assume a top-hat distribution f (a | ā, δ c ) of particles in the crystalline phase with size-dispersity δ c and create a list of free energy differences, Here we have to account explicitly for the mixing free energy ∆F mix (δ c ) =ln( √ 12δ c ) of the particles in the crystal In a monodisperse system a coexistence region of liquid and crystalline phases can be determined from the free energies using the common tangent construction. The underlying assumption is that inside the coexistence region both the liquid and the crystalline phase have a constant packing fraction (and obviously a constant particlesize distribution). The fractionation in size-disperse systems, however, implies that the particle-size distribution in the liquid phase changes with the onset of crystallization. In Refs. We first study the crystallization of hard spheres confined in slabs with different wall separations 2.0 < H/σ < 3.0.. The system displays an onset of crystallization at packing fractions around φ ≈ 0.5, much smaller than the bulk value φ b ≈ 0.6 Comparing the critical packing fractions presented in Fig. The size distribution of particles in the emergent crystals at packing fraction φ φ c is strongly correlated with the wall separation H, as shown in Fig. A major impact of size-dispersity on the stability diagram is the enlargement of domains with stable hexagonal structures compared to the monodiperse case. This is facilitated by a linear increase of the average diameter ā with wall separation H, seen in Fig. We additionally expect that the maximum in the particle-size distribution of the host fluid would lead to the existence of a minimum in φ c which implies a reentrent melting transition. The minimum should be approximately located at a wall separation H for which the average particle diameter ā = σ. Comparing Figs. Using the semi-quantitative theory we can therefore explain the emergence and location of the reentrant melting transition. The depth of the minimum in the critical packing fraction φ c is, however, exaggerated in the theory, which also manifests itself in deviations from the expected dispersity in Fig. This analysis shows that similar to the observations in bulk We also use event-driven molecular dynamics to simulate size-disperse particles in a wedge geometry. To create the wedge one of the walls is tilted by a small angle α creating a linear height profile H(x) = H 0 + tan(α)x. The wedge is closed at H(x) = 4.0 σ by a vertical flat wall and only the y-direction is periodic with L y = 60 σ. The wedge consists of 25,000 particles (for α = 1 • ) leading to an average packing fraction φ = 0.51. We use N s = 100, 000 Monte Carlo moves per swap event and employ a similar equilibration time as used in the slab geometry. For the purpose of evaluation the wedge is separated into slices of size ∆H = 0.05 σ and local averages are calculated to determine the profiles shown in Fig. We have seen that confinement has a strong influence on the particle-size distribution. Different from the fractionation observed in bulk systems We also observe large local variations in the packing fraction φ(H) with wall separation both in the liquid and crystalline regions (see Fig. We have studied the crystallization of size-disperse hard spheres in a confined geometry. The simulation results uncover solid-to-solid transitions between different crystalline phases and a non-monotonic dependence of the critical packing fraction for the liquid-to-solid transition. The latter implies the existence of a reentrant melting scenario. Moreover, we have revealed a systematic dependence of the particle-size distribution on the wall separation in the crystalline phase. To rationalize theses findings we have presented a semi-quantitative theory with which we can explain all features of the stability diagram and the emergent particle-size distributions. Due to the universality of the underlying mechanisms which lead to the described crystallization in confinement we expect that our results generally describe the phase behaviour of particles for which excluded-volume interactions dominate. We anticipate that this holds in particular for the confinement-controlled demixing and fractionation. We have therefore devised a generally applicable technique for the purification of size-disperse particles by insertion into a wedge geometry. In the future it would be interesting to extend our studies to laboratory experiments on charged or hard-sphere-like colloids Appendix B: Dependence on tilt angle and particle reservoir in a wedge geometry The resulting profiles for the wedge with α = 1 • were presented and discussed in Sec. IV, here we compare this data to a wedge with α = 2.6 • (see Fig. A typical laboratory experiment would correspond to a grand-canonical ensemble, because the wedge would most probably be coupled to a "bulk" reservoir. Due to the high packing fraction it is, however, impossible to perform a grand-canonical simulation. Here, we study the effect of the ensemble by including a reservoir in our simulations, adjacent to the wedge. This reservoir has a slab geometry with wall separation H = 3.62 σ, and a volume twice that of the wedge. The packing fraction was chosen such that the wedge itself has the same average packing fraction φ = 0.51 as the ones without reservoir. The reservoir is in a liquid phase with ā = 0.985 σ and δ = 0.145 and thus sufficiently close to the parti- cle distribution in the bulk. The results are presented in Fig. Appendix C: Curvature of the lattice planes in a wedge geometry We also discussed in Sec. IV the role of local variations in particle diameter ā(H) inside the crystalline phases which requires the lattice "planes" to exhibit a certain curvature. For a one-layered hexagonal structure under the mild assumption that ā(x) = H(x) we can derive from straightforward geometrical calculations a radius of curvature, R, for lattice "planes" in the crystalline structures. The sketch in Fig. 