Motivated by the recent experimental realization of twisted double bilayer graphene (TDBG) samples we study, both analytically and numerically, the effects of circularly polarized light propagating in free space and confined into a waveguide on the band structure and topological properties of these systems. These two complementary Floquet protocols allow to selectively tune different parameters of the system by varying the intensity and the light frequency. For the drive protocol in free space, in the high-frequency regime, we find that in TDBG with AB/BA stacking, we can selectively close the zone-center quasienergy gaps around one valley while increasing the gaps near the opposite valley by tuning the parameters of the drive. In TDBG with AB/AB stacking, a similar effect can be obtained upon the application of a perpendicular static electric field. Furthermore, we study the topological properties of the driven system in different settings, provide accurate effective Floquet Hamiltonians, and show that relatively strong drives can generate flat bands. On the other hand, longitudinal light confined into a waveguide couples to the components of the interlayer hopping that are perpendicular to the TDBG sheet, allowing for selective engineering of the bandwidth of Floquet zone center quasienergy bands without breaking the symmetries of the static system. Moiré superlattices have emerged as platforms to attain strongly correlated phases of matter by controlling the stacking configuration between the layers The plethora of strongly-correlated phases available in moiré superlattices naturally invites for the development of controllable mechanisms that would allow one to tune in and out of these phases. In equilibrium, hydrostatic pressure has been used to increase the tunneling strength and tune the magic angle in TBG An interesting effect with topological origin is the valley Hall effect In this work, we consider TDBG in the AB/AB and AB/BA configurations irradiated by circularly polarized light in free-space and confined into a waveguide. We show by deriving effective Floquet Hamiltonians and by numerical calculations that light in free-space can induce transitions from a trivial or valley Chern insulator (depending on the stacking configuration) into a Chern insulator. Furthermore, in the presence of a transverse electric field, driven AB/AB TDBG allows the quasienergy gaps at the K and K valleys to be selectively tuned by varying the direction of the static electric field, and by modulating the amplitude and frequency of the driving laser. For AB/BA TDBG, we find that the quasienergy gaps can be tuned selectively even without an applied electric field. The flexibility of the quasienergy band structure near the Floquet zone center can be used to generate valley polarized currents in TDBG, independent of the stacking configuration. On the other hand, using light confined into a waveguide allows to dynamically tune the component of the tunneling perpendicular to the plane without breaking the symmetries of the static system. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe static TDBG and the notation we adopt throughout the paper. In Sec. III, we consider TDBG driven by circularly polarized light in free space. We consider both high-and intermediate-frequency regimes and describe effects on the band structure and the topological aspects in each regime. In Sec. IV, we consider a drive protocol using longitudinal vector potentials, allowed inside a waveguide and discuss the effects on the quasienergies. Finally, in Secs. V and VI we comment on the experimental drive parameters necessary to observe the effects before discussed and present our conclusions, respectively. In the continuum limit, the static Hamiltonian for TDBG near the K point with AB/AB (s = s = 1) [AB/BA (s = -s = 1)] stacking patterns is given by [15-17] where , and τ i and λ i are Pauli matrices in top/bottom bilayer and layer space, respectively. Here, σ k are Pauli matrices or identity operators in pseudospin space. The bilayer graphene Hamiltonian is given by with tunneling matrix Each diagonal block in Eq. ( The off-diagonal blocks t s (k) describe the tunneling processes within each bilayer unit The interlayer hopping matrix describes tunneling between the two graphene bilayers, where Q 0 = (0, 0), and Q ±1 = k θ ± √ 3/2, 3/2 are the reciprocal lattice vectors. We neglect direct tunneling contributions between layers that are not adjacent to one another, as indicated by the structure τ + ⊗ λ -⊗ T (x). The parameter w 1 in the tunneling term models relaxation effects, since the AB and BA configurations within each bilayer units are energetically preferred over the AA configuration The Hamiltonian near the K valley can be obtained by applying a time reversal operation T to the Hamiltonian at the K valley In addition, TDBG displays topological properties captured by the Chern number, which is defined by C = n∈occ. C n , with band Chern number where In the absence of a potential difference, ∆ i = 0, the M y symmetry of AB/AB TDBG implies C K/K n = 0 for each band n In this section, we consider the effect of circularly polarized light in free space incidenting normal to the TDBG surface. The time-dependent Hamiltonian near the K point is given by H ss (t) ≡ H ss (k(t), x), and k x (t) = k x -A cos(Ωt), and k y (t) = k y -A sin(Ωt). Here we used a minimal coupling procedure that is valid for not too strong couplings to the electromagnetic field In the extended-space picture 0 dτ /(2π)H ss (τ )e -iτ n . In the next two subsections, we consider the effects of the drives in the high-and intermediate-frequency regimes, respectively. In the high-frequency regime, we employ the van Vleck expansion is the Hamiltonian averaged over one drive period, and where vV = ξ(v 4 A) 2 /Ω, and ∆ vV = ξ(v 3 A) 2 /(2Ω), where ξ = 1(ξ = -1) near the K(K ) valley. The simplicity of the high-frequency regime van Vleck expansion allows us to also retain the effects of γ 3,4 , which are harder to capture using more sophisticated intermediate frequency regime methods introduced in later sections. The gap ∆ vV is generated due to the effect that light has on the hopping in each graphene layer, which is captured by the component ] in the time dependent Hamiltonian. It breaks both timereversal T and mirror symmetries (M x for AB/AB and M y for AB/BA) and is staking-independent. The gaps ∆ vV is induced by hopping between equivalent lattice sites on opposite layers. It constitutes a potential difference between the graphene layers in each bilayer unit, and breaks both time-reversal and mirror symmetries in both stacking configurations. On the other hand, ∆ vV is caused by hoppings between inequivalent sublattices on opposite layers. It has two components. The first one is independent of the stacking configuration and acts as ∆ vV . The second component depends on the stacking configuration (AB/AB or AB/BA), and acts as ∆ In equilibrium, AB/AB TDBG is a trivial insulator for ∆ i = 0. The finite ∆ vV induced by circularly-polarized light leads to a transition into a Chern insulator with Floquet topological bands. For example, consider the case θ = 1.4 • , γ 3/4 = 0, Ω/W = 2, with W = v F /a 0 . In Figs. After discussing the Chern number, we recall that while it is a measurable quantity and U ε is a modified time evolution operator For the winding numbers, we obtain Applied static electric field. So far, we have restricted our analysis to ∆ i = 0, which corresponds to no potential difference between the layers (apart from δ ± s ). Now we consider AB/AB TDBG in the presence of an applied perpendicular static electric field, which leads to a potential differences between the layers. We set ∆ 4 = -∆ 1 , ∆ 3 = -∆ 2 , ∆ 1 = 3U/2, and ∆ 2 = U/2, with U being the potential difference. In equilibrium, the transverse electric field places AB/AB TDBG in a valley Chern insulating regime. For U = 10 meV, we find in the static case the band Chern numbers C K -1 = -2 and C K 1 = 2 and corresponding total Chern numbers inside the gaps , as imposed by time-reversal symmetry. When one drives the system, the gaps at the Floquet zone center are renormalized. In Fig. Trigonal warping and particle-hole symmetry-breaking terms. The structure of the van Vleck Hamitonian (3) vV /∆ vV ≈ 0.014, independent of the frequency and amplitude of the drive. However, the effect in the static energies is not negligible. Combined particle-hole asymmetry (γ 4 ) and trigonal warping effects induce a staking-dependent gap. For AB/AB stacking, s = s = 1, the gap has the structure (∆ In general, this terms can renormalize the topological transition points. For example, in Fig. In this subsection, we restricted the discussion to highfrequency and weak drives. In the next subsection, we will derive an effective Floquet Hamiltonian valid for intermediate frequencies and intermediate drive strengths. We will show, in particular, that in this regime we can generate Floquet flat bands, which are impaired by trigonal warping and particle-hole symmetry-breaking effects. In the intermediate-frequency and intermediate drive strength regime, we obtain an effective Hamiltonian by performing a modified rotating frame transformation where R is a twist-angle dependent unitary transformation (see Appendix A for the explicit expression), and , where J n (z) correspond to the n-th Bessel function of the first kind. As in the high-frequency regime, δH F is independent of the AB/AB or AB/BA stacking configu-ration. Hss is given by Hss γ0 = J 0 (2A/Ω)γ 0 = J 0 (2A/Ω)v F /a 0 , which is interpreted as a reduction of the Fermi velocity. The layer and stacking dependent gap δ± s = δJ 0 (2 √ 2A/Ω)(1±s)/2 is suppressed, and the tunneling is now given by ts = γ 1 J 0 (2A/Ω)(σ 1 -isσ 2 )/2. None of these effects are captured in a leading-order van Vleck expansion, and its challenging to capture the functional form simply by computing higher-order terms. The position dependent interlayer coupling for the two center graphene layers renormalizes to where are renormalized interlayer couplings and a new angledependent coupling has been introduced that is absent from the equilibrium case. As it can be deduced from Fig. Finally, in Fig. As in free-space, the effect of the drive in a waveguide enters through a Peierls substitution to the hopping term in a real-space tight binding Hamiltonian. Particularly, the hopping term between two sites R and R acquires the position-dependent phase , where c R and c † R are the creation and a annihilation operators. Assuming that the tight binding is defined in the x-y plane, and the longitudinal vector potential For TDBG, the time-dependent Hamiltonian in the continuum limit is given by where The tunneling sector also depends on the bilayer stacking configuration s. Finally, the interlayer hopping matrix acquires a time dependence according to The above Hamiltonian is obtained by performing the substitutions as one can confirm when mapping the corresponding tight binding hopping processes onto an effective singleparticle Hamiltonian. Here, a AA,AB describes the interlayer distance in AA and AB stacked bilayer graphene. The functional form of T (x, t) implies that the coupling τ ± ⊗λ ∓ ×σ 1,2 is dominant in AB regions and τ ± ⊗λ ∓ ×1 is dominant in AA regions. We have used this to get the approximate form in the second and third line of Eq. ( Specifically, we consider a transverse magnetic (TM) mode of light at the exit of a waveguide as shown in Fig. , where H m = 1/T T 0 H(t)e -imΩt . The corrections of order 1/Ω vanish if derivatives ∂ i T (x, t) are neglected. This is justified because all derivatives in H m and m = 0 appear with a pre-factor γ 3,4 that is small and the terms [H -m , H m ]/(2mΩ) are already suppressed by 1/Ω. In the small-angle regime, where T (x, t) varies slowly in real space this approximation becomes even better because then the corrections that would arise have an additional small factor θ. Therefore, the leading correction is given by the averaged Hamiltonian H 0 , which shares the same structure of the static Hamiltonian with renormalized parameters where J 0 is the zeroth Bessel function of the first kind. Therefore, in the high frequency regime, the interlayer couplings are suppressed by this type of electromagnetic field. This can lead to a renormalization of the bandwidth. In Fig. The laser drive parameters required to obtain the effects discussed here are accessible in experimental settings. The quasienergy gap closings for TDBG without applied static electric field where obtained for driving strengths (e/ )a 0 A = ea 0 E/( Ω) 0.06. For the high frequency considered in the UV regime, Ω = 2W ≈ 5350 meV, a peak electric field E ≈ 9.5MV/cm leads to the required driving strength. A combination of a stronger electric field and lower driving frequency could be also considered. For example, to obtain Floquet flat bands, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have studied twisted double bilayer graphene driven by circularly polarized light in free space and confined into a waveguide. For light propagating in free space, we demonstrated that TDBG in the AB/AB configuration with an applied static electric field perpendicular to the layers, the drive permits valley-selective quasienergy gap engineering. The periodic drive also leads to a topological transition into a Chern insulating state due to the broken time-reversal symmetry. For TDBG in the AB/BA configuration, the driving protocol can lead to valley-selective engineering even in the absence of an applied electric field. Finally, we showed that stronger drives can generate Floquet flat bands. On the other hand, light confined into a waveguide allows us to dynamically tune the bandwidth of the Floquet zone center bands without breaking the symmetries of the static system. Therefore, employing two complementary Floquet protocols, we showed that light-driven TDBG is a flexible system that could be used as a platform to generate valley-polarized currents. For simplicity of discussion we will neglect the effects of trigonal warping for this section. That is the model Hamiltonian we consider is ) is the Hamiltonian for graphene and the index d = ± labels the two bilayer graphenes and l = ± (with "+" for t and "-" for b) labels the layers of each double layer. Furthermore we distinguish between AB and BA stacking for the double layers via a term s that is s = ± for AB/BA stacking. Therefore δlsσ 3 is a stacking and layer dependent gap, t is the interlayer hopping matrix for the top and bottom double layers with t s = t/2(σ 1 -isσ 2 ). The term describes the hopping between the two bilayers and captures the spatial dependence due to the mutual rotation. It depends on two coupling strengths ω and ω that capture the effect that AB/BA and AA-type regions of the center twisted bilayer can have different lattice constants. Since the hopping is dominated by hopping between adjacent layers we neglect higher order interlayer tunnelings. Lastly ∆ i describe a layer dependent bias. We introduce circularly polarized light by means of minimal substitution p → p + A/v F with A = A(cos(Ωt), sin(Ω)). The Hamiltonian then becomes periodically time dependent H(t) = H(t + T ) with period T and can be split as H(t) = H 0 + V (t), where where v ± (t) = R(∓θ)Aσ xy . The time dependence makes a full treatment of the problem cumbersome especially if one wants to build on the model and introduce additional complications such as disorder. Luckily the time dependence can be reduced. This can either be done via a perturbative expansion or non-perturbatively by going to a rotating frame. A useful rotating frame of such a sort is implemented by a unitary transformation U (t) that fulfils U (T ) = 1 because at stroboscopic times one may forget about the unitary transformation since it is unity. Naively one may choose such a unitary transform that has the form U (t) = e -i dtV (t) . While this is useful and leads to good results it is not the ideal choice for the problem at hand. This is because it can introduce mathematical artifacts such as an unphysical breaking of rotational symmetry like in the case of graphene [cite our paper and eckhardt's]. For our case we therefore employ a better choice that was introduced in [cite our paper] and split the time dependent part of the Hamiltonian as given by σ θ/2 i = e i/4θσ3 σ i e -i/4θσ3 were introduced as a convenient shorthand. The unitary transformation we use now is given as U (t) = e -i dtV1(t) e -i dtV2(t) . (A5) This choice is useful because it preserves rotational invariance of the dispersion relation after a time average over one period if the interlayer couplings are neglected as seen in [cite our paper] and leads to an improvement over more conventional high frequency expansions. If we apply this unitary transformation to the Schrödinger equation i∂ t ψ = (H 0 + V (t))ψ and take an average over one period we arrive at the following effective Hamiltonian 