Spin glasses are the paradigm of complex systems. These materials present really slow dynamics. However, the nature of the spin glass phase in finite dimensional systems is still controversial. Different theories describing the low temperature phase have been proposed: droplet, replica symmetry breaking and chaotic pairs. We present analytical studies of critical properties of spin glasses, in particular, critical exponents at and below the phase transition, existence of a phase transition in a magnetic field, computation of the lower critical dimension (in presence/absence of a magnetic field). We also introduce some rigorous results based on the concept of metastate. Finally, we report some numerical results regarding the construction of the Aizenman-Wehr metastate, scaling of the correlation functions in the spin glass phase and existence of a phase transition in a field, confronting these results with the predictions of different theories. Spin glasses are often considered as the paradigm of complex systems. They show frustration and randomness which are now ubiquitous characteristics in nature. In addition, the role played by spin glasses in magnetism is huge: spin glass behavior jointly with ferrromagnetism and antiferromagnetism are the three most frequent forms of "magnetic order". On the theoretical side, radical approaches to describe them have been developed and in some cases are still needed. Finally, there is great interplay among spin glasses and other systems, from the molecular evolution to astrophysics. We start by describing some basic properties of spin glasses in Sec. 2. Next, this book chapter continues in two main parts. In the first one, we report the main theoretical results (Sec. 3), starting with the mean-field solution in Sec. 3.1, which already provides a complex picture even in infinite dimensions. Sec. 3.2 is devoted to study to what extent this complex picture survives in finite dimensions. In Sec. 3.3 we report the droplet theory, a phenomenological theory that can also be formulated in terms of the Migdal-Kadanoff approximation of the renormalization group. Hereafter, we resort to the "standard" approach based on a field theory approach built on the complex mean-field solution, describing its main findings both in absence (Sec. 3.4) and in presence of a magnetic field (Sec. 3.5). We finish this part by introducing in Sec. 3.6 an important concept and tool of the metastate. In the second part of the chapter, we describe numerical simulations at equilibrium (Sec 4). We start to report some important numerical facts in absence of a magnetic field. First, we show in Sec. 4.1 the existence of a phase transition in three dimensions and how its universality class has been characterized. Once we know there is a spin glass phase in three dimensions, in Sec. 4.2 we present numerical simulations that try to characterize the properties of this phase, in particular, we focus on the behavior of the conditional correlation functions. Next, we continue by showing a numerical construction of the metastate and properties of the spin glass phase one can draw from this powerful tool (Sec. 4.3). We close this part with the study of spin glasses in a field. We focus on the simulations performed in four dimensions and the rationale of the new numerical approaches that have been useful to find the phase transition. However, the phase transition in three dimensions in a field has been elusive even using these new numerical tools (Sec. 4.4). The book chapter finishes with the conclusions and two appendices. In the first one we report the finite size scaling tools needed to analyze the critical behavior of these systems, namely the quotient method and the analysis at fixed coupling (Sec. A.1). Part of the numerical simulations presented in this chapter have been obtained with the help of Janus I and II supercomputers. In the last appendix, we have described the basic characteristics of these two dedicated computers (Sec. A.2). This book chapter is based on the lectures given by the author in Lviv during the Ising Lectures 2019 and we have tried to report the contents lectured there during two days. In these two lectures, the focus was on equilibrium numerical simulations on finite dimensional Ising spin glasses. Hence, we have not discussed in this chapter important topics in spin glass physics as experiments and out-of-equilibrium simulations. Finally, let us mention that it is also possible to study the properties of the low temperature phase with h = 0 and h = 0 by simulating D = 1 dimensional Ising spin glass with the coupling decaying following a power law and it has been used for the study of the spin glass phase inside and outside the mean-field region. In this section we describe the main physical properties of these materials. The main ingredients to obtain materials with a spin glass behavior are magnetic interaction, randomness, frustration and anisotropy. Since the characteristic times associated with the magnetic impurities are much bigger than the times associated with the electrons of the metal, we can assume that the impurities are quenched. This approximation is similar to that performed in molecular physics called Born-Oppenheimer approximation (in molecules the nuclei play the role of the magnetic impurities in spin glasses). It is possible to define another kind of disorder, the so-called annealed one, in which the components in the material ("normal" and "impurities") have similar characteristic times and, thus, the statistical mechanics considers all of them in the same way. In spin glasses, the magnetic impurities do not interact following the standard exchange interaction, rather, they interact among them via the electrons moving in the conduction band of the metal, the so-called RKKY interaction following the work of Ruderman, Kittel, Kasuya and Yosida. k F being the Fermi momentum. In addition to a power law decay on the distance of the interaction, an oscillatory factor (the cosine) appears: depending on distance, sometimes it will induce a positive interaction and other times a negative one (see Fig. The joint effect of disorder and frustration usually produces a very complicated landscape of free energy, and in particular, a very slow dynamics. The landscape depicted in Fig. The last ingredient to build the Ising spin glass model is the anisotropy. 1 For instance Ag:Mn and CdCr 1.7 IN 0.3 S 4 are well described by Heisenberg spins, although the description of Fe 0.5 Mn 0.5 TiO 3 is based on Ising spins. Fig. However, some results obtained in experiments performed on films by the Texas group using Heisenberg spin glasses (as CuMn) where the quenched stochastic variables (J ij ) can be drawn from a bimodal distribution or from a Gaussian one, both with zero mean and unit variance and s i = ±1 are Ising spins. In finite dimensional Ising spin glasses the sum is restricted over all pairs of nearest neighbors, and will be denoted as <ij> . In this way, the Edwards-Anderson Hamiltonian takes into account the oscillatory behavior of the interaction in the RKKY theory. with β ≡ 1/(k B T ), where the partition function Z J for a given disorder realization is given by where [s] denotes the trace on all the spins. Second, we take the average of the free energy (of a disorder instance) over the whole set of instances, distributed with the probability density function p[J]: Configuration Free energy Fig. N being the number of spins. Notice that we need to take the average of a logarithm. This fact introduces strong technical difficulties in the analytical solution of the model. At this point, we can describe what is the spin glass order. In a spin glass phase, all possible staggered magnetizations vanish (for all the momenta p), including the standard one (p = 0). Moreover s j ≡ s rj . Despite this fact, a spin glass phase presents a non zero local magnetization s i = 0. The order parameter q, the overlap, is then where (• • • ) is the thermal average (fixed disorder) and (• • • ) is the disorder average. The overlap q is zero in the paramagnetic phase and takes a non zero value below the phase transition, in the spin glass phase. In a numerical simulation is easy to compute the overlap: we simulate in parallel two non-interacting replicas of the system, {s i } and {s (2) i }, in presence of the same disorder. Notice that for a given disorder realization. The total overlap per spin is defined as where and we can compute the probability density function associated with this observable and the probability distribution averaged over the disorder It is easy to show that q = dq q P (q ) . However, the overlap cannot be measured in experiments where the critical behavior of the material is extracted via the non-linear susceptibility (∂ 4 f /∂h 4 ) which is proportional to the spin glass susceptibility defined as To study spin glass phases with several pure states or phases due to broken ergodicity, where α and β are two different pure states and (• • • ) γ denotes the thermal average restricted to the state γ. In general, it is possible to write ( , where the sum runs over all the pure states, and then one can write The Edwards-Anderson overlap, the maximum possible overlap in the system, is just the maximum overlap: q αα . Despite the fact the magnetic interaction plays an important role in spin glasses, there have been found materials, with a spin glass behavior, where the magnetism is not present. For example, it is possible to study dipolar and quadrupolar spin glasses, where the role of magnetization is played by the polarization vector. In this section we discuss different analytical approaches to tackle spin glass behavior. We start with the mean-field approximation, which is exact in infinite dimensions, and then we study finite dimensional spin glasses by presenting the droplet model and the approach based on field theory. Let us summarize the solution of the Edwards-Anderson model (for h = 0) in the mean-field approximation, the so-called Sherrington-Kirpatrick model. Applying this trick to the computation of the quenched free energy we obtain log The average on the disorder of the partition function of n non-interacting replicas, {s a i } (a = 1, . . . , n), can be written as Now, we can compute the integral on the disorder, getting At this point, we can define a first effective Hamiltonian via with This effective Hamiltonian depends on all the replicas {s a i } with i = 1, . . . , N and a = 1, . . . , n. At this point, the disorder has been integrated out. The quadratic term in the exponential can be made linear by using the Hubbard-Stratonovich trick at the price to introduce the replica matrix Q ab In this way we can write the second effective Hamiltonian where where S a = ±1 are Ising spins. This Hamiltonian depends only on the overlap matrix. Taking into account that the argument of the exponential is proportional to the number of spins, N , we can compute Z n using the saddle point method. The stationary condition is that can be written as where Furthermore, S a S b Q = lim n→0 s a i s b i H eff . At this stage of the analytical computation, we need to do some hypotheses on the structure of the matrix Q. The simplest Ansatz, called 0-step, is 32 where q can be computed in a self-consistent way using the saddle point equation (Eq. 32). However, this solution leads to two main problems. The first one is that the 0-step solution does not provide with the correct value of the energy and the second one, is that the entropy of this solution is negative. We can try to understand these problems in the framework of field theory. The effective Hamiltonian can be developed in powers of matrix Q following the framework of the Landau theory of phase transitions. This effective Hamiltonian describes the physics near the critical point. If λ = 0 the symmetry group of this Hamiltonian is O(n). Although, the symmetry group is reduced to the symmetry group S n (permutations of n elements) as λ = 0. Now, let us consider again the λ = 0 case. The 0-step choice for Q ab spontaneously breaks the O(n) symmetry and Goldstone bosons For example, in Fig. This scheme can be generalized, assuming that n, the number of replicas, is large enough to allow a k-step level of breaking the symmetry of the replicas, where k could be arbitrarily large. Finally, we need to do an analytic continuation to n = 0 (to comply with the replica trick). Given matrix Q ab with the Parisi breaking scheme, one can compute what is the probability to find a given value of q, denoted as p(q), assuming that all the matrix elements have the same probability: 32 Taking the limit n → 0, 32 one obtains, p(q) = m 1 δ(qq 0 ) + (m 2 -m 1 )δ(qq 1 ) + (m 3 -m 2 )δ(qq 2 ) + . . . (37) Notice that p(q) is a probability density function composed by sum of Dirac's deltas with different weights, hence, all these weights must be positive and so 0 < m 1 < m 2 < . . . < 1. Notice that the limiting process (n → 0) has inverted the order of the different m's. At this point we can connect p(q) with the pdf of the overlap defined in Eq. ( The overlap defined in Eqs. ( . (38) Notice that the denominator, inside the average over the disorder, is just Z 2 J . We can introduce n -2 extra factors Z J in both numerator and denominator, obtaining in the limit n → 0 (the final Z n J in the denominator goes to one): = lim where, in the last equation, we must average over all the saddle-point solutions (we also refer to the analytical computations we have done to transform Eq. ( Before finishing this section we summarize some of the most important physical and mathematical properties of the Parisi solution: • It shows an infinite number of pure states not related by any symmetry. • These infinite pure states are organized in a ultrametric way In spin glasses we can introduce a distance by using the overlaps (now the elements of this space are the pure states, see Sec. 3.6) In Fig. • The spin glass phase is stable under small magnetic fields. A transition line in the temperature-magnetic field plane separates a paramagnetic phase from a spin glass one (the de Almeida-Thouless line i s (1) i s where {s 1 i } and {s 2 i } are two real replicas and <ij> denotes sum over all pairs of nearest neighbors. In the SK model, one can show that q l = q 2 . • Stochastic stability. The Hamiltonian of spin glasses is generic against random perturbations. Once we have characterized the behavior of spin glasses in infinite dimensions, the fully connected model, we want to understand what are the properties of spin glasses in finite dimensions. Different theories have been developed to describe the behavior of spin glass in finite dimensions. Hereafter, in the next three sections, we report the two most important approaches: the droplet model and the RSB theory. The droplet theory predicts that the spin glasses above the lower critical dimension (D l ) show only two pure states in the spin glass phase and the behavior of this spin glass phase is determined by compact excitations on the ground state. The droplet model can be formulated in terms of the Migdal-Kadanoff approximation of the renormalization group The most important properties of this phenomenological theory are: • The droplets are compact excitations with fractal dimension D F . The energy of a droplet of linear dimension L grows as L θ with θ < (D -1)/2 < D -1 < D F < D. • In the dynamics, the free energy barriers behave as L ψ , with ψ ≥ θ. • The spin glass phase is unstable against the presence of a magnetic field. • There are two pure states (related by spin flip), and thus, the probability distribution of the overlap is trivial: sum of two Dirac's deltas. Finally, there is a variation of the droplet model, known as the chaotic pairs model. In this picture the system has two pure states (as in the droplet model), but these two states vary chaotically with the size of the system, see Sec. 3.6. In this section, we address the problem of how to build a field theory using the RSB solution as starting point in absence of a magnetic field. For a theoretical description of the theory in presence of a magnetic field, see Sec. 3.5. We start considering the theory in infinite dimensions (using the meanfield approximation, which is exact in D = ∞). Next, the upper critical dimension D u is computed. Above it, the predictions of the mean-field approximation hold and below, infrared divergences appear and we need to resort to the renormalization group to tackle them. The upper critical dimension is determined by the dimension of the cubic coupling, g 3 , in the effective Hamiltonian, see Eq. (35), and it turns to be D u = 6. Below the upper critical dimension τ and g 3 are the relevant parameters (using the terminology of the renormalization group To complete this discussion, let us remark that the lower critical dimensions in absence of a magnetic field seems to be D l = 2.5. Thereupon, we summarize the main results. x s (1) x +r s (2) x s (2) x +r . (• • • ) denotes the thermal average, (• • • ) is the average over the disorder, V is the volume of the system, {s i } and {s i } are, as usual, two non-interacting real copies of the system (real replicas) and the system is constrained to have a fixed overlap q q = 1 V x s (1) x s (2) x . This conditional correlation function decays algebraically as The following values for the exponent θ(q) were obtained: The full (non-constrained) correlation function can be recovered with the help of P (q), the probability to find a given overlap q, see Eq. ( We can refer that the prediction of the droplet model is where θ is the exponent which controls the thermal excitations of the system (see Sec. 3.3). In the droplet model there is only one correlation function since there is only a pure state having an equilibrium overlap q EA , see Sec. 3.3, whereas in the RSB theory it is possible to find two states with overlap in the interval [0, q EA ], and therefore it is possible to obtain a correlation function in which one replica belongs to the state α and the other to the β one having mutual overlap q αβ = q, measuring C 4 (r|q). Finally, let us remark that it is possible to show in a rigorous way that if the spin glasses in finite dimensions present ultrametricity, the mathematical properties of this ultrametricity are the same as of the ultrametricity found in the Parisi theory (RSB) which holds in infinite dimensions. The analytical study of spin glasses in presence of a magnetic field below its upper critical dimensions has been and still is a challenge. In Fig. • The upper critical dimensions is 6. Working with this projected theory 87 no fixed points were found at the first order in perturbation theory. The no existence of fixed point of the renormalization group in a theory is usually interpreted as (1) it is needed to work at higher order in perturbation theory in order to find it (or them); 88 (2) the fixed point is of non-perturbative nature and one needs to resort to non-perturbative methods; 89 (3) the phase transition is first-order (runaway trajectories). • By using the most general Hamiltonian in the replica symmetric phase and by relaxing the replica trick condition n = 0, a fixed point below six dimensions was found. Fig. Finally, in Ref. [93] analytical computations were performed suggesting the possible existence of a quasi-first-order phase transition below the upper critical dimension. Pure phases (or pure states) are macroscopic homogeneous states of matter, for example, liquid, gaseous and solid phases. In principle, it is not difficult to determine if a lump of matter is in a given phase or not. However, to define states in the thermodynamic limit (infinite volume) is not easy. Rigorously, a state is a probability distribution and with it we can compute averages: hence, we can see this probability distribution as a linear functional. In general, both in experiments and in numerical simulations, we obtain mixed states: i.e. numerical configurations or lumps with interfaces which split different pure states (or pure phases). These mixed states form a convex set in which its extremal points define the pure states. The mixed states can be written in terms of pure states in the following way (we particularize for the Ising model above one dimension and below the critical temperature): where 0 < w < 1 is the proportion of the positive magnetization phase. In a more general way, one can write an expression of a given state Γ in terms of pure states Γ α with α w α = 1, w α > 0 and the sum runs over all the pure states. Another important property of pure states is that intensive magnitudes do not fluctuate. The generalization of the previous concepts and mathematical tools to systems with quenched disorder is very complicated, since the sequence of states Γ L,J , J denotes the quenched disorder, usually does not converge (chaotic dependence on system size). (3) Ising spin glasses in the chaotic pairs scenario. For each size the system presents two pure states (related by a global spin flip symmetry), however, these two states vary in a chaotic way as the lattice size grows. The definition of the Aizenman-Wehr allows for a numerical implementation. The construction of the Aizenman-Wehr is as follows: (1) For simplicity, let us consider a two-dimensional system, see Fig. (3) The disorder in the outer region Λ L \Λ R is called an outer disorder and denoted as O. (4) The measurements will be done in the region Λ W . To avoid influences of the transition region between the inner and outer regions, we will try to implement the limit Λ W << Λ R << Λ L . J.J. Ruiz-Lorenzo In this framework we are interested to compute the following limit where E O [• • • ] denotes the average over the outer disorder. Assuming that the following limit exits then it will not depend on the inner disorder I and will provide us the Aizenman-Wehr metastate. We can compute averages over the metastate by using Therefore, the metataste is also a state. To characterize the metastate, it is very useful to compute the following correlation function where ζ is a new exponent introduced by Read. 101 The ζ-exponent provides important information about the structure of the states of the spin glass phase: Where N states (W ) is the number of states in a system with size W . • If ζ < D then metastate is disperse (therefore, the droplet theory does not hold). , where, we recall, θ(0) is the exponent of the replicon mode, see Eq. (47) of Sec. 3.4. 101 After the discussion of some aspects of the theories aimed to explain the properties of spin glasses in infinite and finite dimensions, we report in the following sections numerical simulations at equilibrium in presence/absence of the magnetic field. Let us present numerical results showing the existence of a phase transition in the three dimensional Ising spin glass at h = 0. Usually, the numerical simulations are performed using the Monte Carlo exchange method (also known as parallel tempering). 102-105 Another popular approach in the last years has been the population annealing method. [109] where the supercomputer Janus I was used, see Sec. A.2 for a description of the most important characteristic of this computer. As it has been stated in this chapter, the spin glass order parameter is based on the overlap. In numerical simulations, one can run in parallel different non-interacting real replicas, denoted, as usual, as s a x . Usually, the number of simulated real replicas is between two and six. We can recall again the general definition of the overlap (a = b) In the simulations reported in this section 109 four copies of the system were simulated with the same disorder (real replicas), therefore, one can compute six different overlaps q ab . One can define the overlap-overlap correlation function given by and finally the total overlap per volume of the system (V ) Next, we compute the Fourier transform of the overlap-overlap correlation function which allows us to compute the second-moment correlation length where k min = (2π/L, 0, 0) or the other two possible permutations. The total susceptibility is given by the correlation function computed in the Fourier space at zero momentum Finally, the correlation length in units of system size ξ/L is We recall that ξ/L is universal at the critical point. In addition to ξ/L we can define the following observables which also take universal values at the critical point: U 111 = q 12 q 23 q 31 4/3 U 1111 = q 12 q 23 q 34 q 41 q 4 , (68) where We show in Fig. Once we have characterized the critical point, we try to characterize the properties of the low temperature spin glass phase. Let us consider the conditional spatial correlation function C 4 (r|q), see Eq. (45). We focus on the real space behavior of this conditional correlation function, a detailed study of its Fourier transform can be found in Ref. [118]. The first numerical computation of C 4 (r|q = 0) was performed in Ref. [116] working in the out-of-equilibrium regime (with an extrapolation to infinite time). Subsequently, this out-equilibrium correlation function was confronted with an equilibrium computation of the same observable. The conditional correlation function C 4 (r|q = 0) corresponds with the Second, we consider the rescaled difference of the conditional correlation function evaluated at r = L/4 and r = L/2, which following RSB should behave as (see Eq. ( in order to remove the background, for large distances, in the C 4 (r|q) correlation function (finite volume effect). This rescaled difference as a function of q 2 is shown in Fig. [119]). Moreover, for q 2 > 0.2, the scaling breaks down pointing to a value of the θ-exponent used to rescale in Eq. ( In this section, we build numerically the metastate following the Aizenman and Wehr 100 and we present the main results obtained in Ref. [99]. We start with some definitions. The average over the Gibbs state The average over the metastate is given by and the one over the internal disorder by The indices i and o run over the number of inner and outer disorder realizations, denoted as N I and N O , respectively. For example, the metastate spin correlation function (see Eq. ( Inside Λ W , see Fig. Notice the possible cases: o = o and o = o . Therefore, we can compute the following probability distributions of the generalized overlap q i;o,o : 0.1 0.5 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.9 L=24, T=0.698 W=4 W=8 W=12 q P ρ (q) P(q) Fig. Regarding P ρ (q), despite having a trivial limit P ρ (q) → δ(q) for W → ∞, 101 its variance for finite values of W provides with very useful information which allows us to write the following scaling behavior Finally, it is possible to show that the re-scaled metastate-averaged probability distribution is Gaussian: In Fig. The Fig. Finally, we present in Fig. Since the work of de Almeida and Thouless 56 forty years ago, a large amount of work has been devoted to understand the behavior of spin glasses in presence of a magnetic field (see Sec. 3.5). In particular during this long period of time a huge number of numerical simulations have been performed, As in the case of the h = 0 numerical simulations, we have initially based our analysis on the study of the behavior of the correlation length in units of the lattice size R ξ . To do that, we need to compute a critical Both correlation functions have the same critical behavior. The associated correlation lengths are computed in the usual way by calling Eq. ( However, in some models based on random graphs, the phase transition has not been found numerically even in models where the phase transition has already been characterized analytically. where k 1 = (2π/L, 0, 0, 0) and k 2 = (2π/L, 2π/L, 0, 0) (plus permutations) are the two non-zero smallest momenta allowed by the periodic boundary conditions imposed at the system. 134 Nature of the Spin Glass Phase in Finite Dimensional (Ising) Spin Glasses 35 q h = 0.05 h = 0.1 h = 0.2 h = 0.4 Fig. Fig. We can analyze the scaling behavior of these critical temperature performing a test of the Fisher-Sompolinsky relation: where T c (h) is the critical temperature in a field, and the symbols with a zero as superscript refer to the critical properties of the model in zero magnetic field: critical temperature and exponents. In the inset of Fig. However, using this methodology, no traces of a phase transition in the thee dimensional model in a field has been found. The simplest explanation is that the lower critical dimension of the model in a magnetic field (3 < D l < 4) is different of that in h = 0 (D l = 2.5), as happens in the random field Ising model case (the lower critical dimension in h = 0 is one and in presence of a random magnetic field is two). We have presented an overview of different analytical approaches to finite dimensional Ising spin glasses. The analytical approach based on field theory is still incomplete both for h = 0 and h = 0. In presence of a magnetic field, recent analytical work points out to a complicated structure of the critical behavior below the upper critical dimension. Moreover, we have presented numerical evidence for existence of the spin glass phase in absence of a magnetic field. The properties of this low temperature phase fit very well in the framework of the RSB theory. Nextly, we have studied in detailed the replicon propagator and we have shown how a disperse metastate has been found. The situation in presence of a magnetic field is not clear. In particular, there is no evidence of a phase transition in three dimensions, though in four dimensions it has been found. In the case of a dimensionless observable the exponent x O = 0. We will denote as g all the dimensionless quantities. or where x O /ν, g * and the correction-to-scaling exponent ω are universal quantities. Examples of dimensionless quantities are R ξ and the cumulants (e.g. U 4 and U 22 ). We could also consider dimensionful observables as the the susceptibility (x χ = ν(2 -η)) and the β-derivatives of R ξ and U 4 (x = 1 for both). The behavior of the crossing points of the inverse temperature (β cross (L, 2L)) are given by β cross (L, 2L) = β c + A βc,g L -ω-1/ν + . . . , (A.3) where in our case g = R ξ or U 4 . In order to study the leading correction-to-scaling exponent we can build the quotient of a given dimensionless quantity g Q g = g 2L /g L at β cross (L, 2L). This quotient behaves as In the fixed coupling method the analysis is slightly different. For instance we have a fixed value of a dimensionless observable g = g f near the universal one (for example a given value of R ξ ) and we compute the value of β(L) at which g f = g(β(g f , L), L) . (A.5) At this value of the inverse temperature we can study scaling of the derivatives of different observables (e.g. susceptibility, derivatives of R ξ and Binder cumulant, etc.) which allows to extract the critical exponents via A.2. The Janus supercomputers Most of the numerical simulations presented in this chapter were obtained using the Janus I and II supercomputers. These computers were built to take advantage of the powerful integer arithmetic and a high number of processor units of the FPGA (Fast Programmable Devices). They were designed and used by a scientific collaboration composed by researchers of two Italian Universities, Ferrara and Roma I "La Sapienza" and three Spanish ones: Complutense de Madrid, Zaragoza and Extremadura. The physics obtained with the help of the Janus supercomputers • High degree of parallelization inside the boards. • Janus allows us to simulate in the 0.1 s time region. Usually, experimental times range from 1 s to 3000 s and previous numerical simulations simulated the 10 -5 s region (SSUE). The next generation of Janus computer, the Janus II one, was built in 2015 and its principal characteristic are: 149 • Janus II is 5 times most powerful than Janus. • It is still a dedicated computer optimized to simulate a wide variety of spin models. * 12 = 2.211 ± 0.006 replicon correlation function in the framework of RSB theory and it should decay algebraically with the exponent θ(0), see Eq. (47) of Sec. 3.4. This power law decay was corroborated in Refs. [116,117] (see Fig. Nature of the Spin Glass Phase in Finite Dimensional (Ising) Spin Glasses