This work presents the electrostatic analysis of a novel Ga2O3 vertical Schottky diode with three different guard ring configurations to reduce the peak electric field at the metal edges. Highly doped p-type GaN, p-type nonpolar AlGaN and polarization doped graded p-AlGaN is simulated and analyzed as the guard ring material, which forms a heterojunction with the Ga2O3 drift layer. Guard ring with non-polar graded p-AlGaN with band gap larger than Ga2O3 is found to show best performance in terms of screening the electric field at the metal edges. The proposed guard ring configuration is also compared with a reported Ga2O3 Schottky diode with no guard ring and a structure with high resistive Nitrogen doped guard ring. The optimized design is predicted to have breakdown voltage as high as 5.3 kV and a specific on resistance of 3.55 mΩ-cm 2 which leads to an excellent power figure of merit of 7.91 GW/cm 2 . G ALLIUM OXIDE (Ga 2 O 3 ) has a huge potential for power device applications due to its high breakdown field. β-Ga 2 O 3 has a band gap (4.6 eV) larger than GaN and SiC, with an estimated critical breakdown field as high as 8 MV/cm. Due to the large critical electric field, the Baliga Figure of Merit (BFOM) relevant to power switching could be 20003400 times that of Si, which is several times larger than that of SiC or GaN. Low doped drift layers in conjunction with large band gap materials can enable very high breakdown voltage. Various power devices using β-Ga 2 O 3 have been demonstrated recently with high breakdown voltage in the vertical geometry. Several field management techniques have been explored for Schottky diodes over the years that includes edge terminations, superjunctions etc. Guard ring is one such edge termination technique where the anode metal edge is surrounded by a doped region with opposite polarity to that of the drift region to screen the high electric field generated at the metal edge. Lin et. al. In this paper, we propose and design a Ga 2 O 3 SBD with a p-doped III-Nitride guard ring using electric field simulations. We have explored three guard ring configurations including (i) p-Gallium Nitride (p-GaN) GR, (ii) Non-polar graded p-Aluminum Gallium Nitride (p-AlGaN) GR and a (ii) polar graded p-AlGaN GR. In this work we perform detailed electrostatic simulations to capture and manage high in III-nitride/β-Ga 2 O 3 heterostructures. The design is optimized to extract the optimum device parameters which efficiently reduces the electric field. We have also explored the additional use of field plate in the aforementioned optimum design to further minimize the peak electric field in the device structure. The schottky barrier diode device structure (Fig. The SBD with nitrogen doped GR and the one with no GR is simulated for comparison and the electric field profiles are shown in Fig. We now explore the use of p-GaN as the guard ring material (Fig. The electric field simulations clearly establish the comparably superior performance of non-polar p-AlGaN guard ring configuration. We now further focus on this particular configuration and study the effect of thickness of the guard ring. In the case of low-doped guard rings, in order to take advantage of holes, it is essential that the the thickness must be sufficiently large to realize an undepleted region close to the metal. Equilibrium energy band diagram of non-polar graded p-AlGaN GR with low doping (10 16 cm -3 ) with two different thicknesses is shown in Fig. To further improve electric field management, we choose guard ring configuration B with a thickness of 1 μm and doping concentration of 10 16 cm -3 . In this case, the peak electric field is at the metal edge. Now we analyze the potential for further improvement in breakdown voltage with a field plate. Fig. A novel approach to reduce the electric field and thus increasing the breakdown voltage for schottky barrier diode by using p-doped III-nitride guard ring is proposed and shown through a detailed device simulation. This approach circumvents the issue of lack of p-type doping in gallium oxide. The SBD with thick low doped non-polar p-AlGaN GR in conjunction with a field plate and a high-k dielectric can serve best in terms of reducing the peak electric field. The inclusion of field plate and a high permittivity field plate oxide in case of low doped GR is shown to further reduce the electric field at the metal edges. Further research into the interface properties of the AlGaN/Ga 2 O 3 heterointerface will lead to better understanding and use of such heterojunction-based structures for high performance power electronic devices.