The organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) with a conjugated polymer as the active material is the elementary unit of organic bioelectronic devices. Increased functionalities, such as low power consumption, can be achieved by building complementary circuits featuring two or more OECTs. Complementary circuits commonly combine both pand n-type transistors to reduce power draw. While p-type OECTs are readily available, n-type OECTs are less common mainly due to poor stability of the n-type active channel material in aqueous electrolyte. Additionally, an OECT based complementary circuit requires well matched transport properties in the pand n-type materials. Here, a complementary circuit is made using a pair of OECTs having polyaniline (PANI) as the channel material in both transistors. PANI is chosen due to its unique behaviour exhibiting a peak in current versus gate voltage Page 2 of 36 when used as an active channel in an OECT. The PANI based circuit is shown to have excellent performance with gain of ~ 7 and could be transferred on a flexible biocompatible chitosan substrate with demonstrated operation in aqueous electrolyte. This study extends the capabilities of conjugated polymer based OECTs. Organic and flexible bioelectronic devices are envisioned to impact future medical applications This makes the output swing between the drive voltage VDD (p-transistor on / n-transistor off -p-slope in Fig. Both unipolar and ambipolar designs pose serious challenges for conjugated polymer semiconductors. Conjugated polymers are predominantly p-type materials; the n-type polymeric semiconductors synthesized to date have relatively lower carrier mobility than p-type An additional consideration for bioelectronics is the need for the n-type polymer to have an operational electrochemical window compatible with aqueous electrolyte The ambipolar design also requires well matched charge transport properties in the pand n-type regions Circuits designed to cleverly exploit this conductivity peak were not explored at the time; we address this gap here. Our complementary circuit consists of two identical PANI OECTs connected in series between a VDD and ground, as usual. The PANI OECT closest to VDD is operated on the p-slope side of the conductance peak (between 1 and 2 in Fig. For initial studies, PANI OECTs were fabricated on interdigitated gold microelectrodes (IDME) patterned on a glass substrate (PANI-on-IDME OECT). The IDME's serpentine structure gives a channel length of 10 μm and channel width of 50 cm. The PANI film was produced using an oxidative polymerization process with phytic acid as the dopant We set out to investigate whether a single-material complementary circuit can be built using two identical OECTs, i.e., featuring the same active channel material PANI, based on the n-like and p-like behavior we have obtained from our PANI-based OECT. Figure Our inverter gain is  1, meeting an essential functional criterion of an inverter PANI is a p-doped semiconductor in the presence of phytic acid. The origin of the transition between the n-like and p-like behavior we observe here is electrochemically driven. We show this by investigating the electrochemical and optical properties of PANI using an in-house built apparatus (Fig. We concurrently measured the optical transmission via the photodiode current (Fig. Combining optical transmission with cyclic voltammetry while the OECT was operating enabled us to identify with certainty that the non-conductive leucoemeraldine and pernigraniline states are the dominant species in Regions I and III respectively, where the OECT was in the off state, whilst the emeraldine state was dominant in Region II, where the OECT is in the on state. We performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations for PANI in different oxidation states to further understand Regions I-III. In previous studies We find that the leucoemeraldine base is strongly insulating owing to a wide band gap of 2.15 eV and a Fermi energy just above the valence band edge (fig. Overall, these calculations compare well with others in the literature Low operating voltage is a vital property for building bioelectronic circuits, which inevitably need to operate in an aqueous electrolyte environment. An attractive aspect of PANI is that its electrochemical activity is within an ideal range for this purpose (< 1 V) (fig. Introducing electronic circuits into bioelectronic devices will enable new and improved biomedical functionalities. Conjugated polymer based OECTs have demonstrated superior performance at the biointerface, in comparison to other transistor architectures such as the organic field-effect transistor (OFET) or the electrolyte-gated OFET Our work set the foundation for the flexible complementary logic circuit we here developed for in vivo operation at the biointerface. The next step will be to test the capability of the circuit to process signals of physiological frequencies, towards its use as a real-time processing unit at the biointerface All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without any further purification. Any water used was deionized to 18 MΩ.cm using a Millipore (Milli-DI) pro system unless otherwise specified. OECTs were fabricated on interdigitated microelectrode (IDME) structures purchased from Micrux Technologies (ED-IDE1-Au). PANI films were obtained by oxidative polymerization of aniline directly on the IDME as described previously Chitosan substrates (20 μm thick) were prepared by dropcasting 1.6 mL of chitosan solution (1.5wt% chitosan in 2wt% acetic acid aqueous solution) on a microscope slide (76 mm x 25 mm). IDME topography before and after PANI deposition was acquired using a JPK Instruments atomic force microscope with NanoWizard II software. The microscope was operated in contact mode in air using silicon cantilevers (AppNano ACT-50; Length 125 μm, width 30 μm, tip radius <10 nm) with 36 Nm-1 nominal spring constant and 200-400 kHz resonant frequency. Scanning rate was 1 Hz with pixel resolution 1024 x 1024. PANI was polymerized on ITO slides (60 mm x 8 mm) to serve as the working electrode and put into a 3 mL cuvette containing 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid. A platinum wire and Ag/AgCl electrode in 0.1 M AgNO3 (CHI Instruments) were immersed in the ionic liquid as counter and reference electrodes, with potential applied and current measured using an Ivium Vertex 100 mA potentiostat. The absorption spectra were obtained with a PerkinElmer Lambda 900 UV-Vis spectrometer over the 300 nm to 900 nm wavelength with 5 nm steps. Transistor characteristics were measured using a pair of Keithley 2401 Source Measure Units (SMUs) and a Keithley 6517A electrometer. The first SMU supplies the drain-source voltage VDS and measures source current IS, and the second SMU supplies the gate voltage VG and measures gate leakage current IG (via Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M AgNO3 electrode; CHI Instruments). The electrometer measures the drain current ID flowing to virtual ground. Voltage sweeps were performed with a step of 1 mV. The electrical characteristics of the device on IDME and chitosan substrate were obtained using 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid and 0.1 M NaCl solution respectively. Conductivity of the channel (σ) was calculated using the following formula: where R is the resistance, L and w are the length and width of the channel respectively, and t is the thickness of the PANI film. The inverter supply voltage VDD, DC input voltage Vin and shift voltage Vshift were applied using three CV and UV-visible absorption spectroscopy (UV-Vis) are generally used to investigate the electrochemical and optical properties of PANI films. These are commonly performed on separate films/substrates under different experimental conditions using different instruments, making comparative analysis more challenging. To address this, we built an apparatus (shown in Fig. First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) 