We present a new approach to femtosecond direct laser writing lithography to pattern nanocavities in ferromagnetic thin films. To demonstrate the concept we irradiated 300 nm thin nickel films by single intense femtosecond laser pulses through the glass substrate and created complex surface landscapes at the nickel-air interface. Using a fluence above the ablation threshold the process is destructive and irradiation leads to the formation of 200 nm thin flakes of nickel around the ablation crater as seen by electron microscopy. By progressively lowering the peak laser fluence, slightly below the ablation threshold the formation of closed spallation cavities is demonstrated by 1 Destructive laser-matter interactions play an important role in the processing and structuring of materials. The direct optical excitation of solid surfaces and interfaces by single or multiple laser pulses can be utilized to fabricate a variety of nanostructures. In most cases the prerequisite of laser nanostructuring is laser-induced melting. Being an intricate phenomenon by itself, laser-induced melting triggers the complex spatio-temporal hydrodynamic and mechanical motion of melted material. Inevitable modification of resolidified surface landscapes may alter the material properties in an unpredictable manner preventing the use of fs-laser nanostructuring for applications in nanophotonics, where both nanometer precision and well-defined material properties are usually required at once. Our present investigation aims at circumventing the aforementioned complications and has been inspired by older experiments on macroscopically thick aluminum foils. Salzmann et al. 10 demonstrated that nanosecond optical excitation of the front side of 100 μm thick aluminum foil results in the formation of a closed cavity in the vicinity of its back side. The formation of the cavity has been explained by the local mechanical disruption (spallation) in solid aluminum induced by transient spatially inhomogeneous tensile stresses generated upon reflection of large amplitude compressive acoustic/shock pulses from the metal-air interface. Similar observations have been reported by Tamura et at. 11 using picosecond and femtosecond laser pulses on free-standing aluminum foils. However, owing to the macroscopic thickness of the investigated aluminum layers, these studies were not topical from the perspective of modern nanotechnologies. Technically similar experimental investigations on metallic thin films with the thicknesses in the range between 10 and 400 nm suggested that fs-laser pulses result either in the removal of the entire film from the substrate and the formation of an ablation crater (punching 12 ) or to a local thermoelastic separation of the entire film from the dielectric substrate, 13 sometimes denoted as "blistering" 14 or "bulging". We have chosen nickel thin films to demonstrate the potential of the proposed approach for several reasons. First of all, functional nanostructuring of nickel has a great relevance for applications since studies of elementary excitations in nickel thin films and nanostructures revealed already a tremendous variety of interesting fundamental physical phenomena such as ultrafast laser demagnetization, During the first set of experiments, the train of ultrashort laser pulses from an amplified Ti:Sa laser (100 fs duration, 10 Hz repetition rate, pulse energy up to 140 μJ) was focused with a quartz lens (focal length 40 cm) under 45 degrees on a 1 cmx1 cm sample, scanning the beam horizontally at a constant speed thereby making possible to fabricate sequences of almost identical structures in the single-shot regime. Thanks to the high reliability of such scanning fs-laser patterning, we then achieved the fabrication of periodic arrays of different shapes and periods. We first started with the investigation of the key parameters that need to be controlled to achieve the desired precision and fidelity of the process. Figure Outside the elliptical ablation crater the laser fluence decreases towards the periphery of the crater; at the certain distance from the center the absorbed energy is not sufficient to remove the Ni film completely. Nevertheless, in this region the local laser fluence is sufficient to melt a fraction of the film interfaced with the substrate and lift up and rip the topmost part. This outcome is the result of an uncontrolled spallation as confirmed by the molecular dynamics simulation discussed in the last section. As a result of this thermo-mechanical spallation mechanism, the melted part of the Ni film remains on the substrate and the solid part forms dangling flakes surrounding the crater. According to the SEM images presented in Figure A close inspection of Figure In the following we demonstrate that controlled spallation can be indeed achieved tuning the pulse energy in the range between spallation and abalation onsets. Figure Interferograms from the front side display pronounced shift of optical interference fringes. Comparison with reference interferogram of unexcited surface can be used to reconstruct the phase landscape ∆Ψ(x, y) by applying, for example, the 2D-Fourier transform algorithm. Laser pulses with energy 35 μJ (peak fluence F = 1.17F spall ) result in a flat-top surface profile (Fig. Therefore we speculate that the transient vacuum inside the spallation cavity protects the process of resolidification of the bottom layer from surface chemistry, which would alter the Ni surface material under ambient conditions and elevated temperatures. Using the slit projection technique, In order to deeply understand the mechanism of the spallation process observed in the experiments, we performed the atomistic-continuum modeling of fs-laser induced dynamics for Ni thin films irradiated through glass substrate. The model is based on the Molecular Dynamics (MD) approach, but, due to integrated Two Temperature Model (TTM), We demonstrated that the controlled thermo-mechanical spallation of nickel films can be induced and controlled by irradiation with a single femtosecond laser pulses. Molecular dynamics simulations shade light at the complex physics of the spallation process occuring in inside the nickel film at an interface between solid and (laser-molten) nickel. By tuning the irradiation parameters, closed spallation cavities with two distinct flat and "M" shaped top have been produced and characterized by high-resolution interferometric microscopy. Using slit projection technique periodic arrays of elongated bell-shaped spallation cavities with periodicities in the range 3 -30 μm and heights up to 200 nm have been produced demonstrating that the process can be finely controlled to induce desired shapes and parallelized for the fast fabrication of metasurfaces and gratings for visible and IR, potentially also for THz, radiation. The flexible nature of the quasi-free-standing outer nickel membrane forming the spallation cavities will allow for substantial and fast modulation of light diffraction by exciting the acoustic eigenmodes of the cavities. The curved nature of the nickel membrane is expected to result in unique topology-induced magnetic states, which are the focus of intense studies. 