We demonstrate that antiferromagnet-superconductor (AF-S) junctions show qualitatively different transport properties than normal metal-superconductor (N-S) and ferromagnet-superconductor (F-S) junctions. We attribute these transport features to the presence of two new scattering processes in AF-S junctions, i.e., specular reflection of holes and retroreflection of electrons. Using the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk formalism, we find that the electrical and thermal conductance depend nontrivially on antiferromagnetic exchange strength, voltage, and temperature bias. Furthermore, we show that the interplay between the Néel vector direction and the interfacial Rashba spin-orbit coupling leads to a large anisotropic magnetoresistance. The unusual transport properties make AF-S interfaces unique among the traditional condensed-matter-system-based superconducting junctions. Introduction.-Heterostructures composed of superconductors and nonsuperconducting materials exhibit technologically relevant quantum phenomena The simplest superconducting heterostructure is a normal metal (N)-superconductor (S) junction. The low bias transport is dominated by Andreev reflection (AR) The spin dependence of AR at superconducting interfaces causes the transport properties to change drastically when ferromagnetic (F) layers are introduced Antiferromagnets (AFs) are magnetically ordered materials with zero net magnetization and negligible stray fields, as well as intrinsic high-frequency dynamics. Thus, AFs are promising candidates for novel high-density and ultrafast spintronic-based nanodevices AF-S junctions have been theoretically shown to exhibit additional scattering processes that differ from those in N(F)-S junctions To our knowledge, the effect of these additional scattering processes on the electrical and thermal transport in AF-S bilayers remains an open question. In this paper, we address this issue and point out unique experimental signatures in the electrical and thermal conductance. Model.-We consider a collinear, two-sublattice AF metal on a cubic lattice attached to a conventional s-wave superconductor. The AF and S are both semi-infinite and occupy the regions z < 0 and z > 0, respectively. We assume a compensated interface at z = 0. To investigate the electrical and thermal transport, we use the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) scattering formalism The BdG Hamiltonian of an AF-S junction in the continuum limit consists of a Hamiltonian for itinerant charge carriers H e , an antiferromagnetic exchange coupling H AF , an interfacial barrier potential H I , and a Hamiltonian modeling the S layer H S , The Pauli matrices s, σ, and τ denote the spin, sublattice, and charge degrees of freedom, respectively. We also define τ ± 4 = diag(1, ±K), where K represents complex conjugation, and τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y ) /2. The Hamiltonian governing the motion of the itinerant charge carriers is where γ(p) = p 2 -h2 k 2 0 /2m is the kinetic energy, p = -ih∇ is the momentum operator, m is the effective mass of the charge carriers, k 0 is the wavevector at which γ(hk 0 ) = 0, and h is the reduced Planck constant. The chemical potential is μ = μ AF Θ(-z)+μ S Θ(z), where Θ(•) is the Heaviside step function. The s-d exchange interaction between localized antiferromagnetic moments and itinerant spins reads where J = J 0 Θ(-z) denotes the interaction strength and n = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ) is the uniform Néel vector. We assume strong anisotropy set the direction of spins and suppresses quantum fluctuations. The interfacial potential is, where V = V 0 δ(z) is the strength the spin-independent potential barrier and λ R = λ 0 δ(z) is the strength the Rashba SOC (RSOC) where ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 tanh 1.74 (T c /T ) -1 Θ(z) is an interpolation formula for the temperature-dependent gap of an s-wave superconductor with a critical temperature T c To determine the reflection coefficients, we solve the BdG eigenvalue problem, where ψ is an eigenvector with eigenvalue E > 0 (see the Supplemental Material [75]). The x and y directions are translationally invariant. Hence, the eigenvector takes the form ψ = χe iq •r e iqzz , where q = (q x , q y , 0) is the conserved component of the wavevector parallel to the interface and q z is the wavevector component normal to the interface. The spinor χ is expressed in the basis [75]: Here, A (B), ↑ (↓), and e (h) refer to sublattice, spin, and charge degrees of freedom, respectively. Substituting the eigenvector into Eq. ( Figure Thermoelectric coefficients.-To study electrical and thermal transport, we assume that the AF is in contact with a biased reservoir, and that the S is in contact with a reference reservoir. Applying a bias voltage U or a temperature difference ∆T through the junction induces an electric current or a heat current, respectively. In the BTK formalism where A and T are the interfacial area and the thermal equilibrium temperature, respectively. The total reflection probabilities for electrons (e) and holes (h) are Here, R ± c,s is the reflection probability for particles with wavevector q ± c , where c = e, h and s =↑, ↓ [75]. AR results in a net charge transfer of 2e, but zero heat transfer Numerical parameters.-Before presenting our numerical results, we introduce our dimensionless parameters: the spin-independent barrier strength Z = V 0 m/h 2 q * , the Rashba strength λ = 2λ 0 m/h 2 q * , and the exchange strength J 0 /μ. Here q 2 * = k 2 0 + q 2 F , where q 2 F = 2mμ/h 2 . For simplicity, we set μ AF = μ S = μ and normalize the electrical and thermal conductance with respect to the corresponding Sharvin conductance The Sharvin electrical (thermal) conductance is the electrical (thermal) conductance evaluated in the limit ∆ 0 = J 0 = Z = 0, i.e., the response functions of a normal metal with perfect transmission: In our calculations, we estimate the effective mass to be h2 /2m = 0.5 eV nm 2 based on a tight-binding model with typical material parameters Calculation of reflection probabilities.-Figure For simplicity, we first consider a transparent interface (Z = 0) and the subgap regime (E < ∆ 0 ). In the normal metal limit (J 0 = 0), we find that retro AR is the dominant scattering process If the interface is not transparent (Z = 0), AR is suppressed while NR is enhanced, because fewer electrons are allowed to enter the S layer to form Cooper pairs. Increasing J 0 leads to an increase in retro NR and a decrease in specular NR, see Fig. Electrical and thermal conductance.-In the following, we elucidate experimental signatures in the response functions of the system. To simplify the discussion, we only consider the low temperature limit T → 0 in Eqs. (9a), and (9b) in the rest of the paper. In Fig. First, we focus on the electrical conductance shown in Fig. In the tunneling limit (Z = 10), the electrical conductance is singular at eU/∆ 0 = 1, which originates from the singularity in the density of states (DOS) in the S layer. In contrast to the electrical conductance, the thermal conductance is suppressed by AR. The physical reason is that Cooper pairs carry finite charge but zero heat across the junction. Therefore, for the thermal conductance to be finite, the temperature must be so high that electronlike and hole-like particles can be transmitted into the S layer. Since higher temperatures result in greater transmission of particles, the thermal conductance increases with increasing temperature bias, as shown in Fig. In the transparent limit (Z = 0), the retro NR increases with increasing exchange strength. Since less particles are transmitted into the S layer, the thermal conductance decreases with increasing exchange strength. As the barrier strength increases, even fewer particles are transmitted into the S layer. In the tunneling limit (Z = 10), the thermal conductance is strongly suppressed. Figure To compare the AF-S junction with the F-S junction, we plot the electrical conductance as a function of the exchange strength in Fig. FIG. In the regime ∆ 0 J 0 μ, the DOS in the AF layer is approximately constant, and consequently, so is the electrical conductance [75]. As J 0 /μ → 1, the AF layer starts to behave as an insulator, suppressing all transport properties. Anisotropic magnetoresistance.-So far, we have not considered the effect of finite interfacial RSOC, resulting from the inversion symmetry breaking at the interface. For finite interfacial RSOC, additional scattering channels are opened in which spin-flip scattering is allowed. Spin-flipped AR allows for the formation of spin-triplet Cooper pairs in the S layer In the AF layer, the spin quantization axis is determined by the Néel vector. Consequently, a finite interfacial RSOC leads to anisotropy in the electrical and thermal conductance for an AF-S junction. Since we consider only an interfacial RSOC with an inversion-breaking axis in the z direction, this AMR depends only on the Néel vector's polar angle θ. Figure where r ± i represents the reflection amplitude for a particle being reflected to the branch q ± i with i = e, h. For small temperatures T < T c the Fermi-Dirac distribution makes sure that only the scattering processes with E μ AF -J 0 contributes to the electrical and thermal conductance. The sign in the exponents are determined by the z-component of the group velocity v z = ∂E/∂q z of the corresponding branch in Fig. By requiring that the wavefunction is continuous and integrating the BdG equation from z = 0 -to z = 0 + we obtain the matching conditions Here ψ AF and ψ S denotes the wavefunction in the AF and S respectively. We use these equations to calculate the reflection amplitudes in Eq. ( Let Φ be an arbitrary eigenvector of the Hamiltonian. By defining the probability and charge density as we evaluate dρ p,Q /dt using the BdG equation to obtain the probability and charge currents We use J p to evaluate the reflection probabilities R ± i,σ in the main text. The heat current is identical to the probability current except it includes a prefactor of Eμ, for a detailed discussion see A crucial difference between the the N-S and AF-S junctions in our work is that the former has one physical lattice, while the latter has two physical sublattices. This results in that taking the limit J 0 -→ 0 can be subtle. In Fig. In Fig. When we naively take the limit J 0 → 0 we obtain the two bands AF = ± 2 2m (q 2k 2 0 ) shown in Fig. ) in the AF. Note that there is an additional band, due to the two sublattices compared to a). The crossed out green (filled) and blue (empty) circles represents the scattering processes that are allowed in the AF-S junction but absent in the N-S junction. In order to understand the dependence of the angle of incidence it is useful to employ the Andreev approximation, which utilizes that E and ∆ 0 typically is much smaller than μ and J 0 . In the AF the Andreev approximation reads q ± e ≈ q ± h ≈ q ± , where This equation result in two critical angles defined implicitly by the inequality We stress that the critical angle corresponding to k -plays no role in the N(F)-S junction because it originates from the unphysical dispersion AF (J 0 = 0) = -2 2m (q 2k 2 0 ), as discussed in the previous section. To elucidate the importance of the additional critical angle we have plotted the reflection coefficients as function of q and J 0 /∆ 0 in Fig. Note that as soon as q > k -and J 0 = 0 the retro AR decays, while the specular NR increases. This behaviour results in the rapid decay of the electrical conductance shown in Fig. Note that in the regime where ∆ 0 J 0 μ we can approximate the retro AR as This allows us to estimate the constant value of the zero-temperature conductance discussed in Fig. where we made the approximation J 0 μ such that k ± ≈ k 2 0 ± k 2 F . We also provide an estimate for how quickly Gc decays as a function of J/∆ 0 , by performing a curve fit with the function The results are provided in Tab. I. The density of states (DOS) in the AF is defined as In the AF AF (q) = ± 2 2m (q 2k 2 0 ) 2 + J 2 0 which gives In Fig. FIG. In Fig. We find that the the new scattering processes R - e,h suppresses the conductance. This is another essential difference when compared to the AMR in F-S junctions, and might lead to experimentally well-distinct variations of the AMR amplitudes. * Present address