Almost four decades ago, Bergman and Milton independently showed that the isotropic effective electric permittivity of a two-phase composite material with a given volume fraction is constrained to lie within lens-shaped regions in the complex plane that are bounded by two circular arcs. An implication of particular significance is a set of limits to the maximum and minimum absorption of an isotropic composite material at a given frequency. Here, after giving a short summary of the underlying theory, we show that the bound corresponding to one of the circular arcs is at least almost optimal by introducing a certain class of hierarchical laminates. In regard to the second arc, we show that a tighter bound can be derived using variational methods. This tighter bound is optimal as it corresponds to assemblages of doubly coated spheres, which can be easily approximated by more realistic microstructures. We briefly discuss the implications for related problems, including bounds on the complex polarizability. Composite materials can exhibit effective "metamaterial" properties that are quite different from those of their underlying constituents In the following, we study the effective-permittivity problem in the quasistatic regime for isotropic microstructures that are made from two isotropic materials (phases). We assume that the volume fractions f 1 and f 2 = 1 -f 1 of the two phases are given, which is typically the problem of interest in applications in which the weight, or cost, of one of the phases is an issue. However, our results are not limited to fixed volume fractions, as the corresponding results for arbitrary volume fractions follow as a simple corollary. The quasistatic regime corresponds to the assumption that the structures are periodic and that the wavelength and attenuation lengths in the phases and the composite are much longer than the unit cell of periodicity. In this case, one can use the quasistatic equations (see Sec. 11.1 in Ref. 1) (1) where d(x) and e(x) are complex periodic vector fields, with the real parts of d(x)e -iωt and e(x)e -iωt representing the electric displacement field and the electric field, respectively, χ(x) is the periodic characteristic function that takes the value 1 in phase 1 and 0 in phase 2, and ε 1 and ε 2 are the (frequency-dependent) complex electric permittivities of the two materials. Letting ⟨•⟩ denote a volume average over the unit cell of periodicity, we may solve these equations for any value of ⟨e⟩ (provided ε 1 /ε 2 is finite, nonzero, and non-negative). Then, since ⟨d⟩ depends linearly on ⟨e⟩, we may write which defines the effective complex electric permittivity, ε * . The goal is then to find the range that ε * takes as the geometry, i.e., χ(x), varies over all periodic configurations with an isotropic effective permittivity that have the prescribed volume fraction f 1 of phase 1. The geometries that realize (or almost realize) the maximum and minimum values of the imaginary part of ε * are those that show (close to) the maximum and minimum amount of absorption of an incoming plane wave or a constant static applied field. It is not only the imaginary part of ε * that is of interest, as both the real and imaginary parts are of importance in determining the effective refractive index and the transmission and reflection at an interface. If there is a slow variation (relative to the local periodicity) in the microstructure, the resulting variations in ε * (x) can be used to guide waves. Substantial progress on this problem was made about four decades ago when bounds on the effective complex electric permittivity were derived Originally, the BM bounds were derived on the basis of the analytic properties of ε * as a function of ε 1 and ε 2 . Bergman, in his pioneering work The BM bounds can also be used in an inverse fashion, i.e., to obtain information about the composition of a material from a measurement of its effective properties. If we know that a composite material is made from two phases with known permittivities, we can use the BM bounds to obtain bounds on the volume fraction from a measurement of its effective permittivity We remark, in passing, that the analytic method is also useful for bounding the response in the time domain for a given time-dependent applied field (that is not at constant frequency) Furthermore, the analytic properties extend to the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map governing the response of bodies containing two or more phases, not just in quasistatics but also for wave equations (at constant frequency) (see Chaps. 3 and 4 in Before discussing the BM bounds in more detail, we briefly consider the analytic properties of the electric permittivity as a function of frequency In order to derive the BM bounds, one uses the fact that the analytic properties extend to the permittivity as a function of the constituent phases for all z not on the negative real axis of the complex plane, where α and β are non-negative real constants and dμ is a non-negative measure on (0, ∞). Depending on the assumptions about the geometry of the composite, the Stieltjes function satisfies different constraints Second, if the volume fraction of phase 1 in the composite, f 1 , is prescribed, the Stieltjes function additionally satisfies df (z) Third, if the composite is assumed to be isotropic, the Stieltjes function additionally satisfies The goal is then to determine the sets of values that the function f (z) and, hence, the effective permittivity (or any diagonal element of the effective permittivity tensor) attains as the geometry, i.e., the measure dμ, is varied while being subject to the first constraint (anisotropic composites), the first and the second constraint (anisotropic composites with fixed volume fraction) and all of the constraints (isotropic composites with fixed volume fraction). It can be shown that mappings between these sets are realized by linear fractional transformations The BM bounds for an isotropic composite material with fixed volume fraction confine ε * to lie within the following lens-shaped region in the complex plane. One side is the circular arc traced by as u 1 is varied so that u 1 ≥ f 2 /3 and u 2 ≥ f 1 /3 while keeping u 1 + u 2 = 1 as u 1 is varied so that u 1 ≥ 2f 2 /3 and u 2 ≥ 2f 1 /3 while keeping u 1 + u 2 = 1 . When ε 1 and ε 2 are real, the lens-shaped region collapses to an interval between these two points, thus giving the well-known Hashin-Shtrikman bounds In Ref. 6, Milton identified microstructures that attain three additional points on the arc ε + * (u 1 ). His key idea was to look for microstructures that have only one pole, as this is the characteristic feature of the bound , respectively, which, as illustrated in Fig. where I is the identity matrix and M is a matrix that depends on the depolarization tensors of the ellipsoids. As the shape and orientation of the ellipsoids is varied, M ranges over all positive-semidefinite symmetric matrices with Tr(M ) = 1 (see Sec. 7.8 in Ref. 1). If one chooses the coordinate system such that its axes coincide with the principal axes of the ellipsoids, M is a diagonal matrix. The range of effective permittivities of Schulgasser laminates formed from such assemblages is illustrated in Fig. The first main thrust of this paper is to show that there are hierarchical laminate geometries that attain, depending on the volume fraction, two or three more points on the arc ε + * (u 1 ) and other hierarchical laminates, which typically come extremely close to attaining the entire arc. This result shows that any improved bound, if it exists, typically can only be marginally better than Eq. Note that while we are focussing on bounds on the complex permittivity, similar conclusions almost certainly apply to the attainability of four related bounds: those coupling the two effective permittivities ε were also shown to attain the relevant bounds It was noted in Ref. 6 that the formula (8) does not satisfy the phase interchange inequality of Schulgasser has been proposed The second main thrust of this paper is to derive this improved bound, replacing Eq. ( The BM bound and our improved bound, like many bounds on effective moduli that involve the volume fractions of the phases (as well as possibly other information) simplify when expressed in terms of their ytransforms (see Chaps. in terms of which The BM bounds confine y ε to a volume-fractionindependent lens-shaped region bounded by the straight line joining 2ε 1 and 2ε 2 , corresponding to the bound Note that while we obtain an improved bound for isotropic composites, our bound also applies to anisotropic composites if we replace the scalar effective permittivity, ε * , with Tr(ε * )/3 or any other effective permittivity of isotropic polycrystals. In the following, we show that the bound ( The first two of the five microstructures that are known to attain the bound while parallel to the cylinder axes, one obtains The corresponding Schulgasser laminate has effective permittivity and its y-transformed effective permittivity is given by Analogously, one obtains for the phase-interchanged microstructure, i.e., for phase 2 as the core material, The fifth optimal microstructure, the Schulgasser laminate formed from a rank-1 laminate (L), has effective permittivity and, therefore, This last relation implies that every point on the ytransformed version of the bound ( It is well known that for each assemblage of coated ellipsoids, there is a hierarchical laminate with the same effective permittivity (see Ref. Hierarchical laminates are conveniently described using tree structures (see, e.g., Chap. 9 in Ref. 1). More precisely, every hierarchical laminate can be represented by a tree in which every node has either zero or two children. Nodes of the tree that have zero children, which are commonly referred to as leaves, correspond to one of the pure phases. Each node that is not a leaf, on the other hand, refers to a laminate that is formed from its children and, thus, has a certain lamination direction assigned to it. In the case of three-dimensional orthogonal laminates, there are only three possible lamination directions (x, ŷ, and ẑ). Furthermore, we have to specify the volume fractions used in each lamination step. In our tree representation, we assign these volume fractions to the edges that connect the corresponding node to its children, i.e., the edges of the tree have certain weights. As an example, the tree structures of the laminates corresponding to the coated-cylinder assemblage and the coated-sphere assemblage are shown in Fig. In order to identify additional microstructures attaining the bound formed from orthogonal laminates that have only one pole. More precisely, we form hierarchical laminates from laminates that are known to attain the bound (or one of the pure phases) in such a way that no additional poles are introduced. The first such hierarchical laminate (LA1) is formed from phase 1 and the laminate corresponding to the coated-cylinder assemblage (with phase 1 as the core phase and phase 2 as the coating phase). It is closely related to the rank-3 coated laminate that corresponds to the coated-sphere assemblage. However, instead of laminating with phase 2, i.e., the coating phase, in the third and last lamination step, we laminate with phase 1. An illustration of this hierarchical laminate as well as the corresponding tree structure are shown in Fig. where f (2) 2 = 1-f (1) f (2) is the volume fraction of phase 2 in the laminate corresponding to the coated-cylinder assemblage. As the volume fraction of phase 1 in the final laminate is given by and as all volume fractions have to lie in the range [0, 1], we can construct this laminate if only if FIG. Analogously, we can construct the corresponding phaseinterchanged hierarchical laminate (LA2) if and only if f 1 ∈ [0, 1/2]. In the final step, in order to obtain isotropic optimal composites, we form Schulgasser laminates from the anisotropic hierarchical laminates LA1 and LA2. The y-transformed effective permittivities of these Schulgasser laminates are identical and given by the arithmetic mean of the y-transformed permittivities of the two Hashin-Shtrikman coated sphere assemblages, which implies that they attain the bound In a similar fashion, we can obtain an additional optimal microstructure (LB1) by laminating the hierachical laminate corresponding to the coated-cylinder assemblage with a rank-1 laminate. The corresponding tree structure is shown in Fig. We then require that the pole created in the last lamination step is identical to the pole of the two laminates from which it is formed, The volume fraction of phase 1 in the final laminate is given by which, in combination with the conditions ( The y-transformed effective permittivity of the corresponding Schulgasser laminate is given by Similarly, we can find a corresponding laminate with interchanged phases (LB2), with if and only if f 1 ∈ [1/3, 0]. As these points, y LB1 ε and y LB2 ε , lie on the straight line joining 2ε 1 and 2ε 2 , the Schulgasser laminates formed from these laminates attain the bound Hence, in summary, we obtain three additional microstructures attaining the bound if f 1 ∈ (1/3, 2/3) with FIG. f 1 ̸ = 1/2 and two additional microstructures otherwise. While it remains presently unclear whether this strategy succeeds for every permittivity on the bound, using numerical calculations, one can interpolate between the known optimal laminates in such a way that the resulting laminates, which in general have more than a single pole, come very close to the bound. In order to do so, we choose two of the known optimal laminates (CS1, CS2, CC1, CC2, L), which we refer to as laminates A and B, and laminate them along one of the three axes in proportions f and 1 -f . If f A 1 and f B 1 are the volume fractions of phase 1 in the laminates A and B, respectively, the volume fraction of phase 1 in the resulting material is given by As, in general, this laminate is not isotropic, we form a Schulgasser laminate in the final step. We then repeat this process for all three axes and for all possible pairwise combinations of the laminates CS1, CS2, CC1, CC2, and L and a large number of combinations of f A 1 and f B 1 while varying f such that f 1 is kept fixed. We calculate the corresponding effective complex permittivities numerically. The results for different sets of parameters are shown in Fig. We now derive our improved bound on the isotropic effective electric permittivity that corresponds to the doubly-coated sphere assemblage. In the first step, following Cherkaev and Gibiansky being symmetric and positive definite. Now, we can recast the problem of finding the effective permittivity tensor as the following minimization variational principle (see also Ref. 9): . Using a constant trial field, one immediately obtains the arithmetic mean bound L * ≤ ⟨L⟩, while the corresponding dual variational principle leads to the harmonic mean bound L -1 * ≤ ⟨L -1 ⟩. Note that these two bounds are equivalent in the sense that they lead to the same bounds on the effective permittivity tensor Before applying the translation method, we will first embed the variational problem As the microscopic electric field, e(x), and the microscopic electric displacement field, d(x), depend linearly on the macroscopic electric field ⟨e⟩ and ⟨d⟩, we can write thereby introducing the rank-2 tensor fields E(x) and D(x), which, as opposed to a single solution of the quasistatic equations (1), fully characterize the composite material. The corresponding microscopic version of the constitutive law takes the form where ":" denotes a contraction with respect to two indices, i.e., and E is a rank-4 tensor with components The macroscopic version of the constitutive law, which defines the corresponding effective tensor, is given by Using ⟨E⟩ = I and considering an isotropic composite, Eq. ( As in the rank-2 case, cf. Eq. ( where we have introduced the rank-4 tensor L. The components of this tensor are related to the components of the corresponding rank-2 tensor as follows: We now consider a material with translated properties, satisfying the following two conditions (see, e.g., Refs. 68 and 69 and Chap. 24 in Ref. 1): (i) The translated tensor is positive semidefinite, i.e., which, as we are considering a two-phase medium, simplifies to (ii) The translation, T , is quasiconvex, i.e., for all F = (-D ′ , E ′ ) ⊺ with the periodic fields D ′ and E ′ subject to the usual differential constraints. Note that if Eq. ( and condition (ii) implies that In combination, we obtain the so-called translation bound: Analogous to the y-transform of the scalar effective parameters, Eq. ( in terms of which the bound takes the particularly simple form While in principle, we could consider any arbitrary translation satisfying the aforementioned conditions, it has been shown that isotropic translations, reflecting the symmetry of the problem, are most-well suited where the three terms correspond to projections of an arbitrary rank-2 tensor onto the subspaces of tensors proportional to the identity tensor, trace-free symmetric tensors, and antisymmetric tensors. We refer to these three terms as the bulk-modulus, shear-modulus, and antisymmetrization terms, since in elasticity the coefficients λ 1 and λ 2 correspond to the bulk and shear modulus, respectively, while λ 3 has no counterpart as the elasticity tensor is symmetric with respect to permutations of the first two (as well as the last two) indices. In the following, we encounter tensors of the form We use the fact that such a tensor is positive semidefinite if and only if the three matrices, are positive semidefinite. We now chose the translation as for t 1 ≥ 0 and t 2 and t 3 arbitrary. In order to show that such a translation is quasiconvex, as shown by Tartar and Since E and D are curl-and divergence-free, respectively, we obtain the following constraints on the Fourier coefficients Using Plancherel's identity, one finds that, in order to prove the quasiconvexity of the translation, it suffices to show that and where E k denotes the complex conjugate of E k . Note that we choose A(-2t 2 , t 2 , -t 2 ) and A(-t 3 , -t 3 , -t 3 ) to be null Lagrangians (with respect to the appropriate subspaces) rather than merely satisfying the condition of quasiconvexity. As we are considering isotropic tensors, it is sufficient to consider a single choice of k. For example, for k = (1, 0, 0) ⊺ the constraints and it becomes straightforward to show that the inequalities ( Having established that a translation of the form given in Eq. ( we can write (see, e.g., Ref. Restricting ourselves to isotropic effective permittivities, we then obtain . Using the decomposition into the bulk-modulus, shearmodulus, and antisymmetrization terms, it becomes clear that the translation bound reduces to the three conditions which imply that the corresponding determinants are non-negative. Thus, we obtain from the first of these conditions, Eq. ( where we have introduced the parameters and Hence, the y-transformed effective permittivity has to lie inside of or on a circle with center (y ′ c , y ′′ c ) and radius R. Choosing different translations, i.e., different values of 1 , t 2 , and t 3 , corresponds to moving and scaling the circle in the complex plane. In contrast to the complex bulk modulus case is not necessarily non-negative. As shown below, the first condition leads to bounds that constrain the ytransformed effective permittivity to a region in the complex plane that is bounded by a circular arc and a straight line. As the circular arc turns out to correspond to the doubly-coated-sphere assemblage and the straight line corresponds to the bound We now identify the restrictions on the parameters y ′ c , y ′′ c , and R, i.e., on the choice of circles bounding the ytransformed effective permittivity, imposed by the condition that the translated tensor is positive semidefinite, i.e., by Eq. we find that . (73) Again using the decomposition into the bulk-modulus, shear-modulus, and antisymmetrization terms, we find that the positive-semidefiniteness of the translated tensor is equivalent to the three constraints which imply that the corresponding determinants are non-negative. Evaluating the first two determinants gives By considering the remaining principal minors, i.e., the diagonal elements, it can be shown that Eq. ( Thus, we find that, as illustrated in Fig. where the volume fractions of the core, the inner shell, and the outer shell are pf 1 , 1 -f 1 , and (1 -p)f 1 , respectively. Clearly, this equation corresponds to a circular arc passing through 2ε 1 , 2ε 2 , and -ε 1 . For the phaseinterchanged case, i.e., phase 2 in the core and the outer shell and phase 1 in the inner shell, one obtains which corresponds to a circular arc passing through 2ε 1 , 2ε 2 , and -ε 2 . Here, the volume fractions of the core, the inner shell, and the outer shell are p(1 -f 1 ), f 1 , and (1 -p)(1 -f 1 ), respectively. As shown in Ref. 71, bounds on the effective complex permittivity for small values of f 1 directly lead to bounds on the orientation averaged complex polarizability of an inclusion (or set of inclusions) having permittivity ε 1 embedded in a medium with permittivity ε 2 . Independently, Miller and coauthors Consider, in the quasistatic regime, a dilute suspension of randomly oriented identical particles in vacuum or air. The effective relative permittivity of such a cloud of particles is given by where Tr(α)/3 and V are the angle-averaged polarizability tensor and the volume of each of the particles. Then, it follows from the bound where χ 1 is the electric susceptibility of the constituent material of the particles and u ∈ [0, 1]. This result improves on the bounds derived in Ref. 52 that follow from the BM bounds. We immediately obtain a corresponding bound on the angle-averaged extinction cross-section per unit volume of a quasistatic particle which is a measure of the efficiency at which a particle scatters and absorbs light. This new bound reads as and improves on the bounds by Miller et al. We studied the range of effective complex permittivities of a three-dimensional isotropic composite material made from two isotropic phases. We started from the well-known Bergman-Milton bounds, which bound the effective complex permittivity by two circular arcs in the complex plane. In the first step, we showed that several points on one of these arcs are attained by a specific class of hierarchical laminates. Furthermore, on the basis of numerical calculations, we showed that there is a natural way of interpolating between these laminates, which results in laminates approaching the arc in the gaps between these points. We then showed, using established variational methods, that the second arc can be replaced by an optimal bound that corresponds to assemblages of doubly coated spheres. Using this result, we derived corresponding bounds on the angle-averaged polarizability and the extinction cross-section of small particles. While we have focused on bounds using the quasistatic approximation, our results should be a useful benchmark for future bounds that might be more generally valid. For example, bounds on the absorption and scattering of radiation by particles of general shape and valid at any frequency have been derived in Ref. 