Hexagonal oxide perovskites, in contrast to the more familiar perovskites, allow for face-sharing of metal-oxygen octahedra or trigonal prisms within their structural frameworks. This results in dimers, trimers, tetramers, or longer fragments of chains of face-sharing octahedra in the crystal structures, and consequently in much shorter metal-metal distances and lower metal-oxygen-metal bond angles than are seen in the more familiar perovskites. The presence of the face-sharing octahedra can have a dramatic impact on magnetic properties of these compounds, and dimer-based materials, in particular, have been the subjects of many quantum-materials-directed studies in materials physics. Hexagonal oxide perovskites are of contemporary interest due to their potential for geometrical frustration of the ordering of magnetic moments or orbital occupancies at low temperatures, which is especially relevant to their significance as quantum materials. As such, several hexagonal oxide perovskites have been identified as potential candidates for hosting the quantum spin liquid state at low temperatures. In our view, hexagonal oxide perovskites are fertile ground for finding new quantum materials. This review briefly describes the solid state chemistry of many of these materials. Halide perovskites have recently been widely studied by chemical researchers. They can be processed under relatively mild conditions compared to oxides and, as semiconductors, can sometimes have favorable optical and charge transport properties, making them suitable for study as materials with the potential for solar energy conversion. They are not currently widely studied in the materials physics community as quantum materials. These materials are variants of the familiar perovskite AMX3 formula, where the A atom or molecule (e.g. Cs or CH3NH3) is in the large cavity in the classic perovskite structure, and the MX6 octahedra, made from main group M ions, share corner X ions (here Cl, Br, or I) in a three-dimensional framework. Such materials obey the familiar radius rules known for derivatives of cubic perovskites, with some potential refinements The classic oxide perovskites, with formulas AMO3, (where A = a larger ion, typically monovalent, divalent or trivalent, and M is a smaller metal ion) are well known in the solid state chemistry and materials physics communities and have been intensively studied for many decades The familiar oxide perovskites are typically made from electropositive (non-molecular) A ions (e.g. Alkali, alkaline earth or rare earth ions) that reside somewhere in a perovskite cavity where they are ideally 12 coordinated to the surrounding oxygens, and MO6 octahedra sharing corners with each other to create a MO3 framework structure. The d orbitals on the M ions hybridize in different degrees with the oxygen p orbitals. The quantum-like properties can arise for d n ions (where the d states are partly filled, and n is between 1 and 9) and even for d 0 or d 10 ions (e.g. Ti Structurally, the octahedra are often considered as rigid entities that tilt around their shared corners to accommodate different size A site ions and an overall cell size that is also determined by temperature or pressure. A rich set of symmetry variants is possible due to the tilting, and too many interesting combinations of atoms, physical properties and structural distortions have been studied to even list generally Symmetry matters when it comes to physical properties, and the 3 or 6 fold rotational symmetries of the structural components in the hexagonal perovskites are of contemporary interest due to the potential that such geometries have to engender the geometrical frustration of the ordering of the magnetic moments or orbital occupancies of the framework ions into a single lowest energy state at low temperatures. Thus such materials are good candidates for the quantum-spin-liquid state, as described briefly here. (In quantum spin liquids, the spin state of the magnetic ions continues to fluctuate down to very low temperatures compared to the strength of the magnetic interactions as measured by the Curie-Weiss temperature.) Figure Further, their properties frequently challenge our current understanding of when a chemistry (i.e. an orbital based) vs. a physics (i.e., a Fermi Surface based) description is most appropriate for interpretation and prediction of the properties of a material, which is good fun As is found in the more familiar cubic-symmetry-based AMO3 perovskites, structural distortions, chemical disorder, and non-AMO3 stoichiometries are also found in the hexagonal perovskites. Structurally layered variants are also known. The basic crystal structures and, in some cases, the known structural complexities are the focus of this review. Although metallic, semiconducting, and dielectric hexagonal perovskites are known, the physical properties of this class of materials have so far not turned out to be of as wide interest in the materials physics community as those of their cubic-symmetry-based cousins. The properties of the materials whose chemistry and structure are the primary focus of this review are also generally summarized here when known. This organization of this review is based on the solid state chemistry of the hexagonal perovskites, and is based primarily on their crystal structures. A reader particularly interested in the crystal structures of such materials can find alternative presentations in books on perovskites Let's start with the SrRuO3-BaRuO3 perovskites as our initial example. SrRuO3 is a slightly distorted conventional cubic perovskite due to a small tilt of the RuO6 octahedra in the RuO3 framework, while, at conventional pressures, the Ba 2+ ion is not a good fit for the cubic perovskite cavity. It is a better fit when inserted into a close packed plane of oxygen, however, and thus, the crystal structures of the ambient pressure BaRuO3 polymorphs are hexagonal perovskites. For A site ions of size between Sr and Ba, the resulting crystal structure is an ordered mixture of cubic perovskite plus hexagonal perovskite. There is no electropositive divalent ion with a size intermediate between Sr and Ba, but as is often found in solid state chemistry, such an ion can be simulated by mixing Sr and Ba together. Although any individual position in one unit cell is occupied by either Ba or Sr, their average radius is what impacts the long range average crystal structure observed. The (111) plane of conventional cubic perovskites has three fold rotational symmetry. When used as a building block a small section of the (111) plane is a layer of isolated MO6 octahedra lying on their faces in a triangular array. The A ions are found between these layers. When the (111) layers are included in a structure, the octahedra share corners with others. When this layer is used as a structural building block in the creation of a new material and mixed with hexagonal symmetry AMO3 layers that consist of face-shared octahedra, then materials with overall hexagonal symmetry are the result. The compounds in the SrRuO3-BaRuO3 system allow us to introduce the simple short-hand nomenclature that is used to describe hexagonal perovskites. In this nomenclature, a number is first, which indicates the number of structural layers within a unit cell. The designation then ends with a letter, an R, an H or a C, which indicates whether the material is based on rhombohedral, hexagonal or cubic layer stacking (like in all perovskites, small distortions are possible, typically due to octahedral tilting) Using this nomenclature, classic cubic-symmetry-based SrRuO3 has a 3C structure (three cubic layers per cell stacked along (111) and BaRuO3 has three polymorphs, one with a 4H structure, one with a 6H structure and one with a 9R structure Figure Iridium oxides are of special interest in the study of quantum materials because, for these materials, spin-orbit-coupling can have a dramatic effect on the energies of the valence electrons associated with the M ions and consequently the materials' electronic and magnetic properties. The strong influence of spin-orbit-coupling can explain some of the properties of iridates such as their widely insulating behavior. SrIrO3 and BaIrO3 are quantum materials closely related to the ruthenate perovskites. In this series, however, SrIrO3 and BaIrO3 are both monoclinic C2/c distortions of the 6H-BaTiO3 hexagonal (chc)2 structure 3. Dimers and trimers. Relation to classic double perovskites. In classical double perovskites, there are two different "M type" ions in an ordered array or a partially ordered array within the MO3 framework. Double perovskites can be written in the form A2MM'O6, where M and M' can be different ions such as in Sr2FeWO6, a material that has a particularly high magnetoresistance Dimer-based hexagonal oxide perovskites are by far the most frequently studied quantum materials in this family. The most common dimer-based hexagonal double perovskite family of quantum materials is found when the M'-site is occupied by Ru or Ir, making the formula Ba3MRu2O9 or Ba3MIr2O9. For purposes of organization in this group, which consists of many frequently studied materials, we consider the generic formula to be Ba3MM'2O9, and we classify the materials into subgroups that differ in the total number of electrons on the M'2O9 dimer. The formal oxidation state of M can range from 1+ to 4+ -as the formal charge on the M site ion increases, to maintain neutrality, the formal oxidation state of the M' ion, and thus the total number of electrons on the M'2O9 dimer, decreases. (For formal electron counts, the electropositive Ba ion is always taken to be Ba In Ba3MRu2O9, when M is a non-magnetic monovalent cation (eg. Li or Na), the total number of electrons donated by the Ru to the oxygens in a Ru2O9 dimer is 11 When M is clearly a divalent cation in Ba3MRu2O9, the hexagonal 6H crystal structure that we have been discussing has been reported for in the cases of Ni 2+ , Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , and Zn 2+ . For these materials there would be 10 electrons donated to the Ru2O9 dimer by its constituent metal atoms, for a formal charge on both Ru of 5+. For the cases above when M is a transition metal (i.e. Ni 2+ , which is an S=1 ion), there must be an internal equilibrium within the compound between the formal valence of the M ion and the formal valence of the Ru in the dimers. Thus dimer-based hexagonal perovskites such as Ba3CoRu2O9 and Ba3FeRu2O9 would be interesting if studied in this context because Fe 3+ or Co 3+ may more likely be in equilibrium with a formally Ru 4+ -Ru 5+ mixture than a Co 2+ or Fe 2+ mixture would be with Ru 5+ . Some of the divalent ions listed above are nonmagnetic (i.e. Ca, Mg and Zn), an important characteristic for M ions that results in the magnetism, and the resulting quantum properties, arising from transition metal ions in the dimers and their orbital overlap with the oxygens. Sb is a common 5+ ion in octahedral coordination in oxides and is an important constituent in some hexagonal perovskites. It is non-magnetic, so when it is present, the magnetism arises from the other ions present. The dimer-based hexagonal perovskite which mixes Cu and Sb as the M and M' ions is both important and unusual. An ordered 6H hexagonal perovskite crystal structure for Ba3CuSb2O9 was reported in 1978 In the same structural vein, we also have Ba3CoSb2O9, another dimer-based quantum material that crystallizes in the hexagonal space group P63/mmc. That is, it is another classical dimer hexagonal perovskite, with the lattice parameters a = 5.857 Å and c = 14.459 Å Much more obscure, but none-the-less chemically interesting, with substantially different magnetic properties, are Ba3MoCr2O9 and Ba3WCr2O9 83 . These materials are fun from a chemical perspective because Cr, Mo and W are in the same column in the periodic table and yet Cr is in a nominally 3+ state, while Mo and W are formally in a 6+ (d 0 ) state. (Cr 3+ is arguably the mother of all strongly Hund's rule coupled ions, and is therefore quite stable, but when combined with Ba and O, Cr can be in more highly oxidized valence states. These materials appear to require an extremely reducing ambient for synthesis). The crystal structures are classical dimerized hexagonal perovskites like we have been describing here, and while the W variant is argued to be chemically ordered with Cr in the dimers, displaying a "dimer like" magnetic susceptibility, the Mo variant is said to be disordered, with Cr in an oxidation state greater than 3+, displaying a classical Curie-Weiss magnetic behavior. Further work on the chemistry, structures and properties of these materials would be of interest. We now consider the group of compounds where the isolated M octahedra are occupied by 3+ ions. The only distorted hexagonal perovskite having the M formal valence = 3 in the 6H family of ruthenates is monoclinic Ba3ScRu2O9. (Sc is an electropositive, non-magnetic, 3+ ion in oxides.) Some structures can also be stabilized in the orthorhombic space group Cmcm, such as Ba3CuRu2O9 or the low temperature phase of Ba3CoRu2O9 In the M = M 3+ group, M = In 3+ Ba3InRu2O9 is reported to be hexagonal. For this material, researchers claim that due to the strong hybridization of Ru and O orbitals, the Ru2O9 dimers are better explained as being molecular units, where an s = 1⁄2 moment is delocalized in the dimers. This kind of consideration -whether the face sharing units are best considered as "molecules" with distinct molecular orbitals, or simply should be thought of as the sum of the electron configurations of the transition metals that often occupy them -is one of the fundamental interesting aspects of the hexagonal perovskites. A spin glass transition was observed at 3.5 K, which can either be due to geometric frustration or disorder on the magnetic lattice (i.e. some so-far undetected structural mixing of In and Ru the hexagonal perovskite M+M' sites). In addition, the static magnetic "ground state" (Theoretically a T = 0 Kelvin state but from a practical perspective materials physicists mean the lowest temperature state that they can attain in their measurements.) in this material, studied by μSR, has been said by the researchers involved to indicate that Ba3InRu2O9 is more complicated than a conventional spin glass In the case of M 4+ cations, there are several reported compounds, such as Ba3BiRu2O9, Ba3TiRu2O9 and Ba3ZrRu2O9. Ba3BiRu2O9 is particularly unusual, in that although the average formal valence of Bi is claimed to be 4+, charge disproportionation of 2Bi4+ to Bi 3+ + Bi 5+ is said to be present, similar to what is seen in BaBiO3. The evidence for this exotic state (said to be a "negative U" state in materials physics) is Bi L3-edge Xray absorption near-edge (XANES) spectroscopy. This compound also undergoes a spin gap opening at T*=176 K, meaning that above 176 K, Ba3BiRu2O9 is a S=1 magnetic dimer system, and a spin gap state (in other words that there is a distinct energy range of forbidden spin excitations, which are usually continuously available through "magnons") emerges below 176 K. The effect on magnetoelastic transitions in Ba3BiRu2O9 by external physical or internal chemical pressure has also been studied. It is claimed to reduce the spin gap opening temperature 6H hexagonal oxide perovskites are not the only Ba3MM'2O9 materials known in this family. Materials with dimers can also have rhombohedral (9R) rather than hexagonal (6H) stacking along c. Ba3MnRu2O9 (Mn has the formal valence of Mn 2+ , apparently) adopts a 9R structure while the majority of the Ba3MRu2O9 phases form the 6H structure. When the A site ion is too small, hexagonal perovskites are not stable, and Ca3MnRu2O9 for example adopts the standard Pbnm space group seen often for orthorhombically distorted conventional perovskites. In this material, Mn and Ru are randomly distributed over the M-sites. Ba3MnRu2O9, unsurprisingly due to its magnetic disorder, shows a short range spin glass transition at 30 K while for the orthorhombically distorted conventional perovskite Ca3MnRu2O9 a glass transition is seen at 150 K 99 also a likely indication of Mn-Ru disorder. Similarly, Sr3CaRu2O9 and Sr3CaIr2O9 have monoclinic structures, distortions of the conventional perovskite structure, with space group P21/c Moving now to iridates, of particular interest as quantum materials due to the fact that Ir is a 5d ion and therefore its orbital energies are known to be influenced spin orbit coupling, the materials and crystal structures are similar to what is seen in the Ba3MRu2O9 system. Again, the oxidation state of M in the Ba3MIr2O9 series of dimer-based hexagonal perovskites can range from 1+ to 4+, resulting in the total number of electrons donated by Ir to the Ir2O9 dimer ranging from 11 to 8, respectively. For monovalent M ions, both Ba3NaIr2O9 and Ba3LiIr2O9 compounds crystallize in the hexagonal space group P63/mmc, however, only Ba3NaIr2O9 undergoes a structural transition to a monoclinic of a hexagonal perovskite, space group C2/c, below 100 K. For divalent M ions, hexagonal structures are stabilized when M = Mg, Zn and Ni, and distorted monoclinic structures are observed in the cases of M = Ca and Sr. While all rare earth M elements result in structures in the hexagonal space group P63/mmc in the Ba3MRu2O9 ruthenates, the structural trends in the Ba3MIr2O9 system are quite different, in that the small rare earth ions (M = Sm-Lu) result in hexagonal structures, while the larger rare earth ions (eg. La and Nd) lead to structures in the distorted monoclinic space group C2/c. Finally, analogous to Ba3BiRu2O9, Ba3BiIr2O9 also adopts a monoclinic structure. This material displays a spin gap opening at a lower temperature of 74 K, as described briefly above. In the Ir2O9 dimers, pure Ir 5+ is expected to have a nonmagnetic ground state. For Ir 4+ dimers, small the observed effective moments in a localized spin picture can be taken to indicate the presence of strong AFM interactions between the Ir 4+ ions within the dimers. For the case of the mix between Ir 4+ and Ir 5+ , magnetic ordering of Ir 4+ is reported to occur at 10 K in Ba3ScIr2O9 and Ba3InIr2O9 102 . Ba3MIr2O9 compounds with M = Rare Earth (RE)) adopt the usual ordered hexagonal perovskite P63/mmc space group, except for RE= La and Nd (which have the monoclinically distorted C2/c space group) as demonstrated in Figure The reader can easily see from what we summarize here that the dimer-based hexagonal perovskites are a mainstay of quantum materials research. Structural disorder is sometimes detected for these materials and sometimes not, and as frequently is the case in materials physics, disorder is not universally believed to be a bad thing when it comes to quantum materials. It is only considered significant when its influence on the quantum properties can be clearly detected through physics characterization We now briefly consider a few complex dimer-based hexagonal perovskites. The first of these is very highly structurally disordered, but in an interesting way. The complex disordered dimer material Ba3Fe1.56Ir1.44O9 116 adopts the hexagonal space group P3m1, with the lattice parameters a = 5.740 Å and c = 14.160 Å as shown in Figure Table When the ratio of M to M' ions is 1:3 instead of 1:2 then variations of hexagonal double perovskites can form with formulas A4MM'3O12. In these materials, there are three M'O6 octahedra sharing faces with each other and corners with a triangular lattice of MO6 octahedra. These trimer materials are much more rare than the hexagonal perovskite oxides based on dimers, and have been studied proportionally much less frequently. The site in the middle of the M' trimer is crystallographically distinct from that of the two outer octahedra (The central octahedron shares only faces with other octahedra while the two peripheral ones share a face on one side and corners on the other side). Thus it is occasionally noted that the central octahedron can have a different ion in it, described further below, making such materials hexagonal triple perovskites (A4MM'2M"O12). From a property perspective, the trimer-based materials can be interesting magnetically, as the electrons in the trimer are either localized on the ions, as they are when M' is a 3d element, or confused about whether they are localized or delocalized within the trimer, as has been proposed when M' is a 4d or a 5d element In this section, we focus our attention mostly on the three trimer systems Ba4NbM3O12 (M = Mn, Ru, Ir), which have been investigated in the context of whether the unpaired electrons are localized or delocalized within the M3O12 trimer clusters and whether spin orbit coupling can play an important role in the magnetism of face-sharing hexagonal perovskites. There are only three Mn3O12 trimer compounds reported in the literature in this group so far, Ba4MMn3O12 (M = Nb, Ce and Pr), all of which crystallize in the hexagonal space group R-3m. The latter two materials were only structurally reported without any magnetic analysis. This can be due to the multi-valent states of Ce and Pr, causing complicated magnetic properties, or that the phases are not pure enough for the magnetic study. Ce is 4+ (with no d electrons an no f electrons) in the BaCeO3 conventional perovskite, so there may be no interference of rare earth magnetism in that case, but Pr is a notorious nightmare to deal with in the more familiar oxide perovskites Moving to a 4d transition metal based material, the Ba4MRu3O12 system for example, Ba4NbRu3O12 and Ba4TaRu3O12 are reported to adopt the hexagonal space group R-3m. The crystal structures consist of a trimer-based Ru3O12 cluster. The exchange interaction between Ru 3+ and Ru 4+ is claimed to be the origin of the magnetic ground state The magnetic properties of isolated Ru3O12 trimers in Ba4NbRu3O12 have been compared with the combined magnetic moments of the magnetic rare earth Tb 4+ and the Ru3O12 trimer in Ba4TbRu3O12. The temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibilities of both compounds are shown in Figure Spin-orbit coupling is the interaction of a non-zero electron spin with its orbital motion. This is a relativistic effect, and is proportional to the fourth power of the atomic number Z There is one example that we can find of a material that has both trimers and dimers in its hexagonal oxide perovskite structure. This material is 10H-Ba5Fe4NiO13.5, synthesized by the decomposition of nitrate salts, which crystallizes in the hexagonal space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 5.771 Å and c = 24.581 Å. The crystal structure consists of the stacking of clusters of three face-sharing octahedra (trimers) corner-sharing with clusters of two face-sharing octahedra (dimers). Structural refinement shows that the Ni ions (in gray in Figure An example of this kind of structure is Ba4Fe3NiO12. In this material the transition metals are ordered and there does not appear to be an issue with the oxygen content. While the two end members BaNiO3 and BaFeO3 crystallize in the 2H and 6H hexagonal perovskite structures, a composition in between, Ba4Fe3NiO12, adopts the 12R hexagonal structure, space group R-3m with lattice parameters a = 5.66564 (7) Å and c = 27.8416(3) Å) 141 . Similar to other trimers discussed above, the crystal structure of Ba4Fe3NiO12 consists of three face-sharing octahedra (the trimers) separated by a layer of single FeO6 octahedra, as shown in Figure Similar to Ba4Fe3NiO12, Ba4Ni2Ir2O12 also crystallizes in a hexagonal 12R perovskite structure, space group R-3m, with the lattice parameters a = 5.7309(2) Å and c = 28.6318( Very few tetramer-based materials are known; we describe one here and another in a later section where we consider the presence of tetrahedral in the crystal structures. The return of Sb 5+ to our systems allows for the formation of Ba5Sb1-xMn4+xO15-δ, which is a 10 layer, 10H-hexagonal perovskite based on tetramers. It crystallizes in the space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 5.7095(1) Å, and c = 23.4866(3) Å. It has different stacking from Ba5Fe4NiO13.5. The crystal structure of Ba5Sb1-xMn4+xO15-δ consists of four face-sharing MnO6 octahedra (tetramers) and a layer of corner-sharing disordered (Sb/Mn)O6 octahedra, as shown in Figure The crystal structure of Ba5AlIr2O11 was first reported in 1989, but its quantum magnetism has only recently been investigated. Ba5AlIr2O11 crystallizes in the orthorhombic space group Pnma, with the lattice parameters a = 18.8360 Å, b = 5.7887 Å and c = 11.1030 Å, it is a distorted version of a hexagonal perovskite. The crystal structure consists of two face-sharing IrO6 octahedra (Ir2O9 dimers), corner-sharing with AlO4 tetrahedra. However, within the Ir2O9 dimers, there are two inequivalent Ir sites, as shown in Figure The 10L-Ba5In2Al2ZrO13 hexagonal perovskite is another example of a material with MO4 tetrahedra in the structural framework. The crystal structure is shown in Figure Recently, two additional compounds with this crystal structure have reported, with formulas Ba6R2Ti4O17 (R = Nd and Y) In this complex yet somehow flexible structure, we successfully synthesized the new compound Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17. In this material, the only magnetic ion is Rh 4+ (4d 5 ) in the Rh2O9 dimers, which helps simplify a potentially complex magnetic picture (Figure Finally, we end this section of this summary by describing one more multi-layered structure in the hexagonal perovskite family is 16L-Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ (Figure Nominally simple hexagonal oxide perovskites that actually have oxygen deficiency can form complex structures when the vacancies are ordered, especially for multi-valent transition 3d metal cations such as Mn, Fe and Co. Even randomly distributed vacancies can lead to a wide variety of structures, presumably to accommodate the different oxidation states if the M site metals. BaMnO3-x, for example, can adopt different types of structures depending on the fraction of oxygen vacancies present. The published structures have randomly distributed oxygen vacancies, although structural probes that are sensitive to the local structures of the ions may eventually reveal that the structures are more complex. A similar phenomenon is also observed in BaFeO3-x and BaCoO3-x systems. In some cases, for example for the Cobalt compound BaCoO2.6, the oxygens appear to be largely missing in an ordered fashion, resulting in the presence of CoO4 tetrahedra. This is also seen for some materials in the BaFeO3-x system. Different polytypes can be stabilized by the ionic size of the central atom and its valence state. Without the oxygen vacancy, BaCoO3, with a typical hexagonal perovskite formula, displays infinite linear chains of face-sharing CoO6 in the ideal hexagonal space group P63/mmc, with the lattice parameters a = 5.645(3) Å and c = 4.752(3) Å 163 . When the oxygen content is less than 3 in a formula unit, a variety of octahedral stackings occur, and the crystal structures adopt different space groups as shown in Figure Similarly, BaFeO3-x also adopts different structures at different oxygen contents. This family of materials displayed in Figure For the BaMnO3-x system, there is a systematic trend in the number of face-sharing MnO6 octahedra in the chains. The system goes from an infinite chain of MnO6 octahedra in 2H-BaMnO3 to a dimer consisting of two face-sharing MnO6 octahedra in 4H-BaMnO2.59 as seen in Figure 27 We briefly specifically point out that hexagonal perovskites, even at a fixed AMO3 formula, are not free from the kind of polymorphism that is seen in many other kinds of materials systems. Although this has been described previously in the case of BaRuO3, it is seen in other hexagonal perovskites as well. A nice example is shown in Figure Figure Oxyhalide perovskites have sometimes been found as new phases in the crystal growth of oxide perovskites in a halide flux. In these materials, in addition to the Ba-O layers, Ba-X (X = F, Cl, Br, I) layers can also be stabilized between the facesharing magnetic building blocks. Oxychlorides are the most frequently reported of this group. As shown in Figure those of the purely oxide hexagonal perovskites. Their potential applications as photocatalysts and cathode materials have, however, recently been investigated One of the very nice structural aspects of hexagonal perovskites is that chain fragments of different lengths can be formed from face centered transition metal octahedra. These chains can be interrupted by face sharing with triangular prisms, which have some leeway along their prismatic lengths to shrink or stretch to accommodate ions of different preferred M-O bond lengths. This leads to some very interesting compounds. In a hexagonal perovskite structure type, materials of the type Sr4MO6 (M = Pt, Rh, and Ir), for example, crystallize in a rhombohedral structure, space group R-3c, as shown in Figure From the quantum materials perspective, a few materials of this type have been studied. The analysis of magnetic susceptibility in Sr4RhO6 204 results in an effective moment of 2.03 μB/f.u and a Curie-Weiss temperature of -10 K. The authors of that study argue that Sr4RhO6 is the first clear example of a magnetically ordered Rh 4+ compound. The antiferromagnetic ordering temperatures of Sr4RhO6 and the related Sr4IrO6 chain compounds are 7 K and 12 K, respectively, which has been interpreted as reflecting a greater degree of covalency in the Ir5d-O than the Rh 4d-O system In this K4CdCl6-type structure, a series of 2H-related perovskites (A3-xNax)NaBO6 (A = La, Pr, Nd; B = Rh, Pt) has also been reported, made through synthesis by carbonate and hydroxide flux techniques. These materials are different in that the ions on the A site are mixed to yield charge neutrality. All of the materials crystallize in the rhombohedral space group R-3c. The temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility of a selected material in this family, (Nd2Na)NaPtO6 shows no magnetic ordering down to 2 K. The observed effective moment is found to be 5.06 μB/f.u, which agrees well with the expected moment of non-interacting Nd 3+ ions, 5.12 μB/f.u. In the same A3n+3mA′nB3m+nO9m+6n family, the compound Sr6Rh5O15 207 with m = 1 and n = 1, grown by a molten K2CO3 flux technique, has been reported. It crystallizes in the hexagonal space group R32, with the lattice parameters a = 9.6517(5) Å and c = 13.0480(5) Å. The crystal structure consists of 1Dchains parallel to the c-axis of four face-sharing RhO6 octahedra a single RhO6 trigonal prism. This material differs from the ones we have described so far because the atom in the triangular prism is the same as the atom in the octahedra. Magnetic susceptibility measurements shows an antiferromagnetic transition at 11 K, and thus that this material is another example of a magnetic Rh-based hexagonal oxide perovskite. The material is reported to have a large magnetic anisotropy, with the magnetic susceptibility when the applied field is parallel to the crystal's c-axis being many orders of magnitude larger than the case when the applied field is perpendicular to the crystal's c-axis. Another example of a chain-structure variation is found for Sr4CuIr2O9, whose crystal structure consists of Ir2O9 dimers face-sharing with CuO6 trigonal prisms, to form 1 D chains along the c-axis (Figure Along the same line of study is a material where Cu and Ir are mixed in triangular prisms but there are three octahedra before the chains are interrupted by a triangular prism. The crystal structure of Ba5CuIr3O12 was determined by a combination of both X-ray and neutron diffraction in 1999 211 . As shown in Figure Although weak antiferromagnetic interactions were seen in the magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements, the magnetization did not saturate, even up to a 59 T applied magnetic field. This implies the existence of a random single state, which can fully explain the experimental data 213 . In contrast to the other materials described here, the crystal structure of Ca2IrO4 214 displays a pure 1D chain of edgesharing (not face-sharing) IrO6 octahedra, but nonetheless has hexagonal symmetry, as shown in Figure A few more crystal structures of materials with 1D chains are outlined in Figure But the crystal structures can sometimes be even more complex than these. Pb3Rh7O15 219 for example crystallizes in a hexagonal structure, space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 10.3537(2) Å and c = 13.2837( The crystal structure of a recently described rhodate Bi1.4CuORh5O10 220 is shown in Figure In a way, the hexagonal oxide perovskites and their distorted derivatives are much richer materials than the cubic perovskites and their derivatives because the crystal structures are more widely varied. Their properties are not studied as much because the hexagonal perovskites are not as jawdropping when considered as quantum materials as the classical perovskites are. There are no known superconductors in this family for example. Growing crystals by the optical floating zone method for the simple ones is not often done, presumably due to the volatility of the constituents and relatively little motivation by the physical properties. However, the study of quantum spin liquids is a topic of considerable interest nowadays, especially in the neutron scattering community, and thus single crystals of some of the dimer-based materials have been studied extensively. Quite a few hexagonal-perovskite-based materials have been identified as potential candidates for the quantum spin liquid state at low temperatures (i.e. Ba3CuSb2O9, Ba3CoSb2O9, Ba3InIr2O9, Ba3IrTi2O9, Ba4NbIr3O12, Ba4Ir3O10 and Ba2Y2Rh2Ti2O17), but so far the field remains "dynamic"; and at the time of this writing there appears to be no community-wide accepted hexagonal perovskite quantum spin liquid, although as described above there are many candidates. Perhaps the problem is that there are too many contenders and different researchers have different favorites among them. Several ferromagnetic hexagonal perovskites have recently been reported, such as Ba4NdRu3O12 ordering at 11.5 K or Ba4NbMn3O12 ordering at 42 K. There may be worth further study. Most of the hexagonal perovskite derivatives are materials in the Ba3MM'2O9 family (based on dimers) and next the Ba4MM'3O12 family (based on trimers). The ferroelectric and dielectric properties of these materials have not generally been reported, though Ba6Nd2Ti4O17, a material that includes layers of both tetrahedra and octahedra, is a well-known dielectric. In the near future, in our view, comprehensive studies will reveal more interesting quantum properties in the hexagonal oxide perovskite family. The family does seem to have an excellent chance for hosting the exotic quantum spin liquid state, and that may turn out after several more years of study, to be its primary "claim to fame". The authors' research on hexagonal oxide perovskites and geometric magnetic frustration has been supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, grant GBMF-4412, and by the Basic Energy Sciences Division of the Department of Energy, grant number DE-FG02-08ER46544 to the Institute of Quantum Matter, which continues as an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under Award No. DE-SC0019331. The magnetic data presented in this review has been extracted and plotted through use of the program Origin. Similarly, the crystal structures presented have been imaged though use of the program Vesta, using information available on the International Crystal Structure Database or in the published literature. This review article was written through equal contributions of both authors, Loi Nguyen and Robert Cava. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Loi T. Nguyen graduated from the California State University, Fullerton (CSUF) in 2017, where his solid state chemistry research was on unconventional oxide perovskites. He is currently a third year graduate student in the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University. His research focuses on the synthesis and magnetic properties of hexagonal perovskites. He has discovered several new face-sharing hexagonal perovskites, several of which potentially host a quantum spin liquid state. Robert J. Cava is the Russell Wellman Moore Professor and former chair of the Chemistry Department at Princeton University. He received his Ph.D. in Ceramics from MIT in 1978, after which he was an NRC Postdoctoral Fellow at the National Bureau of Standards. He then eventually became a Distinguished Member of Technical Staff at Bell Laboratories, where he worked for 17 years. He is a member of the US National Academy of Sciences and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society of London. 122 