It is prohibitively expensive to deposit customized dielectric coatings on individual optics. One solution is to batch-coat many optics with extra dielectric layers, then remove layers from individual optics as needed. Here we present a low-cost, single-step, monitored wet etch technique for reliably removing (or partially removing) individual SiO 2 and Ta 2 O 5 dielectric layers, in this case from a high-reflectivity fiber mirror. By immersing in acid and monitoring off-band reflected light, we show it is straightforward to iteratively (or continuously) remove six bilayers. At each stage, we characterize the coating performance with a Fabry-Pérot cavity, observing the expected stepwise decrease in finesse from 92, 000 ± 3, 000 to 3, 950 ± 50, finding no evidence of added optical losses. The etch also removes the fiber's sidewall coating after a single bilayer, and, after six bilayers, confines the remaining coating to a ∼50-μm-diameter pedestal at the center of the fiber tip. Vapor etching above the solution produces a tapered "pool cue" cladding profile, reducing the fiber diameter (nominally 125 μm) to ∼100 μm at an angle of ∼0.3 • near the tip. Finally, we note that the data generated by this technique provides a sensitive estimate of the layers' optical depths. This technique could be readily adapted to free-space optics and other coatings. Dielectric optical coatings represent a ubiquitous enabling technology throughout the field of optics Within these (and other) contexts, one routinely wishes to choose a specific mirror reflectivity, for example to make a trade-off between the storage time of a cavity and collection efficiency. Currently, however, it is expensive to deposit a customized, highquality coating on a small number of optics, as this requires a dedicated deposition chamber. An alternative approach is to deposit more dielectric layers than are required upon many substrates, and then remove them as needed to tune the coating properties. There exists a great body of knowledge about different etch processes and materials Here, we present a simple, monitored wet-etch technique for removing (or partially removing) dielectric layers from a high-reflectivity, low-loss SiO 2 /Ta 2 O 5 Bragg mirror. We show that it is straightforward to iteratively remove 6 bilayers, and, importantly, find no evidence of additional optical losses associated with the process in a finesse-50,000 Fabry-Pérot cavity. The studied mirror coatings reside at the tips of cleaved, laser-machined optical fibers Figure During the etch process, we monitor "off-band" (1310 nm) light reflected from the coating, which provides a high-contrast interferometric signal (blue data in Fig. In Figure As shown in Fig. The fiber mirror resides in a clamp mounted upon a rigid single-axis stage (Luminos model I1000). Once the desired cavity length (L = 6.2 μm) is achieved, we tune the flat mirror angle by hand to maximize the finesse. After each adjustment, which also changes the cavity length, L is returned to 6.2 μm using the fiber mirror's stage. It is critical to iteratively repeat this procedure until the maximum finesse is achieved, or else the results are neither reproducible nor well-matched with theory Ultimately, we find a nominal cavity finesse of 92, 000 ± 3, 000 at L = 6.2 μm, consistent with the coating company's specified 25 ppm transmission and 10 ppm losses. We now show it is straightforward to iteratively remove multiple bilayers without introducing significant optical losses. Figure The teal symbols in Fig. Inset optical images in Fig. We presented a simple, cost-effective etching technique for removing individual dielectric layers from a Ta 2 O 5 /SiO 2 dielectric coating. Importantly, this technique introduces no observable optical losses to a fiber mirror, as measured in a Fabry-Pérot cavity up to finesse ∼50,000. For the specific case of fiber mirrors, vapor etching above the solution produces a "pool cue" profile that we suspect can be tuned with a combination of surfactants (e.g., 3M Novec 4200 Electronic Surfactant), controlled gas flow, and / or protective layers applied to the cladding. Additionally, we find that a single bilayer etch eliminates the unwanted sidewall coating, which may facilitate their use in tighttolerance ferrules. We find that etchants involving only HF destroy the cladding before the first Ta 2 O 5 layer is removed, but, due to this high selectivity, these solutions could be used as a finishing step to precisely end the etch at the Ta 2 O 5 surface, as in Ref. The above measurement system is sufficient for our needs, but we can suggest a few improvements. First, multiple off-band wavelengths (in the ultimate limit, white light illumination with a spectrometer) would improve the ability to detect layer transitions. Second, we note that lasers are not strictly required, especially for coatings having only a few layers; a reasonably coherent LED source may suffice. Finally, we reiterate the sensitivity of the off-band fringes to small changes in the optical depths of the layers, as shown in Fig. 