Bio-inspired molecular communications (MC), where molecules are used to transfer information, is the most promising technique to realise the Internet of Nano Things (IoNT), thanks to its inherent biocompatibility, energy-efficiency, and reliability in physiologically-relevant environments. Despite a substantial body of theoretical work concerning MC, the lack of practical micro/nanoscale MC devices and MC testbeds has led researchers to make overly simplifying assumptions about the implications of the channel conditions and the physical architectures of the practical transceivers in developing theoretical models and devising communication methods for MC. On the other hand, MC imposes unique challenges resulting from the highly complex, nonlinear, time-varying channel properties that cannot be always tackled by conventional information and communication tools and technologies (ICT). As a result, the reliability of the existing MC methods, which are mostly adopted from electromagnetic communications and not validated with practical testbeds, is highly questionable. As the first step to remove this discrepancy, in this study, we report on the fabrication of a nanoscale MC receiver based on graphene field-effect transistor biosensors. We perform its ICT characterisation in a custom-designed microfluidic MC system with the information encoded into the concentration of single-stranded DNA molecules. This experimental platform is the first practical implementation of a micro/nanoscale MC system with nanoscale MC receivers, and can serve as a testbed for developing realistic MC methods and IoNT applications. Nanotechnology is enabling us to devise ever-smaller devices to interact with the universe at molecular resolution. Though small enough to penetrate into cells, these devices individually are of limited capability. To unleash the full potential of nanotechnology, communication among nanomachines is a must. This would enable more complex applications, e.g., continuous health monitoring with intrabody nanosensor networks, theranostic applications with distributed sensor and actuator networks, and industrial nanosensor applications. Internet of Nano Things (IoNT), which defines these networks of nanomachines, such as nanobiosensors and engineered bacteria, integrated with the Internet infrastructure, has seen tremendous interest recently Although there is tremendous interest in this field accompanied by a large body of theoretical work to develop models and devise communication methods for MC This leaves a huge question mark over the reliability of the existing MC methods, which are mostly adopted from conventional EM communications and not validated with practical testbeds. Few studies in MC literature have focused on macroscale implementation of MC systems taking into account the physical limitations of a receiver, although the utilized receivers are made of off-the-shelf macroscale components. In As the first step to overcome this challenge, in this work, we report on the first implementation of a nanoscale MC receiver based on graphene field-effect transistor-based DNA biosensors (graphene bioFETs), and its ICT performance tests in a custom-designed microfluidic MC system. The main objective of this work is to provide an experimental testbed at physically relevant dimensions for nanonetworks, which can be used to reveal and study the effects of intricate biochemical and physical processes on the MC performance, and develop practical and realistic communication methods, including new MC detection techniques. Graphene, with its exceptional electrical, chemical and mechanical properties, such as high carrier mobility at room temperature, one atomic layer thickness and two dimensional geometry exposing all its atoms to the sensing environment, provides very high sensitivity towards biochemical molecules especially in a bioFET configuration Functionalisation of graphene with biomolecular probes can provide the selectivity against target analytes, required for avoiding biochemical interference for MC applications in physiologically relevant environments. In this work, graphene is functionalised with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) probes (pDNAs) which undergo reversible hybridisation reaction with the complementary target DNAs (tDNAs). The reason for selecting DNA as the recognition element is that DNA can be easily customized with different base sequences of different lengths, and can be designed to bind not only complementary DNAs but also peptides, proteins, carbohydrates and small molecules In the remainder of this paper, we elaborate on the fabrication process of single layer graphene (SLG) bioFET-based MC receiver and its integration into a microfluidic testbed. The electrical characterisation of the device is performed at each step of functionalisation. Sensing response characteristics are revealed to determine the affinity between the complementary tDNA-pDNA pair. Selectivity of the device against complementary tDNAs is examined through real-time sensing response to non-complementary target DNAs (ntDNAs). Following the fabrication and sensitivity/selectivity analysis, we provide an MC detection performance analysis based on the transmission of pseudo-random binary data encoded into the concentration of tDNAs. The timevarying response of the MC receiver is fitted by a previously developed microfluidic MC model. This analysis provides important insights particularly into the infamous ISI problem of MC resulting from the slow kinetics of ligand-receptor binding reactions. Similar to the existing approaches in the MC literature 3) Deposition of Contacts: In the following step, metal contact areas (source and drain) are defined on the sample through another optical lithography process (Figs. 2(a)-(b)). Depositions of 5 nm Cr and 50 nm Au are performed successively over the sample covered with the patterned photoresist layer by thermal evaporation at 10 -6 mbar (using MiniLab 060 from Moorfield Nanotechnology Ltd) (Fig. 4) Deposition of Insulator: Finally, the drain and source contact areas, which might be exposed to the electrolyte during microfluidic experiments, are insulated to prevent any parasitic current between metal contacts through the electrolyte. For this, a thin layer of Al 2 O 3 (20 nm) is uniformly deposited over the sample through atomic layer deposition (ALD) in TFS200 (manufactured by Beneq) (Fig. . For removing any excess photoresist, the sample is dipped in acetone for 20 minutes and IPA for 5 minutes followed by drying with N 2 , leaving the patterned Al 2 O 3 film on top (Fig. . The optical images of the fabricated GFET are shown in Fig. Fabricated GFET is encapsulated with a PDMS microfluidic channel, as demonstrated in Fig. is set to 1 cm. In the next step, the patterned PDMS with the Pt solution gate is bonded to the surface of the MC receiver, ensuring that the graphene channels are well-aligned with the microfluidic channel and not placed under the PDMS walls. The most common method for bonding PDMS on SiO 2 and glass substrates is based on the O 2 plasma activation of the PDMS surface and the target substrate. This requires the surfaces of both the PDMS and the target substrate to be smooth. In our case, however, the exposed graphene channels on the target SiO 2 substrate prevents the application of the O 2 plasma, as this would cause the removal of graphene channels through plasma etching. Moreover, the plasma activation of only the PDMS surface is not sufficient because curing in the 3d-printed moulds made of Polylactic acid (PLA) results in PDMS layers with a rough surface (see Fig. Then, the PDMS is carefully placed on the sample, which is cleaned off any dust with N 2 prior to bonding. After placement, it takes approximately 1 minute for the PDMS prepolymer to spread uniformly and cover the entire area between the PDMS and substrate except for the empty area DRAFT July 7, 2020 defining the microfluidic channel. Once a uniform PDMS prepolymer layer is observed, the temperature of the hot plate is increased to 150 • C, and the prepolymer, serving as mortar, is quickly cured, resulting in a strong bonding. This method has consistently yielded leakage-free PDMS-substrate bonding during the fabrication process. After bonding process, the inlet and outlet tubes are placed on the predefined inlet/outlet holes, as shown in Fig. The dimensions of the microfluidic channel together with the fluid flow rate and fluid properties determine the Reynolds number, which is a dimensionless variable indicating the fluid flow regime in the channel where ρ is the fluid density, u is the linear flow velocity of the fluid, μ is the viscosity of the fluid, and D H is the hydraulic diameter, which can be obtained for rectangular channels as follows Here A ch = w ch × h ch is the cross-sectional area of the channel, and Due to its one atomic thickness and 2d structure, the electronic properties of the pristine SLG is highly sensitive to the biochemical environment in the vicinity of its surface. Therefore, it suffers from low-level selectivity. On the other hand, in order to suppress the interference from other biochemical processes in physiologically relevant applications of the MC receiver, selectivity against information-carrying molecules is a must. Selectivity of the graphene can be realised through bio-functionalisation with recognition elements such as DNA and antibodies. As ssDNAs are preferred as target information-carrying molecules, i.e., tDNAs, in this work, the fabricated GFET is functionalised with probe DNAs (pDNAs), which are complementary to tDNAs. For increasing the strength of the probe DNA immobilisation, and reducing the effect of nonspecific binding, the pristine SLG channels are first functionalised with 1-Pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (PBASE, obtained from Cambridge Bioscience Ltd), which has been widely utilised in the literature as linker molecules between graphene surface and DNA molecules After pDNA immobilisation, the passivation of the unbound PBASE molecules is necessary to prevent nonspecific binding of target DNAs (tDNAs). This is performed by flowing 100 mM ethanolamine (NH 2 CH 2 CH 2 OH) solution prepared in DI water through the microfluidic channel. Ethanolamine reacts with amine-reactive succinimide group of unbound PBASE molecules. With the passivation of PBASE, the device becomes ready for sensing and communication experiments with tDNAs. For the electrical characterisation of the fabricated devices, direct-current (DC) measurements are taken using a high-precision source measure unit (SMU, Keysight B2902A), which is connected to the device electrodes via high-impedance passive probes, as shown in Fig. After each step of functionalisation, transfer characteristics of the devices are obtained with a constant drain-to-source bias V ds = 100 mV, and a solution gate potential V g varying between -0.2 V and 1.2 V. The sweep rate of V g is set to 140 mV/s. All data are obtained after removal of excessive functional molecules from the microfluidic channel and the SLG surfaces by rinsing with PBS. This ensures that no change occurs in transfer characteristics due to ongoing chemical reactions. The PBS (pH 7.4) is used as the electrolyte in all measurements of transfer characteristics. The measurements are taken from four of the SLG channels in the MC receiver, and results are provided in Fig. attracting hole carriers to the graphene surface, thus, contributing to the p-type doping With the help of the transfer characteristics, we can deepen our analysis by determining the surface density of the immobilised pDNAs. To this end, we need to first determine the electrolyte gate capacitance, which can be approximated by the overall capacitance of three parallel plate capacitors connected in series: where C Gr is the EDLC between the graphene and the electrolyte, C P t is the EDLC between Pt gate electrode and electrolyte, and C Q is the quantum capacitance of graphene However, since the surface area of the Pt wire inside the electrolyte (A P t = l P t d P t π/2 = 1 cm×0.5 mm×π/2 = 7.85 × 10 6 μm 2 , calculated as the area of an half sphere of 1cm-length and 0.5mm-diameter) is significantly larger than the graphene surface area (A gr = 4 × 10 3 μm 2 ), C P t can be neglected. Lastly, the quantum capacitance of graphene per unit area has been reported DRAFT July 7, 2020 as c q ≈ 2 μF•cm -2 [25], The effective electric charge of a single immobilised 18-mer pDNA screened by the EDL can be written as where q e is the elementary charge, r is the effective length of the pDNA taken as the half of its length, i.e., r = 18(basepairs)×0.34(nm/basepair)×1/2 = 3.06 nm, by assuming a vertical orientation for the single-stranded pDNAs following the analysis in Finally, the surface density of the immobilised pDNAs can be written as a function of the average shift in V CN P upon pDNA functionalisation: which gives n pDN A ≈ 2 × 10 3 μm -2 . A similar surface density (∼ 1.14 × 10 3 μm -2 ) for pDNA was previously reported in For determining the sensing characteristics of the MC receiver, complementary 18-mer target DNA (tDNA: 5'-GCA ATA CGG TGA AGT CCT-3', obtained from Sigma Aldrich) is prepared in 0.01xPBS solution. tDNAs of varying concentrations (50 nM, 100 nM, . . . 10 μM) are successively flowed through the microfluidic channel in the order of increasing concentration, and I ds is recorded in real time with V ds = 100 mV and V g = 0 V. During the experiment, the volumetric flow rate is held constant at u V = 80 μl/min. The results of the measurements are provided in Fig. The n-type doping effect upon target DNA hybridisation or probe DNA immobilisation was previously reported in The electron transfer from DNA upon immobilisation was also reported for CNT transistors Given that the hybridised dsDNAs carry twice the amount of negative charge of the ssDNAs, it can be considered that the hybridised pDNA-tDNA pairs, in our case, are more strongly attracted to the graphene surface compared to pDNAs Each working concentration of tDNAs were propagated in the channel until I ds reaches a plateau. The value of I ds at these plateaus are used to construct the sensing response graph of the MC receiver, which is provided in Fig. where ∆I ds,sat is the receiver response in saturation, which occurs when all the probe DNAs The specificity of the MC receiver against the complementary tDNAs is evaluated by comparing the receiver's response to different ssDNAs, which are not complementary to the pDNAs. The ultimate specificity can be determined with the application of an ssDNA having only one single base-pair mismatch. For this, we use 18-mer ntDNA 1 with the base sequence 5'-GCA ATA CGG CGA AGT CCT-3', which has the mismatch in its 10 th base pair, where T to C mutation occurs. Another test is performed with the application of 18-mer ntDNA 2 (5'-GCA CGT CGG CGT CGT CAT-3'), which has 7 base-pair mismatches. Complementary tDNA is also applied for comparison. All DNAs are dissolved in 0.01xPBS with 1 μM working concentration. The measurement results before and after a moving mean filter of 21-second window length is applied are provided in Fig. The response curve of the MC receiver for different DNAs is fitted by the Langmuir model of adsorption to determine the kinetic rates of the DNA hybridisation for the three DNA sequences. The solution of the Langmuir model gives the time-varying response of the MC receiver during the association and dissociation phases of DNA hybridisation DRAFT July 7, 2020 where, c in is the input concentration, which is set to c in = 1 μM for all DNAs. t d denotes the time of dissociation, and ∆I ds,eq is the asymptotic value of the sensing response, which occurs when the hybridisation reaches equilibrium. The variables to be fitted are the binding rate k + , unbinding rate k -, and ∆I ds,eq . The fitted response is plotted in Fig. The nonlinear curve fitting gives the dissociation constant of the tDNA as To determine the time-varying response of the receiver, varying length pulses of 1 μM tDNAs are flowed through the microfluidic channel. The results of three independent measurements taken from the same channel are provided in Fig. The time-varying response of the MC receiver to finite-length concentration pulses can be described by the analytical microfluidic MC model developed in where To use this model for fitting the electrical measurements obtained by the graphene-based MC receiver, we need to transform the variables in with Here, g m = ∂I ds /∂V g is the transconductance of the device, q tDN A is the effective charge of a single tDNA molecule, and C G,0.01xPBS is the total gate capacitance in 0.01xPBS buffer. Gate capacitance is obtained as C G,0.01xPBS = 6.58× 10 -2 nF using (3) with the new Debye length in diluted PBS electrolyte, i.e., λ D,0.01xPBS = 7.75 nm. The effective charge of a single tDNA is obtained similarly using (4) with λ D,0.01xPBS . The transconductance of the device g m = ∂I ds /∂V g before the communication experiments can be calculated by a linear approximation of the V g -I ds curve around V g = 0 V bias. Averaging over the transfer curves of the four graphene channels obtained at the last step of functionalisation in 0.01xPBS, shown in Fig. Here, ∆I ds,eq is the response of the receiver to 1 μM tDNA at equilibrium, and obtained from the sensing response given in Fig. = ((c avg + K D )/c avg ) × ∆I ds,eq /Q tDN A , with c avg being the average tDNA concentration passing over the receiver surface with the transformed parameters given as The model developed in deviation of the measurements. We can observe that the approximate model is highly accurate in calculating the propagation delay and I ds during the association phase. Although its accuracy is lower during the dissociation phase, it well captures the pulse amplitude and the pulse width, which are the two important parameters in evaluating the performance of a communication system. The same model will be applied in the next section for binary data transmission. To reveal the detection performance of the MC receiver, 20-bit-long pseudorandom binary information encoded into the concentration of tDNAs is transmitted through the microfluidic channel and detected by the fabricated MC receiver located at the bottom of the channel. Here bit-1 is represented by a 30-second pulse of 1 μM tDNA at the beginning of a bit interval, and bit-0 is represented by no pulse during the entire bit interval, i.e., the buffer line stays connected into the microfluidic channel. The results are provided for bit intervals of 60-, 120-, and 360-second length in Fig. Another important observation is that the propagation delay t delay between the transmission time of the bit-1 and the receiver response is ∼55 seconds in each test, and the delay remains almost constant during the entire data transmission period. This implies that the application of a constant delay shift in the receiver response can be sufficient for the synchronisation of the receiver with the transmitter during the decoding process. As the receiver response is away from saturation in the performed tests, we can assume that the response is linear and time-invariant (LTI). Based on this assumption, we can reconstruct the received signal by applying the superposition principle of LTI systems in the approximate model developed in The normalised model response is plotted in Fig. The deviations can largely be attributed to the LTI approximation in writing Based on the observation of constant delay during data transmission, the delay-shifted version of the bit intervals is indicated with dashed lines in Fig. where ŝ[i] is the decoded bit, and r[i] = I ds (t -t transmit -t delay -(i -1)T s ) is the discrete time sample of I ds at decision points, and 1 . is the indicator function, which outputs 1 if the inside expression is true. Applying the difference-based detection method on the unfiltered MC signal yielded 5% bit error rate (BER). We observed 1 bit error for 60 s bit interval, and 2 bit errors for 360 s (M -1 s -1 ) (× 10 -4 s -1 ) (× 10 -6 M) * , β * and γ * are provided in July 7, 2020 DRAFT July 7, 2020 