The interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) is of great interest as it can stabilize chiral spin structures in thin films. Experiments verifying the orientation of the interfacial DMI vector remain rare, in part due to the difficulty of separating vector components of DMI. In this study, Fe/Ni bilayers and Co/Ni multilayers were deposited epitaxially onto Cu(001) and Pt(111) substrates, respectively. By tailoring the effective anisotropy, spin reorientation transitions (SRTs) are employed to probe the orientation of the DMI vector by measuring the spin structure of domain walls on both sides of the SRTs. The interfacial DMI is found to be sufficiently strong to stabilize chiral Néel walls in the out-of-plane magnetized regimes, while achiral Néel walls are observed in the in-plane magnetized regimes. These findings experimentally confirm that the out-of-plane component of the DMI vector is insignificant in these fcc(001) and fcc(111) oriented interfaces, even in the presence of atomic steps. Spin textures such as magnetic domain walls (DWs), spin spirals, and magnetic skyrmions have emerged as an exciting playground for explorations of topological characteristics of nanomagnetic elements and spin-orbit coupling at surfaces and interfaces In in-plane magnetized systems the observation of DMI-stabilized chirality is much less common or in case of interlayer Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interactions Additionally, in certain magnetic nanodisks in the vortex state, a preferred circularity of the vortex with a given polarity of the vortex core has been attributed to the DMI at the surface of the nanodisks In the present work we investigate the rotation sense of in-plane Néel walls in purely inplane magnetized systems with significant DMI Finally, we comment on how the chiral degeneracy of in-plane Néel walls in such systems may be lifted. The experiments were performed in the spin-polarized low-energy electron microscope (SPLEEM) at the National Center for Electron Microscopy of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory We selected two systems, (i) [Co/Ni]n multilayer stacks on Pt(111) and (ii) Fe/Ni bilayer stacks on Cu(001), as both systems exhibit very sensitive thickness-dependent SRTs. Specifically, in the [Co/Ni]n/Pt (111) system the easy axis of magnetization rotates from out-of-plane to inplane orientation with the addition of a single monolayer of Co; Similarly the magnetic configuration of Fe/Ni bilayers grown on Cu(001) changes from an out-of-plane magnetized stripe phase to an in-plane magnetized phase when the thickness of the Fe layer is increased from 2ML to 3ML We first discuss the out-of-plane magnetized fcc(001) system, Fe (2.5ML)/Ni (2ML) on Cu (001). Fig. However, the degeneracy of opposite in-plane rotation senses of 90 domain walls is lifted due to the different exchange energy penalties between 90 and 270 magnetization rotation, which is related to the magnetization direction of adjacent domains. On the other hand, the exchange energy penalties of 180 domain walls with opposite in-plane rotation senses remain the same, which is ideal to test the role of the DMI on the chirality. The resulting magnetic microstructure of 180 domain wall is illustrated in Fig. To investigate a system with a different crystal orientation -and an even larger value of the DMI -we now discuss measurements on fcc(111) [Co/Ni]n multilayer stacks on Pt(111). Fig. For this sample the histogram of the angle α, as defined earlier, has a peak centered around α = 0°, indicating the presence of chiral (left-handed) Néel walls. We then deposited an additional 1ML of Co onto this stack in order to induce the SRT to in-plane magnetization, as shown in Fig. negligible compared to the overall DMI of the system These results are further corroborated by our micromagnetic simulations based on a twodimensional model described in refs For ideal interfaces in fcc(111) and fcc(001) lattices, the DMI vector is predicted to lie in the plane as sketched in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) , respectively Néel wall separating two in-plane domains the S i × S j vector is perpendicular to the vector D ij , as shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated domain wall chirality using SPLEEM in fcc(111) and fcc(001 that in both fcc(111) and fcc(001) interface orientations the DMI vector is oriented completely within the film plane, with no significant out-of-plane component, even in the presence of the a small degree of vicinality seen in the substrates used here. Further experiments are required to test whether the use of substrates with a substantial degree of vicinal miscut may provide a route towards stabilizing chiral Néel walls in in-plane magnetized system. FIG. 