We fabricate large-area atomically thin MoS2 layers through the direct transformation of crystalline molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) by sulfurization at relatively low temperatures. The obtained MoS2 sheets are polycrystalline (~10-20 nm single-crystal domain size) with areas of up to 300×300 μm 2 with 2-4 layers in thickness and show a marked p-type behaviour. The synthesized films are characterized by a combination of complementary techniques: Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy and electronic transport measurements. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have recently gained interest among the scientific community to solve the weakness of the lack of a bandgap in graphene, which limits its applications in field-effect transistors and digital integrated circuits First methods that were reported for the synthesis of 2D MoS2 consisted of mechanical and chemical exfoliation from bulk crystals Here, we explore an alternative route to obtain atomically thin MoS2 layers: the direct transformation of crystalline molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) layers into MoS2 nanosheets by sulfurization at moderate temperatures. Up to now the sulfurization of crystalline MoO3 have only demonstrated to produce MoS2 fullerenes and nanotubes but here we demonstrate that it can be also employed to fabricate large area MoS2 layers The crystalline MoO3 source is obtained by heating up a molybdenum foil (99.99% purity) to 540 °C in air using a laboratory hot plate. At this temperature, the MoO3 starts to sublime. A mica substrate is placed above the hot molybdenum foil. The MoO3 gas sublimed from the hot molybdenum foil crystalizes on the slightly cooler mica substrate placed on top, as we show in Figure Prior to the sulfuration of the MoO3 crystals, they are reduced by heating them at 300 °C for 24 hours in a tube furnace in forming gas atmosphere, Figure In Figure The crystal structure of the films has been characterized with X-ray diffraction (XRD). XRD was performed at room temperature on the initial sample (MoO3 grown on mica 18 mm x 2 mm substrate) and on the final sample (MoS2 obtained after the sulfuration process). Figure Notice that the green spectrum exhibits peaks that correspond to (0 2 0), (0 4 0) and (0 6 0) reflections, which belong to the diffraction peaks of MoO3. The appearance of the (0 k 0) peaks, parallel to the plane (0 1 0), is a product of a preferred orientation of the MoO3 crystal with respect to the mica (0 0 1) surface due to the van der Waals epitaxy type of growth The crystal structure of the films can be further characterized in real space by STEM. Figure The STEM characterization indicates that the MoS2 film is polycrystalline with a single-crystal domain size of 10-20 nm. Thinner regions can be found at the edges of the sulfurized film, where one can find monolayer, bilayer and trilayer areas (Figure That has been published in its final form: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1944/13/10/2293 which is significantly higher to that of single-crystal MoS2 (~1-5 Ω•cm), In order to get a deeper insight into the microscopic origin of this p-doping in our MoS2 layers we have done an electron energy loss spectra (EELS) analysis of the STEM data (see Supporting Information). Apart from the presence of Mo and S, we found C (which could come from e-beam induced deposition of amorphous carbon during the STEM measurement), O and B. The presence of O could be due to an incomplete MoO3 to MoS2 transformation and the presence of B impurities could come from unintentional cross-contamination from the surface of the glass ampoules used during the growth. The presence of these foreign species could be a plausible source of the unexpected p-type doping. Figure In summary, we presented an alternative method to obtain atomically thin MoS2 layers through the direct transformation of crystalline molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) layers into MoS2 nanosheets by sulfurization. The process can be carried out at moderate temperatures and using simple instrumentation. We obtained large area polycrystalline MoS2 sheets 2 to 4 layers thick and we characterized them by Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Regarding their electronic properties, they are strongly p-doped. This is the authors' version (post peer-review) of the manuscript: F Carrascoso et al. Materials, 13 