We perform a microscopic study on the redistribution of electric charge near the surface of a model d-wave superconductor cut along the [110] direction, with a Fermi surface appropriate for cuprate superconductors, using the augmented quasiclassical equations. We identify two possible mechanisms for the redistribution of charged particles different from the well-known magnetic Hall effect, namely; the pair potential gradient (PPG) force due to surface effects on the pair potential and the pressure difference between the normal and superconducting regions arising from the slope of the density of states (SDOS) in the normal states at the Fermi level. Our present results show that in spite of the absence of supercurrents, electric charge is induced around the surface. Moreover, the charging effect due to the SDOS pressure dominates over that due to the PPG force for all the realistic electron-fillings n = 0.8, 0.9, and 1.15, at all temperatures. In addition, for the filling n = 1.15, the PPG force and the SDOS pressure contributions have the same negative signs, which gives a larger total surface charge i.e., both the sign and amount of the surface charge depends greatly on the Fermi-surface curvature. We have also calculated the local density of states (LDOS) within the augmented quasiclassical theory. Spatially varying local particle-hole asymmetry appears in the LDOS, which suggests the presence of electric charge. In general, electrostatic charge redistribution implies the action of certain forces on charged particles. For instance, in normal metals, Quite recently, the augmented quasiclassical equations incorporating the three force terms were derived, with the standard Eilenberger equations It has been shown that in the isolated vortex core of an isotropic type-II superconductor the PPG force gives up to 10 to 10 2 times larger contribution to the electric charging compared to the Lorentz force. Even in the absence of magnetic fields, surface effects in d-wave superconductors result in the appearance of the PPG force due to the suppression of the pair potential near the surface and the pressure due to the SDOS at the Fermi level. Hence the presence of oriented surfaces in d-wave superconductors is expected to be accompanied by the redistribution of charged particles. In this paper, we report the accumulation of charged particles around the [110] specular surface of a d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconductor with a Fermi surface used for cuprate superconductors, due to the PPG force and the SDOS pressure, notwithstanding the absence of magnetic field. Although surface charging without time-reversal symmetry breaking itself has already been suggested in Ref. 18, our microscopic theory clarifies the origin of the charging, which is missing from the Eilenberger equations. The augmented quasiclassical theory describes the particle-hole-asymmetric LDOS which also cannot be described at the level of the Eilenberger equations. In our calculations, it is shown that the SDOS pressure gives the dominant contribution to the surface charge for the realistic electron-fillings n = 0.8, 0.9, and 1.15 at all temperatures. Moreover, the SDOS pressure with some approximations reduces to the mechanism considered in Ref. 18. It is also noteworthy that since the PPG-force contribution turns out to be comparable to that due to the SDOS pressure, their respective contributions should be calculated simultaneously. We also observe ZES at the surface of the d-wave superconductor within the augmented quasiclassical theory. In addition, we discuss the structure of the LDOS, especially the particle-hole asymmetry due to the SDOS pressure and the PPG force as an indicator of the existence of surface charge. This asymmetric behaviour in the LDOS caused by surface charging is expected to be observed. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we give a summary of the quasiclassical formalism relevant to our present study. This is based on the formulation in Ref. 11. Our numerical procedures and results are summarized in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, we give a summary of the present study and discuss future directions. The quasiclassical equations augmented with the PPG terms are given in the Matsubara formalism by where ε n = (2n + 1)πk B T is the fermion Matsubara energy (n = 0, ±1, . . . ), v F is the Fermi velocity while p F is the Fermi momentum, and ∂ is the gauge-invariant differential operator. where the functions ∆ = ∆(r) and φ = φ( p F ) denote the amplitude of the energy gap and the basis function of the energy gap, respectively. The barred functions in the Matsubara formalism are defined generally by X(ε n , p F , r) ≡ X * (ε n , -p F , r). Following the procedure used in Ref. 14, we carry out a perturbation expansion of f and g in terms of δ as Then the main part in the standard Eilenberger equations where e < 0 is the electron charge. We also obtain the relations from the normalization condition as g 0 = ḡ0 = sgn(ε n ) 1f 0 f0 . where the cutoff n c is determined from (2n c + 1)πk B T = ε c with ε c denoting the cutoff energy, We note that the momentum derivative of φ terms come in the g 1 equation for anisotropic superconductors. The LDOS is obtained as 11) where the functions g R 0,1 and f R 0 are the quasiclassical retarded Green's functions which are obtained by solving Eqs. (3) and ( r), η is a positive infinitesimal constant, and the barred functions in the real energy formalism are defined generally by X(ε, p F , r) ≡ X * (-ε, -p F , r). The electric field is expressed as where λ TF ≡ dǫ 0 /2e 2 N(0) denotes the Thomas-Fermi screening length with thickness d where T c denotes the superconducting transition temperature at zero magnetic field. The cutoff energies εc± are determined by 2.4 Density of states and the chemical potential difference in the homogeneous system We introduce the normal DOS, N(ε), expressed as where ǫ p denotes the single particle energy. p x and p y are the x and y-components of the quasiparticle momentum, respectively, while μ is the chemical potential. We should also restrict momentum integration in Eq. ( where ∆ bulk denotes the gap amplitude in the bulk. The chemical potential difference between the normal and superconducting states of the homogeneous system is given by where N bulk s0 (ε) is the LDOS in the bulk obtained from the standard Eilenberger equations with the zeroth-order in δ as The details of the derivation of Eqs. ( We here perform numerical calculations for a quasi-twodimensional semi-infinite system with a single specular surface at x = 0. As a starting point, we introduce the singleparticle energy on a two-dimensional square lattice used for high-T c superconductors, with the lattice constant a, the dimensionless hopping parameters t 1 /t = 1/6 and t 2 /t = -1/5, and the momenta px and py given by px = (p x + p y )/ √ 2 and py = (p yp x )/ √ 2 as depicted in Fig. First, we obtain the self-consistent solutions to the standard Eilenberger equations in Eqs. ( , for an arbitrary function Q, where p F and p ′ F are the Fermi momenta before and after reflection at the surface, respectively, and are related by p ′ F =p F -2n(n• p F ), with n=-x. Next, we solve Eq. ( We discuss our numerical results in the following. Figure Note that ξ 1 is well described by the coherence length bulk . In Fig. where ρ PPG represents the charge density induced by the PPG force and a H ) yy , where R (n) H is the Hall coefficient. In Fig. where c ≡ ln(ε c /k B T c ). From this relation, we find the SDOS pressure is essentially equivalent to the mechanism studied in Ref. 18. If we substitute ∆(x) ≃ ∆ bulk tanh(x/ξ 1 ) into Eq. ( which naturally satisfies the charge neutrality. On the other hand, however, the charge density described in Eq. (3.4) of Ref. 18 is derived by using the asymptotic approximation from the bulk to the surface for the source term of the electricfield equation, i.e., the behaviour of ρ SDOS is quite different from the charge density by Ref. 18 around the surface. Specif- Using Eqs. ( where we use ρ SDOS in Eq. ( Note that in Ref. 18 the accumulated charge near the surface with thickness x c = λ TF ln(ξ 1 /2λ TF ) ∼ λ TF was calculated. Therefore, we conclude from this comparison that (1) our theory with approximations (i), (ii), (iii) reproduces the formalism used in Ref. 18, (2) our estimate of the accumulated charge within a surface layer of thickness x c 2ξ 1 is consistent with the estimate in Ref. 18. In addition, we emphasise the importance of the PPG-force contribution neglected in Ref. 18, since it competes with the SDOS pressure and yields nontrivial temperature dependence for the surface charge as shown in Fig. Figure Figures 9 and 10 plot the difference in deviations Where δN PPG(SDOS) s (ε, x) is the local deviation from the Eilenberger solution due to quantum corrections from the PPG force (SDOS pressure) at x = 0, ξ 0 , 2ξ 0 . While δN PPG(SDOS) s (ε, x = ∞) is the local deviation from the Eilenberger solution due to quantum corrections from the PPG force (SDOS pressure) in the bulk region. The deviations δN PPG s (ε, x) and δN SDOS s (ε, x) are defined by We observe spatial variation in the local particle-hole asymmetry in the LDOS deviations. The difference in LDOS deviations between the surface and the bulk due to the PPG force and due to the SDOS pressure show a change in their local peaks around ε = 0 and around ε = ±1.5∆ 0 . Furthermore, the behavior of ∂Im f R 0 /∂x results in the multiple turning points in the LDOS deviation due to the PPG force around ε = 0, since the PPG force and the LDOS terms are t he space-momentum Moyal product for ∆φ and Im f R 0 . Figure One may wonder why we can use the cutoff energies ε± obtained from the DOS in the homogeneous system for the calculation of the surface charge, despite the fact that the deviation in Fig. Surface charge measurement in superconductors may be possible using atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the noncontact mode. It is known that as the atomically sharp tip of the AFM cantilever approaches the surface of the superconductive material, the cloud of charged particles around the tip forms an electric dipole. The sample on the other hand, piles up charged particles in response to this dipole, so as to screen itself. In summary, we have performed a microscopic calculation on surface charging at a single [110] specularly reflective surface of a d-wave superconductor with a Fermi surface used for cuprate superconductors, using the augmented quasiclassical theory. We have shown that the SDOS pressure gives the dominant contribution to the charging compared to the PPG force, for all the realistic electron-fillings n = 0.8, 0.9 and 1.15 at all temperatures. In addition, since the charge due to PPG force and that due to the SDOS pressure at n = 1.15 have the same signs, the PPG force and the SDOS pressure may induce a larger surface charge in electron-doped d-wave superconductors compared to hole-doped superconductors. Both the sign and amount of the surface charge depends greatly on the Fermi-surface curvature. We have also calculated the LDOS within the augmented quasiclassical theory, taking into account the contributions due to the PPG force and the SDOS pressure. At the surface, the LDOS shows a peak structure which signifies the presence of ZES. The bulk region shows a (nodal) gap-like structure which is a characteristic of the superconducting state. We have also shown the existence of particle-hole asymmetry (the SDOS pressure gives a locally larger particle-hole asymmetry at the filling n = 0.9) in the LDOS. This spatially varying local asymmetry suggests the presence of electric charge. Although our present study is restricted to a smooth surface without edge currents, the presence of surface roughness is expected to affect the surface states and may consequently alter the surface charge. In addition, surface imperfections appear in the process of fabricating real samples, it is therefore important to consider the effects of surface imperfections, theoretically. It is relatively easier to consider surface roughness within the quasiclassical theory using the random S-matrix theory We are grateful to Marie Ohuchi for very insightful discussions. E. S. J. is supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) of Japan, H. U. and W. K. are supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 15H05885 (J-Physics) and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 18J13241, respectively. The computation in this work was carried out using the facilities of the Supercomputer Center, the Institute for Solid State Physics, the University of Tokyo. We start from the Riccati form of Eq. (3). where a=a(ε n , p F , x) is the Riccati parameter and is related to f 0 and g 0 as We carry out a gradient expansion The derivatives ∂ f 0 /∂x and ∂ f 0 /∂p Fx in Eq. ( Here, we derive Eq. ( First, we expand Green's functions as Substituting Eq. (B•1) into Eq. ( where we assumed v Fx d∆/dx = O(∆ 2 ). Using Eq. (B•2) with initial conditions and normalization condition g 2 0 = 1f 0 f0 , f (ν) 0 and g 