Two-particle spectroscopy with correlated electron pairs is used to establish the causal link between the secondary electron spectrum, the (π + σ)-plasmon peak and the unoccupied band structure of highly oriented pyrolitic graphite. The plasmon spectrum is resolved with respect to the involved interband transitions and clearly exhibits final state effects, in particular due to the energy gap between the interlayer resonances along the ΓA-direction. The corresponding final state effects can also be identified in the secondary electron spectrum. Interpretation of the results is performed on the basis of density functional theory and tight binding calculations. Excitation of the plasmon perturbs the symmetry of the system and leads to hybridisation of the interlayer resonances with atom-like σ * bands along the ΓA-direction. These hybrid states have a high density of states as well as sufficient mobility along the graphite c-axis leading to the sharp ∼3 eV resonance in the spectrum of emitted secondary electrons reported throughout the literature. Van der Waals materials have recently been attracting interest in materials science since they exhibit outstanding fundamental and technological properties and are building blocks for multilayered quasi 2D materials as well as 3D materials and heterostructures When two or more graphene layers are put on top of each other, so-called interlayer resonances form in the electronic structure which are highly dispersive along the c-axis and reflect the three dimensional structure of the crystal Compared to the works cited above, the present paper concerns the reverse process where electrons are leaving the surface after being liberated inside the solid. This phenomenon of secondary electron emission (SEE) is of great fundamental as well as technological importance works by different authors We use time-correlated two-electron spectroscopy to establish a causal relationship between energy losses and secondary electron emission Our experimental results are summarized in Figs. The coincidence spectrum shown in Fig. Three distinctly different parts can be identified in the coincidence spectrum: (1) a region of high intensity near the green line labeled E 2 = ∆E-φ. Comparison with the singles spectrum allows one to conclude that this feature corresponds to the excitation of a single plasmon, which is shown separately in Fig. Fig. Finally, in Fig. A striking feature of the single scattering plasmon feature is the complete absence of the π-plasmon in the coincidence data, in particular also at low energies: finite count rates appear only for ∆ >12 eV. This can be understood on the basis of the k-space representation of the data in Fig. The coincidence data also convey the fact that plural inelastic scattering proceeds via a Markov-type process Here n is an integer and E b is the (negative) binding energy of the initial state. Likewise, no plasmon replicas are seen for ejected electron energies corresponding to a single plasmon loss, i.e. at energies near ( . Instead, stripes of intensity at energies (marked by the yellow arrows) of 3.7 and 17 eV, respectively are observed. The fact that the ejected electron energy in the plural scattering region is completely independent of ∆E cannot be understood within the DL-model. The explanation is that when more than one inelastic process occurs, any combination of scattering angles and energy losses in individual scattering events can lead to the net energy and momentum transfer observed for the ejected electron. In other words, the initial state for the process leading to ejection of the second electron is no longer determined as in the single scattering feature (see Fig. For any energy loss ∆E in the single scattering plasmon feature the probability for generating a secondary electron has a strong peak at energies E 2 within the plasmon feature. This observation highlights the fact that the final state of the scattering process corresponds to the ejection of a single bound electron. Any conceivable process in which the energy is transferred to more than one electron in the final state would lead to intensity below the single scattering plasmon feature for any reasonable energy sharing model. Furthermore, the intensity in the single scattering feature is seen to occur for a range of slightly different binding energies (energetic distance from the green diagonal) when going from top to bottom, following the dispersion of the initial state. This is indeed confirmed by the representation of the single scattering data in k-space, Fig. These findings show that for a material with a complex band structure, such as graphite, the excitation of a plasmon and the associated interband transitions are both essential parts of the same coherent process, a plasmonassisted interband transition Finally, the energies of the secondary electrons emitted along the graphite c-axis (stripes in the plural scattering region marked with yellow arrows) and the sharp peak in the SE spectrum at 3.7 eV exhibiting a surprising lack of dispersion Since the parametrization of our tight-binding model only extends to about 18 eV, the origin of the second stripe in the coincidence data at E -E F ∼17 eV could not be verified. It is conjectured however, that a similar hybridisation mechanism plays a role in that case as for the lower lying interlayer band around 3.7 eV. The peak of apparent correlated emission at (E 1 , E 2 ) = In summary, the (π + σ)-plasmon in graphite has been resolved with respect to the involved electronic transitions. Formation of a hybrid state as a consequence of plasmon induced symmetry breaking provides an explanation for the strong resonance observed in SE-spectra in the literature (at 3.7 eV in the present work). Most importantly, it explains the difference in band structure measurements using elastic processes and techniques which involve creation of plasmon. To fully appreciate this point the reader is referred to Fig. . Plasmon Induced Symmetry Breaking in Highly Oriented Pyrolitic Graphite (HOPG)" Wolfgang S.M. Werner, Vytautas Astašauskas, Philipp Ziegler, Alessandra Bellissimo, Giovanni Stefani, Lukas Linhart and Florian Libisch. The sample was a HOPG crystal of ZYB quality with a nominal mosaic spread of (0.8 ± 0.2) • , mechanically exfoliated in air and annealed for several hours at 500 • C in the UHV system with a base pressure of 2×10 -10 mbar housing the spectrometer. During the measurement, the pressure rises to 5×10 -10 mbar. The employed coincidence spectrometer is schematically shown in Fig. The coincidence spectra are obtained with a continuous electron beam in order to increase the effective coincidence rate. Flight times for each energy measured by the hemispherical analyser are measured before the coincidence measurement using a pulsed electron beam. In this way, the flight time of an electron in a correlated pair reaching the time of flight detector during the coincidence measurement is calibrated. Coincident flight time spectra for each energy measured with the HMA are superim- Figure the binding energy, " bin , and of the momentum of the bound electron prior to its emission, q. In SE2ELCS (illustrated on the left panel of fig. Note that both analysers are located in the scattering plane. The opening angles of the analysers amount to ∆Ω HM A = 10 • and ∆Ω T OF = 12 • . Owing to the employed experimental geometry (see Fig. In the specular reflection geometry, diffraction of the incoming beam by the graphene planes gives rise to a Bragg beam oriented exactly along the specular direction inside the solid, which then can induce an inelastic process. In the UV-energy range an energy loss is predominantly accompanied by an electronic transition, which leads to liberation of a second electron inside the solid. For sufficiently large losses, this electron may overcome the surface potential barrier and is ejected from the surface. This deflection-loss (DL) model where the binding energy is counted from the Fermi level and is negative. Momentum conservation yields for the momentum of the bound electron: where G is a reciprocal lattice vector and ∆ K is the momentum transfer. The above equation holds inside the solid. To convert the momenta inside the solid to the momenta measured in vacuum (or vice versa), the increase of the energy by the inner potential U i when the electron crosses the surface potential barrier needs to be accounted for. Using atomic units ( = m e = e = 1) the relationship between the perpendicular component of momentum inside and outside the solid can be expressed as follows: while the parallel momentum is conserved as the electron penetrates the barrier. The inner potential U i has been determined by measuring the elastic peak intensity as a function of the vacuum energy E v and identifying the n-th order Bragg maximum E Bragg (n). Using the Equation which is written here in atomic units with d the interlayer distance and α the vacuum polar angle of incidence and emission, we have plotted the Bragg energies in vacuum against n 2 and determined the inner potential from the axis offset after fitting the data to a straight line. The value of U i = 16.1 eV obtained in this way is in good agreement with values found in the literature (see Ref. Given the complexity of the inelastic scattering processes inside HOPG, we do not model this process beyond the energy and momentum conservation considerations outlined above. Instead, we aim to elucidate the ejection process of the ejected electron by considering its scattering from an initial state inside the HOPG target (the final state of the inelastic scattering process) to a final propagating state outside of the solid (resulting in a signal at the detector). We first model bulk graphite and a graphite surface slab using density functional theory (DFT) employing the VASP software package Using our Wannier representation, we compose a tightbinding Hamiltonian H containing a large number of bulk layers, four surface layers from the slab and free electron states outside the slab. We obtain a scattering problem by introducing open boundary conditions at both sides by infinite waveguides representing graphite Bloch states (incoming lead) and free particle states (outgoing lead). The Green's function of this system is given by where the self-energies Σ Gr (Σ V ) represent the open boundary conditions of bulk graphite (vacuum). We solve the scattering problem using our modular recursive Green's function approach where the integral over the vacuum wave vector k v goes over those final states that can reach the detector in the experimental setup, and the delta function ensures energy conservation.