For the first time, cyclic re-austenitization is carried out for additively manufactured highstrength low-alloy (HSLA) steels in order to refine the microstructure by reducing the prior austenite grain (PAG) size. In this work, HSLA-100 steels processed using laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) technique are subjected to several cycles of re-austenitization using quenching dilatometry. Microstructure characterization for every cycle revealed the presence of bainite, martensite and martensite/austenite (M/A) islands. From the analysis of the dilatometry curves and extensive microstructure characterization, it was found that till the 2 nd cycle of re-austenitization, both PAG size and martensite start (Ms) temperature get reduced, while the amount of bainite transformed decreased and the retained austenite content increased. Concomitantly, the highest microhardness along with peak nanohardness of the constituent phases was achieved at the 2 nd cycle. Conversely, from the 3 rd cycle, the microhardness, as well as the nanohardness of the constituent phases, are found to decrease due to an increase in the PAG size. This behavior is in contrast to the general tendency where a saturation limit is reached after the peak refinement is achieved. It is found that retained austenite can act as a pinning particle to obstruct the PAG boundary movement and its fraction is found to decrease from the 3 rd cycle. Hence, the increase in PAG size after the 3 rd cycle can be attributed to the destabilization of effective pinning particles to hinder the PAG boundary movement during the re-austenitization. In order to refine the martensite for enhanced strength with retained toughness of steels, the size of prior austenite grains (PAG) needs to be reduced, since this will result in a reduction of the block and packet size of the martensite Ausforming is one such technique where the austenite is work-hardened, prior to the martensitic transformation to form fine martensite In order to circumvent this shortcoming, cyclic re-austenitization is a feasible option that can be applied to achieve grain refinement. It is a cost-effective and distortion-free technique to refine the PAG, without involving any deformation. Repeated heating and quenching for several cycles are performed either above Ac3 (austenite finish) or between the Ac1 (austenite start) and Ac3 temperatures, depending on the material and application. This method was first applied by Grange Additive manufacturing (AM) has attracted significant attention in recent years since it has several distinct advantages over conventional manufacturing processes such as high freedom to produce parts with complex geometry, reduced material wastage and high production flexibility Owing to the difficulties in welding of steels with high carbon content for naval applications, copper-bearing high-strength low-alloy (HSLA) steels with low carbon content were developed The reduction in PAG size was achieved using cyclic re-austenitization for hot rolled and aircooled HSLA-100 steel plates by Chapman et al. An evaluation of the feasibility of this method on AM steels will allow us to explore a new post-heat treatment strategy to enhance the quality of the AM builds. In this study, HSLA-100 steels processed using laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) are subjected to cyclic reaustenitization using quenching dilatometry and the effect of this treatment on the PAG size is investigated. With the aim of understanding the structure-property relationship, extensive microstructure characterization is performed, in order to correlate the refinement of PAG size due to cyclic-austenitization with the mechanical properties. Pre-alloyed HSLA-100 steel powders with composition (in wt.%) Al: 0.006, C: 0.046, Cr: 0.4, Cu: 1.44, Mn: 0.9, Mo: 0.8, Nb: 0.03, Ni: 3.47, Si: 0.19, were manufactured by Praxair Co., USA, using vacuum induction-melting atomizer with Ar gas, within a mesh size of -200 (74 μm) to -325 (44 μm). The d10, d50 and d90 particle sizes are 22, 32 and 47 μm, respectively. Cubes (1 cm 3 ) of HSLA-100 steels were printed using EOS M 290 direct metal laser sintering machine with the factory default parameters for printing stainless steel 316L (Power=195 W; Scan speed=1083 mm/s; hatch spacing=0.9 mm; layer thickness=0.2 mm, size of build platform= 250x250 mm 2 , temperature of build platform= 80 o C). The X, Y and Z directions of the printed cube are the normal (scan), transverse (print) and build directions, respectively. The X-Z and X-Y planes are the build and transverse planes, respectively. The chemical composition of the as-built HSLA steel cube was measured using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). The composition (in wt.%) was found to be Al: 0.006%, C: 0.042, Cr: 0.41, Cu: 1.32, Mn: 0.77, Mo: 0.84, Nb: 0.03, Ni: 3.45, Si: 0.19. The asfabricated cubes were cut into cuboids of dimensions 5 x 5 x 10 mm 3 using electric discharge machining (EDM, Mitsubishi MV2400S, Japan). The as-built HSLA steel consists of noncolumnar martensite and bainite as the initial microstructure, with a PAG size of 7.5 μm and microhardness of 384±10 HV0.1 The equilibrium phase fraction as a function of temperature was calculated using the Thermo-Calc software Extensive microstructure characterization for the AM HSLA-100 steel samples that were subjected to cyclic re-austenitization was performed in the build direction (Z direction of X-Z plane) using optical and electron microscopy. The samples were ground using 400 to 1200 grit SiC emery paper and polished with diamond and Al2O3 suspensions containing 1 and 0.01 μm particles, respectively. Subsequently, they were etched using 2% Nital (2 ml HNO3 + 98 ml ethanol) for 10-30 seconds before observing the surface using a Zeiss Axio Lab A1 optical microscope. Further analysis of the phase evolution was performed using Zeiss Sigma backscattered diffraction (EBSD) was carried out using FEI Scios Dual-Beam FIB-SEM with a step size of 0.08 μm. The automated reconstruction of the prior austenite grains from the martensite/bainite grains was accomplished using the ARPGE software package The microhardness was measured using the Vickers microhardness tester (LECO LM800) with a load of 100 g and dwell time of 10 s. The reported values are an average of ten readings. The hardness of constituent phases was determined using nanoindentation (Hysitron TI900 TriboIndenter). The indentation was performed using a Berkovich tip with a half angle of 65 o . A triangular load profile was used with a peak load of 5000 μN and a dwell time of 10 s. The load-displacement curve obtained after the indentation was analyzed using the Oliver-Pharr method The dilation vs. temperature plots obtained after the quenching dilatometry measurements for different cycles of re-austenitization is shown in Fig. The amount of bainite formed at each cycle was calculated from the dilatometric curves using a geometrical method involving inflection point and tangents which is predominantly based on the commonly used Lever rule. The exact Lever rule could not be implemented due to the lack of clear distinction between the Bf (bainite finish) and Ms (martensite start) temperatures. As shown in Fig. There are several reasons available for this phenomenon, mostly explained based on the strengthening of austenite as the PAG gets refined An alternative explanation was proposed by Olson et al. The optical and SE-SEM (secondary electron) micrographs for each cycle of reaustenitization are shown in Fig. The inverse pole figure (IPF), image quality (IQ), and phase maps obtained using EBSD for each cycle are shown in Fig. The reconstructed PAG maps (Figs. The PAG size measured using the linear intercept method from the reconstructed PAG maps for each cycle (Fig. Figure The geometrically necessary dislocation density (ρ GND ) can be directly estimated from the KAM using the equation formulated by Kubin and Mortensen ρ GND = 1.5γθ ub The highest value of ρ GND is obtained for 2 cycles of re-austenitization. From these observations, it implies that as the PAG size is refined, the areas with high strain within a grain increase. The amount of bainite and martensite calculated using the peak fitting procedure from the IQ curves for BCC as well as the amount of retained austenite obtained from the phase maps for every cycle is shown in Fig. The microhardness as a function of re-austenitization cycles is shown in Fig. Grange The nanohardness of the constituent phases as a function of the number of cycles of reaustenitization is shown in Fig. Due to the strengthening, the martensite has to overcome higher shear stresses during its transformation, that necessitates the development of higher dislocation density to accommodate the plastic strain In addition to this, the role of C distribution during the cyclic re-austenitization needs to be considered for the increase in the nanohardness of the bainite and martensite. Carbon diffusion occurs during quenching in low alloy steels with Ms temperature above the room temperature Although cyclic re-austenitization is a conventional method to refine the prior austenite grain size, it has been applied to a near-net-shaped AM part successfully, in this work. However, there are several limitations to the application of this method. The first restriction is the type of material involved. The material should have a predominantly martensitic transformation upon rapid quenching. There are several reports where grain refinement has been achieved in martensitic steels using cyclic re-austenitization In this work, HSLA-100 steels processed using LPBF technique is subjected to cyclic reaustenitization using quenching dilatometry, for the first time. The microstructure consisted of bainite, martensite, and M/A islands after each cycle. The peak microhardness was achieved at the 2 nd cycle of re-austenitization with the maximum refinement in PAG size. The PAG size reduced by nearly 50% from the 0 th cycle to the 2 nd cycle of re-austenitization. In addition to this, the nanohardness of the constituent phases such as martensite and bainite was the highest at the 2 nd cycle. As the PAG size gets refined, a reduction in the Ms temperature was observed, along with a decrease as well as an increase in the amount of bainite and retained austenite, respectively. From the distribution of the retained austenite obtained from the microstructure characterization, it was deduced that it acts as particles that impede the coarsening of the PAG boundaries. The microhardness and the nanohardness of the constituent phases decreased from the 3 rd cycle of re-austenitization due to the coarsening of the PAG size and decrease in the fraction of retained austenite. Hence, it can be ascertained that the increase in PAG size from the 3 rd cycle is due to the destabilization of the effective pinning particle to hinder the grain boundary movement. 