In various topological phases, nontrivial states appear at the boundaries of the system. In this paper, we investigate anomalous dielectric response caused by such states caused by the π Zak phase. First, by using the one-dimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model, we show that, when the system is insulating and the Zak phase is π, the polarization suddenly rises to a large value close to e/2, by application of an external electric field. The π Zak phase indicates existence of half-filled edge states, and we attribute this phenomenon to charge transfer between the edge states at the two ends of the system. We extend this idea to two-and three-dimensional insulators with the π Zak phase over the Brillouin zone, and find similar anomalous dielectric response. We also show that diamond and silicon slabs with (111) surfaces have the π Zak phase by ab intio calculations, and show that this anomalous response survives even surface reconstruction involving an odd number of original surface unit cells. Another material example with an anomalous dielectric response is polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), showing plateaus of polarization at ±e by ab initio calculation, in agreement with our theory. Topological materials such as topological insulators are currently under intense investigations due to their unique properties In this paper we focus on topological phases characterized by the Zak phase. The Zak phase In this paper, we apply a static electric field to such insulators with the π Zak phase and calculate their dielectric response. As a result, we find a sudden uprise of the polarization even for a very weak electric field. First we show this phenomena in a one-dimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model with a Zak phase equal to π, which in turn has topological in-gap edge states of the chain. We also confirm that this anomalous phenomenon is attributed to the topological edge states. In two-and three-dimensional insulating systems with π Zak phase, we find a similar anomalous behavior of the polarization when the edge or surface bands are sufficiently flat. Insulators with the π Zak phases have actually been found, such as silicon and diamond The organization of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we first confirm that the anomalous dielectric response occurs in the one-dimensional SSH model and also confirm that the phenomenon is caused by the topological edge states. In Sec. III, we also show similar phenomena in a three-dimensional model. We discuss several points on realizing anomalous dielectric responses in Sec. IV. In Sec. V, we show that diamond and silicon slabs with the (111) surfaces have the π Zak phase leading to midgap surface states. We also show an anomalous dielectric response of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). We then discuss the relationship between our results and the bulk polarization described in the modern theory of polarization in Sec. VI. We summarize our result in Sec. VII. Throughout the paper, we consider systems with weak spin-orbit coupling, and ignore it. Thus the polarizations and surface charges in the subsequent results should be doubled, in order to include the spin degree of freedom. In this chapter, we show anomalous dielectric response in the SSH model We first review the definition of the Zak phase and its connection with electric polarization. For onedimensional crystalline insulators, the Zak phase is defined as where a is the lattice constant, k is the wavenumber, u n (k) is the periodic part of the Bloch wave function of the nth eigenstate, and the summation is over the occupied states. This Zak phase is defined modulo 2π. It is quantized as 0 or π under the SI symmetry In this section, we consider the SSH model. It is a tight-binding model on a one-dimensional lattice with two sites A i and B i in the ith unit cell and with different intracell (-t 1 ) and intercell (-t 2 ) hopping amplitudes between A and B sites as shown in Fig. This model has chiral symmetry, and therefore the spectrum is symmetric with respect to E = 0. The energy eigenvalues are given by E = ± t 2 1 + t 2 2 + 2t 1 t 2 cos ka and the band gap exists when t 1 = t 2 (see Fig. Here we focus on the case of t 1 = t 2 , where the system is insulating. We set the Fermi energy to be E f = 0, i.e. the system is half-filled. The Zak phase of the SSH model is calculated by substituting the eigenstates of (3) into (1), and we get This value of the Zak phase can be calculated from the parity eigenvalues at time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM), k = 0 and k = π: where ξ n (k) is the parity eigenvalue of the nth band at k, and the product is taken over the occupied bands. In the present case of the SSH model, from the inversion operator at the center of the unit cell P = 0 1 1 0 , we get and we reproduce the result (4). This also means that the bands are inverted at k = π when t 1 is changed across the gap closing at t 1 = t 2 . From Eq. ( We next consider the dielectric polarization in a finite SSH chain (see Fig. where a † i and b † i are creation operators at the A i and B i sites respectively. The Hamiltonian with static electric field ε is given by The dielectric polarization is given by ; where E n with n = 1, 2, • • • , N are the energy eigenvalues of ( The result shows that the dielectric polarization takes an anomalously large value of P (ε) = ±e/2 even for a very weak electric field when t 1 < t 2 . This behavior is dramatically different from that in the other case t 1 > t 2 , where P (ε) linearly increases with a small slope. We note that in the previous work The π Zak phase indicates presence of topological edge states, and we attribute this anomalous dielectric response to these edge states. Because of the chiral symmetry, the edge state at each end of the chain is at the zero energy, when hybridization between the edge states at the two ends is neglected. These edge states are half filled. Thus, at an either edge, there appears an edge charge equal to e/2 as shown in Fig. We put one electron into the model. The effective dielectric polarization is given by where |-is the eigenstate of Eq. The discussion in the previous section on a onedimensional model can be extended to higher-dimesions. In this section, we show that a jump of the dielectric response also appears in a simple three-dimensional tight- , ), ), A. Zak phase and dielectric polarization for three-dimensional systems First, we review the Zak phase and its connection with electric polarization in three-dimensional systems. When we take the integration path along the reciprocal lattice vector G ⊥ , the Zak phase is defined as where The Zak phase is related with the polarization for the systems with surface perpendicular to G ⊥ . This phase is quantized as 0 or π modulo 2π under both the TR and SI symmetries where S is the area of surface unit cell, and the integral is over the two-dimensional Brillouin zone for k . We consider a model as shown in Fig. where t ij is the hopping amplitude from site i to j. First, we consider a bulk system to calculate the Zak phase. The bulk Bloch Hamiltonian is given by where k = (k x , k y , k z ). The band gap is open when t 2 > 3t 1 because these two points are time-reversal invariant momenta on the k = 0 line. In this calculation, the unit cell is taken to be a pair of the A and B sites displaced by d 2 , as determined from the crystal termination in this case, and the inversion center is in the middle of the unit cell. Therefore this equation indicates θ z (k ) ≡ π for any k because the Zak phase is constant in the two-dimensional Brillouin zone for k when the band gap is open. The Hamiltonian of the slab with the (111) surfaces (Figs. where ) is the creation operator of an electron with Bloch wave vector k at the nth A(B) site in the unit cell and di = (d ix , d iy ). When we apply an electric field of strength ε along the z axis, the Hamiltonian is given by The dielectric polarization is given by where the integral is taken over the two-dimensional Brillouin for k , E n (k ) is the nth lowest eigenvalue of ( We have discussed several models in one, and three dimensions with the π Zak phase, and demonstrated that there is an abrupt jump in the dielectric response. Because they are idealized models, we make several remarks in order to see how the anomalous dielectric responses in general systems including in real materials. Here, we discuss flatness of surface-state dispersions and its relation to anomalous dielectric response. In the models in Secs. II and III and in Appendices A and C, the edge/surface states are exactly at the zero energy and are dispersionless, which is due to chiral symmetry and particle-hole symmetry in these models. Under the chiral symmetry the energy band becomes symmetric with respect to E ↔ -E, which means that the energy eigenvalues satisfy E n,k = -E m,k . Under the particle-hole symmetry the energy eigenvalues satisfy E n,k = -E m,-k . Because of the inversion symmetry of the sysem, both the chiral symmetry and the particle-hole symmetry are preserved here, which makes the topological boundary states to be exactly at the zero energy. Therefore, as we discussed so far, their response under a small electric field becomes anomalous, since even for a small electric field, the energies of all the states on one surface become positive, while those on the other surface become negative, and all the surface charges are transferred at the same time. In contrast, general systems do not have chiral or particle-hole symmetry, and the edge/surface states have dispersions. This edge-/surface-state dispersion will make the dielectric response less abrupt, because upon the application of the electric field, not all the charges in these edge/surface states are carried from one end to the other at the same time. Thus depending on the dispersion of the edge/surface states, the response becomes less anomalous. We show several examples for dispersions of surface states in real materials with the π Zak phase in the next section. Thus far we have seen that the polarization jumps to e/(2S) by a weak electric field when the surface-state dispersion is flat. In this discussion we do not take into account electron correlation. If we take electronelectron interaction into account, the dielectric response may change. When a weak electric field is applied, the electrons at the surface may segregate and form a superstructure, so that the correlation energy may overcome the potential difference of the surface states at the both ends of the slab. Such kinds of formation of charge segregation will make the dielectric response less abrupt. We do not argue this phenomena any further here, because it should be sensitive to various details of the system such as the form and the strength of the electron-electron interaction, dispersion of the surface states, and so on. So far we have ignored an influence of the depolarization field. When an electric field is applied and a polarization is induced, the induced polarization generates a depolarization field. This depolarization field depends on the geometry of the system. Particularly when the shape of the system is an ellipsoid or a large thin slab, the influence can be easily calculated because the depolarization field is uniform, represented by the depolarization factor. The electric field ε used in the discussion so far represents the total electric field felt by the electrons. It is a sum of the external electric field ε ext and the depolarization field ε dep . The depolarization field ε dep is expressed as ε dep = -LP/ 0 , where P is the dielectric polarization, L (0 ≤ L ≤ 1) is the depolarization factor, and 0 is the permittivity of vacuum. Therefore, the total electric field ε takes the form; Here, the dependence of P (ε) on ε has been discussed so far in this present paper. Now, we focus on the case with the Zak phase equal to π for any value of k , and for simplicity we assume that the topological surface states have flat dispersion. Then, the response of the polarization P to the electric field ε is given by where S is an area of the surface unit cell, as shown in Fig. Thus the ratio of the polarization to the external electric field ε ext , is given by P/ε ext = 0( -0) L( -0)+ 0 . By comparison with our result in Fig. with the π Zak phase So far we have discussed how anomalous dielectric response appears in a static case. We here discuss dynamical response; we suppose there is no electric field when the time T is in T < 0, and then we apply a constant electric field when T ≥ 0. To study dynamical response we study the following model, representing the two states at the two ends of the one-dimensional system similar to Eq. ( Here, we set |R = (1, 0) T |L = (0, 1) T ] to denote the state at the right (left) end, similarly to Eq. ( We set the Fermi energy E F = 0 so that only one state is occupied. At the time T = 0, the occupied state is expressed as The evolution of this state is described by the timedependent Schrödinger equation Through a straightforward calculation, we obtain for T > 0, where A = √ ε2 + t * 2 . Thus the probablity for the electron to reside at the left (right) end of the chain is calculated as Therefore, the dynamical polarization P * dyn. is given by On the other hand, the static polarization is also calculated in response to the static electric field, similarly to Sec. IIB. By putting V ≡ ε, the occupied state is given by Thus the probablity for the electron to reside at the left (right) end of the chain is calculated as Therefore, the static response of the polarization P * sta. is given by The dynamical and static polarizations are shown in Fig. t * On the other hand, when ε = 10 -1 t * , the dynamical polarization with the Rabi oscillation is much smaller than the static value. This Rabi oscillation appears due to the interference between two eigenstates. Therefore, when we include dissipation to other degrees of freedom such as phonons, the state showing the Rabi oscillation will gradually relax to the lowest-energy state of the static Hamiltonian, and this oscillating polarization P * dyn. will gradually approach the value of the static one P * sta. . Nonetheless, in the present context, the overlap between the two states at the two ends of the chain is small, and the dissipation from the higher-energy state to the ground state is very slow. Thus it may take a long time to approach the static value of the polarization, which shows anomalous behaviors proposed in the previous Sections. In this section, we propose some materials whose Zak phase has a quantized value of π along some direction. In such cases, there exist topological in-gap states, similar to the in-gap states at the two ends of the SSH model within the topological regime. To search for candidate materials, we point out that the π Zak phase typically means existence of dangling bonds. One can see it from the simple example of the SSH model. The π Zak phase and resulting in-gap states appear when the bond within each dimer is cut at the end of the system. This is nothing but a dangling bond. It is also similar in two and three dimensions. The π value of the Zak phase is realized when the Wannier orbitals are "cut into halves" at the surfaces. In covalent crystals, where the Wannier orbitals are in the middle of the bonds, this typically leads to dangling bonds. On the other hand, if the Wannier orbitals are at the atomic sites, one cannot cut the crystal at the center of the Wannier orbitals. Thus, realization of a surface supporting the in-gap surface states with π Zak phase is not straightforward from the viewpoint of stability of materials. Here we propose three classes of materials, which circumvent this obstacle against realizing the in-gap surface states due to the π Zak phase. One is a cubic semiconductor with the (111) surface, such as diamond and silicon. In this case, the surface has in-gap surface states due to the π Zak phase, if the surface reconstruction is absent. In reality, dangling bonds exist at the surface, leading to surface reconstructions. Nevertheless, as we show later, when the surface reconstruction leads to the formation of surface superstructure with enlarged surface unit cell by M times, where M is an integer, the Zak phase becomes M π modulo 2π. Therefore, when M is odd, the Zak phase remains π and the topological in-gap states survive. Another example is a carbon nanotube. In this case, the covalent bond of the sp 2 hybrid orbital gives rise to the π Zak phase. In nanotubes, existence of a gapless state and symmetry of the system change depending on the chirality (m, n). Here, we focus on a zigzag nanotube with chirality (m, 0) with m being an odd number other than a multiple of 3, so that it is insulating and the Zak phase is π. The other material is Sc 2 C, one of the topological electrides In this section, we show that diamond and silicon have the π Zak phase along the [111] direction over the entire two-dimensional Brillouin zone along the (111) surface, similarly to Sec. III. In fact, this was first pointed out in Ref. In the following, we show how the topological surface states in diamond and silicon appear, based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the density functional theory (DFT) and discuss physical origins for the topological nature of the bands. The computational condition is shown in Appendix D. Their band structures are shown in Fig. As we explain here, the Zak phase is related with dangling bonds at the surface. The Zak phases of these materials along [111], [111], [001] and [110] directions are calculated by ab intio calculation. Table Here, we discuss flatness of surface-state dispersions and its relation to anomalous dielectric response. As we discussed in Sec. VA, the models discussed in Secs. II-IV have dispersionless topological surface states due to chiral symmetry, and an anomalous dielectric response is expected. In contrast, real materials do not have chiral symmetry. As a result, in silicon and diamond, the surface states protected by the π Zak phase have dispersions. In such cases, the two surface modes on the two surfaces are half filled and are metallic. Under a small electric field, the surface remains metallic; in other words, there is still an overlap in energy between the surface states on one surface and those on the other surface. Therefore, an abrupt charge transfer does not take place, and the polarization does not jump. The strength of the electric field has a threshold fro a charge transfer from one surface to the other, leading to the uprise of the polarization. In silicon, we see from Figs. Since any system in the atomic limit is always in a topologically trivial phase, topological phase transition should occur when the interatomic distance in diamond is extended from the topological insulator phase with a π Zak phase. We show the change of band structure in diamond with various lattice constant in Fig. Thus far, we have ignored the surface reconstruction. Since the electron energy in a dangling bond is higher than that in the valence band, the atoms on the surface are generally displaced so as to reduce the number of dangling bonds. It is called surface reconstruction. The effect of surface reconstruction has been discussed in Sec. IIID in Ref. Here, θ does not depend on the wave vector k because we consider only insulators. This result agrees with a counting argument of dangling bonds. When M = even, all dangling bonds form pairs with covalent bonds, and there are no surface states in the gap, and the Zak phase becomes zero. Thus, the dielectric response is normal. Meanwhile when M is odd, the electric polarization converges to P = e/(2M S) mod e/(M S), where M S is a surface area of the superstructure. The previous studies show the correspondence between the survival of surface states and the parity of the number of unit cells constituting the superstructure in silicon Next, we show the result of a carbon nanotube. While a carbon nanotube of the armchair type is always semimetallic, that of the zigzag type has a gap when the chirality is (3i + 1, 0) or (3i + 2, 0) (i = 1, 2, ...). As we limit ourselves on insulating systems, we focus on the (m, 0) zigzag nanotube, with m not an integer multiple of three. As the number of dangling bonds in this nanotube is m, we restrict ourselves to the case with odd m, so that the Zak phase is π. Figure In our previous work The π Zak phase in this topological electride shows that the notion of the Zak phase has wider applicability than counting of dangling bonds at the surface. In Sec VIA, we have discussed that in covalent crystals, the number of dangling bonds being even and odd corresponds to the Zak phase 0 or π, respectively. On the other hand, in Sc 2 C, we can make the (111) surface without appearance of dangling bonds. Even in such crystals we can adopt the notion of the Zak phase, and indeed we can see appearance of midgap topological surface states on the (111) surface of Sc 2 C. Here we show the ab initio calculation for the dielectric response. First, we calculate the dielectric response of PTFE [C 2 F 4 ] n . Figure Next, we calculate the energy eigenvalues of a finite system of the PTFE (Fig. We also calculate the dielectric response of a (111) diamond slab with 1 × 1 surface structure discussed in Sec. V A. We find that the polarization does not show an anomalous response but has a linear dependence on the electric field. We attribute the absence of the anomalous behavior of the dielectric response to the weak k dependence of the topological surface states in diamond (111) surface with 1 × 1 structure (Fig. In this section, we discuss how the anomalous dielectric response is related with the bulk polarization, described in the modern theory of polarization. In the modern theory of polarization We need some care in comparing our results with those in the previous works on bulk dielectric responses This discrepancy is related with an interplay between the bulk and surface physics. To explain this, we focus on degrees of freedom in the choices of the crystal terminations and those of the unit cell We now turn to the Rice-Mele model studied in Refs. 15 and 20. In Ref. in the basis of A and B sublattices, where t(1 ± δ) represents the alternating hopping, and ∆ is a staggered onsite potential. If we start from our SSH model in Eq. ( To summarize, we have shown anomalous dielectric response in insulators with the π Zak phase. We demonstrated it in various tight-binding models in one, two and three dimensions. In each model, the polarization suddenly rises to a large value close to e/2 per edge or surface unit cell by application of an external electric field when the Zak phase is π over the entire Brillouin zone. By using effective models, we have confirmed that the topological surface states protected by the π Zak phase give rise to this phenomenon. We also show, by using ab-intio calculation, that diamond and silicon slabs with (111) surfaces have the π Zak phase over the entire Brillouin zone and relatively flat midgap states. Our results are expected to be applicable to these materials even when surface reconstruction occurs. We also show such a dielectric response of the PTFE with plateaus at P ∼ ±e by ab initio calculation, in agreement with our theory. We have also discussed that this anomalous dielectric response do not appear for the bulk polarization described by the modern theory of polarization, because this effect depends on the termination of the system, and therefore is attributed to the surface effect. tiative to Form Core Research Center (TIES), Grant Number JPMXP0112101001. Appendix A: Two-dimensional models (Models III and IV) In Sec. II, we have seen that the dielectric polarization in the SSH model abruptly increases up to ±e/2 in response to a weak electric field when the Zak phase is π. We expect similar phenomena in two-dimensional insulators. To confirm that, we consider two tightbinding models on the honeycomb lattice: the Model III with anisotropic hopping amplitude and the Model IV with three orbitals per lattice site. In both models, the lattice consists of two sublattices A and B. Let a denote the distance between the two nearest A sites, and we set the nearest bond vectors from the A site to the adjacent B sites d i=1,2,3 to be 2 ) as shown in Fig. First, we review the Zak phase and its connection with electric polarization in two-dimensional insulators. The Zak phase with an integration path along a reciprocal lattice vector G ⊥ is defined as where This Zak phase is related with a polarization in a ribbon geometry with its edges along l, defined at k in the surface Brillouin zone. The Zak phase θ(k ) is quantized as 0 or π modulo 2π under both the TR and SI symmetries where a is the lattice constant along the edge parallel to l. This equation indicates that the polarization takes a large value of e/(2a) in the system with the π Zak phase for any k . This nonzero value of the polarization P 0 does not contradict the inversion symmetry of the system, because P ≡ e/(2a) ≡ -e/(2a) (mod e/a). In this section, we consider an anisotropic tightbinding model on the honeycomb lattice. The hopping amplitudes between the nearest-neighbor sites are anisotropic. The hopping amplitude along d 1 is -t 2 and those along other directions are -t 1 , as shown in Fig. where t ij is the hopping amplitude from site i to j. First, the bulk Hamiltonian is given by The energy eigenvalues are given by A band gap exists when t 2 > 2t 1 (see Fig. When the band gap is open, i.e. t 2 > 2t 1 , the Zak phase equals to π in the whole Brillouin zone. The π Zak phase represents the polarization e/(2a)(mod e/a) along the yaxis where ξ n (k) is the parity eigenvalue of the nth eigenstate. It reproduces the result in Eq. (A7). Here, the unit cell for the bulk used in the calculation of ξ n is taken as a pair of a A-site and a B-site, displaced by d 2 , so that the the unit cell covers the whole ribbon by translating the unit cell by the translation vectors, and the inversion center is located at the midpoint of the unit cell. - We next study the dielectric polarization for a ribbon with zigzag edges as shown in Figs. 12 (b) and (c). There are 2N sites in the unit cell of the zigzag-edge nano ribbon. Let A i and B i (i = 1, 2, • • • , N ) denote the 2N lattice sites in the unit cell as shown in Fig. where a † kx,n (b † kx,n ) and a kx,n (b kx,n ) are the creation and annihilation operators of an electron with Bloch wave vector k x at the A n (B n ) site in the unit cell, and di (i = 1, 2, 3) is the x component of d i . When an electric field of strength ε along the y axis is applied, the Hamiltonian is given by Then the dielectric polarization is given by where E n (k x ) is the nth lowest eigenvalue of H(k x ), and √ 3a(N -2/3) is the width of the ribbon. We set the Fermi energy to be E f = 0. The calculation results are shown in Fig. We attribute this phenomenon to topological edge states. To confirm this, we use an effective model which describes the present model at a fixed value of where a † k,α,n (b † k,α,n ) is the creation operator of an electron with the Bloch wave vector k in the α orbital at the nth A(B) site. H 0 (k) is the Bloch form of the Hamiltonian H 0 with the Bloch wavevector k along the x axis. The dielectric polarization is given by where E n (k) is the nth lowest eigenvalue of (A22). The calculation results are shown in Fig. Appendix B: Analytical derivation of the edge states for Model III In this section, we show the derivation of the eigenstates of (A10). In Ref. By eliminating E kx from these equations, we obtain an equation for p: F (p, N ) ≡ -t 2 sin paN + g k sin pa(N + 1) = 0. (B10) This equation holds when pa = 0, ±π. However, this corresponds to the trivial solutions a n = b n = 0 for all n, and should be discarded. As shown in Ref. The remaining two solutions are expected to correspond to the edge states. These edge states can be obtained by analytical continuation as pa = π ± iη kx = p π , k L c a < |k x a| < π, 0 ± iη kx = p 0 , π < |k x a| < k R c a, where the wavevectors k L c and k R c are defined as Substituting (B12) into (B10), we get -t 1 sinh η kx N -g k sinh η kx (N + 1) = 0, for p π , -t 1 sinh η kx N + g k sinh η kx (N + 1) = 0, for p 0 . (B14) There exists one solution for η kx each equation in Eq. (B14) when Eq. (B11) is satisfied. When t 2 > 2t 1 and in the limit of large N , Eq. (B14) is always satisfied and the two edge states are given by Eq. (B12). Since we focus on the edge states, we consider only the solution of (B14). Then, the coefficients a n and b n are given by where C N is the normalization factor expressed in (A16). The two edge states |Ψ + edge (k x ) and |Ψ - edge (k x ) are obtained by substituting these into (B1). These edge states |Ψ ± edge (k x ) are not localized at one edge, but are symmetric and antisymmetric linear combinations of edge states at an either end. Therefore, to obtain approximate edge states at one edge, we take linear combinations as follows: 8 × 8 × 1 k-point mesh for the bulk and the slab calculation for diamond and silicon, respectively, and the 1 × 1 × 16 k-point mesh for carbon nanotube and PTFE. The valence orbital set is s2p2d1 for C, s2p3d1 for Si, and s2p2d1 for F. The energy cutoff for the numerical integrations is 150 Ry.