Applying elastic deformation can tune a material's physical properties locally and reversibly. Spatially modulated lattice deformation can create a bandgap gradient, favouring photo-generated charge separation and collection in optoelectronic devices. These advantages are hindered by the maximum elastic strain that a material can withstand before breaking. Nanomaterials derived by exfoliating transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are an ideal playground for elastic deformation, as they can sustain large elastic strains, up to a few percent. However, exfoliable TMDs with highly strain-tunable properties have proven challenging for researchers to identify. We investigated 1T-ZrS2 and 1T-ZrSe2, exfoliable semiconductors with large bandgaps. Under compressive deformation, both TMDs dramatically change their physical properties. 1T-ZrSe2 undergoes a reversible transformation into an exotic three-dimensional lattice, with a semiconductorto-metal transition. In ZrS2, the irreversible transformation between two different layered structures is accompanied by a sudden 14% bandgap reduction. These results establish that Zr-based TMDs are an optimal strain-tunable platform for spatially textured bandgaps, with a strong potential for novel optoelectronic devices and light harvesting. When developing semiconductor-based devices for photovoltaic, photocatalytic or photosensing applications, light harvesting efficiencies can be optimised by fine-tuning the size, or even the spatial variation of the electronic bandgap. This can be achieved by mechanical actions, such as strain or hydrostatic pressure. Application of high pressure is an experimentally accessible path for exploring how the properties of a material change upon varying the interatomic distances Established techniques, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), can then be used in combination to thoroughly quantify the response of crystalline systems to various mechanical actions, and compute the corresponding compressibility and elastic moduli. Once a material's mechanical and electronical response to applied forces is known, one can design a device in which, for example, a specific strain induced in the photosensitive component attunes it to a chosen wavelength. A variety of tools and methods for such strain-tuning have been implemented and reported, such as local compression by AFM cantilevers Layered van der Waals materials are especially good candidates for strain-engineered optoelectronic devices, thanks to their proven extremely wide range of elastic strain which they can support (above 5%), when reduced to nanometre thickness by exfoliation Furthermore, tuning the bandgap in TMDs by mechanical action has been used to enhance the performance of semiconducting devices for light harvesting applications Realising a structural phase transition driven by applying a mechanical action is a long-standing desire of the community working on layered semiconductors, such as TMDs. A mechanically induced lattice reconstruction in TMDs can open a venue for strain-controlled semiconductorto-metal conversion In light of the different chalcogen size for the investigated materials, Se being larger than S, their response under applied pressure may be expected to vary. For both mentioned compounds, we observed transitions between two distinct crystalline structures, characterized by different electronic properties. Such lattice reconstructions commonly occur in metallic TMDs, and are responsible for the unusual transport properties of 1T-TaS2 Figure Single crystals of Zr-based TMDs were loaded into a diamond anvil cell for optical measurements under high-pressure conditions. A finely ground powder was used for X-ray diffraction experiments. The applied pressure was monitored using ruby fluorescence Using our high-pressure XRD and Raman data, and aided by the work of Zhai et al. Rietveld refinement of the powder X-ray diffraction patterns was done for every pressure point (Figures SI. Having identified the crystalline structures, the optical and electronic properties of those newly created materials are of immediate interest. By measuring optical transmittance as a function of pressure, we investigated the presence and magnitude of the optical bandgap (further details can be found in the SI). For ZrS2, at low pressures (0 to 2 GPa) the bandgap of the 1T phase is reduced, like it is commonly seen in other TMDs ZrSe2 changes its properties more dramatically. We observed a continuous reduction of the bandgap of the 1T phase up to 5 GPa,. As the new crystalline phase appears, the optical transparency is suppressed for all frequencies. This means that HP-ZrSe2 is metallic, or possibly a narrow-gap semiconductor with a bandgap of less than 0.1 eV. The evolution of the optical bandgaps extracted from the optical transmittance data is summarized in Figure To conclude, we have experimentally demonstrated room-temperature pressure-driven structural phase transitions in the semiconducting layered transition metal dichalcogenides 1T-ZrS2 and 1T-ZrSe2. The two materials are isostructural and isoelectronic, but undergo completely different lattice reconstructions, and their physical properties evolve in distinct manners. Under applied pressure of 3 GPa, ZrS2 is transformed irreversibly into a new layered structure, with a consequent reduction of the bandgap by 200 meV. As for ZrSe2, once pressure is above 8 GPa, the layers merge into a 3D structure. This collapse results in a semiconductorto-metal transition, as confirmed by ab initio calculations. In addition, the bandgap of the starting 1T phase reduces under compression at the rate of 50 meV/GPa, giving a further tunability over the materials' optical properties. Our demonstration of structural transformations induced by mechanical actions, with the associated dramatic changes in their electronic properties, grants the long-awaited additional functionality in TMDs, enabling us to control structure and properties on-demand. New opportunities in the field of strain-designed devices-charge funnelling and clean metal-semiconductor homojunctions in optoelectronic components-are now within reach. Further research needs to be done in the direction of understanding the dynamics of the lattice reconstruction, in particular for ZrSe2 because of its close reminiscence to the graphite to diamond transformation. Crystals synthesis: Single crystals of 1T-ZrS2 and 1T-ZrSe2 were synthesized by chemical vapour transport method using I2 as transport agent. Similar conditions as those presented in High-pressure Raman and infrared spectroscopy: Raman and infrared measurements were performed on the infrared beamline SMIS at the synchrotron SOLEIL. We used a DXR2 Thermo Fisher Raman microspectrometer equipped with a 633nm He-Ne laser as light source, a Peltier cooled CCD detector, a 600 grooves/mm grating, resulting in a spectral resolution of about 4 cm -1 . Infrared measurements were performed on a custom-built horizontal microscope for diamond anvil cells (DACs), equipped with custom Cassegrain objectives, a MCT and a Si diode detectors, for the Mid-IR and the Near-IR respectively Square samples of about 100 × 100 μm 2 were loaded into a membrane DAC with 400 μm culets. Stainless-steel gaskets were pre-indented to a thickness of about 50 μm and a hole of diameter 150 um was drilled by electro-erosion. NaCl was used as pressure transmitting medium Pressure was measured in situ by the standard ruby fluorescence technique. Data was collected every 1 GPa during both compression and decompression, with the last data point collected after the cell was open to release any residual pressure. The high-pressure X-ray diffraction experiments were performed at the Xray diffraction platform of IMPMC at 0.85GPa and 293K, using a membrane diamond anvil cell (DAC) with a culet of 500 μm in diameter. A 250 μm-diameter hole was drilled in a stainless-steel gasket with a thickness of 200 μm pre-indented to 80 μm. The finely ground powders of ZrSe2 and ZrS2 were loaded into the gasket hole together with a ruby ball as pressure sensor The DAC was then mounted on a Rigaku MM007HF diffractometer equipped with a Mo rotating anode (λKα1 = 0.709319 Å, λKα2 = 0.713609 Å), VariMax focusing optics and a RAXIS4++ image plate detector. X-ray data were collected at 20 °C. A LaB6 standard sample was measured in the same experimental conditions to calibrate the FIT2D program, the image processing software used to integrate the intensities around the Debye-Scherrer rings and to get the 1D patterns. Density Functional Theory Calculations: Our first-principles calculations were performed at the density functional theory level as implemented in VASP Values of the optical band gap as a function of pressure were estimated from the optical transmittance data. As all semiconducting phases have an indirect band gap, we used the same empirical model for all data points. After computing the absorption coefficient (α) from the experimental data, we estimated the indirect band gap Eg via linear extrapolations of (hθα) 1 2 ⁄ . Representative 