Exceptional point (EP) associated with the parity-time (PT ) symmetry breaking is receiving considerable recent attention by the broad physics community. By introducing balanced gain and loss, it has been realized in photonic, acoustic, and electronic structures. However, the observation of magnonic EP remains elusive. The major challenge is to experimentally generate the negative Gilbert damping, which was thought to be highly unlikely but is demanded by the PT symmetry. In this work, we study the magneto-optical interaction of circularly-polarized lasers with a submicron magnet placed in an optical cavity. We show that the off-resonant coupling between the driving laser and cavity photon in the far-blue detuning can induce the magnetic gain (or negative damping) exactly of the Gilbert type. A hyperbolic-tangent function ansatz is found to well describe the time-resolved spin switching as the intrinsic magnetization dissipation is overcome. When the optically pumped magnet interacts with a purely lossy one, we observe a phase transition from the imbalanced to passive PT symmetries by varying the detuning coefficient. Our findings provide a feasible way to manipulate the sign of the magnetic damping parameter and to realize the EP in cavity optomagnonics. Introduction.-One of the most fundamental principles in quantum mechanics is that a physical observable should be described by a Hermitian operator to guarantee real eigenvalues The past ten years have witnessed the development and application of spin cavitronics, allowing cavity photons resonantly coupled to magnons with the same microwave fre-quency In the far-blue detuning, we find that the optical torque exactly takes the Gilbert form -α opt S Ṡ × S with α opt > 0 (see below). The total Gilbert damping becomes negative when the intrinsic dissipation is overcome. In such case, a hyperbolic-tangent function ansatz is found to well describe the time-resolved spin switching. We further study the optically pumped spin interacting with a purely lossy one, and observe a phase transition from the imbalanced to passive PT symmetries by varying the detuning parameter. Model.-The proposed setup is schematically plotted in Fig. where ω 0 = γB 0 is the Larmor frequency around the external magnetic field B 0 pointing to the negative z-direction with γ being the gyromagnetic ratio, ∆ j = ω las, j -ω cav is the detuning between the laser frequency ω las, j and the cavity resonant frequency ω cav , and ĉ † j (ĉ j ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of the optical cavity photons, with j = x, y, z. The coupling strength g j between the spin and optical photon originates from the Faraday-induced modification of the electromagnetic energy in ferromagnets The Heisenberg-Langevin equations of motion for coupled photons and spins are expressed as (o ≡ ô ), where n j = ĉ † j ĉ j is the average photon number in the cavity. Because the spin dynamics usually is much slower than optical photons, one can expand the cavity photon operator as by keeping up to the first-order terms. We can therefore derive the formula of photon number in the cavity Substituting (4) into Eqs. (2b)-(2d), we obtain where the effective magnetic field B eff = -B 0 e z + B opt includes both the external magnetic field and the optically induced magnetic field which is the zeroth-order of Ṡ j . The second term in the right hand side of ( which is linear with the first-order time-derivative of S j . Below, we show that the anisotropic nature of ( and being the laser-induced magnetic gain or loss that depends the sign of the detuning ∆. Based on the above results, we finally obtain the optically modulated spin dynamics with α eff = -α opt + α. One can observe that a negative effective Gilbert constant (α eff < 0) emerges in the far-blue detuning regime, i.e., 1 < η < η c . In case of the red detuning (η < 0), we have α opt < 0, which indicates the enhancement of the magnetic attenuation. In the deep-blue detuning regime (η > η c ), driving lasers can still generate the magnetic gain (α opt > 0) but cannot compensate the intrinsic dissipation, i.e., 0 < α opt < α. Here η c is the critical detuning parameter at which the effective Gilbert damping vanishes. The physics can be understood from the diagram plotted in Figs. 1(b) and 1(c): In the blue detuning regime (ω las > ω cav ), microwave magnons are emitted in the non-resonant interaction between the driving laser and the cavity photon, representing a magnetic gain. On the contrary, they are absorbed in the red detuning (ω las < ω cav ), manifesting a magnon absorption or cooling. Below we discuss practical materials and parameters to realize this proposal. Materials realizations.-For a ferromagnetic insulator like yttrium ion garnet (YIG), the intrinsic Gilbert constant α typically ranges 10 -3 ∼ 10 -5 Time-resolved spin flipping.-To justify the approximation adopted in deriving the Gilbert-type magnetic gain, we directly simulate the time evolution of the unit spin components (s j ≡ S j /S ) based on both Eq. ( which is reminiscent of the Walker solution for modeling the profile of 180 • magnetic domain wall Figure Phase transition in spin dimers.-We have shown that under proper conditions, one can realize the Gilbert-type magnetic gain which is essential for observing PT -symmetry in purely magnetic structures. Next, we consider the optically pumped spin S interacting with a lossy one S , as shown in Fig. where s ( ) ≡ S ( ) /S is the unit spin vector. Since the optically induced magnetic field is the same order of magnitude with the geomagnetic field (much smaller than B 0 ), it can be safely ignored. Spin s is exchange coupled to the optically pumped spin s, and suffers an intrinsic Gilbert damping. If α eff = -α, the two-spin system satisfies the PT -symmetry: Eqs. ( Conclusion.-To summarize, we have proposed an optomagnonic method to generate the negative Gilbert damping in ferromagnets, by studying the parametric dynamics of a macrospin coupled with three orthogonally propagating circularly-polarized lasers in an optical cavity. We analytically derived the formula of the optical torque on the spin and identified the condition for the magnetic gain exactly in the Gilbert form. We found a hyperbolic-tangent function reminiscent of the Walker ansatz to well describe the timeresolved spin switching when the intrinsic damping is overcome. We finally investigated the spectrum of exchange coupled spin dimers. By varying the detuning parameter, we observed phase transitions from imbalanced to exact, and to passive PT symmetries. Our findings suggest an experimentally feasible way to achieve negative Gilbert damping that is essential for studying the PT physics and for observing the EP in magnonic systems.