We propose a new type of reflective polarizer based on polarizationdependent coupling to surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs) from free space. This inexpensive polarizer is relatively narrowband but features an extinction ratio of up to 1000 with efficiency of up to 95% for the desired polarization (numbers from a calculation), and thus can be stacked to achieve extinction ratios of 10 6 or more. As a proof of concept, we experimentally realized a polarizer based on nanoporous aluminum oxide that operates around a wavelength of 10.6 μm, corresponding to the output of a CO 2 laser, using aluminum anodization, a low-cost electrochemical process. Optical polarizers typically function in transmission, reflection, or refraction modes. Wire-grid polarizers based on subwavelength parallel metallic wires transmit light with polarization perpendicular to the wire direction The most common high-extinction-ratio polarizers in the long-wavelength infrared (LWIR) are based on finely spaced wire grids or other micro/nanostructures and are thus rather expensive optical components. Here, we introduce an infrared reflective-type polarizer based on direct coupling between free-space light and a special type of surface-plasmon polariton (SPP) mode that has a dispersion relation above the light line. This approach requires no micro-or nanopatterning and can thus be inexpensively manufactured. We demonstrated such a polarizer based on porous anodized aluminum, designed to operate at CO 2 -laser wavelengths. SPPs are surface waves that propagate at the interface between a metal and a dielectric Around a wavelength of 10 μm, amorphous Al 2 O 3 has nn < 1 and modest optical losses, represented by a small extinction coefficient, κκ, as shown in Fig. Polarizers are readily evaluated using two figures of merit: extinction ratio and efficiency. The extinction ratio is the ratio of the output power to the input power, given input light polarized perpendicular to the desired polarization (i.e., in the "wrong" polarization). The efficiency is the ratio of the output power to the input power, given input light polarized along the desired polarization direction. Therefore, in Fig. Since our target wavelength was 10.6 μm rather than the ideal operating wavelength of 10.2 μm for the structure in Fig. To realize our structure without the use of expensive nanofabrication techniques, we relied on an electrochemical anodization process to grow porous anodic aluminum oxide (p-AAO) with porosity of 0.35 on top of aluminum sheets (synthesis by InRedox LLC). Anodization can grow oxide layers on the surfaces of certain metals (aluminum, titanium, etc.), and is often used to enhance surface durability or for decorative purposes Figure Eq. 1 Eq. 2 Here, pp is the volume ratio of air and nn AAAA is the complex refractive index of bulk Al 2 O 3 . The real and imaginary parts of the anisotropic complex index for pp = 0.35 are shown in Fig. To test the operation of the proposed polarizer, we 3D printed a box [Fig. We proposed a reflective polarizer based on direct coupling to surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), enabled by the use of a dielectric with a refractive index less than unity. We demonstrated this concept using porous anodized aluminum oxide (p-AAO), making a polarizer optimized for the CO 2 -laser wavelength. Notably, our method does not require any nanopatterning or other expensive fabrication techniques, resulting in a low-cost design that can be easily mass produced. be achieved. Increasing the porosity tends to push the region with high extinction ratios toward longer wavelengths and larger thicknesses. Increasing the incident angle tends to increase the extinction ratio. Furthermore, we conducted a calculation for a finer angular step size (from 65° to 75°, with step size of 1°) to investigate the difference between the calculations and our measurement using a CO 2 laser (Fig. To design SPP polarizers at substantially different wavelengths, different materials with refractive index less than unity must be used. We analyzed the porosity of the samples based on the dark areas in the SEM images in Fig. 