Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) has become an important scientific tool. Nonetheless, conventional high-resolution RIXS measurements (< 100 meV), especially in the soft x-ray range, require large and low-throughput grating spectrometers that limits measurement accuracy and simplicity. Here, we computationally investigate the performance of a different method for measuring RIXS, Photoelectron Spectrometry for Analysis of X-rays (PAX). This method transforms the Xray measurement problem of RIXS to an electron measurement problem, enabling use of compact, high-throughput electron spectrometers. In PAX, X-rays to be measured are incident on a converter material and the energy distribution of the resultant photoelectrons, the PAX spectrum, is measured with an electron spectrometer. The incident X-ray spectrum is then estimated through a deconvolution algorithm that leverages concepts from machine learning. We investigate a few example PAX cases. Using the 3d levels of Ag as a converter material, and with 10 5 detected electrons, we accurately estimate features with 100s of meV width in a model RIXS spectrum. Using a sharp Fermi edge to encode RIXS spectra, we accurately distinguish 100 meV FWHM peaks separated by 45 meV with 10 7 electrons detected that were photoemitted from within 0.4 eV of the Fermi level. Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Scattering (RIXS) has emerged as a powerful technique to study elementary excitations Despite these strengths and much instrumentation development Coinciding with the rise and development of RIXS, the capabilities of electron spectrometers have also greatly increased Recently, Dakovski et al. that occur in the photoemission spectra of materials such as Ag, Au, Pt or Al when measured with monochromatic incident X-ray radiation. Fig. where we only integrate over physically realistic positive photon energies. Here, kE is electron kinetic energy, s( ω) is the X-ray spectrum incident on the converter material as a function of photon energy, ω, and m(kE) is a measured PAX spectrum. Given a PAX spectrum, the ground truth X-ray spectrum, s( ω), can be estimated directly through deconvolution or in a parameterized form such as a sum of peaks. (The ground truth X-ray spectrum is the X-ray spectrum that would be measured without noise and with perfect resolution.) The decomposition of RIXS spectra into a sum of peaks is a natural method already widely used for traditionally recorded RIXS spectra as the parameters of these peaks can be directly linked to physical characteristics of the matter under study While Dakovski et al. The rest of this report is organized as follows. In section II, we discuss the considerations for choosing a converter material for PAX, and explain why the Ag 3d lines and a sharp Fermi edge are compelling cases. In section III we describe and discuss the deconvolution algorithm we used to estimate RIXS spectra from simulated PAX spectra. In section IV we show the simulated performance of PAX in estimating model RIXS features. We find that, using the Ag 3d levels as a photoemission converter, PAX can accurately estimate the width of few hundred meV features when 10 5 electrons are detected in the measured PAX spectrum. Using a sharp Fermi edge photoemission converter shows promise for estimating finer features. Finally, in section V we conclude and give an outlook for future investigations. The converter material plays a key role in PAX measurements. Converter materials with high conversion efficiency and narrow photoemssion lines are desirable. Higher conversion efficiencies give higher numbers of detected electrons and thus, potentially, higher signal-tonoise ratios. Narrow photoemission lines enable retrieval of narrow X-ray spectral features with a reasonable number of detected electrons. For thick converter materials with near normal incidence of X-rays and emission of photoelectrons, the conversion efficiency of X-rays to photoelectrons can be approximated as where τ q is the effective ionzation cross-section for the creation of photoelectrons from subshell q, ρ is the number per unit volume of atoms within the sample which can emit photoelectrons from the subshell used for PAX, and λ e is the electron mean free path at the kinetic energy of the relevant photoelectrons. In Fig. In principle, a similar convolution equation as Eq. 1 describes the measured signal in many X-ray spectroscopies. The signal of interest, such as a RIXS spectrum or X-ray absorption spectrum, is convolved with an instrument response function and an intrinsic broadening function to give the measured spectrum. Thus, more accurate X-ray spectra can often be retrieved through deconvolution of measured results Eq. 1 gives the expected value of a PAX measurement in the case that the PAX spectrum is measured at every electron kinetic energy. In reality, the measured PAX spectrum, m[kE] is discrete with each measured point integrating over a range of electron kinetic energies. Thus, the expected value of the measured PAX spectrum is approximately given by a discrete convolution, where s[ ω] and h[-BE] are the discretized versions of the X-ray spectrum incident on the converter material and the photoemission spectrum of the converter material. Eq. 3 extends over an infinite range, but, fortunately, experimental circumstances can be chosen so that the summation is non-negligible only over a finite and experimentally tractable range. We assume that we want to estimate a RIXS spectrum from ω min to ω max and that we want to use photoemission features extending from at least BE min to BE max in the measurement. These ranges give a PAX spectrum extending from KE min = ω min -BE max through KE max = ω max -BE min . In order to accurately model this PAX spectrum we must keep all X-ray photon energies in Eq. 3 that contribute non-negligibly to the PAX spectrum over this range. Xrays with energies higher than some cutoff ω + give negligible contributions (a typical cutoff may be a few hundred meV above the incident X-ray energy). The lower limit of photon energies that contribute to the PAX spectrum is set through the lowest binding energy that contributes significantly to the PAX spectrum, BE -. For example, if one is using valence photoemission features, this limit on binding energies is set by the typical restriction of significant photoemission intensity to positive binding energies. This sets the lower limit ω -= kE min + BE -on the photon energies of X-rays that will contribute to the PAX spectrum. With these range limitations, Eq. 3 is simplified to which is practical to analyze for PAX. It is convenient to write this as where m is a column vector whose entries are the measured PAX spectrum, s is another column vector whose entries are the desired X-ray spectrum, and H is a matrix such that the entries of Hs are the same as the discrete convolution h * s. We assume we are in a regime where shot noise is the dominant noise. In this case, the measured PAX spectrum can be approximated by a Poisson process. The probability of measuring b counts for a kinetic energy bin with expected value a is The probability of measuring a PAX spectrum m is then where x i denotes the ith element of x. We note that a matrix equation like Eq. 5 holds as a description of the expected value of a PAX spectrum even when the photoemission spectrum of the converter material is dependent on the incident photon energy. Thus, the methods we describe below can still be used to estimate a RIXS spectrum in such cases, albeit with likely less computational efficiency. We now describe how we estimate a ground truth RIXS spectrum given a PAX data set. We assume that we have a set of PAX spectra recorded under statistically identical conditions as well as a high accuracy measurement of the photoemission spectrum of the converter material recorded with monochromatic incident X-ray radiation. Neglecting noise of the photoemission spectrum is an acceptable approximation because the photoemission spectrum can be measured with direct photoemission which has orders of magnitude higher count rate than a PAX measurement. We estimate the ground truth RIXS spectrum from this data using regularized maximum likelihood estimation. The maximum likelihood estimate of the ground truth RIXS spectrum is the spectrum which maximizes the probability of measuring the actually measured PAX spectrum. Regularization prevents the estimate from having finer structure than is warranted for the quality of the data. For the probability given in Eq. 7, the negative loglikelihood of s is The gradient of this with respect to s is where 1 is a vector where all the entries are one and with dimension such that the equation it appears in is valid, and x T denotes the transpose of x. Having this gradient, we can iteratively minimize the negative log likelihood (maximizing the likelihood) with the scaled gradient iteration where ŝ(n) is the estimate of s after n iterations. This gives the iteration This is equivalent to If then Eq. 12 simplifies to the wellknown Lucy-Richardson algorithm It is a well-known problem that algorithms like Eq. 12 amplify high frequency noise when they are used without regularization Various regularization schemes have been proposed to avoid the amplification of high frequency noise encountered in such algorithms. This is typically achieved by enforcing some degree of smoothness of the deconvolved result. Regularization by stopping iterations after certain criteria have been met where f (x) is a Gaussian function with unit integrated amplitude, The width of the Gaussian, σ, constrains the maximum roughness of deconvolved spectra and thus sets the regu- larization strength (it acts as a hyperparameter in the deconvolution algorithm). Smaller regularization strengths allow for more roughness in the deconvolved spectra than larger regularization strengths. Fig. We now show how we can estimate the optimal regularization strength. Fister et al. Fig. Instead of trying to determine the optimal regularization strength through direct assessment of deconvolved error, we can assess how well our model reconstructs PAX spectra from deconvolved spectra as a proxy for the accuracy of deconvolved spectra. In other words, we can compare the convolution of a deconvolved spectrum with the corresponding photoemission impulse response function to recorded PAX data. If the deconvolution is perfect and there is no noise, these spectra should be the same. It has been shown in previous deconvolution studies that such a comparison can allow one to estimate the optimal regularization strength Fig. Fig. To perform iterative deconvolution, it is necessary to decide when a sufficient number of iterations have been completed. To choose such a stopping criterion, we recognized that (1) we wanted to perform sufficient iterations for the deconvolution with the optimal regularization strength to converge to near its asymptotic value and (2) we wanted the number of iterations to be high enough for the optimal regularization strength to be closely approximated by that which minimizes the validation reconstruction RMSE. Fig. essary to complete iterations at least a few times more than that where the errors for the smallest regularization strength are minimized. In our case we chose to conduct iterations at least equal to four times that where the validation RMSE for the smallest regularization strength reaches a minimum. We note that it can still be beneficial to do more iterations where possible to better fulfill the above priorities. We have now finished describing an algorithm for estimating a ground truth X-ray spectrum from PAX data. We summarize this procedure in Algorithms 1 and 2. The code used to perform the deconvolution analysis described in this report can be found at github.com/dhigley6/PAX2. Now that we have described an algorithm for analyzing PAX spectra, in this section we evaluate the performance of this algorithm on simulated data. We simulated PAX measurements using the Ag 3d photoemission lines to estimate features with structure on a 100 meV scale as well as a sharp Fermi edge such as seen in Au to estimate finer features. Fig. lines as a photoemission converter (A) in estimating the model RIXS spectrum shown in Fig. As the peak separation decreases from top to bottom in Fig. We have demonstrated the potential of PAX for measurement of RIXS spectra. Using the Ag 3d levels as a photoemission converter for PAX, few hundred meV FWHM features can be accurately estimated with 10 5 detected electrons. Even finer features can be accurately estimated with higher numbers of detected electrons. Details with aspects much smaller than 100 meV could be estimated using a sharp Fermi edge photoemssion converter, albeit at the expense of reduced conversion efficiency of RIXS photons to electrons. In this report, we proposed and tested one algorithm which can be used to estimate a RIXS spectrum from measured PAX data. Our algorithm is simple and closely linked to the classic Lucy-Richardson algorithm. Recently, however, more sophisticated algorithms have shown much promise on achieving more accurate deconvolution results and reducing computational time Additional experimental development could also push the capability of PAX further. The model photoemission converters highlighted here were chosen based on a survey of literature photoemission data. A systematic investigation of other materials may provide photoemission features better suited for PAX measurements. Finally, the PAX measurement method could be applied to other situations where high signal-to-noise ratio estimates of X-ray spectra are desired without using traditional grating-based technology. An example could be transmissive soft X-ray spectrometers.