We systematically studied the magnetoresistance effect in a Pt/(CoNi)n multilayer system with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and the fcc (111) texture. The angular dependence of magnetoresistance, including high-order cosine terms, was observed in a plane perpendicular to the electrical current; this was attributed to the geometricalsize effects caused by crystal symmetry, the ordered arrangement of grains, and the anisotropic interface magnetoresistance effect caused by the breaking of the symmetry at interfaces. Based on the accuracy of our experimental results, the magnitude of spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) in Pt/(CoNi)n was expected to be below 1×10 -4 . However, on evaluating the spin Hall angle of  0.07 for Pt using spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance measurements, the theoretical magnitude of SMR in our samples was estimated to exceed 7×10 -4 . This absence of SMR in the experimental results can be explained by the Elliott-Yafet spin relaxation of itinerant electrons in the ferromagnetic metal, which indicates that the boundary conditions of the spin current in the heavy metal/ferromagnetic insulator may not be applicable to all-metallic heterostructures. Spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) refers to the anisotropic absorption of spin currents in heavy metals (HMs); this absorption is determined by the direction of magnetization in the adjacent ferromagnetic layer (FML) and represented by a change in the HM resistance along the direction of magnetization A model for the SMR in the heterostructures of HMs and ferromagnetic insulators (FMI) has been proposed In this work, Ta (3)/Pt (10)/[Co (0.3) Ni (0.4)]n/Ta (3) was deposited on a naturally oxidized monocrystalline silicon substrate via magnetron sputtering at room temperature. The numbers in brackets represent the thickness of each layer in nanometer units, and n=2, First, we determined the crystal structure and orientation of all samples by using HR-XRD with a Cu Kα radiation source. Figure To further validate that the CoNi repetition was accurately regulated, we evaluated the dependence of PMA on n. As shown in Fig. Thus, the AHE curve was fitted in the range of 1-6 kOe, as shown in the inset of Fig. The solid line depicted in this figure represents the fitting curve of A/n+B; this line proves that the PMA can be primarily attributed to the interface effect. This result is consistent with previous reports In this equation, the effective perpendicular anisotropy can be obtained using K eff = H k eff M s It is generally believed that the presence of cos^2 symmetric magnetoresistance in the HM/FM structure in the plane perpendicular to the direction of current [i.e., the yzplane, as defined in Fig. As shown in Fig. where ρ 0 refers to the resistivity of the sample when the magnetic field direction is perpendicular to the direction of current, and ∆ρ xy refers to the change in resistivity when the magnetic field coincides with the xand y-axes, respectively. Results of the Fourier analysis reveal that the orders of cos 2n β need to be considered in order to appropriately describe the magnetoresistance curve for the yz-plane This adequately fits the experimental data, as shown in Fig. where ∆ρ ρ is the total magnetoresistance observed during the experiment, and ρ CoNi =1.8×10 -7 Ω•m and ρ Pt =2×10 -7 Ω•m represent the resistivities of CoNi and Pt, respectively. In addition, considering the presence of magnetic dead layers at the interface between CoNi and the non-magnetic layer, we employed the effective thickness of the magnetic layer (t CoNi,corr = t CoNi -0.65 nm), as shown in Fig. The SMR effect is derived through the absorption and reflection of the interface spin current in the Pt layer, which is related to the direction of FM magnetization and is reflected as magnetoresistance under the combined effects of spin Hall effect (SHE) and inverse SHE. There are three basic characteristics of this effect. First, the variation in magnetoresistance depends on the angle between magnetization and spin polarization (y-axis); hence, it can be observed in both the yz-and xy-planes. Second, according to a previous theory, there is only one cos^2 term /ρ CoNi ) and t CoNi,corr . When t CoNi,corr <4 nm, the magnetoresistance ratio decreases with the increase in thickness, thereby confirming the existence of an interface contribution. When t CoNi,corr ≥ 4 nm, the magnetoresistance ratio tends to increase with the thickness. Therefore, we analyze and fit the dependence of the magnetoresistance ratio on thickness, using the following empirical formula: This formula introduces three undetermined parameters: A, B, and C. A describes the contribution of the interface, B represents the contribution of the linear relationship with thickness, and C represents the contribution of magnetoresistance independent of thickness. As indicated by the black curve in Fig. To further investigate this absence of SMR, based on the analysis results depicted in Fig. where U s and U a are the voltage amplitudes of the symmetric Lorentz and antisymmetric dispersive line-shapes, respectively; Sankey et al. reported that these line-shapes are a result of the damping-like torque caused by the SHE of the Pt layer and the torque generated by the Oersted field Based on the reciprocal relationship with t CoNi , the spin Hall angle of Pt in the sample was determined to be 0.07. It should be noted that the interface was considered to be transparent to the spin current generated in Pt. If the transparency of the Pt/Co interface T=0.65±0.06 is considered, according to Ref. where λ Pt =1.5 nm is the spin diffusion length of Pt To directly compare the theoretical value of SMR with the experimental results, the theoretical SMR value is attributed to the magnetoresistance of the CoNi layer through shunt treatment; this resulted in a contribution that is inversely proportional to the thickness of the CoNi layer in the xy-and yz-planes, corresponding to ASMR≈6.57×10 -3 nm in Eq. ( The results of the ST-FMR experiment indicate that the spin current torque generated in the Pt layer affects the magnetization of CoNi,; however, the absorption of these spin currents was not evidenced by an apparent SMR effect. Based on the spin diffusion equation, the spin current density j s (F) at the magnetic interface is where G r (G i ) is the real(imaginary) component of the spin mixing conductance, and μ s is the accumulation of spin at the interface. The spin current flowing into the FM through the interface and the reflected spin current are uniquely influenced by the direction of magnetization, which eventually leads to the SMR effect. Therefore, starting from the interface effect, we consider the effect of spin memory loss (SML) on the spin transport of the Pt/Co interface As SMR was first confirmed and systematically studied in HM/YIG, we believe that the SMR effect in HM/FMI and HM/FM is significantly different due to the different carriers of spin current and the corresponding scattering mechanisms in FMI and FMs. In general, spin current can only be absorbed by FMI through the spinangular-momentum exchange between the localized magnetization M in FMI and the conduction-electron spin polarization σ in HMs, i.e., the spin-orbit torque (SOT). However, in FMs, the spin relaxation of itinerant electrons needs to be considered. In 2011, Berger extended Elliott's theory of spin relaxation in metals and semiconductors to include metallic ferromagnets With regard to the absence of SMR observed during our experiment, we consider two mechanisms that absorbed the injected spin current in FMs: SOT (M-dependent, interfacial effect) and spin relaxation (less M-independent, bulk effect). The absorption of spin currents using SOT is dominant when M is perpendicular to σ. Contrarily, when M is parallel to σ, SOT is not applicable; however, most of the spin currents would be relaxed in FMs. In general, most of the spin currents flowing into FMs will be absorbed, resulting in a spin boundary condition for the FM/HM, which is independent of (or less dependent on) the direction of magnetization. Therefore, although SOT in the Pt/CoNi system was evident, a corresponding magnitude of SMR does not appears. In conclusion, we believe that, when considering different mechanisms for the spin current absorption in FMs and FMI, boundary conditions of the spin current in the HM/FMI may not be applicable to the HM/FM interface; thus, SMR performance would be significantly different. In summary, we systematically investigated the magnetoresistance effect in a Pt/(CoNi)n system with strong PMA and a (111) texture. By ascribing all the magnetoresistance to the CoNi layer, the contribution of the magnetoresistance with interface characteristics was emphasized. By comparing the magnetoresistance characteristics of the yz and xy planes, we determined that the magnetoresistance with interface characteristics in the yz plane could be primarily attributed to AIMR, and no obvious contribution of SMR was found in the experimental results. However, we obtained the θ SH of Pt through an ST-FMR experiment, and the magnitude predicted by the SMR theory was higher than our experimental accuracy. Consequently, the appearance of cos 2 β terms in the plane perpendicular to the current cannot be used as an indicator of SMR in metallic magnetic heterostructures. The separation of the magnetoresistance in the yz plane introduced by the symmetry breaking of the interface is a necessary prerequisite for the study of the SMR effect in metallic magnetic heterostructures. 