We study analytically an underdamped current-biased topological Josephson junction. First, we consider a simplified model at zero temperature, where the parity of the non-local fermionic state formed by Majorana bound states (MBSs) localized on the junction is fixed, and show that a transition from insulating to conducting state in this case is governed by single-quasiparticle tunneling rather than by Cooper pair tunneling in contrast to a non-topological Josephson junction. This results in a significantly lower critical current for the transition from insulating to conducting state. We propose that, if the length of the system is finite, the transition from insulating to conducting state occurs at exponentially higher bias current due to hybridization of the states with different parities as a result of the overlap of MBSs localized on the junction and at the edges of the topological nanowire forming the junction. Finally, we discuss how the appearance of MBSs can be established experimentally by measuring the critical current for an insulating regime at different values of the applied magnetic field. Topological superconductors have recently received much attention in the condensed matter community as a new exotic form of quantum matter There are several platforms to fabricate a topological Josephson junction: topological insulators where q is the electric charge on the Josephson junction of capacitance C, φ is the superconducting phase difference across the junction, E J is the Josephson energy of arXiv:2006.16643v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 31 Aug 2020 the junction. The last two terms in Eq. ( The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the simplified model with the fixed fermionic parity, which corresponds to an infinite nanowire limit. We de-rive the expressions for the lowest band of a topological Josephson junction in two important limits: E M E J and E M E J , and calculate the critical current for an insulating regime of the Josephson junction. In Sec. III, we discuss finite-size effects. We show that the critical current in this regime is significantly larger, however, it is possible that at certain values of the applied magnetic field the critical current falls to the values characteristic for infinite systems. We summarize our results and give an outlook in Sec. IV. In App. A we discuss the instanton action and the fluctuation determinant for our problem. Let us start with the simplified model of a very long nanowire, introduced in the previous section, so that we can neglect the overlap between MBSs on the junction and MBSs on the edges of the wire. At zero temperature and without quasiparticles, we can consider the fermionic parity to be fixed. Without loss of generality we can choose an odd parity state. Let us start with the case of zero bias current and no dissipation. Having fixed the parity, we can integrate out the degrees of freedom corresponding to the subgap fermion formed by the MBSs localized on the junction. The effective Hamiltonian takes the form In analogy with a particle moving in a one-dimensional periodic potential is the potential energy (the phase difference φ plays the role of the conjugate coordinate), which is depicted in Fig. We start with the case in which single-quasiparticle tunneling dominates, i.e., E M E J . If we completely ignore the Josephson term, the corresponding Schrödinger equation becomes which is the Mathieu equation. The wave functions ψ corresponding to that equation should be composed of Bloch wave functions: where u k (φ) is 4π-periodic and n corresponds to the band number. As we are looking for the lowest bands in the limit E M E c , we can use the tight-binding approximation and present u where w (n) (φ) are the eigenfunctions of the harmonic oscillator with the frequency ω 0 = √ E M E c . This gives us the bands dispersion 4π cos(4πk) n! e -4 This expression is valid for the lowest bands, which are close to the energy of the harmonic oscillator with frequency ω 0 : n E M /ω 0 = E M /E c . Including the Josephson term into our consideration perturbatively will modify the harmonic frequency to as well as the exponent, determined by an instanton action (see Appendix A), connecting neighboring minima of the potential (see Fig. As a result, including these modifications in Eq. ( with the amplitude FIG. Next, we study the case E M E J . Here, we consider the limit of E M ν 0 , which corresponds to the suppression of 2π phase slips, where we introduce which is the 2π tunneling amplitude in case of E M = 0 (which corresponds to a non-topological junction), where is the instanton action for this tunneling process. We assume that this limit is realistic as the phase-slip amplitude is exponentially small in the chosen range of parameters (E J E c ). Therefore, the band structure is again determined by 4π phase slips. Following the same approach as in the opposite limit, we derive Here, the harmonic frequency is given by while the tunneling amplitude is determined again by an instanton action, Here, N is determined by the reduced determinant (with excluded zero mode) of an operator that corresponds to the second variation of the imaginary-time action (see Appendix A and B. Critical current for the insulating state of an underdamped topological junction In this subsection, we study the insulating regime of an underdamped topological junction. Therefore, we include dissipation through a large impedance Z into our consideration and allow for a small current I through the system (see Fig. Then, up to a critical current Z , the current I flows through the external impedance Z as there is a stationary solution with constant k: with V = ZI being the voltage. It is important to note that I c is not the maximum current supported by the junction but a critical current for an insulating regime of an underdamped junction. This stationary regime corresponds to an insulating state of the junction. At stronger driving currents, i.e., I > I c , there is no longer a solution with constant k and the system enters the regime of Bloch oscillations. In this regime, for the low dissipation, the motion is periodic in k while in the second limit we have One can see that the expressions are sufficiently different from the one for a non-topological junction due to an exponential factor. For E M E J , the instanton action is parametrically larger, i.e. S M 4π S 2π , while in the opposite limit E M E J , it is at least twice as large as in the non-topological case: The critical current in both topological limits is exponentially smaller compared to the non-topological case, provided that E J can be considered to be the same as in the non-topological setup. In principle, this effect should be measurable, for example, by driving the junction from the non-topological to topological state by increasing the magnetic field. However, this increase of field will also change the effective E J . We expect the first limit E M E J to be more promising for the demonstration of the presence of MBSs in the system, as the current I c depends mostly on E M . Here, E J results only in a parametrically small corrections to the critical current. In addition, E M is non-monotonic as a function of the applied magnetic field Unfortunately, there is another restriction for experimental observation of this effect. In any realistic experimental setup one has to take into account quasiparticles that are switching the parity of the MBSs. Therefore, this effect can be measured only on the time scales sufficiently smaller than the characteristic time τ q between quasiparticles passing the system, while the latter could be short in existing experimental setups In a realistic experimental setup the whole system is finite, therefore, there is a small but finite overlap between MBSs on the junction (γ 1 and γ 2 ) and MBSs on the edges of the topological nanowire (γ 0 and γ 3 ) it in the following form where ψ = ψ 0 ψ 1 corresponds to the wave function of the subgap fermion state, given by ψ 0 |0 + ψ 1 |1 , where |0 and |1 are an even and an odd parity state, respectively where δ L/R is the coupling between the MBSs to the left/right from the junction (see Fig. If we consider the phase to be constant, the ground state of such a system is (see Fig. If the total coupling energy δ is much larger than the tunneling amplitude, given by 2π phase slip, ν 2π [calculated later: Eq. ( where φ = dφ/dt and can be estimated as the tunneling amplitude between neighboring minima of the effective potential φ = 2πν 2π . Therefore, the quantitative condition for this regime is That means that we can still consider δ to be sufficiently smaller than any other energy scale in the system, as 0 Landau-Zener transition First excited state FIG. the whole tunneling amplitude is exponentially small in both limits considered, ν , due to the large tunneling action. We can assume that this regime is indeed reasonable since where L L/R is the length of the nanowire to the left/right of the junction, ξ M is the localization length of the Majorana fermions, which is of the order of hundred nanometers for typical materials like InAs, and p F is the Fermi momentum. Moreover, p F effectively grows with the applied magnetic field B, therefore, δ L/R oscillates around zero as a function of the magnetic field Then, the tunneling actions in the two opposite limits, E M E J and E M E J , become and respectively. Here, we have neglected the correction due to δ, as we consider it to be small in comparison to all the energy parameters in the system except for the tunneling amplitudes. As a result, we can calculate ν 2π for these cases and, finally, the critical current for an insulating regime: for E M E J and for E M E J . One can see that the critical current value in the limit E M E J is close to the value for the non-topological junction given in Eq. In conclusion, we have studied an underdamped topological Josephson junction. We used the effective model of a topological junction based on a semiconducting nanowire proximitized by a conventional s-wave superconductor. We started with deriving an expression for the lowest energy band of such a junction in the absence of a current source at zero temperature. We introduced two regimes governed either by single-quasiparticle tunneling or by Cooper-pair tunneling, which are determined by the geometry of the sample (mostly the transparency of the junction). Then we discussed the insulating regime (Coulomb blockade) of the junction, shunted by a huge impedance, which holds up to some critical bias current. We have shown that this critical current in the topological regime is sufficiently lower than in the non-topological junction with the same E J due to the possibility of singlequasiparticle tunneling and the resulting suppression of 2π phase slips. From an experimental point of view, a way to determine whether the junction supports MBSs or not could be to measure this critical current at dif-ferent values of the magnetic field. We have argued that a non-monotonic dependence on the magnetic field indicates the presence of MBSs. We continued our analysis by addressing finite-size effects, resulting in hybridization of the states with different parities due to coupling of the MBSs on the junction with the MBSs on the outer edges of the nanowire. If the coupling energy is significantly larger than δ c , given by Eq. ( Finally, we have also discussed a specific case where the parts of the nanowire to the right and to the left of the junction could be considered identical. Then the total hybridization energy δ = δ L +δ R should be oscillating around zero as a function of the magnetic field. Alternatively, δ L can be made zero by sufficiently increasing the length of the left part of the nanowire, while the finite δ R can be tuned by the magnetic field. As a result, the system should move from the limit of δ δ c to δ δ c and back with the increase of the magnetic field. Therefore, the critical current I c for the insulating regime should have significant drops at certain values of the magnetic field (suppression of 2π phase slips). This may significantly simplify the experimental identification of MBSs in the system. In this work we have focused on two limiting cases: δ δ c and δ δ c , which correspond to regimes with 4π and 2π phase slips, respectively. As an outlook we plan to study the transition between these regimes in more detail, as the difference between these limiting cases is dramatic due to the exponentially different values of the critical current for the insulating state of an underdamped junction.