We characterize a high-density sample of negatively charged silicon-vacancy (SiV -) centers in diamond using collinear optical multidimensional coherent spectroscopy. By comparing the results of complementary signal detection schemes, we identify a hidden population of SiV -centers that is not typically observed in photoluminescence, and which exhibits significant spectral inhomogeneity and extended electronic T2 times. The phenomenon is likely caused by strain, indicating a potential mechanism for controlling electric coherence in color-center-based quantum devices. Color centers in diamond are point defects within the diamond host lattice that absorb and emit visible or near-infrared light. Such defects have drawn attention recently as potential hardware elements in quantum networks and devices Despite these advantages, challenges still hinder the development of SiV -center devices. For example, spin coherence times are in most cases too short for practical applications with the exception of measurements at sub-Kelvin temperatures In this Letter, we report measurements using collinear multidimensional coherent spectroscopy (MDCS) of the optical transitions in a high-density ensemble of SiV - centers in bulk single-crystal diamond. By comparing photoluminescence (PL)-based and heterodynedetection-based MDCS signal collection schemes, we selectively distinguish between luminescing and nonluminescing color centers, observing a large population of SiV -transitions that are typically hidden (i.e., not observed) under PL detection, and which have more than 60 times as much inhomogeneous spectral broadening as the population of PL-emitting "bright" states. A detailed comparison of homogeneous dephasing rates reveals longer T 2 optical coherence times for the hidden population as compared to the bright population, indicating that electronic dephasing interactions in the hidden population are diminished. Finally, by characterizing the amount of inhomogeneous broadening, we argue that the most likely source of the inhomogeneity and extended T 2 times of the hidden population is inhomogeneous strain, and discuss mechanisms by which strain and electronic dephasing might be linked. The results exemplify the power of MDCS as a tool for characterizing color-center materials, and they inform the development of strain-utilizing color-center devices and applications. The experimental layout is illustrated in Fig. Figure More striking than the characteristics of the PLdetected plot in isolation, however, are the dramatic differences between the PL-detected spectrum of Fig. As mentioned above, the PL-detected spectrum of Fig. Our assignment of the hidden center resonances to strain-impacted SiV -centers as opposed to some other kind of silicon-related complex is based on the fact that the hidden center resonance is peaked at the SiV -zero- phonon line and-while broader than the bright center resonance-remains too narrow in this sample to originate from any other source. The most plausible alternate contender is the neutral carbon vacancy (GR1) zerophonon line at 404.5 THz (740.9 nm). However, this resonance lies decidedly away from the hidden-center spectral peak as demonstrated in both Fig. In the absence of other complexes, the clear distinction between the heterodyne-detected and PL-detected SiV - center ensembles begs a microscopic explanation. The simplest possibility is that the presence of strain in the hidden centers reduces their radiative dipole moments relative to unstrained centers, thereby both reducing radiative decay from the excited state and extending its coherence time through the same underlying mechanism. Such an explanation is inconsistent with the nonlinear character of MDCS peak strengths, however, which depend on the dipole moment to the 4th power in the χ (3) limit. It would be surprising, for example, that the unstrained centers are not observed in Fig. An explanation of the phenomenology that is more consistent with our results is that strain enhances the coupling between the 2 E u excited states and an electronic dark state in the SiV -center system. For example, the dark state may be shifted by strain from an energy higher than the 2 E u excited states to an energy nearly commensurate with them, or selection rules and phonon-coupling may be modified to make the transition from the 2 E u states into a dark state at lower energy dark state more likely. In either of these situations, the luminescence would be suppressed by the system relaxing into the dark state but the nonlinear optical response would be unaffected, as confirmed by simulations we have performed to illustrate the effect Perhaps the most powerful aspect of MDCS in this study is its ability to extract homogeneous decay rates even in the midst of an inhomogeneous ensemble. Figure with the second term being omitted for the PL-detected measurement. As shown by the data and fit in Fig. As shown in Fig. Finally, the extracted T 2 times can be compared to the sample's electronic population decay times T 1 , allowing us to verify that the SiV -resonances are in the incoherent limit. We have performed measurements of T 1 by measuring the response of our MDCS signal to variations in the waiting time T between the second and third excitation pulses In conclusion, we have used collinear optical MDCS to measure the coherent properties of an ensemble of SiV -centers in diamond, observing a large and inhomogeneously broadened population of nonradiative electronic states that have remarkably long optical decoherence times in comparison to their radiatively coupled counterparts. The effect can understood as a likely consequence of strain. Beyond their fundamental relevance to the physics of diamond color centers, the results open opportunities for the controlled use of strain in practical SiV -center applications. One possible use of the effect is in a device in which strain is intentionally applied or modulated in order to controllably tune the amount of radiative emission and electronic coherence in a single-photon emitters or in an emitter ensemble.