Mullins' theory predicts the buildup of adatoms during surface diffusion at the edges of grooves where grain boundaries emerge to the surface of a polycrystalline film. However, the mesoscopic nature of this theory prevents the identification of the atomicscale physical mechanisms involved in this phenomenon. Here, we interpret the buildup of adatoms in atomistic terms through a mean-field rate-equation model and demonstrate both its kinetic nature and its impact on the intrinsic stress in these systems. Furthermore, the model provides estimates of the surface profile of intrinsic stress, of its typical mean values, and of the dependence of stress on temperature and deposition flux for different growth stages. These estimates agree well with reported experimental results obtained from recent advances in nanoscale mapping of mechanical stresses on the surface of polycrystalline films. Compact polycrystalline films typically show a latent compression state upon completion of the film that is In this work, we develop an atomistic mean-field model that sheds light on the physical processes involved in the mesoscopically described phenomenon The kinetic nature of the phenomenon is probed and used to estimate the resulting profile of intrinsic stress under conditions of high atomic mobility. This description allows us to explain the dependence of the intrinsic stress on the deposition parameters, in order to address the large body of experimental evidence reported so far. In this study, we assume a surface, which is initially in equilibrium, evolving under deposition conditions. As previously discussed in Refs. evolves according to the mesoscopic Mullins ́s equation driven by a surface diffusion current J ⃗ = -φ∇ ⃗ κ. J ⃗ is biased by the gradient of the surface curvature ∇ ⃗ κ (driving force) where κ ∝ ∇ h; φ, the diffusive mobility of adatoms, corresponds to the kinetic constant of J ⃗ ; and the minus sign considers the curvature sign convention Considering the surface slope constraints at the GB triple-junction and away from GB (namely, ∂ h(r, t)| → → m and ∂ h(r, t)| → → 0, respectively) (see Fig. Ref. We infer the following from the mesoscopic model, along the profile of the GB groove: In the case of the Mullins-type diffusive profile, the mass accumulation at the edges of the GB grooves has been ascribed to the decrease in the diffusive mobility of the adatoms as they diffuse towards the GB triple-junction. Plausibly and in agreement with the results in This causes the gradient of superficial curvature to remain roughly constant (∇ ⃗ k ≈ const.) along the groove profile such that its divergence is minimized. In practical terms, the second term in Eq. 3 is much smaller than the first, and thus ∇ ⃗ • J ⃗ ∝ -∇ ⃗ φ. In this context, a microscopic interpretation of the profile of the GB groove in terms of terraces and steps (vicinal surfaces), rather than the blind distribution of dangling bonds, helps us to identify the physical mechanisms involved in the phenomenon of mass accumulation induced by the Mullins-type diffusion on the surface of polycrystalline solids. As we know today By applying the law of conservation of mass, the evolution of the surface profile (in Eq. 2) can be rewritten in atomistic parameters as: , where n (r, t) is the density of diffusing monomers (i.e. mobile single adatoms), which are deposited from a flux F and incorporated into the film bulk at the growth rate. Thus, Eq. 4 distinguishes between the deposition rate F (atoms deposited per unit of time and area) and the growth rate ∂ h (thickness variation over the unit of time) through n (r, t) evolution, which is described according the following kinetic rate equation: where D is the intralayer monomer diffusion coefficient, n = √2/∂ h(r, t) -3/4 denotes the step density in a vicinal surface comprising fcc (111) terraces separated by indistinguishable A and B steps The first term in Eq. 6 corresponds to growth by step-flow within the GB groove (i.e., steps capture diffusing monomers). The second term accounts for second nucleation on the grain top (diffusing monomers meet each other), and the third one correlates spatially the rates of the two first terms through the monomer density. The factor [1 -(λ/ξ) ] in the second term evaluates the probability of second nucleation on the grain top. For grain sizes much larger than the diffusion length (ξ ≫ λ), the contribution of the monomers to the step-flow is proportional to the number of atoms landing in the λ-wide strip near the GB (where n is higher), and then the monomer current is j ∼ Fλ(λ/ξ). Otherwise, all the deposited monomers contribute with j ∼ Fξ. In accordance with the law of conservation of mass, the probability of second nucleation can be estimated from the relative difference between these two cases ∝ [Fξ -Fλ(λ/ξ)]/Fξ. In principle, the diffusion length is effectively limited by the grain size, so that [1 -(λ/ξ) ] is ranged between 0 and 1 (i.e., without and with second nucleation, respectively). On the other hand, the kinetic parameter β (in the third term of Eq. 6) ranges between two limiting cases: β ≈ 1 corresponds to a kinetic limitation-free stage where the surface diffusion is much faster than the monomer capture and cancels any gradient of the monomer density. Otherwise, β ≪ 1 corresponds to an aggregation-limited diffusion that characterizes kinetically limited growth. The interlayer transport delayed by step-edge barriers and/or reversible nucleation would be, potentially, the major kinetic limitations in these systems. indicates that monomer density is depleted within the GB groove, in agreement with the predictions of the classical growth theories (Kinetically limited growth, β ≪ 1) Fig. This gives rise to the formation of small terraces with unstable steps where the monomer capture is reversible. Consequently, n takes negative values to indicate that these sites correspond to delayed detachment sites (i.e., kinetic limitations as discussed above) rather than attachment sites. (Kinetic limitation-free growth, β → 1) Fig. Fig. Unlike the extrinsic stress in thin films, which is associated to lattice and thermal mismatches with the substrate, the intrinsic stress is attributed to unbalanced force fields that arise around discontinuities in the crystalline lattice of the films. In polycrystalline films, the lattices discontinuities playing major role in the generation of intrinsic stress are the grain boundaries and the film surface. As discussed above, the Laplace-Young equation describes the balance between these two discontinuities at the GB groove, with the Laplace pressure being the resulting stress for small perturbations in the equilibrium profile (Eq. 1). These perturbations must be understood in terms of changes in the chemical potential of the surface, which is estimated from its curvature κ. Consequently, an stress σ in the form of a Laplace pressure is generated from the Young-Laplace equation: whenever the curvature κ of the surface profile that results from kinetically limited growth differs from the curvature κ of the surface profile that corresponds to kinetic limitation-free growth (that of equilibrium as demonstrated above), for a similar deposited volume. Fig. Since the diffusion length  is determined by the diffusion coefficient-to-flux ratio, as λ ∼ D /F 2D+1 growth of films from diffusing monomers Otherwise, the in-situ variations of F and T (later growth parameters) during the postcoalescence modify the fraction of the grain surface λ(〈h〉 ≫ 0)/ξ involved in the phenomena of mass transport. As the flux increases and/or the temperature drops, the transport towards the GBs decreases and the step-flow leaves room for the second nucleation on the grain top λ ≪ ξ. The second nucleation on the same grain, which forces the crystalline coherence of the second nuclei, gives rise crystallites with slight misorientations to each other (in agreement with the Structure Zone Model ́s predictions for zone 1b Based on the above considerations, the behavior of σ the early growth can be addressed straightforwardly from the dependence of the GB density on these parameters Figure Beyond the reported qualitative behavior of the intrinsic stress with the later deposition flux (namely, σ drops as F increases where, as discussed above, F = F(〈h〉 → 0) is the early-growth flux, determining the grain size ξ. The power-law dependence σ ∝ F  (with α = -1/3) in Eq. 8 is consistent with the later flux-dependences of the steady intrinsic stress σ reported for moderated fluxes and submicron-sized grains Eq. 8 describes the effects of the flux on intrinsic stress for different stages of growth. Thus, while the early increase in flux raises the density of grain boundaries around which the material under compression accumulates (i.e. σ increases), the late postcoalescence increase in flux induces extra surface roughness that results in traction between crystalline-coherent surface features (i.e. σ decreases We present an atomistic interpretation of the origin of the non-equilibrium morphology that forms at the edges of the grooves where adatoms accumulate during surface diffusion, according to Mullins' theory. This non-equilibrium morphology is the result of   ~ Flux  Ag film 