Large-scale spiking neural networks have been designed based on superconducting-nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) as receiver elements for photonic communication between artificial neurons and synapses. Such large-scale artificial neural networks will require thousands of waveguide-integrated SNSPD devices on a single chip. Efficient waveguide-coupled SNSPDs and high-throughput methods for their characterization at this scale are very challenging. Here, we design, fabricate, and measure SNSPDs that are compatible with these large-scale networks. We demonstrate integrated-photonic circuits to simultaneously characterize many waveguide-coupled SNSPDs with a single fiber input. We achieve up to 15 waveguide-coupled SNSPDs in a single integrated-photonic circuit and a total of 49 waveguide SNSPDs with a detection plateau out of 49 tested. To our knowledge, this is the largest number of SNSPDs integrated in a photonic circuit to date. We employ several types of photonic circuits to enable rapid and reliable characterization of detector performance. We further demonstrate several important synaptic functions of these detectors. These include a binary response in the detectors with average incident photon numbers ranging from less than 10 -3 to greater than 10, indicating that synaptic responses based on these detectors will be independent of the number of incident photons in a communication pulse. Such a binary response is ideal for communication in neural systems. We further demonstrate that the response has a linear dependence of output current pulse height on bias current with up to a factor of 1.7 tunability in pulse height, a function that cannot be obtained without a detection plateau. A defining feature of neural systems is the presence of highly interconnected neurons making thousands of synaptic connections that are often spatially distant. Many electronic circuits based on semiconductors While superconducting optoelectronic hardware has been proposed as a means to achieve large-scale neural * sonia.buckley@nist.gov systems, significant experimental progress is required to prove the practical viability. Before the full neuronal circuit can be realized, individual subcomponents must be fabricated and tested, so that each is performing as needed before integration. There are four main device subcomponents under investigation for future integration There are many aspects of an SNSPD that must be considered when designing a synapse, including critical current, inductance, device area, operating temperature, detection efficiency, detection plateau width, device yield, and superconductor material. All of these properties are interconnected, and therefore they must be optimized self-consistently in the system context. Fabrication and testing of waveguide-SNSPDs with the most likely parameters to be used in a system integration is therefore a necessary precursor to building neuronal circuits. In Section II, we focus on experimental characterization and measurement techniques of waveguidecoupled SNSPDs with parameters similar to those expected to be utilized in the full neuronal circuit demonstrations. Because synapses are the most numerous el-ements in neural systems, the ability to rapidly characterize many SNSPDs in the integrated-photonic environment in which they will be utilized is necessary both initially and for any further system optimization. Therefore both the characterized parameters and measurement techniques are highly relevant for the synaptic application. The requirement for saturated internal efficiency in the definition of the yield of SNSPDs has often been overlooked in the literature, despite being of critical importance for most applications due to its direct impact on detection efficiency. It is of particular importance in this work for implementations of synaptic function. In Section III we show how technological improvements that lead to high-yield detectors directly enable a technique for setting analog synaptic weights, an exciting space in applied physics. While synaptic weights may be either digital or analog, signaling between neurons is binary. Binary signaling is an important technique to reduce noise in communication from a neuron to its synaptic connections, and the effectiveness of communication in neural systems is due in part to the binary nature of action potentials. Binary communication is therefore a key feature of the superconducting opto-electronic hardware platform, and we demonstrate the conversion of photonic pulses with intensities varying by up to four orders of magnitude to binary electrical pulses. Finally in Section V we discuss the relevance of this work in a broader context. Waveguide-integrated SNSPDs are being pursued for a variety of applications in integrated quantum optics, metrology and large-scale neural systems. Several review articles have been written on the subject In this work we follow most closely the approach suggested in Ref. Recent work has shown that detection plateaus can be achieved in much wider wires than previously thought possible The ability to fabricate devices with large numbers of waveguide-coupled SNSPDs leads to challenges in testing. One major challenge in the measurement of waveguide-integrated SNSPDs is to couple light from an optical fiber into an on-chip waveguide. Due to variations in fiber coupling efficiency and the complexity of the fiber coupling/packaging procedure, it is helpful to make as many measurements as possible using a single fiber input, particularly when one wishes to compare the efficiency of different detector designs. We therefore use waveguides and beamsplitters to route light to different devices from a single fiber input. This is in contrast to the previous work on the characterization of waveguide-coupled SNSPDs, in which characterization devices typically only include a single SNSPD per input grating coupler In Sec. II A we describe the integrated-photonic tree device, which evenly divides input light between seven detectors and can be used to compare different detector designs. In Sec. II B we describe the HiDRA. The full integrated circuits consist of up to 15 detectors, integrated with up to 18 beamsplitters/beamtaps and several centimeters of waveguides. One promising light source used in the proposed superconducting spiking neural systems operate at wavelengths of around 1.22 μm The 'branching tree' structure provides a method for evenly distributing light to a number of different detec- tors. This allows comparison of the performance of several detectors under uniform waveguide-coupled illumination. A microscope image of such a device is shown in Fig. With the light evenly divided, comparisons can be made between detectors with different geometric param- eters. A layout error caused one of the seven detectors on each tree to fail, so each tree in this work compares six detectors. For the first tree, the width of the SNSPDs was varied from 400 nm to 1.5 μm, keeping the length of the nanowire constant (see Fig. We further use the tree structure to investigate the height and width of the plateau region. The height of these curves quantifies the relative detection efficiency of wires with differing widths, while the width of the plateau quantifies the range of bias currents providing saturated internal quantum efficiency. We find very little dependence of detection efficiency on wire width (see Methods Sec. IV F). Figure The optimal performance depends on the application and the circuit used to read out the signal. Based on this analysis, any of the detector widths chosen would work for applications at 1.55 μm. The widest wires are the least sensitive to lithography, but have the largest area and highest energy consumption, while the narrowest wires' reduced performance suggests this is close to the resolution limit of our 365 nm i-line lithography process. A second tree device with nanowires of different lengths was also fabricated and measured. The nanowire length was varied from 5 μm to 200 μm, based on simulations of the nanowire absorption length (see Methods Sec. IV B). We find an absorption length of 160 dB/mm when measuring the detectors cryogenically at 1.55 μm (see Methods Sec. IV F), and 175 dB/mm when measured at room temperature. The room temperature measurement technique is automated and highly parallel, and is described in Methods Sec. IV E. Similar roomtemperature/cryogenic comparison has been performed previously for NbN SNSPDs on nanophotonic silicon and diamond waveguides The next device examined in this study is a highdynamic-range detector array (HiDRA). These were previously proposed and demonstrated in Ref. 31, but the devices did not work as predicted due to the presence of multiple waveguide modes. In this work, all waveguides are single mode. An optical microscope image of the device is shown in Fig. In the superconducting optoelectronic neuromorphic platform proposed in Refs. 20 and 28, communication is photonic, but computation is electronic. The signals communicated from each neuron to its synaptic connections are binary, few-photon pulses, meaning the information communicated is independent of the number of photons in the pulse. Only the timing of spikes is rele- vant. Synaptic weighting of the pulses is done entirely electronically. This communication scheme requires the detectors to be insensitive to the number of incident photons. We use the tree and HiDRA structures to test whether or not SNSPDs demonstrate this behavior by measuring their output electrical pulses when they are illuminated over a light intensity range of close to 50 dB. At the low end of this range, multi-photon absorption events are very improbable, with less than 10 -3 photons per pulse on average, while at the high end multi-photon events are likely, with greater than 10 photons per pulse on average. The measurement is performed with an input laser with 50 ps pulses operating at a pulse rate of 200 kHz and wavelength of 1.57 μm. The photon number is changed via a calibrated variable fiber attenuator. For coherent light, the photon number should follow a Poisson distribution given by p (n > 0) = 1 -e -n ph . Since the laser pulse length is much shorter than the response time of the detector, at most one count is observed every time the photon number in a pulse incident on the detector is greater than zero. Therefore p (n > 0) can be approximated by the count rate on the detector R det divided by the repetition rate of the laser, R laser . The average photon number in the pulse received on the detector should therefore be related to these quantities by Since this is the mean photon number received on the detector, no assumptions so far have been made about the absolute value of the laser power. Next, we assume the laser power is proportional to the mean photon number, and therefore the plot of count rate versus attenuation can be used to extract the mean photon number incident upon the detector at each set laser power. Figure Waveguide-coupled SNSPDs were fabricated using a layer structure that builds toward the full superconducting-optoelectronic neuromorphic hardware fabrication process A 2.1 nm W 0.64 Si 0.36 film was then co-sputtered as described in Ref. A partial silicon etch was performed to create the grating used for coupling light from an optical fiber to the waveguides. This patterning was performed with electron-beam lithography. The etch depth was designed to be 50 nm and measured at 65 nm -70 nm. A 100 nm SiO 2 hardmask was then deposited using plasmaenhanced chemical vapor (PECVD) and the waveguides were patterned and etched with electronbeam lithography using a positive tone resist with 2 μm clearance around the photonic devices. The remainder of the Si was then cleared out with photolithography. All silicon etches used SF 6 and C 4 F 8 chemistry. Following the waveguide etch, vias were etched through the waveguide oxide hard mask to make electrical contact to the Au layer using CHF 3 /O 2 chemistry. A wiring layer of 2 nm/440 nm/2 nm Ti/Au/Ti was then deposited and patterned with liftoff. A 1.8 μm cladding oxide (white) was then deposited using PECVD. Openings to the wirebond pads and the ground plane were then etched using the same CHF 3 /O 2 dry etch. Finally, a 50-μm-thick SU8 packaging layer (light blue) was spun on and patterned with photolithography The devices described in this paper required design of a number of components. These devices include waveguides, beamsplitters, beamtaps and SNSPD hairpins. Photonic devices were designed for operation at both 1.55 μm (standard telecommunications wavelength), and at 1.22 μm, where the proposed spiking neural networks The waveguide-integrated nanowire geometry is shown in Fig. Nanowire absorption was calculated for a 500 nm-wide nanowire with the geometry shown in Fig. For every aspect of the integrated devices described in Sec. II, test structures were also fabricated to characterize performance and losses. These test structures are described below and in Fig. The transmission of meandering waveguides of various lengths was used to measure the propagation loss of the waveguides (cutback method). The transmission as a function of waveguide length is shown in Fig. The loss per beamsplitter was measured using a similar technique to waveguide propagation loss. Transmission through sequences of various numbers of beamsplitters was measured. The data are shown in Fig. Room-temperature and cryogenic measurements were made on devices comprising both integrated photonic and superconducting nanowire components. For cryogenic measurements, detector samples were wire-bonded and fiber-packaged by the method described in For each cryogenic measurement, a corresponding room-temperature measurement was also performed on a similar device with output gratings in place of singlephoton detectors. For these room-temperature measurements, we used a technique that has been previously described for characterization of photonic structures in Ref. Parallel automated measurements of the roomtemperature properties of passive photonic devices were made using a procedure similar to that described in Ref. Figure The results of this measurement for the tree structure with varying nanowire length are compared to cryogenic measurements of counts per second in Fig. Figure . We extract tap fractions of 0.26 and 0.28 from the two HiDRAs designed to have taps with f = 0.1, with the mean value (solid black line) of 0.27. This deviation from the designed value is likely due to the the gaps coming out narrower than designed. This in combination with a slightly longer effective length due to the sine bends leading up to the beamtap could explain the dis-crepancy. A third device with intentionally disconnected waveguides was also measured (red stars). Disconnected HiDRAs were identical aside from a 180 • waveguide turn and taper that couples light into free space, away from the SNSPD. The disconnected device shows a relatively constant level at around 30 dB below the level of the first waveguide coupled detector on the connected HiDRA. This indicates that with our current fabrication process and packaging scheme there is a 30 dB noise floor. Previous measurements of LEDs coupled to waveguides indicated a 40 dB noise floor Figure The results of cryogenic and room temperature measurements of HiDRA designed to have 1% and 0.1% beamtaps are shown in Fig. The HiDRA devices designed to have 10% beamtaps suffered from a very high background, with the intensity flattening out at around 20 dB, as shown in Fig. Realization of the hardware necessary for several forms of advanced cryogenic computing involves integrating devices in a scalable fabrication process. One of the main elements required for quantum and neural computing hardware involving photonic communication is highyield, high-efficiency detectors. The work presented here introduces several tools leveraging integrated-photonic circuits for the characterization of waveguide-integrated SNSPDs, and makes several measurements important for synaptic operation. The integration of the detectors with photonic structures provides a powerful toolbox to rapidly assess large numbers of detectors with various design parameters in a context similar to that in which the detectors will be utilized. We have described the fabrication of waveguidecoupled SNSPDs that can be used as components in synapses in superconducting optoelectronic networks. We have demonstrated several integrated photonic structures that can be used to assess important properties of waveguide-integrated SNSPDs using a single fiber input, and we have compared room-temperature measurements with cryogenic measurements. We have demonstrated the effects of photon number and bias current on SNSPD pulse height, which are relevant to synaptic operation. Such measurement methods leveraging integrated-photonic circuits are likely to be indispensable in the maturation of advanced computing technologies using photons for communication. A primary focus of this work has been on realizing SNSPDs that have high yield, enabling many such detectors to be integrated in large computational systems. To enable this, we have chosen to work with wide wires fabricated with photolithography rather than narrower wires commonly fabricated with electron-beam lithography. In total throughout this paper, we have tested 49 waveguide-coupled SNSPDs, of which all 49 yielded with plateaus with P > 0.1. These wider wires consume more area, which is problematic in large, integrated sys-tems. However, we have found that elimination of even a single electron-beam lithography step greatly simplifies fabrication. This compromise will enable near-term demonstrations in academic and government lab cleanrooms, which is important for the scientific goal of building and testing superconducting optoelectronic neural networks. By simplifying the fabrication of the detectors to be compatible with our 365 nm photolithography equipment, we have been able to fabricate large numbers of detectors with saturated internal efficiencies in a single device, something that has proved challenging in other materials Since the inductance is set so that the L/R time constant is sufficiently long to avoid latching, in this work large inductance meanders were added in series with the detection hairpins to bring the total value of the inductances L above 1 μ H and achieve the correct L/R. This led to a large increase of the area of the devices. However, in a practical neuronal circuit, the inductance may be very different. In these measurements, SNSPD pulses were read out across a 50 Ω transmission line. In the context of synapses, the detectors will be in parallel with a much smaller resistance, and the inductance (and therefore the size) can be reduced while maintaining the same L/R time constant for resetting. If the synapses of Ref. The experiments presented here point to important challenges for the scaling of future technologies. The HiDRA device showed that in the present devices scattered light was significant, only 30 dB below the measured signal. This finding is particularly relevant for photonic quantum computing, in which relatively strong pump lasers are used to generate entangled-photon pairs on chip, as well as for superconducting optoelectronic networks used for spiking neural systems in which many light sources must be integrated on a chip with many singlephoton detectors. The scattered light from a neuron must be less than the waveguide coupled light pulses. Scat-tered light therefore puts an upper limit on the number of connections possible per neuron. This demonstrates that for most large-scale photonic systems incorporating on-chip detectors, some form of detector shielding will likely be necessary. Finally, the synaptic measurements made in this paper confirm the utility of SNSPDs for the synaptic application, where the physics of the superconducting to normal phase transition is used as the binary signaling mechanism for neuromorphic computing. Future work will build on this to demonstrate complex synaptic circuits integrated with transmitters for integrate-and-fire functionality.