An in-depth analysis of valley physics in 2D materials like transition metal dichalcogenides requires the measurement of many material properties as a function of Fermi level position within the electronic band structure. This is normally done by changing the charge carrier density of the 2D material via the gate electric field effect. Here, we show that a comparison of gate-dependent measurements, which were acquired under different measurement conditions can encounter significant problems due to the temporal evolution of the charging of trap states inside the dielectric layer or at its interfaces. The impact of, e.g., the gate sweep direction and the sweep rate on the overall gate dependence gets especially prominent in optical measurements due to photo-excitation of donor and acceptor states. Under such conditions the same nominal gate-voltage may lead to different gate-induced charge carrier densities and, hence, Fermi level positions. We demonstrate that a current flow from or even through the dielectric layer via leakage currents can significantly diminish the gate tunability in optical measurements of 2D materials. One important goal in the field of 2D materials is the investigation of valley physics in semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) Therefore, it is important to compare gate-dependent measurements recorded under different conditions. Here, we show that comparing gate-dependent data from different measurement techniques may easily lead to erroneous conclusions, as the same nominal gate-voltage may lead to different gate-induced charge carrier densities and, hence, Fermi level positions, depending on the measurement technique. This is due to donor and acceptor states created by impurities in the hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) layer which is used as a gate dielectric This mechanism gets significantly more important as soon as the device is illuminated, as photo excitation of energetically strongly bound defect states becomes feasible (see additional charge transfer into the TMD by the optical excitation in Figure An effective gate tuning of the 2D material, i.e. a change of its charge carrier density, can only be achieved as long as more charges per unit time are transferred via the voltage supply of the gate into the 2D material (see Figure with the thickness d of the dielectric layer, its dielectric constant r , the area A of the 2D material, and the gate voltage V gate . On the other hand, the rate at which charges get transferred into defect states was shown to depend on both the photon energy The PL measurements of Figures 1d and 1e demonstrate the impact of the sweep rate and also the sweep direction on the measured gate tunability of a monolayer WSe 2 flake. The monolayer TMD is sandwiched between two layers of hBN (thicknesses of around [ 20-30]nm), placed onto a Si ++ /SiO 2 ([ 285]nm) wafer, and contacted via graphitic leads (see schematic in Figure ing gate-dependent bias currents). Due to these transport measurements we conclude that in Figure The reversal of the sweep direction (compare white solid arrows in Figures A similar apparent lack of gate tunability can also be observed in Figure We now discuss in detail the situation in Figure The efficient gate tuning stops as soon as negative gate voltages are applied which results in a reversal of the gate electric field direction (see Figure In the following we discuss another current flow that can counteract an accumulation of charges in the 2D material. For this we investigate a device made from a monolayer MoSe 2 which is transferred onto a Si ++ /SiO 2 ([ 285]nm) wafer, contacted via graphitic leads, and gated via a graphitic top gate separated from the TMD by an hBN layer (see schematic in Figure The appearance of a sub-gap conductance even with a laser excitation energy smaller than the band gap energy is demonstrated in Figure TRANSFER CHARACTERISTIC. In the previous sections we discussed that the assignment of a gate voltage to a charge carrier density is quite volatile in the presence of photo-induced effects. Now, we focus on the fact that even without light illumination it can be misleading if data from different measurements are plotted as a function of the applied gate voltage and then compared to each other. This can be clearly seen in the onsets of the conduction band marked by dashed lines in Figures Figure Overall, the only difference between the black and red curve (or the blue and green curve) is the shift of the potential at each point of the TMD flake by [ 1]V referenced to ground potential and, therefore, also to the gate voltage. As a result, there is exactly a [ 1]V shift seen in the gate-dependent electrical transport between these pairs of curves. Instead, the shift between e.g. the blue and black curve is far less straightforward as the highly nonlinear I-V-characteristics of the Schottky contacts come into play as soon as the current direction is switched in the presence of two differently high Schottky barriers. We have demonstrated that for optical measurements of 2D materials the assignment of a gate voltage to a charge carrier density can be extremely volatile: Once the gate voltage is set to a fixed value, the time-dependent photo-induced ionization of acceptor or donor states starts to screen the gate-electric field. This in turn leads to a change in the gate-induced charge carrier densities over time. The situation gets even more complicated if a gate sweep is conducted during the measurements. Under such conditions, an effective gate tuning of the 2D material, i.e. a change of the charge carrier density, can only be achieved as long as more charges per unit time are transferred via the voltage supply of the gate into the 2D material than charges going either into defect states or contributing to a leakage current over the gate dielectric layer. Overall, we demonstrate that great care has to be taken if gate-dependent measurements acquired under different measurement conditions are compared to each other that is, on the other hand, neccessary for an indepth analysis of valley physics in 2D materials. This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-gramme under grant agreement No. 881603 (Graphene Flagship), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germanys Excellence Strategy -Cluster of Excellence Matter and Light for Quantum Computing (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1 -390534769 and by the Helmholtz Nanoelectronic Facility (HNF) at the Forschungszentrum Jülich 32 . K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan, Grant Number JPMXP0112101001, JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP20H00354 and the CREST(JPMJCR15F3), JST.