We evaluate the effect of mechanical exfoliation of van der Waals materials on crystallographic orientations of the resulting flakes. Flakes originating from a single crystal of graphite, whose orientation is confirmed using STM, are studied using facet orientations and electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD). While facets exhibit a wide distribution of angles after a single round of exfoliation (σ ∼ 5 • ), EBSD shows that the true crystallographic orientations are more narrowly distributed (σ ∼ 1.5 • ), and facets have an approximately 3 • error from the true orientation. Furthermore, we find that the majority of graphite fractures are along armchair lines, and that the cleavage process results in an increase of the zigzag lines portion. Our results place values on the rotation caused by a single round of the exfoliation process, and suggest that when a 1-2 degree precision is necessary, the orientation of a flake can be gauged by the orientation of the macroscopic single crystal from which it was exfoliated. The advent of the van der Waals transfer method The interface between graphene and other conductors is also of great interest. When placed at proximity to a topological insulator such as Bi 2 Se 3 , commensurate orientation conditions are expected to result in strong inter-band hybridization One possible and widely used approach for fabricating orientation-sensitive devices is identifying orientations according to apparent crystallographic facets of flakes When fabricating devices consisting of a single material, this problem can be circumvented. For example, exquisite orientation control can be reached in tBLG devices by tearing a single graphene flake and re-stacking the torn pieces In this work we collect statistical data of graphite and WSe 2 flake orientation using facet and fracture lines and electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD). Given that graphene tearing dynamics is to date an open question We measure the orientation of the flakes using optical microscopy and EBSD, and find that when graphite flakes are exfoliated from a single crystal bulk piece, their facets exhibit a rather wide distribution, with σ ≈ 5 • . Facets are, however, a poor proxy for exact crystallographic orientation, and indeed, by mapping such flakes using EBSD, we find that the true crystallographic orientations have a narrower distribution -with σ ≈ 1.5 • . The difference is made up by the mismatch between the true crystallographic orientation and the visible straight facets. We hence conclude that any two flakes exfoliated by a single step from a single-crystal bulk are likely to be relatively oriented within 1.5 • . In addition, we find that in exfoliated graphite, most of the facets are closer to the armchair orientation. This was seen both in HOPG and natural graphite. To find the exact crystallographic orientation prior to exfoliation, we carry out STM measurements of natural graphite and HOPG samples. These crystallographic orientations are later compared to the angular distributions of existing fractures on the surface of the unexfoliated sample, and to angular distributions of facet lines after exfoliation. The materials used in the experiments are from commercially available sources (HQ graphene and Mikro-Masch for natural graphite and HOPG respectively). The natural graphite is characterized by the vendor using XRD as single crystal, and the HOPG with a mosaic spread is 0.2 • . The surface areas of the natural graphite and of the HOPG samples were 25 mm 2 and 100 mm 2 , respectively. The bulk crystals were fixed with silver paste to SiO 2 wafers (we used NOVA silicon with 285 nm thermal oxide) and the top layer of each sample was connected directly to the STM drain. All STM measurements were performed at room temperature at ultra-high vacuum conditions (∽ 5 * 10 -11 mbar), using an Omicron LT-STM system. The scans were carried out at constant height mode, with V bias = 0.7 V and I set = 1 nA for the graphite, and V bias = 0.02 V and I set = 7 nA for the HOPG. Figure We now turn to measuring the distribution of fracture orientations. For the natural graphite we also compare the fracture statistics before and after exfoliation, while in the HOPG case there were almost no fractures on the surface before exfoliation. Measurements are performed using optic micrograph mapping of the entire surface of each sample. We use a BX-51 Olympus microscope with ×10 magnification at the ocular and ×100 objective, yielding ×1000 total magnification. Then, facet lines are identified and angles are measured as positive angles in the range [0 • , 180 • ] with respect to a set reference angle on the SiO 2 . Total angle measurement error is less than 0.3 • , resulting mainly from image resolution and focus limitations. Natural graphite before exfoliation: Fracture lengths were also measured and no correlation was found between fracture length and its distance from the mean orientation (Pearson correlation test: ρ = 0.0175, p = 0.75). In view of the different fracture energies between armchair and zigzag, we expect to find a higher occurrence of one type of fracture (though theoretically it is not clear which fracture type should be more frequent). Indeed, in the case of the natural graphite bulk (before exfoliation), 92% of the fractures are found close to the armchair orientation, and exhibit a narrow distribution (σ = 1.13 • ). The remaining 8% are scattered around the zigzag orientation. This finding is consistent with Natural graphite after exfoliation: Next, we turn to measure the effect of exfoliation on the distribution of facet angles. Exfoliation is carried out in the following procedure: Adhesive tape is applied to the sample to pull off a thin layer of graphite while keeping the tape connected to a fixed reference; then the tape with the graphite is pressed on to a silicon chip which is aligned with the reference to obtain the reference angle on the new chip, and finally, the tape is removed and the remaining adhered flakes on the chip are examined. We call this method "first-generation exfoliation" (where the first generation of exfoliated material from the bulk is applied directly to the target substrate). The same procedure is used also for HOPG and for WSe 2 (see Section II C). Most of the flakes created by this first-generation procedure are estimated to be between 10 and 100 nm thick. Fracture statistics of the exfoliated graphite are shown in Figure To test whether the facet orientation distribution is material specific, we have repeated the experiment with the TMD WSe 2 , which is used ubiquitously in photonic devices original crystal and the distribution center was taken as zero. Figure The observed orientation distribution width can either be associated with flake-specific rotations occurring during exfoliation, or with false facets -lines that are not aligned with the crystal. These may appear to be straight but actually consist of short crystallographic segments. In graphene, specifically, these consist of armchair (zigzag) and small zigzag (armchair) transitions Examples of false facets may be seen in atomic force microscopy scans (AFM) of the exfoliated graphite sample. In Figure This phenomenon, together with the STM results that show no crystallographic orientation variation at different locations on the sample, imply that false facets are the origin of the distribution width measured on the graphite sample before exfoliation (Figure This observation actually places a lower bound on the possible error when trying to estimate graphite orientations based on optically observed lines. That is -a straight line is not necessarily aligned with the crystallographic orientation. To differentiate between false-faceting, and actual crystallographic orientation errors in- We can then assess the distribution of false facets -this is done by comparing facet angles with EBSD-derived angles (panel (b)). This error is found to be approximately 3 • . The total observed facet angular distribution is thus associated with both the contribution of actual rotations and with the false-facet angular distribution. The distributions we find indicate that when a 1-2-degree precision is required, the orientation of a flake can be estimated by the orientation of the macroscopic single crystal from which it was exfoliated, and that this method has an advantage over the standard method which relies on facets. We have demonstrated that upon a single exfoliation step, flakes accumulate a typical 1.5 • rotation. Facets misrepresent the true crystallographic orientation with typical errors of ≈3 • . This poses a challenge for the fabrication of hybrid heterostructures, where existing angle control methods are not applicable (e.g., the methods used in strong local torques during exfoliation. Improving any of these processes could ultimately yield highly oriented flakes, which reflect the orientation of the original bulk. It is also interesting to test these effects under multiple exfoliation generations and to check correlation to flake thickness. In graphite, we found that the majority of facets are close to the armchair orientation. This distribution may change after additional generations of exfoliation, or after exfoliation in different chemical conditions. It is a challenge for future work to theoretically explain and predict the occurrence frequency of each facet type as a result of exfoliation.