In this article we present a study of the effects of hydrostatic pressure on the energy levels of a quantum dot with an electron. A quantum dot is modeled using an infinite potential well and a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator and solved through the formalism of second quantization. A scheme for the implementation of a quantum NOT gate controlled with hydrostatic pressure is proposed. Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), are low dimensional systems, in which charge carriers are confined to three dimensions Previous work has been done on the effects of hydrostatic pressure on the energy behavior of quantum dots with multiple electrons, with the use of different geometries The effect of hydrostatic pressure the binding energy of donor impurities in QW structures is calculated by Elabsy In this article, we studied the effects of magnetic fields and hydrostatic pressure in the energy of a quantum dot with a single electron. We applied an algebraic method to find an analytical solution to the energy of the system. In Section 2 we present the Hamiltonian of the system; in Section 3 we develop the method and the solution of the problem. Section 4 shows that the energy of the system as a function of the hydrostatic pressure and a scheme for the implementation of a quantum NOT gate. Finally, we discuss the implications of this work in Section 5. The three-dimensional Hamiltonian for a paraboloid quantum dot of GaAn, with the effective mass approximation under the effects of hydrostatic pressure (P ) in a uniform magnetic field B = B k, can be written in a separable form as follows: where A(r) = B 2 (-ŷ, x, 0) is a vector potential, p = px + px + pz represents the total momentun of the system, m * (P ) is the effective mass of the electron in the GaAs. and Ŝ = 2 σ. Using [x, py ] = [ŷ, px ] = 0, with the cyclotron frequency as ω c = qeB m * (P ) c , the projection of the angular momentum in the z-axis is Lz = x py -ŷ px and + py in a separable form where and Ĥ⊥ is the Hamiltonian of a bi-dimensional harmonic oscillator and Ĥ|| is Hamiltonian of a infinite square well potential. If β = μΩ/ , and the operators and the Hamiltonian Ĥ⊥ is: If Â+ Â = NA and B+ B = NB with eigenvalues n A and n B where n = n A + n B and m = n A -n B , the energy of the system in xy is The potential u(z , where the energy is Using μs = -gsμ B S , μ B = qe 2m * (P ) and Ŝ = 2 σ, the Hamiltonian 7 is If (g s = 2), the energy of the system is The total energy of the system is The application of hydrostatic pressure modifies the dot size and effective mass. The variation of the dot with pressure is given by where P is in kbar and R 0 is the radius value of the quantum dot when the hydrostatic pressure is zero. The effective mass in the quantum dot is: where R 0 and m * 0 are the zero-pressure dot radius and initial effective mass respectively. To include the effect of the pressure (P ) on the quantum dots energy states and the magnetization, we replaced the effective mass and dot radius as defined by equations 14 and 15 in the quantum dot energy equations 13. 4 4 where . The variable γ is a function of the magnetic field value in the z direction. In the Figure increases. This is the result of increasing the magnetic field B for a pressure P = 0. The results are in agreement with the results of Caicedo-Ortiz et al. Energy behavior of a quantum dot of constant radius ρ, under the action of an external magnetic field B parallel to the z axis, in function of ω c /ω 0 . As the magnetic field changes over the quantum dot, the energy levels intersect. As a result of the change in the orientation of the magnetic moments (parallel or antiparallel), the change of sign of m produces a splitting of the energy levels, which translates to an increase or decrease of energy. This particular phenomenon was described analytically by Fock Using the effective mass approximation and the algebraic formalism of creation and destruction operators, we determined the energy spectrum for a quantum dot of GaAs with an electron, under the effects of a constant external magnetic field B and hydrostatic pressure. The hydrostatic pressure modifies the single-electron energy spectrum. In general, the application of hydrostatic pressure in the quantum dot increases the energy. This result offers a new possibility to implement and complete a 1-qubit quantum gate controlled with variations of hydrostatic pressure. The confinement in a narrow dot system operating under hydrostatic pressure and a constant magnetic field may be used to tune the output of an optoelectronic device while modifying the physical size of quantum dots. Specifically, a scheme for the implementation of a negation gate was proposed, using variations in the hydrostatic pressure as a control system over the quantum dot.