We amalgamate two fundamental designs from distinct areas of wave control in physics, and place them in the setting of elasticity. Graded elastic metasurfaces, so-called metawedges, are combined with the now classical Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model from the field of topological insulators. The resulting structures form one-dimensional graded-SSH-metawedges that support multiple, simultaneous, topologically protected edge states. These robust, enhanced localised modes are leveraged for applications in elastic energy harvesting using the piezoelectric effect. The designs we develop are first motivated by applying the SSH model to mass-loaded Kirchhoff-Love thin elastic plates. We then extend these ideas to using graded resonant rods, and create SSH models, coupled to elastic beams and full elastic half-spaces. Topological insulators are exotic materials in which protected edge or interfacial surface states exist between bulk band gaps, owing their existence to broken symmetries within a periodic system. Despite their origins in quantum mechanical systems The nature of the symmetry breaking giving rise to a protected edge state defines two classes of topological insulators. Inspired by the original quantum mechanical systems exhibiting the quantum Hall effect (QHE), where time reversal symmetry (TRS) is broken through applied external fields Underpinning the topological nature of the Bloch bands defined by each material are associated invariants which characterise the geometric phase, that is the phase change associated with a continuous, adiabatic deformation of the system; most notably the Berry phase Numerous translations of 2D topological insulators to wave physics have been realised, often based around honeycomb structures Despite their relative simplicity, 1D topological insulators serve not only as pedagogical examples, but posses important features for applications ranging from lasing Throughout this article we will examine the SSH model, due to its successful predictions and ease of its translation from topological wave physics to mechanical systems Shown in Figure To elucidate the design paradigm and conditions for existence of an edge mode, we firstly consider the simplified elastic model of a point mass loaded thin Kirchhoff-Love elastic plate. The expected existence of edge states in a one dimensional SSH chain is confirmed through calculation of the Zak phase via an efficient numerical scheme The equations governing flexural wave propagation in thin Kirchhoff-Love (KL) elastic plates For a point mass loaded KL plate, loaded with J masses of value M (j) at positions x (j) , the restoring forces at the mass position are proportional to the displacement of the mass at that point, resulting in the out-of-plane flexural wave displacement, w(x), being governed by the biharmonic wave equation, We adopt a non-dimensionalised frequency such that Ω 2 = ρhω 2 /D, where ρ is the mass density of the plate and h is the plate thickness, with ω being the dimensional angular frequency. D is the flexural rigidity, which encodes the Young's modulus, E, and Poisson's ratio, ν, of the plate through Considering an infinite periodic line array of point masses, capable of supporting propagating Rayleigh-Bloch modes which exponentially decay perpendicularly to the array, allows the governing equation to be formulated as a generalised eigenvalue problem; we do so by partitioning the array and plate into periodic infinite strips and by formulating the wavefield, w(x) as a combination of a Fourier series and a decaying basis, as in where, for integer n, G = 2nπ/a is a reciprocal lattice vector, κ is the Bloch wavenumber and ψ m (y) is an exponentially decaying orthonormal Hermite function. The advantages of this approach allows a spectral Galerkin method to accurately and rapidly characterise the dispersion relation, an example of which is shown in Fig. To build the SSH model, in the setting of a 1D array of point loaded masses on a KL elastic plate, we first consider an infinite, periodic 1D array consisting of infinite unit strips of width a, with two masses of mass M placed symmetrically about the strips origin a distance ∆ 1 apart; this system has the dispersion relation highlighted in Fig. We then form an SSH array by creating a 1D chain composed of repeated cells of S1 and S1 which meet at an interface (Fig. The Zak phase, φ Zak n , for the n th band is defined in terms of the Berry connection A(κ) such that with where BZ denotes the Brillouin Zone; there are several efficient methods capable of calculating such invariants In doing so the required quantities are readily available from the obtained eigensolutions. We evaluate (3) over the discretised BZ in κ-space such that resulting in The periodic gauge condition is satisfied through |u n,κ J+1 = e -iG•r |u n,κ 1 . Due to the intrinsic connection with Wannier charge centers As expected, we find distinct Zak phases as highlighted for the lowest band in S1 and S1 in Fig. To visualise the edge mode we make use of the attractive Green's function approach From this, fast Fourier transform (FFT) techniques can be utilised to obtain the dispersion relation in κ-space, shown in Fig. We have successfully shown that the SSH model can be implemented in the setting of point mass loaded KL elastic plates. The existence of edge modes is confirmed through a variety of numerical techniques. The purpose of exploring such features in this system is to motivate energy harvesting applications in elastic settings, particularly because the localised amplitudes of edge modes are so much greater than those for conventional defect modes. A key feature of such harvesting structures is the ability to recycle energy from a distance; until now we have only focused on source positions at the interface between topologically distinct media. In order to assess the feasibility of harvesting devices, we explore the excitation of this mode from a distance. To do this, we consider a region, S0, consisting of the same geometric structure as S1, but with a lower mass value (M = 2.3) such that a propagating mode exists at the frequency of the edge mode in the SSH model. Then, at a given spatial position, we abruptly switch the mass value to be consistent with S1 (M = 5) -in this region an exponentially decaying mode is excited. The SSH interface is then encountered, by constructing a region of S1 close to the interface between S0 and S1. A schematic of this is shown, along with the field and flux computations in Fig. The graded resonant metawedge Topological systems therefore seem attractive candidates for energy extraction, due to their resilience to back-scatter and strong confinement; the longer energy is confined to a spatial position, the more energy that can be harvested Due to the low dimensionality of the 1D-SSH system, the SSH model provides an optimal arrangement for elastic energy harvesting as there is no propagating component of the edge mode. However, the caveat to this has already been alluded to -this mode only exists for a very narrow range of frequencies. We therefore design a hybrid graded-SSH-metawedge which, based on a gentle adiabatic grading of alternating SSH structures, significantly increases the bandwidth of operation, serving as the perfect candidate for topological rainbow trapping. Due to the strong interaction between the symmetry broken structure and the edge mode, these devices offer an additional benefit of being compact compared to classical metawedges. Figure Topological systems have been widely proposed as efficient solutions for elastic energy transport, guiding and localization Here we propose a multimodal scheme, i.e. a broadband device, which is simultaneously compact due to the reduced number of required cells. The device is similar to that in To quantify the advantages of such designs for energy harvesting, we compare its performance with a conventional rainbow reflection device We firstly verify the existence of an edge mode, by considering two arrays, one only composed of equal rods with constant spacing, i.e. consisting only of structures S1 (Fig. We consider graded line arrays of resonators, to simultaneously excite the array from outside and to enlarge the bandwidth, based around the designs shown in Figures Before finalising this design in 3D elastic half-spaces, we address the question of why altering the height of the resonators was chosen as the grading parameter other than, say, the initial spacing ∆ 1 in S1. Figure Galvanised by the amplifications achieved by the 1D topological edge states in elastic beams, we now turn our focus to full 3D (isotropic) elastic half-spaces, patterned with arrays of resonant rods on the surface. This structuration creates a so-called metawedge and these have been used to exhibit extraordinary control of surface Rayleigh waves in terms of rainbow devices and tailored surface to body wave converters Elastic half-spaces support a wider variety of waves than the motivational KL plates or elastic beams. Surface Rayleigh waves propagate along the free surface, exponentially decaying with depth into the bulk, travelling at wavespeed c r , independently of any periodic structuring. Further to this, two polarisations of body waves, namely compressional (P) and vertical/horizontal shear (SV and SH) waves exist, both travelling at differing wavespeeds c p and c s respectively such that c p > c s > c r We obtain these results from time domain simulations of an array consisting of 10 cells of S1 and 10 cells of S1 atop an aluminium halfspace, as shown in Fig. The system is initially excited with a broadband sweep source ranging from 10 to 50 kHz, polarised in the vertical direction (z). By double Fourier transforming the output signal in both space and time we obtain the dispersion curves as the Fourier spectrum in Fig. After a thorough analysis of the dispersion relations we select the input frequencies for the scattering simulations in SPECFEM3D. Here we excite the array at the SSH interface with a sinusoidal source corresponding to propagating, scattering and edge mode frequencies, respectively at 35 kHz, 37 kHz and 37.5 kHz, shown in Fig. To confirm the characteristic chiral flux of the surface edge modes, we calculate the time-averaged flux, only on the surface. To do this, we use a simplified asymptotic approximation for the surface Rayleigh wave, treating the governing equation as a simple scalar wave equation, with the wavespeed corresponding to that of the Rayleigh wave, c r . This model has been extensively developed where φ is the out of plane displacement of the surface and * denotes complex conjugation. As such this approximation treats the Rayleigh wave as a scalar surface wave, and allows the nature of the edge modes to be seen, as highlighted in Figs. As for the conventional graded metawedge devices, the design of graded-SSH-metawedge structures for energy harvesting depends on the desired operational frequencies. For conventional metawedges, the height and grading profile is informed by the periodicity and resonances of the individual rods; for efficient harvesting these structures operate by slowing propagating waves to encounter zero group velocity modes at some designed spatial position. Such modes are always present at the band edge by virtue of the Bragg condition. Alternatively, symmetry broken structures can obtain zero group velocity modes within the first BZ To further emphasise the utility of these devices, and to better emulate a true metawedge, we extend the device to include several rows of the graded-SSH geometry, representing those considered in We have successfully implemented the SSH model in a variety of elastic wave regimes, extending the uses of one-dimensional topological modes. The coalescence between the, seemingly distinct, SSH topological insulator and the graded metawedge provides a new avenue for topological rainbow devices; these provide significant broadening of the bandwidth over which these one dimensional edge modes can be utilised. Specifically we have shown elastic energy harvesting applications and compared the graded-SSH-metawedge to conventional metawedges, showing a pronounced increase in extracted energy, of approximately 40%, due to the strong localisation of these modes. Further applications, be it in thin plates, elastic beams or 3D elastic halfspaces, include vibration isolation. These small scale models can be readily scaled up to groundborne and mechanical vibration control 