Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) and wave propagation in engineering structures can cause severe damage to piping systems or fluid machines, inducing serious accidents. In these phenomena, the mechanism of structural damage depends on the wave propagation across the fluid-solid interface. Previous studies reported that disagreements between the induced pressure value on the solid-fluid movable interface and the value predicted by the classical one-dimensional theory arose from the effects of two-dimensional wave propagation. To address this problem, in this study, a two-dimensional axisymmetric simulation of wave propagation across the solidfluid interface with FSI was conducted. The simulation was performed using ANSYS Autodyn with a Lagrangian solver for solids and Eulerian solver for water. The results showed that radial wave propagation caused by the dynamic effect of the tube and water's inertia affected the peak pressure on the solid-fluid interface. The peak pressure was attenuated near the tube wall because of the inertial effect of the tube and fluid expansion. By calculating the mean pressure and axial stress to compare the simulated peak pressure with that Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. Numerical analysis of water confined in tube under axial impact • Radial wave propagation shown to affect pressure distribution in tube • Peak pressure exceeds value predicted by acoustic theory in specific region of tube Fluid-structure interactions (FSIs) can severely damage piping systems or fluid machines, inducing serious accidents, especially when they occur with wave propagation. Many studies have investigated FSI with wave propagation, including research on water hammers In the early stage, wave propagation crossing the fluid-solid interface was investigated by Taylor theoretically modeled the response of a rigid plate to exponentially decaying blast loading from a fluid in one dimensional Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. Some research has investigated wave propagation across fluid-solid interfaces using shock tubes. Many years after In our previous studies, we have investigated wave propagation across a solid-fluid interface with FSI using a water-filled circular tube. These revealed that the classical one-dimensional theory of acoustic impedance could not predict the pressure induced on the solid-fluid interface with FSI Many numerical methods have been developed and widely used to analyze FSI problems because they are of practical interest to many researchers for industrial applications. The hydrocode is one such simulation method Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. This method is considered to arise from the HEMP code In this study, we conducted numerical simulations using ANSYS Autodyn v.15.0. We chose this method because our target phenomenon of wave propagation across the interface of FSI is completed in a very short time. We conducted the numerical simulation with a two-dimensional axisymmetric model of wave propagation across the solid-fluid interface with FSI. The aim of this study is twofold. First, we intend to locate the transition region of a pressure wave in which the pressure cannot be predicted by classical one-dimensional theory, and second, we aim to propose an estimation method for the pressure in this transition region. We conducted a numerical study with ANSYS Autodyn v.15.0 and a 2D axially symmetric model of the problem. The problem geometry is presented in Fig. the cylindrical solid buffer and the water-filled circular tube. A steel projectile impact is used to generate a stress wave in the buffer. The generated stress wave propagates through the buffer and across the interface of the buffer and water in the tube. Thus, the stress wave in the solid is propagated to the water in the tube as a pressure wave. We used a Lagrangian solver for the solids and a Eulerian solver for water with the simulation model. In the experiment, the water was sealed with the buffer using an O-ring. In the simulation model, because of the complexity of modeling the O-ring seal, such as modeling the pre-stressed rubber and determination of the friction condition, water is stopped to spout out with the projection on the buffer in the gap between the buffer and tube wall. We used the projection of the buffer materials to avoid the occurrence of wave reflection between the buffer and the projection part. Over the simulation steps, the projection of the buffer and tube wall were not in contact. Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. Table Slip boundaries were applied to all interfaces between parts with no friction. The fixed condition was applied to the tube end, setting the velocity equal to 0 in the z-direction. The bottom of the water was closed with the end of the water flow field. Therefore, neither water nor pressure is transmitted through the bottom of the tube. Waves reaching the bottom were fully reflected. The material properties are given in Table Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. where C0 is the bulk speed of sound, s = dUs/dUp. The equation of state is as follows; ( ) where ρ0 is the density in the static state. Originally, polycarbonate is a viscoelastic material, but the viscoelastic features should have little effect in the short time as in the present simulation Figure The axial strain histories of the buffer both in the experiments and the simulation are presented in Fig. The black lines in Figs. 3 to 6 are from the experimental results in the previous study These strain histories correspond to the incident stress wave profiles generated due to the collision of the Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. projectile and the buffer. In the case with the aluminum buffer and the polycarbonate buffer, a difference of 50% and 35% was generated in the first peak value of the incident stress wave between the simulation and the experiment. Experiments confirmed repeated contact and separation when the projectile and buffer collided, and it seemed that the energy was lost when it was transferred from the projectile to the buffer during the collision. There is a limit to reproducing such complicated contact conditions on the simulation, then as a result, amplitudes of the incident stress waves generated by the collision have not been completely reproduced in this simulation. However, from Fig. Figure In Fig. Figure Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. There may be some other factors that caused the difference between the experiment and the simulation, such as friction due to the O-rings between the buffer and the tube wall, trapped air below the buffer, and threedimensional effects in the experiments. However, it appeared that the reproducibility of the incident waves resulting from an imperfect collision of the projectile and buffer contributing by about 80% of the difference between the simulation and the experiments in the amplitude of the strain histories in Fig. In Fig. Since the sound speed of aluminum is fast, even if the pressure in the water rises due to a stress wave transmitted into the water, the tensile wave generated by the free-end reflection at the end face of the buffer or projectile immediately returns and is transmitted into the water. As a result, the tube wall vibrates then cannot be fully pushed out by the pressure in water. On the other hand, because the sound speed of polycarbonate is slower, there is sufficient time for transmitted pressure waves to push and expand the tube wall without being affected by reflected tensile waves. Figure Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. As for the first peak value, the simulated results were larger than the experimental results. With the aluminum buffer and the polycarbonate buffer, the experimental results were 17% and 21% smaller for the pressure history at the center of the tube, respectively. These differences would be mainly attributed to the difference of the incident stress wave between the experiment and the simulation, as mentioned above. We investigated the effect of radial wave propagation with the obtained simulation result. Figure With the aluminum buffer, the pressure reached the second peak due to the transmission of the reflected stress wave from the buffer. Therefore, the mechanisms for reaching the second pressure peak at the center of the tube may different from both buffer materials. To investigate the radial pressure distribution on the solid-fluid interface quantitatively, the pressure same data with "simulation" lines in Fig. where ε φ,out = -(1 -ν)p out /E is the hoop strain of the external tube wall when p = p out . Equation ( Here, we compared the simulation results with the one-dimensional acoustic theory to clarify the effect of radial wave propagation. According to the acoustic theory, the amplitude of transmitted stress crossing the interface of the different solid media can be estimated with the following equation where σT is the transmitted stress, σI is the incident stress, Z is the acoustic impedance of the medium (Z = ρc where ρ is density and c is sound speed), and A is the cross-sectional area. The index numbers distinguish the two solid media. As it stands, the acoustic theory for wave transmission and reflection is derived only for solidsolid or fluid-fluid discontinuous interfaces. Here, we applied Eq. ( Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. To obtain the acoustic impedance of water, we used the Korteweg speed of sound in the calculation as the sound speed in the water. The Korteweg speed is the wave speed when the wave propagates axially in an elastic tube interacting with the tube wall where cw is the sound speed of the unconfined water, R0 is a representative value of the tube radius, K is the bulk modulus of the fluid, Etube is the elastic modulus of the tube, and e is tube thickness. For the buffer, the longitudinal wave speed cB was calculated assuming isotropy (Eqs. ( Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. We plotted the first peak pressure of water at every 5 mm in the r-axis in Fig. Fig. { A 1 = π(5/2) 2 A i=2~5 = π{(r i + 5/2) 2 -(r i -5/2) 2 } A 6 = π{r 6 2 -(r 6 -5/2) 2 } (for the buffer) A 6 = π{(r 6 + 1) 2 -(r 6 -5/2) 2 } (for water) Figure Tube wall Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. where V1 is the impact velocity. In this study, we used V 1 = √2gh, and applied the projectile to medium 1 (index number 1) in Eq. ( In Fig. The length of the transition region should be differed by the intensity of the generated pressure distribution, the material properties of the solid and fluid, and the shape parameters such as the thickness of the tube wall. Specifically, it is considered to depend on each parameter contained in Eqs. ( The disagreement of the simulation result with theory in the transition region indicates the transition of the tube expansion. In the transition region, the transmitted pressure wave begins interacting with the tube wall to expand it. Therefore, the deformation state of the tube wall is in transition in the region. We plot the transmitted peak pressures according to the acoustic theory with the wave speed of unconfined water (c w = 1,491 m/s) in Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. In addition, the mean pressure is converted to the circumferential stress generated in the pipe, then compared with the simulation results, experimental results, and acoustic theory (Fig. 12 (a)). However, it is understood that the circumferential stress generated in the tube is slightly lower than the theoretically predicted value in both the experimental result and the simulation result. This is because the pressure exerted on the pipe is reduced by the pressure distribution, as shown in Fig. fluid, it can be said that the one-dimensional acoustic theory using the Korteweg velocity can predict the circumferential stress generated in the tube enclosing the fluid with sufficient accuracy, regardless of the transitional region of the pressure. In this study, we focused on a case in which a stress wave is transmitted from the solid to fluid in an elastic tube. The transition region is considered to appear due to the interaction between the elastic tube wall and fluid. Therefore, the concept of transition region proposed in this study would not be applicable to the case of wave transmission from fluid to solid. It would not be applicable also to the case of wave reflection on the interface. Further study is needed about the wave transition across the solid-fluid/fluid-solid interface. depending on the buffer material, varying for aluminum and polycarbonate. With the aluminum buffer, the pressure on the interface peaked when the stress wave propagating axially in the buffer reached the interface. On the other hand, with the polycarbonate buffer, the interfacial pressure oscillated, and its peaks were caused Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. by radial pressure wave propagation. It was revealed that the transmitted peak pressure was strongly affected by the dynamic effects of the tube and water's inertia. The peak pressure was attenuated near the tube wall because of the inertia effect of the tube and fluid expansion. The averaged pressure distribution after the transmission gradually converged to that predicted by one-dimensional acoustic theory as the pressure wave propagated away from the interface. By calculating the mean pressure to compare the simulated peak pressure with that predicted by one-dimensional acoustic theory, it was indicated that a transition region for the transmitted pressure existed immediately after the solid-fluid interface. In this region, the transmitted peak pressure exceeded the value predicted by one-dimensional acoustic theory for the aluminum buffer. The length of the transition region zT was expressed as a function of the inner diameter of the tube D, extending to the point zT/D = 0.58 and 0.19 for the aluminum and polycarbonate buffers, respectively in the axial direction from the interface. In this region, the transmitted peak pressure should be estimated with the one-dimensional acoustic theory using the normal wave speed in the unconfined fluid from a safety engineering perspective. However, the circumferential stress generated in the tube enclosing the fluid can be predicted with sufficient accuracy using the same theory and the Korteweg speed. Further study is needed with more various materials and scale of the diameter of the buffer, tube, and fluid, also with an unmovable solid buffer for application of this study to the engineering of structures intended for transporting or storing moving fluids, such as piping and reactors. Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. Please cite this article as: Kojima T, Inaba K, Numerical analysis of wave propagation across Solid-Fluid interface with Fluid-Structure interaction in circular tube, International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, Vol. 183 (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpvp.2020.104099. *with the Korteweg speed