Neutron diffraction and magnetic susceptibility studies show that orthorhombic single-crystals of topological semimetals Sr(Mn0.9Cu0.1)Sb2 and Sr(Mn0.9Zn0.1)Sb2 undergo three dimensional Ctype antiferromagnetic (AFM) ordering of the Mn 2+ moments at TN = 200 ± 10 and 210 ± 12 K, respectively, significantly lower than that of the parent SrMnSb2 with TN = 297 ± 3 K. Magnetization versus applied magnetic field (perpendicular to MnSb planes) below TN exhibits slightly modified de Haas van Alphen oscillations for the Zn-doped crystal as compared to that of the parent compound. By contrast, the Cu-doped system does not show de Haas van Alphen magnetic oscillations, suggesting that either Cu substitution for Mn changes the electronic structure of the parent compound substantially, or that the Cu sites are strong scatterers of carriers that significantly shorten their mean free path thus diminishing the oscillations. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations including spin-orbit coupling predict the C-type AFM state for the parent, Cu-, and Zn-doped systems and identify the a-axis (i.e., perpendicular to the Mn layer) as the easy magnetization direction in the parent and 12.5% of Cu or Zn substitutions. In contrast, 25% of Cu content changes the easy magnetization to the b-axis (i.e., within the Mn layer). We find that the incorporation of Cu and Zn in SrMnSb2 tunes electronic bands near the Fermi level resulting in different band topology and semi-metallicity. The parent and Zn-doped systems have coexistence of electron and hole pockets with opened Dirac cone around the Y-point whereas the Cu-doped system has dominant hole pockets around the Fermi level with a distorted Dirac cone. The tunable electronic structure may point out possibilities of rationalizing the experimentally observed de Haas van Alphen magnetic oscillations. SrMnSb 2 belongs to a class of bulk topological semimetals (AMnP n 2 ; A = Sr, Ba, Ca; P n = Sb and Bi) where Sr-Sb layers are predicted to host Dirac fermions Based on the interest to understand the role of defects, * Electronic address: vaknin@ameslab.gov and the capability of carrier doping to tune topological semimetals, we recently reported neutron diffraction and magnetic susceptibility studies of hole-doped single crystal (Sr 0.97 K 0.03 )MnSb 2 confirming the three-dimensional (3D) C-type type AFM ordering of the Mn 2+ moments at a slightly higher Néel temperature (T N ) than that of the parent SrMnSb 2 . These compounds form checkerboardlike AFM layers that are stacked ferro-magneticallly, as shown in Fig. Plate-like single crystals of Sr(Mn 0.9 Cu 0.1 )Sb 2 and Sr(Mn 0.9 Zn 0.1 )Sb 2 were grown by a self-flux method. Cu and Zn substituted samples were prepared from a starting molar ratio of Sr:Mn:Cu(Zn):Sb=1:0.9:0.1:4. The strontium dendritic pieces, manganese powder, copper powder, zinc pellets, and antimony chunks were weighed and loaded into alumina crucible in a glovebox. The alumina crucible was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube with backfilling 300 mbar Ar gas. The quartz ampoule was heated up to 1073 K. After a dwell of 6 hours, it was cooled down to 773 K at a cooling rate of 3 K/h. Then the furnace was switched off. The centimeter-sized platelike single crystals were mechanically separated from the matrix. More details can be found in Ref. Sr(Mn Zn )Sb 0.9 0.1 2 Corrected magnetization versus the inverse applied magnetic field (1/H) perpendicular to MnSb planes, ∆M (1/H), of Sr(Mn0.9Zn0.1)Sb2 at various temperatures, as indicated, showing dHvA oscillations (data were corrected for an FM contribution as discussed in Refs. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements of the (h00) reflections from the surfaces of the crystals were performed on a Bruker D8 Advanced Powder Diffractometer by using Cu Kα radiation. These measurements indicate that the a-axis (corresponding to the crystallographic direction normal to the layers in the P nma structure) lies parallel to the surface normal of the plate-like crystals. We note that there are two inequivalent Sb atoms in the unit cell (labelled as Sb1 and Sb2 in Fig. Magnetization measurements were performed by using a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) equipped with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). For the temperature-dependent magne-tization measurements, the samples were cooled down to the desired temperature with or without an applied magnetic field, termed as FC and ZFC, respectively. The temperature-dependent magnetization data were then collected upon warming at 2 K/min and at a fixed field. The magnetic field H was applied either perpendicular to the MnSb layers (i.e., perpendicular to the plate; H ⊥ ) or the bc MnSb planes (H || ). To determine the magnetic structures, single-crystal neutron diffraction experiments were carried out on the triple-axis spectrometer (TRIAX) located at the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR). The TRIAX measurements operate at an incident energy of E i = 14.7 meV using a pyrolytic graphite (PG) monochromator system and is equipped with a PG analyzer stage. PG filters were placed before and after the second monochromator to reduce higher order contamination in the incident beam achieving a ratio I λ 2 : I λ ≈ 10 -4 . The beam divergence was defined by collimators of 60 -60 -40 -80 between the reactor source to a monochromator, monochromator to sample, sample to analyzer, and analyzer to detector, respectfully. Crystals were anchored to the cold tip of the Advanced Research Systems closed- cycle helium refrigerator and cooled to a base temperature of 6.7 K samples oriented in their (0kl) scattering plane. To better understand and rationalize the experimental results of the SrMnSb 2 based materials at the atomic level, we have performed ab-initio density functional theory calculations based on the structure shown in Fig. Figure Magnetization versus applied field data for H ⊥ (M ⊥ (H)) (Fig. Figure where C is a scale factor and K = 2π H start = 6 and H end = 9 T. This is the same method used in Ref. At base temperature (T ∼ 10 K), the neutron diffraction data for both the Sr(Mn 0.9 Zn 0.1 )Sb 2 and Sr(Mn 0.9 Cu 0.1 )Sb 2 crystals show an intense (010) peak that is not allowed by the chemical symmetry of these crystals, indicating magnetic origin. We also observe significant increase in the intensity of various low index nuclear (210), (410), and (610) Bragg peaks as the temperature is lowered (see Fig. Figure pound is consistent with site dilution at the level of ≈ 10%. We employ DFT calculations to obtain a better understanding of the evolution of the magnetic properties of Cu and Zn doped SrMnSb 2 . First, we perform a detailed study of the parent-SrMnSb 2 to establish the band structure and magnetic structure. Various spin configurations of SrMnSb 2 -such as FM; C-, A-, and G-type AFM -are compared by calculating their ground state energies. C-type AFM configuration is energetically stable, but the energy difference between G-type and C-type AFM is very small ∼ 1.29 meV/Mn, consistent with quasi 2D magnetism, as discussed previously We employ similar calculations to the 12.5% Cu-and Zn-doped systems with 2 × 1 × 1-supercell, as shown in Fig. The calculated average Mn-moment in the parent, 12.5% Cu-doped, and 12.5% Zn-doped systems is 3.75, 3.84, and 3.83 μ B per Mn atom, respectively, agreeing with the presented experimental values (see Table Figure Atom projected DOS (Fig. Figure We have grown single crystals of Sr(Mn 0.9 Cu 0.1 )Sb 2 and Sr(Mn 0.9 Zn 0.1 )Sb 2 , and determined their properties using magnetic susceptibility, magnetization versus the applied magnetic field, and neutron diffraction measurements. We find that the Mn 2+ moments in both systems undergo C-type antiferromagnetic ordering at T N = 200 ± 10 and 210 ± 12 K, respectively -which is significantly reduced compared to their parent SrMnSb 2 with T N = 297 ± 3 K. The reduction of T N with respect to the parent compound is likely caused by dilution effects. Analyzing the neutron diffraction patterns, we find that the magnetic moment per Mn 2+ is 3.9(3) and 4.0(3) μ B for the Cu-and Zn-doped systems and slightly larger than that of the parent SrMnSb 2 . Magnetization versus applied magnetic field (perpendicular to the MnSb planes) measurements at low temperatures (below ∼ 30 K) show oscillations due to the dHvA effect for the Zndoped system, with features that are slightly modified compared to those of the parent compound. In contrast, the Cu-doped system does not show the dHvA effect. We also provide DFT calculations including spin-orbit coupling which confirm that Zn and Cu substitute for Mn. DFT predicts C-type AFM order with a magnetic moment that agrees with experiments in the parent, and doped Cu and Zn systems. The calculations also identify the easy a-axis of the magnetic moment in the parent and 12.5% of Cu or Zn compositions. Interestingly, for the 25% Cu content, the calculations predict an easy b-axis C-type antiferromagnet, which has not yet been observed experimentally. Considering that the single-ion anisotropy is expected to be very weak for an Mn 2+ (d 5 configuration) with L 0, it is likely that the spin direction can be readily flopped by either magnetic field or internal perturbation (i.e., crystal field effects), in this case, apparently exerted by the Cu substitution. The DFT calculations show that the incorporation of Cu and Zn in SrMnSb 2 causes distortions of the electronic bands at the Fermi level. The calculations yield two distinct behaviors of the Cu and the Zn doped systems that qualitatively rationalize the absence and observation of the dHvA effect, respectively. First, the calculated DOS show that the Cu states are more hybridized with Sb1's p-states and are more abundant near the Fermi level, possibly increasing the carrier scattering, which results in a decrease in the mean free path of the carriers that will suppress the dHvA oscillations. Second, the band structure calculations for the Zn-doped system show that the Y-point, hosting a gapped Dirac cone and being responsible for the dHvA oscillations, is only slightly modified compared to the parent SrMnSb 2 . By contrast, the calculations for the Cu-doped system show severe disruption near the Y-point, which may inhibit the occurrence of the dHvA effect. portion of this research used resources at the High Flux Isotope Reactor, a DOE Office of Science User Facility operated by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The theoretical capabilities, specific to electronic (band) structure, magnetic order, and magnetic anisotropy predictions, employed in this work have been developed in Critical Materials Institute, an Energy In-novation Hub led by Ames Laboratory and funded by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Advanced Manufacturing Office. R. C. and D. P. would like to acknowledge Ed Moxley for maintaining computational facilities, including the RA-MAN cluster and computational software. * The values are compiled from Refs.