We study a one-dimensional model of a dislocation pileup driven by an external stress and interacting with random quenched disorder, focusing on predictability of the plastic deformation process. Upon quasistatically ramping up the externally applied stress from zero the system responds by exhibiting an irregular stress-strain curve consisting of a sequence of strain bursts, i.e., critical-like dislocation avalanches. The strain bursts are power-law distributed up to a cutoff scale which increases with the stress level up to a critical flow stress value. There, the system undergoes a depinning phase transition and the dislocations start moving indefinitely, i.e., the strain burst size diverges. Using sample-specific information about the pinning landscape as well as the initial dislocation configuration as input, we employ predictive models such as linear regression, simple neural networks and convolutional neural networks to study the predictability of the simulated stress-strain curves of individual samples. Our results show that the response of the system -including the flow stress value -can be predicted quite well, with the correlation coefficient between predicted and actual stress exhibiting a non-monotonic dependence on strain. We also discuss our attempts to predict the individual strain bursts. One of the key ideas of many disciplines including materials science in particular is that structure and properties of materials tend to be related. This raises the important general question of what can be said about the relation between initial structure and mechanical properties for individual samples of small crystals, when random variations in the initial (micro)structure become important. One way of framing the issue is to consider what we refer to as deformation predictability: Given a small crystalline sample with a specific arrangement of pre-existing dislocations and possibly of some other defects interfering with dislocation motion, how well can one use such information to predict the plastic response of that sample? A key challenge here is the high dimensionality of any reasonable description a) Electronic mail: lasse.laurson@tuni.fi of the disordered initial state, combined with the possibility of non-linearities in the mapping from the initial state properties to the ensuing response. This likely implies that simple empirical laws relating sample properties to its plastic response may be difficult to formulate. Challenges of this type are a key factor behind the recent emergence of machine learning (ML) algorithms as an important part of the toolbox of scientists in a wide range of fields including also physics and materials science. In general, many supervised ML algorithms including neural networks are capable of learning non-linear mappings from a high-dimensional feature vector to a desired output, and hence these methods should be useful tools when addressing the question of deformation predictability. An important opening in this direction was recently achieved by Salmenjoki et al., Our results show that the different predictive models employed are capable of learning the relation between the input and the stress-strain curves quite well, as measured by the correlation coefficient between the predicted and simulated stress value at a given strain. In particular, the sample flow stress (i.e., the sample-dependent finite size critical point of the depinning transition) can be predicted surprisingly well, with the correlation coefficient reaching values as high as 0.89 for a regularized CNN. We also explore the predictability of individual strain bursts taking place during the deformation process. Critical avalanches are expected to be inherently unpredictable, and indeed we find approximately zero predictability for most of the strain bursts belonging to the power law scaling regime of their size distribution. Interestingly, we also find that strain bursts belonging to the cutoffs of the distributions as well as those taking place very close to the flow stress exhibit non-vanishing predictability. The dislocation pileup model we study here is similar to the one in Refs. where χ is the effective viscosity, x i the position of the ith dislocation, μ the shear modulus, b the Burgers vector magnitude, and F is the pinning force landscape. We choose a pinning force consisting of Gaussian potential wells centered at pinning sites x p , given by where x p is the position of the pth pinning point, E p a pinning energy scale, and s p the standard deviation of the Gaussian. For simplicity, we set χ = μ = b = 1, and E p = s 2 p = 0.5. Periodic boundary conditions within a system of size L are employed by performing an infinite sum over the stress fields of the periodic images of each dislocation, 29 The average spacing between dislocations is set to L/N = 16 and that between pinning sites to L/N p = 2. The sum over pinning sites is truncated so that only pinning sites that are closer than a cut-off distance of 8 are included in the sum. The simulations are carried out by first choosing the positions of the N p pinning sites at random from a uniform distribution along the one-dimensional system of length L. N dislocations are then placed in the system with the constant spacing of L/N = 16; this equally spaced dislocation configuration would be the minimum energy state of the pileup in the absence of pinning sites. The dislocations are initially allowed to relax to a metastable configuration with σ = 0; see Fig. where m σ = 10 -4 is the maximum stress rate, ) is the spatially averaged dislocation velocity, and r = 100 is a shape parameter. In practice this amounts to a continuous, smooth approximation of the step function, with dσ /dt ≈ m σ for v < v th and dσ /dt ≈ 0 for v > v th , such that σ is increased only in between strain bursts and kept constant during them. Strain ε is accumulated by dislocation motion, The simulations are run until the dislocations start to flow indefinitely, i.e., the strain burst size diverges, which happens at a sample-dependent flow stress σ flow . The stress-strain curves σ (ε) are recorded by storing σ (t) and ε(t) every 20 dimensionless time unit during the simulations. Example stressstrain curves are shown in Fig. The resulting stress-strain curves, each corresponding to a different realization of the random pinning landscape and relaxed initial dislocation positions, are stored in a database consisting of 10 000 stress-strain curves for each system size, to be used as training and testing data for the predictive models. For the largest systems (N = 64 . . . 512), we also generate a separate dataset of 1 000 stress-strain curves stored at a finer time resolution of ∆t = 2, in order to better detect individual strain bursts. This latter data set is used to analyze the statistical properties of the strain bursts, as well as to train and test ML models for predicting strain bursts. In what follows we will introduce the predictive models used in this study. These encompass both linear and nonlinear models using hand-picked features as input, as well as a CNN that requires less feature engineering as it uses a complete description of the system's initial state as input. Using these different models allows us to assess the dependence of our results on any particular model. Before training, each input feature (each input channel in the CNN case) is standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation, and the dataset is divided randomly into a training set containing 80% of the data points, and a testing set containing the remaining 20%. Predictability is measured by calculating the correlation coefficient between predicted and target outputs of the testing set and averaging the result over 5 training instances. Predictive models are implemented using the Python libraries scikit-learn The prediction models work by minimizing the loss, which mainly consists of the mean squared error. In addition, most models are L 1 -regularized, which adds a penalty term to the loss to prevent overlearning. L 1 regularization often improves the result and encourages the model to focus on the most useful/promising input features while discarding the unimportant, and as a byproduct it allows us to determine which input features are used by the model. A linear regression model performs an affine transformation, where input features are first linearly combined by multiplication with a (weight) matrix and then biased by adding a translation vector. If the model is optimized using L 1 -regularization for the weight matrix, it is commonly called LASSO (linear absolute shrinkage and selection operator When two linear regression models are stacked in such a way that the intermediate result is activated by applying a non-linear activation function, such as the rectified linear unit (ReLU), the combined model becomes a simple neural network which can, to some extent, learn general non-linear mappings. An intermediate result of such model is called a hidden layer, and elements of the intermediate result are referred to as hidden units. L 1 -regularization is applied to each layer, with a parameter α n describing the strength of regularization at each layer. Tested variants for stress-strain curve prediction differ by the number of hidden units, hidden layers and regularization. Most have one hidden layer with 64 hidden units and use α 1 = 10 -2 for the first weight matrix and α n = 10 -5 for the rest. All models use ReLU-activations for the hidden layers. One variant has less regularization, meaning that α 1 = 10 -3 instead of 10 -2 . Theoretically, one hidden layer is enough for reproducing any continuous mapping given enough hidden units, but a model with 3 hidden layers is employed here as well for comparison to other studies. The models are trained using the Adam optimizer The predictability of strain bursts is studied using a simple neural network having one hidden layer with 64 hidden units. Model output is in this case very big, consisting of a vectorized (one-dimensional) version of an avalanche map that is originally two-dimensional (see the Results section below for details). We found that all parameters collapsed to 0 if α is too high, so a value of 10 -5 is used for all weight matrices. A lower α parameter makes the model susceptible to overlearning. Therefore, models are trained only for 10 epochs but with a higher learning rate of 10 -2 . The LASSO and simple neural network models require hand-picked features for predicting stress-strain curves and strain bursts. It turns out that good, information-rich features for flow stress prediction are given by quantiles of distributions derived from the sample-specific pinning landscapes. Fig. In a non-interacting system, the flow stress would be controlled by the most negative pinning force F, which provides the strongest obstacle for dislocation motion. In an interacting system, it is possible for the dislocations to push on each other and overcome the strongest pinning force at a smaller applied stress. As a result, the correlation between the most negative value of F [given by the 0% quantile of F in Fig. stress prediction. We therefore give the entire quantile curve (sampled on 64 uniformly chosen points) of each field as input features. In addition to these input features describing the pinning landscape, we also give input features that describe the initial relaxed configuration of dislocations {x j } N j=1 . In particular, we use the values E(x j ), F(x j ), DF(x j ) and D 2 F(x j ), as well as the distances between successive dislocations, Dx j = x j+1 -x j (with x N+1 = x 1 +L). These fields are given as sorted lists, so they can be interpreted as quantiles. Finally, we choose a set of features given by local extrema of E and F, as well as the successive differences in energy extrema D(E extrema), also given as 64 uniformly spaced quantiles. These models take discretized fields as input and have the ability to find out if the target output depends on the spatial variations within the input fields. The CNN structure used in this study is adapted for periodic input signals by applying a convolution-activation-pooling scheme that continues to downsample the input array down to a single spatial element. Initially, an input field has 1 024 = 2 10 spatial elements, so there are 10 convolutional layers (each layer halves the number of spatial elements). This makes the result effectively independent of the particular choice of origin of the input fields. All convolutional layers employed here use a window size The CNN is trained using the same Adam optimizer as for other neural network models, with a learning rate of 10 -3 , learning rate decay of 10 -5 and 50 training epochs. We found that even weak L 1 -regularization caused the parameters to collapse to 0 in most cases, so we do not regularize these models. However, in the case of predicting flow stress only, a kernel regularization value of 5 • 10 -4 for the convolutional layers is found to work. The input to the CNNs consists of the pinning landscape fields E, F, DF and D 2 F (although we found that giving one pinning field, such as E or F, suffices because the CNN can compute the higher derivatives by differentiation), as well as a field J defined as a sum of Gaussians centered on the relaxed dislocation positions x i , This field J serves to describe the dislocation positions in terms of an input field with similar structure as the pinning landscape, and which is independent of the spatial resolution [see Fig. In this section, we first consider the statistical properties of our dataset of stress-strain curves. Then we report our results for training the predictive models, and employ them to explore the predictability of the deformation dynamics of the pileup model. Finally, we also discuss our results on the problem of predicting individual strain bursts. We start by quantifying the system size dependent sampleto-sample variations in the plastic response of the system. Figs. The same applies to the probability densities of the sample flow stresses σ flow , shown in Fig. where τ is the critical exponent of the avalanche size distribution, f (x) is a scaling function that obeys f (x) = const. for x 1 and f (x) → 0 for x 1, and ∆ε * (σ ) is a stressdependent cutoff avalanche size. Left panels of Figs. Overall, the statistical properties of the plastic response of the pileup model shows two key features relevant for deformation predictability: (i) There are sample-to-sample variations in the response (that we will try to predict using machine learning), and (ii) the distribution of strain bursts ∆ε displays characteristics of a critical system, suggesting that individual strain bursts may be inherently unpredictable. In what follows we will use our trained predictive models to explore how well (i) the sample stress-strain curves and (ii) individual strain bursts can be predicted. 1. LASSO and simple neural networks Fig. It is interesting to analyze which features the predictive models end up using for prediction, and how that might depend on strain. Since the models utilize heavy L 1 -regularization, analysis of the learned weights becomes straightforward. Features that contribute to predictability are allowed to have high regularization penalty in exchange for decreasing loss, while unimportant features will not decrease loss sufficiently to justify a high regularization penalty. Fig. We then proceed to employ CNNs as predictive models. Fig. Notably, neither of the models discussed above is able to predict the flow stress much better than by just considering the correlation with the 5% quantile of the pinning force F (see Fig. Finally, we explore the possibility of predicting individual strain bursts along the stress-strain curves. First, we need to formulate a problem that is suitable for analysis using the predictive models at hand. To this end, we generalize the bivariate avalanche histograms (left panels of Fig. Three different examples of smoothed avalanche maps are shown in the left column of Fig. In order to shed some light on the origin of the key features of avalanche predictability discussed above, we finish by considering the correlation between the avalanche count and flow stress. The logic here is that since we have demonstrated above that the sample-specific flow stress can be predicted quite well, if the avalanche maps are correlated with the flow stress, these should be predictable as well. Fig. We have established that predictive models ranging from linear regression to CNNs can be used to predict the stressstrain curves of the pileup model with a good accuracy. While the different models employed give rise to somewhat different results, a practical conclusion is that the model giving the highest correlation coefficient for a given strain provides a lower limit for deformation predictability of the pileup system. Notably the "specialist" CNN discussed above results in correlation coefficients exceeding 0.8 over the entire range of strains considered, and adding regularization further improves the correlation coefficient of the flow stress prediction to 0.89. These should be interpreted as lower limits of deformation predictability as we obviously cannot exclude the possibility that a hypothetical predictive model not considered here might outperform our models. While the predictability of the stress-strain curves turns out to be quite good, it is not perfect. This is to be expected because the stress-strain curves consist of critical-like strain bursts which are expected to be inherently hard to predict. Indeed, our attempts to predict the sample-level bivariate avalanche count resulted in essentially zero predictability for most of the "critical" dislocation avalanches belonging to the power-law distributed part of the avalanche size distribution. On the other hand, these sample-level avalanche distributions also showed an interesting regularity: A larger than average flow stress value indicates lower than average number of the largest avalanches for stresses below the flow stress, and larger than average number of avalanches in the immediate vicinity of the flow stress. It would be interesting to extend such analysis from our stress-controlled simulations to strain-controlled ones. The pileup model studied here has the advantage that the dislocation system will sample the entire one-dimensional random energy landscape, and hence extracting relevant descriptors of the sample-specific quenched disorder is straightforward. This is in contrast to other systems exhibiting a depinning phase transition such as magnetic domain walls in disordered ferromagnetic thin films, 