In the present work, we investigated the electronic and elastic properties in equilibrium and under strain of the type-II Dirac semimetal NiTe2 using density functional theory (DFT). Our results demonstrate the tunability of Dirac nodes' energy and momentum with strain and that it is possible to bring them closer to the Fermi level, while other metallic bands are supressed. We also derive a minimal 4-band effective model for the Dirac cones which accounts for the aforementioned strain effects by means of lattice regularization, providing an inexpensive way for further theoretical investigations and easy comparison with experiments. On an equal footing, we propose the static control of the electronic structure by intercalating alkali species into the van der Waals gap, resulting in the same effects obtained by strain-engineering and removing the requirement of in situ strain. Finally, evaluating the wavefunction's symmetry evolution as the lattice is deformed, we discuss possible consequences, such as Liftshitz transitions and the coexistence of type-I and type-II Dirac cones, thus motivating future investigations. The existence of quasiparticle excitations with no counterpart in high energy physics became relevant, not only due to mere scientific interest, but also for the possibility of using their properties as building blocks for new electronic devices. From the description of the quantum spin Hall effect in graphene by Kane and Mele The simplest example of a Dirac material is graphene, for which valence and conduction bands touch at discrete points in the first Brillouin zone and disperse linearly in all momentum directions Different from their high energy physics counterparts, massless quasiparticles in solids move at the Fermi ve-locity, thus their dispersion is not effectively constrained by Lorentz invariance. Therefore, the energy-momentum dispersion explicitly depends on its direction in momentum space contrast to type-I materials. In this context, the transition metal dichalcogenide NiTe 2 was recently rediscovered as a type-II Dirac semimetal In the present work, we study, from first-principles calculations, strain effects on the electronic structure of NiTe 2 . Our results show that it is possible to systematically tune both the energy relative to the Fermi level and the point in the Brillouin zone where the type-II Dirac cone is located, as illustrated in Fig. The manuscript is organized as follows. Sec. II describes the computational methods and numerical parameters used in the first-principle electronic-structure calculations. In Sec. III, we present a comprehensive investigation of the electronic and elastic properties of the ground-state structure. Sec. IV shows the key results related to the strain-engineering of the electronic states of NiTe 2 in the vicinity of the Fermi level. Finally, Sec. V is devoted to constructing a 4-band low-energy effective model for the type-II Dirac cone. First-principles electronic-structure calculations were carried out in the framework of the Density Functional Theory (DFT) within the Kohn-Sham scheme The full second-order elastic stiffness tensor was obtained from a set of deformations imposed on the underformed reference ground-state (η = 0) structures, as implemented in the ElaStic tool Finally, the effective model was constructed using Qsymm All code and data used to prepare this manuscript is freely available on the Zenodo repository NiTe 2 is a layered compound that crystallizes in a trigonal centrosymmetric structure within CdI 2 -prototype (space-group P 3m1, no. 164), as shown in Fig. The six independent second-order elastic constants c αβ , calculated with different approximations for the exchange and correlation functional, are listed in Tab. II and show good agreement when compared with the experimental data available. Elastic constants with a shear component, such as c 14 and c 44 , are better predicted by The mechanical stability can be easily verified using the Mouhat and Coudert criteria The projected density of states (DOS) of NiTe 2 is presented in Fig. Lastly, just above the Dirac point, located in close vicinity of the Fermi level, there is another band crossing giving rise to type-I Dirac fermions at k D = (0, 0, ±0.388) with R ± 4 and R ∓ 5,6 representations and energy E D = 1.36 eV, an energy level comparable to type-II Dirac nodes in Pd-and Pt-based dichalcogenides We now turn to investigate how different strain states modify the electronic properties of NiTe 2 . To this end, calculations were performed with three types of strain: uniaxial deformation along the [001] direction (z-axis); biaxial deformation within the basal plane, perpendicular to the z-direction; and an isostatic deformation. For each type, at least 6 deformations were performed, going from -5% to +5% with respect to the ground-state structure. A. Effects of strain in the band-structure Fig. We can also check that some non-Dirac bands crossing the Fermi level are suppressed when the structure is expanded, and extra bands become part of the Fermi sur-face when the structure is compressed. To illustrate this, the velocity operator projected onto the Fermi surface under isostatic deformation is shown in Fig. If we lower the chemical potential further, the surfaces disconnect again and the electron-pockets will gradually decrease in size. From this perspective, the isoenergetic surfaces will evolve rapidly and undergo a sudden change in their topology due to lattice deformations, paving the way for Lifshitz transitions In Fig. It is also possible to observe regions in the parameter space with the coexistence of type-II and type-I Dirac cones, as shown in Fig. The type-II Dirac cone strain-engineering seems an exciting route for electronic transport experiments. For example, magnetoresistance for conventional metals grows quadratically at low fields and tends to a saturation value at high fields. However, in materials where conventional charge carriers and Dirac fermions coexist and populate the Fermi surface, the magnetoresistance curve as a function of the applied magnetic field reveals an additional (and predominant) linear term Here, we show that it is possible to deform the structure without causing significant hybridization effects in the low-energy states by increasing the interlayer gap with the intercalation of alkali species. As a proof of concept, we performed first-principle calculations using the supercell method for Li x NiTe 2 varying the Li content in the range 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Fig. We can see in Fig. With the information collected from the first-principle calculations presented in Sec. III, we construct an effective model that describes the type-II Dirac cones. First, we note that a minimal Hamiltonian should include NiTe 2 discrete symmetries, namely, C 3 rotations, inversion, reflection along the x-axis and time-reversal. We restrict the Hilbert space to Te-p orbitals, based on the orbital-projected band structure shown in Fig. We then search for a family of Hamiltonians compatible with the symmetry group with Qsymm Investigating the third order terms in momentum, available in the supplementary material We also capture the effects of strain in the type-II Dirac cones with the effective model. We build a model restricted to strain states keeping all discrete symmetries, such that Eq. 2 holds, but with different parameter values. Thus, we restrict strain states to (η x , η y , η z ), with η x = η y = η xy . To recover the notion of a crystal we perform lattice regularization, and then all Hamiltonian parameters are expanded up to first order on strain (more details in App. C). Finally, we performed a k•p expansion to find that the hamiltonian is modified as: while the Dirac node energy changes as The Dirac cone tunability with isostatic pressure is shown in Fig. In the present work, we considered only uniform strain states, but it is worth to emphasize effects of non-uniform strain. Equation 13 suggests that, in this case, a local dependency of the Dirac cone momentum, generating pseudo-Landau levels, with direct consequences to transport properties It is worth mentioning that the model derived here, including the effects of strain, is not restricted to NiTe 2 , but works for any system within the same symmetry group, for example, other TMDs which are type-II Dirac semimetals, such as PtSe 2 , PdSe 2 and PtTe 2 We presented the elastic behavior of NiTe 2 and its electronic structure dependency on the strain state. By analysing the electronic states' irreducible representations at high-symmetry points in the first Brillouin zone, we concluded that a type-II Dirac cone is formed by a single-orbital manifold band-inversion mechanism. Furthermore, we have shown that bulk NiTe 2 possesses a ductile regime, making it a candidate for electronic structure strain-engineering. Our first-principle calculations show that it is possible to tune the type-II Dirac point to the Fermi energy, making it a suitable platform for transport experiments when compared with materials of the same class We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) under Grants 2016/10167-8, 2018/10835-6, 2018/08819-2, 2019/07082-9, 2019/14359-7, 2019/05005-7, and 2020/08258-0. This study was also financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) -Brasil -Finance Code 001. The research was carried out using high-performance computing resources made available by the Superintendência de Tecnologia da Informação (STI), Universidade de São Paulo. The authors also thank Daniel Varjas, Artem Pulkin and Anton Akhmerov for fruitful discussions. The second-order elastic constants c αβ provide valuable information about the mechanical response of a compound to a certain applied strain condition. The c 11 and c 33 constants, for instance, represent the resistance to an unixial deformation along the The mechanical properties within the Voigt-Reuss-Hill approximation Knowledge of the degree of anisotropy in the single crystal elastic properties is essential to strainengineering. The reciprocal linear compressibility (B c ) and Young's modulus (E) directional dependencies for several exchange and correlation functionals are shown Such mechanical manifestations occur due to, as discussed based on the second-order elastic constants, the weak van der Waals interactions between adjacent Telayers and a stronger in-plane electronic density. It is also important to depict the changes in the elastic anisotropy profiles for different exchange and correlation functionals. Fig. optB86b-vdW 3.863 5.277 68.20 0.2494 Expt. [57] 3.858 5.264 67.85 -Calc. [83] 3.808 5.236 65.75 -TABLE II. Independent second order elastic constants (in GPa) calculated for trigonal NiTe2. ACKNOWLEDMENTS