The aviation industry aims to reduce CO2 emission by reducing energy consumption and benefitting from more electrical systems than those based on fossil fuels. The more electric aircraft (MEA) can take advantage of the drives based on wide bandgap (WBG)-based power modules that are lighter and can bear higher voltages and currents. However, the fast-rise and repetitive voltage pulses generated by WBG-based systems can endanger the insulating property of dielectric materials due to the partial discharges. PDs cause the local breakdown of insulation materials in regions with high electric field magnitude. In the case of power electronic modules, silicone gel, which is a predominant type of encapsulation material, is susceptible to these PDs. In this study, it is aimed to investigate the impact of rise time on various PD characteristics including PD true charge magnitude, inception and extinction fields, duration, and so forth. Besides, those systems that are anticipated to operate under harsh environmental conditions -such as naval or aviation industries -may expect additional threat. Therefore, this paper puts forth the combination of low-pressure conditions and fast-rise, high-frequency square wave pulses. The results demonstrate that more intense and more intense ones are going to be imposed at lower pressures. COMSOL Multiphysics interfaced with MATLAB is used to simulate the PD detection process based on the experimental data found in the literature. While the aviation industry is expected to meet an increasing demand Although WBG-based systems are the major focus of researchers to achieve all-electric powertrains with higher efficiency and power density, the concern on the reliability of the insulation systems when being exposed to extremely high electric tensions has not been well-responded. In literature, the detrimental impacts of high-frequency, fast-rise voltage pulses generated by WBG-based systems have been reported Besides, the harsh environmental conditions during a flight even make the situation worse for the insulation system. For instance, an aircraft can undergo a pressure as low as 4 psi when flying at cruising altitude where the impact of pressure on PD occurrence has not been sufficiently studied so far. While the impact of different pressure levels (20kPa -100kPa) on the repetitive partial discharge inception voltage (RPDIV) of a solid dielectric (a twisted wire pair) is investigated in authors in This study aims to assess the combined effect of lowpressure levels with ultra-short rise times with the aid FEA model. Therefore, the developed PD model is used to monitor the impact of rise time and low-pressure level on the PD intensity and duration, simultaneously. The electric field threshold for a local breakdown (PD) is different from that of the global breakdown. However, the PD inception field is directly related to the critical electric field magnitude for global breakdown In the above expression, (E/p) , B, and n are gas parameters. In the air, their values are 24.2 V Pa m , 8.6 Pa . m . , and 0.5, respectively. The pressure of air is denoted as p, while l represents the cavity diameter. Aside from the above condition, there is another condition that must be met to have an ionization taking place. It is the existence of initial free electron(s); this condition stands for the statistical time lag before the occurrence of a PD and is stochastic in nature. There are various mechanisms for the provision initial electron that are explained in When a PD activity ignites, the collisions among electrons and atoms keep happening until a moment where the electron does not have enough energy to further expand the streamer. Same as the PD inception criterion, the PD extinction criterion is also a field-dependent condition. The electric field at which streamer cannot further grow and PD quenches is called the Extinction Electric Field (E ). According to Gutfleisch and Niemeyer In the above expression, γ is a dimensionless factor varying with the change of voltage polarity. γ can be estimated experimentally. This work determines γ such that at normal temperature and pressure (NTP) conditions ( p , T ), E equals the value proposed in the literature. During the PD activity, the reason behind the decrease in the electric field inside the air-bubble is the higher conductivity of the cavity compared to its normal condition. Starting from the inception time of a PD, the conductivity of cavity increases from an initial value (approximately zero) to a higher value (σ , ). Between the time at which a PD starts (t ), and the time at which PD quenches (t ), the electric charges (electrons and positive ions) are formed and accumulate over the cavity and electrode surfaces. The amount of charge accumulated on each upper/lower surface of the cavity is called PD true charge magnitude ( q ). The value of q is a parameter for demonstrating the intensity of a PD event: where In the above expressions, J(t) is the magnitude of current density, and I (t) is the magnitude of current flow through the upper/lower surface of the void (S ). To integrate the impact of low-pressure conditions with high electric tension due to the applied voltage, this paper investigates the role of pressure in three parameters: (1) PD inception field (2) PD extinction field (3) Dielectric constant Among the above three parameters, the dependencies of E and E on pressure are shown in ( where ε and p denote the dielectric constant and pressure at sea level and room temperature. Similarly, ε is the dielectric constant at pressure p. The constants A and B are functions of the material and must be experimentally determined. Approximate values for A and B are derived from Generally, the dielectric constant has a direct relationship with pressure meaning that as the pressure declines, ε also goes down. However, according to In this study, COMSOL Multiphysics and MATLAB are used for modeling the PD phenomenon as well as performing the sensitivity analysis for parameters of interest. COMSOL Multiphysics takes over the part of the finite-element analysis which is necessary for electric field estimation while MATLAB is used to model the algorithm of PD detection. Figure The geometry that was examined for the modeling and simulations is shown in Fig. Due to the symmetry of the configuration, a 2D axisymmetrical representation of geometry is used for electric field estimation. The properties of the unipolar square wave voltage for the base case are shown in Table Fig. The electrification trend in the aviation industry requires the reliability of the electrified system in all aspects. Therefore, the threats imposed on the insulation system by the WBG-based power modules are studied in this work. Because the pressure at higher altitudes can be extremely low, this study examined the combined impact of high slew rate and low-pressure conditions with the aid of the FEA model. The results show that while short rise time square wave voltages are expected to cause more intense discharges with longer durations, the low-pressure conditions make these harmful changes even worse. The main reasons behind these changes are the changes in the inception and extinction electric field magnitudes as well as the lower dielectric constant values at higher altitudes.