Motivated by the recent discovery of superconductivity in doped NdNiO2, we study the magnetic exchange interaction J in layered d 9 nickelates from first principles. The mother compounds of the high-Tc cuprates belong to the charge-transfer regime in the Zaanen-Sawatzky-Allen diagram and have J larger than 100 meV. While this feature makes the cuprates very different from other transition metal oxides, it is of great interest whether layered d 9 nickelates can also have such a large J. However, one complexity is that NdNiO2 is not a Mott insulator due to carrier doping from the block layer. To compare the cuprates and d 9 nickelates on an equal basis, we study RbCa2NiO3 and A2NiO2Br2 (A: a cation with the valence of 2.5+), which were recently designed theoretically by block-layer engineering. These nickelates are free from the self-doping effect and belong to the Mott-Hubbard regime. We show that these nickelates share a common thread with the high-Tc cuprates in that they also have a significant exchange interaction J as large as about 100 meV. The discovery of superconductivity in doped nickel oxides Nd 0.8 Sr 0.2 NiO 2 Here, a natural question arises: is there any possibility to realize T c as high as the cuprates in nickelates? In the cuprates, the superconductivity emerges by doping carriers into the antiferromagnetic Mott insulator having a large magnetic exchange coupling J (∼130 meV) On the other hand, in the case of the nickelate NdNiO 2 , * yusuke.nomura@riken.jp ∆ dp is larger than that of the cuprates The experimental estimate should be understood as the J value including the effect of the self-doping, not the J value at the ideal d 9 configuration. One of the reasons for the controversy in theory about the size of J Recently, there was a proposal to design cuprateanalog nickelates without the complication of the selfdoping In this paper, we study the strength of J in the two ideal d 9 nickelates, which are free from the self-doping (see Sec II for the details of the materials). We estimate the J value by the following three methods The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce two ideal d 9 nickelates, RbCa 2 NiO 3 and A 2 NiO 2 Br 2 (A: a cation with the valence of 2.5+) and discuss the advantage over NdNiO 2 . In Sec. III, we explain the three methods employed in the present study, and we show the results in Sec. IV. Section V is devoted to the summary. In Ref. The advantages of studying these nickelates rather than NdNiO 2 are as follows. First, it is still controver-sial whether the role of Nd-layer (block-layer) orbitals is essential or not. If the hybridization between Ni 3d and Nd-layer orbitals is substantial, the Nd-layer orbitals are not only a charge reservoir, but they might give Kondolike physics Another controversial issue for NdNiO 2 is to which orbitals the doped holes go (d 9 L vs. d 8 , where L denotes a hole in a ligand oxygen). In the case of the cuprates (charge-transfer insulator), the holes are doped into the oxygen 2p orbitals. On the other hand, the nickelates have larger ∆ dp and are classified as Mott-Hubbard type When the system is Mott-Hubbard type and the holes mainly reside in the Ni 3d orbitals, another issue arises: which model is more appropriate, the single-orbital or multi-orbital model? In other words, whether the doped d 8 configuration favors high-spin state or low-spin state. If the crystal field splitting between Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 and the other 3d orbitals is much larger than the Hund's coupling, holes stay within the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital, and the singleorbital model is justified. On this issue, several studies insist that Ni 3d multi-orbital nature cannot be ignored Here, we introduce three different methods to estimate J (see eg., Ref. When the single-orbital Hubbard model is a good description, the magnetic interactions in the Mott insulating region can be obtained by strong-coupling perturbation expansion. The strong-coupling expansion becomes valid in the region U W with the bandwidth W (in the square lattice W = 8t) In the strong-coupling expansion, the superexchange interaction J s (with t 4 -order correction term) and cyclic ring-exchange interaction J c are given by J s = 4t 2 /U -24t 4 /U 3 and J c = 80t 4 /U 3 , respectively with S = 1/2. Within the LDA+U Based on the Néel-type solutions of the LDA+U calculations, we estimate J and J using the local force theorem where ω n = (2n+1)πT denotes the Matsubara frequency. Here, we set P = 0 (1) when the spins at i and j sites are aligned parallel (anti-parallel) to each other. The Green's function G ij is defined by , where H 0 ij is the hopping matrix of the Wannier tightbinding model, and μ is the chemical potential. Note that H 0 ij is a N orbi × N orbj matrix, where N orbi is the number of Wannier orbitals at i-site including the spin index. In the case of collinear magnets, one may write Then, M i is defined by M i = m i ⊗ σ x and proportional to the exchange splitting at i-site m i . Here, we have neglected the spin-dependent hopping term of M i (see Ref. The strong-coupling expansion gives local (in realspace) J, the energy mapping method sees the energy difference between the global and local minima of the magnetic solutions, and the local force method sees the lowenergy excitations around the global minimum. These J are complementary to each other, and hence we employ all the three methods. When the Coulomb repulsion is much larger than the bandwidth and the mapping to the Heisenberg model becomes valid, these three methods see the same J. As we will show in Sec. IV, the three results agree reasonably well as expected from a Mott insulating behavior of the proposed d 9 nickelates. The DFT band structure calculations are performed using Quantum ESPRESSO The energy comparison between the Néel-and stripetype antiferromagnetic solutions is performed using 9 × 9×7 and 9×9×3 k-mesh for RbCa 2 NiO 3 and A 2 NiO 2 Br 2 (A = Ba 0.5 La 0.5 ), respectively. We treat Ba 0.5 La 0.5 by the virtual crystal approximation. The energy cutoff is set to be 100 Ry for the Kohn-Sham wave functions, and 400 Ry for the electron charge density. For the estimate of J based on the local force approach, we first construct the maximally localized Wannier functions In the calculation of Eq. ( In the previous study Figures In contrast to the case of the LDA+U calculation for NdNiO 2 , where the system stays metal even in the presence of antiferromagnetic order Figure In Figs. From ∆E in Fig. These results on top of the J value estimated by the strong-coupling expansion (see above) are summarized in Although the energy mapping method and local force approach are based on the same LDA+U calculations, we see that there is a discrepancy between the two results at small U values (although the difference is no more than two times). It should be noted that the former method sees the global change of the energy between the completely different magnetic patterns, whereas the latter approach only sees the local landscape around the Néel-type solutions, as described in Sec. III D. For larger U , the agreement between these two results becomes better as is expected: The system can be mapped to the classical spin model with a constant J regardless of the assumed magnetic structure in the local force approach. Overall, all the three estimates of J lie within 60-140 meV, and we conclude that the d 9 nickelates have a sizable J of the order of 100 meV. The agreement in the order estimate of J among three independent methods shows that RbCa 2 NiO 3 and A 2 NiO 2 Br 2 (A = Ba 0.5 La 0.5 ) are indeed Mott insulators with the effective model being the Heisenberg model, and the magnetic exchange coupling J is governed by the superexchange interaction [if the materials were, for example, weakly correlated, the three methods would not agree well (see Sec. III D)]. Finally, we compare the J value with that of the cuprates. In the cuprates, the magnitude of J is intensively studied by Raman spectroscopy in the early stage One of the remarkable features of the high T c cuprates is the large exchange coupling J, whose size is as large as 130 meV Finally, we note that the proposed d 9 nickelates might give rare examples of realizing the square-lattice Hubbard model with sizeable J in real materials. Recent numer-ical studies show that the phase diagram of the doped Hubbard model is under severe competition between the stripe state with charge/spin modulation and d-wave superconductivity 