Herein, we report on the improvement of structural quality and enhancement of photoluminescence (PL) emission for an optimally N doped nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) film. Pure and N doped nanocrystalline diamond films are synthesized on Si by hot filament chemical vapour deposition using NH3:CH4:H2 at different nominal N/C ratios viz. 0, 0.13, 0.35, 0.50 and 0.75 in feedstock. X-ray diffraction analysis reveal a systematic initial increase and then a decrease in crystallite size with N/C ratio in feedstock. Further, a monotonic increase in Raman line width and peak position of diamond band indicates that the compressive strain in diamond lattice increases as a function of N/C ratio upto 0.50. However, at higher N/C ratio of 0.75, the compressive strain gets relaxed a little and produces a lower strain. Furthermore, a unique Raman mode at 1195 cm -1 is observed corresponding to the C=N-H vibrations indicating a significant N concentration in the NCD films. In addition, visible and UV PL studies reveal the presence of several N-related colour centres with multiple emission lines in the range of 380 -700 nm. An optimally N doped diamond film grown at N/C ratio of 0.35 in feedstock shows a significant enhancement in room temperature PL emission at ~ 505 and 700 nm. This PL enhancement is attributed to H3 and other aggregates of N related defect centres, under 355 and 532 nm laser excitations respectively. Diamonds have attracted much attention of researchers due to their unique structural, electrical, optical, chemical and mechanical properties. The single crystal diamonds are used in several electronic devices with high performance which can operate at high temperature, high frequency and high power and high energy ionizing radiation. Moreover, it has applications in particle detectors, single photon emitters in quantum information technology Hot filament chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) is one of the simplest techniques and it can produce diamond films with reasonable high quality and growth rate. Boron doping in diamond is the most successful method for p-type conduction with its ionization energy is ~ 0.37 eV. Mostly N is the preferred impurity for n-type doping, however, N does not provide excess carrier at room temperature due to its deep energy level (1.7 eV) in diamond. Hence, N doped diamond is not so beneficial for electronic device applications. However, N doping in NCD and ultra nanocrystalline diamond films enhance the electrical conductivity by several orders and also behaves as n-type semiconductors. The enhanced conductivity is generally assigned to increase in sp 2 -rich C=C bonding at grain boundaries (GBs) Generally N2 or NH3 is used as source of N under plasma assisted CVD reactors. NH3 is preferred over N2 because of weaker N-H bond as compared to stronger NN bond of N2 under HFCVD reactor Further, the morphology and growth habit change due to the orientation dependent growth rate which results in texturing of diamond films Further, N incorporation in feedstock is found to either improve or deteriorate the structural quality of diamond upon N/C ratio and other feedstock composition Intensive vibrational spectroscopic studies are carried out to assess the structural quality of the diamonds grown with different N concentration in the feedstock using visible and UV Raman spectroscopy and IR spectroscopy. Nitrogen incorporation in diamond lattice results in significant mechanical stress, increase in vacancy defects and also N-vacancy defect complexes. Consequently, N doping in diamond decreases the phonon life time which manifest as broadening of Raman line width Although a significant amount of literature is currently available on the role of N containing molecules in feedstock on the growth and properties of N doped NCDs, a combined study on structural and optical properties of N-doped NCDs is limited. In this study, N doped NCD films are synthesized by HFCVD using wide range of N/C ratios upto 75% in the feedstock. The N induced structural evolution is studied systematically using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Raman spectroscopy. Further, N related impurity energy levels and their influence on the photoluminescence (PL) intensity are measured through PL spectroscopy using 532 and 355 nm diode lasers. Further, a combined analysis of XRD, SEM, Raman and PL are performed to have better understating on the role of N in feedstock on the growth, structure and optical properties of N doped NCD films. Nitrogen doped diamond films were grown by a custom designed HFCVD system and the details could be found elsewhere Fig. These XRD spectra exhibit a typical pattern of polycrystalline cubic diamond with diffraction peaks at ~ 43.6, 74.9 and 91.0 degrees corresponding to (111), ( Further, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (111) diffraction peak varies as a function of N/C ratio as shown in inset of Fig. Figure Further, the Raman spectra also consist of a weak Raman signal from Si substrate indicating that the penetration depth of laser is higher than the thickness of the studied NCD films. Under such condition, the laser also probes the defective nuclear later at filmsubstrate interface which can influence the overall Raman spectra of the NCD films. However, since our samples are nanocrystalline in size with a large amount of sp 2 -rich grains and grain boundaries in the bulk which can absorb laser intensity significantly, the contribution from defective nucleation layer, if at all present, is negligible by considering the volume ratio of bulk to interface layer Thus, N75 has lower graphitic content than the N50 and other diamond films. In addition, the N35 and N50 films have relatively lower FWHM of G band and higher ID/IG ratio which indicate a higher graphitic content in the films The Raman line width and peak position of the N doped diamonds exhibit a monotonic increase with N concentration upto N/C ratio of 0.50, as can be seen from Fig. The Raman line broadening and position shift in NCD films can be associated with several factors such as surface and bulk structural defects, GBs, internal strain caused by impurities, growth temperature induced thermal stress that arises due to the difference in thermal expansion coefficients (TECs) of substrate and diamond and also laser induced heating on the surface However, the analysis of peak shift and broadening of diamond Raman band in NCD films is complex. In the present study, the laser induced temperature effect can be ignored since it always redshifts the Raman peak position which is about 0.5 cm -1 for an increase in temperature upto 500 K Figure Fig. Note that the increase in nominal N/C ratio in feedstock is known to increase the N concentration in diamond lattice A closer look at the Fig. The pure and N doped nanocrystalline diamond (NCD) films are successfully synthesized by hot filament chemical vapour deposition using NH3:CH4:H2 at different nominal N/C ratios in the feedstock. The structural quality of the N doped diamond films is found to improve at lower N/C ratio and it degrades at higher N/C ratio in feedstock as evidenced by x-ray diffraction. The N doped NCDs are under compressive strain due to the presence of large amount of sp 2 -rich grains and grain boundaries and it manifests as increase in the Raman line width. In addition, the observation of a unique Raman mode at 1195 cm -1 also confirms a significant N concentration in the NCD with C=N-H bonding. In addition, the N doped diamonds display several N-related colour centres with multiple emission lines in the range of 380 -700 nm as evidenced by visible and UV photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. Especially, the intensity of PL emission at ~ 505 and 700 nm is increased drastically for an optimally N doped diamond film grown at N/C ratio of 0.35 in feedstock at room temperature under 355 and 532 nm laser excitations, respectively. Since the diamonds are known as radiation hard materials, an enhanced PL emission with improved structural quality of an optimally N doped diamonds have potential applications in luminescence based radiation detectors which can work under extreme environments.