We explore the ultrafast generation of spin currents in magnetic multilayer samples by applying fs laser pulses to one layer and measuring the magnetic response in the other layer by element-resolved x-ray spectroscopy. In Ni(5 nm)/Ru(2 nm)/Fe(4 nm), the Ni and Fe magnetization directions couple antiferromagnetically due to the RKKY interaction, but may be oriented parallel through an applied magnetic field. After exciting the top Ni layer with a fs laser pulse, we find that also the Fe layer underneath demagnetizes, with a 4.1 ± 1.9% amplitude difference between parallel and antiparallel orientation of the Ni and Fe magnetizations. We attribute this difference to the influence of a spin current generated by the fs laser pulse that transfers angular momentum from the Ni into the Fe layer. Our results confirm that superdiffusive spin transport plays a role in determining the sub-ps demagnetization dynamics of synthetic antiferromagnetic layers, but also evidence large depolarization effects due to hot electron dynamics, which are independent of the relative alignment of the magnetization in Ni and Fe. The concept of spin currents, i.e. the flow of spin angular momentum in the absence of a net charge current, yields novel and challenging research topics, and empowers new technological opportunities in the field of spintronics A quantitative measurement of the involved spin current however is lacking so far, as the magneto-optic VUV measurements Here we used the intense and ultrashort x-ray pulses from the free electron laser LCLS at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory to quantitatively explore the magnetic response in the fs time domain following fs laser excitation of magnetic double layer samples. The key prerequisites for successful measurements with magnetic contrast are circularly polarized soft x-ray pulses. Their availability at LCLS was previously demonstrated by using the Delta undulator generating 98% of circular polarization The x-ray transmission measurements have been performed at the LCLS SXR instrument We investigated magnetic double layer samples of Ni and Fe, with Ru or Cu interlayer as drawn in Fig. We first discuss results from time scan measurements, for which we vary the pump probe time delay while keeping the probing x-ray photon energy fixed at the respective L 3 absorption line of Ni or Fe, and selecting circular polarization from the delta undulator. XMCD was calculated as the difference in absorption for the sample in positive and negative applied magnetic field. In order to test the effect of a possible spin current from the (top) Ni layer into the (lower) Fe layer, we measured XMCD for the two relative orientations of their magnetizations, parallel and antiparallel. For the parallel state, we applied a field of 50 mT along the x-ray beam direction, or at 45 • to the surface normal. To reach the antiparallel configuration, we first saturated the sample in 50 mT and then measured in a reduced field of < 10 mT, which was used to define the preferential magnetization direction for the relaxation process following the pump laser pulse. We show in Fig. For a more detailed look at the electronic state of the excited sample we performed Fe L 3 energy scans selecting a pump probe time delay of ≈ 1 ps, i.e. shortly after laser pumping. Applying different magnetic fields to achieve the parallel and antiparallel configuration led to slightly different XMCD amplitudes. We thus alternated between measuring with and without optical pump pulse, and normalize the XMCD spectra to the respective measurements without laser pump pulse. We plot in Fig. icant differences between the pumped curves: in the parallel state, the magnetization is better conserved as in the antiparallel state. This is qualitatively the same result as we found in the time scans in Fig. In order to find the strongest effect of the spin current on the Fe layer underneath, we repeated the time and energy scans at different values for the pump fluences, and show the resulting XMCD values at ≈1 ps after excitation in Fig. We thus additionally investigated a multilayer consisting of Ni(5 nm)/Cu(30 nm)/Fe(4 nm), in which the thick Cu interlayer was introduced to block the optical pump laser. In fact, calculating the absorbed intensity in each layer with the transfer matrix method, we find that the Fe layer absorbs only 1% of the intensity that the Ni layer absorbs, see supplementary material. For the Ni/Cu/Fe sample, we show in Fig. Comparing the results from the two samples, we notice a much stronger Fe XMCD loss in Ni/Cu/Fe than in the Ni/Ru/Fe sample. The calculated absorption value for the top Ni layer may reveal the reason: the direct optical excitation of the Ni film in Ni/Cu/Fe is almost 10× higher than in Ni/Ru/Fe, as a consequence of the semi-transparent Ni/Ru/Fe stack in conjunction with a highly reflective Al layer on the back of the membrane. The higher reflectivity, i.e. lower absorption, compared to the Ni/Cu/Fe sample therefore leads to a considerably higher number of hot electrons that are generated in the latter, for the same incoming pump fluence. We have seen before in our measurements on Ni/Ru/Fe that the spin dependent response in Fe is quenched at very high fluences, being overwhelmed presumably by direct laser excitation. In Ni/Cu/Fe we efficiently block the pump laser from reaching the Fe layer, however we cannot block hot electrons from moving between the layers. Together with the produced cascades of secondary electrons, the hot electrons transport spin but also energy towards the Fe layer. It was shown before that excited electrons can have greatly enhanced spin-flip scattering rates Finally we discuss quantitatively the observed spin current. The XMCD time scans at the Ni L 3 edge performed at 23 and 36 mJ/cm 2 (see supplementary material) allow us to interpolate a 55% drop of the Ni magnetization for the fluence of 26 mJ/cm 2 used for the relevant Fe scan. With a Ni magnetization of 485 kA/m, this amounts to a loss of 267 kA/m, available for the spin current originating from the Ni film. Assuming a lossless spin transport we find, after correcting by 5/4 for the Ni and Fe layer thicknesses, a magnetization of 333 kA/m ready to flow into Fe. This is as much as 20% of the Fe magnetization, assuming the full Fe magnetization of 1700 kA/m. Our measurements report an effect on the Fe magnetization of 4%, i.e. ±2% deviation from the central value, corresponding to ±34 kA/m. Therefore, we conclude that only 10% of the total Ni magnetization is transferred to Fe as a spin current. At least two effects will attenuate the spin current from Ni to Fe. One is the direct spin relaxation within Ni, as found for laser-induced demagnetization for single layer Ni films Here we presented time and layer-resolved XMCD measurements on trilayer samples consisting of two magnetic layers, Ni and Fe, separated by a non-magnetic Ru or Cu interlayer. Whereas the top magnetic layer was excited by an optical fs laser pulse and subsequently exhibited ultrafast demagnetization, we measured the response of the lower magnetic layer which reacted with a less pronounced magnetization drop. For a 2 nm Ru interlayer, the Ni and Fe layer's magnetization direction were oriented antiparallel, making the structure a synthetic antiferromagnet. Application of a magnetic field can align the Ni and Fe magnetization parallel, and we found that the amount of Fe demagnetization depends on the relative magnetization orientation of the two layers. We attribute this to the influence of spin currents transporting angular momentum from Ni into Fe, and observed this difference to be 4.1 ± 1.9% of the initial Fe magnetization. This is much smaller than the 25-30% reported in previous measurements that used VUV pulses as a probe • Use original data without any time jitter correction: useful for quick online visualization of results. Depending on the jitter amplitude, XMCD decay times may increase to > 500 fs. • Divide measurements into two 60 Hz bins, in order to separate the two alternating states with different x-ray arrival times. After that, perform individual fits of the XMCD data. For each bin, subtract their time-zero before combining to a common data set. • Apply same division of the data as above. Use the phase cavity information that monitors the electron bunch arrival (see Fig. • Use phase cavity data for shot-to-shot based correction. This procedure may have more noise, depending on data quality. Also long-term drifts of e.g. the pump laser line are not accounted for (see next two points for their inclusion). • Apply a custom sorting algorithm based on the best correlation in the phase cavity corrected data from above, after averaging a few minutes of data S2 outlined in • Use time tool data, filtered by 100-1000 events to extract long-term drifts from the high noise level present in the timing data while operating with the delta undulator. For shot-to-shot correction, the phase cavity data is used. While this procedure has the best potential for precise jitter correction, unfortunately only very few data sets recorded with the circular polarization from the delta undulator have valid time tool data, due to the one order of magnitude lower x-ray intensity. Besides time-scans recorded at fixed photon energy, we recorded XAS spectra around the L 3 absorption edges, applying four different magnetic fields. This forced the magnetization directions of the Ni and Fe layers into each of the four possible configurations, with two parallel and two antiparallel configurations. From these spectra, we calculate the dichroism for parallel and antiparallel configuration. In order to obtain a common normalization of the two XMCD spectra, we also recorded for each spectrum the sample in equilibrium, e.g. without pump laser pulse. The measurements for four different pump laser fluences are plotted in Fig. The absorption of the exciting laser pulse is modeled within a transfer matrix calculation 