Monolayer group-IV monochalcogenides (MX, M = Ge, Sn, Pb; X = S, Se, Te) are a family of novel two-dimensional (2D) materials that have atomic structures closely related to that of the staggered black phosphorus lattice. The structure of most monolayer MX materials exhibits a broken inversion symmetry, and many of them exhibit ferroelectricity with a reversible in-plane electric polarization. A further consequence of the noncentrosymmetric structure is that when coupled with strong spin-orbit coupling, many MX materials are promising for the future applications in non-linear optics, photovoltaics, spintronics and valleytronics. Nevertheless, because of the relatively large exfoliation energy, the creation of monolayer MX materials is not easy, which hinders the integration of these materials into the fast-developing field of 2D material heterostructures. In this Perspective, we review recent developments in experimental routes to the creation of monolayer MX, including molecular beam epitaxy and two-step etching methods. Other approaches that could be used to prepare monolayer MX are also discussed, such as liquid phase exfoliation and solution phase synthesis. A quantitative comparison between these different methods is also presented. Monolayer (ML) group-IV monochalcogenides, abbreviated as MX according to their chemical composition, are a series of 2D semiconductors with many intriguing structural, optical and electronic properties, such as in-plane ferroelectricity, The difficulty in obtaining MX monolayers is a result of a) Electronic mail: changkai@baqis.ac.cn b) Electronic mail: stuart.parkin@mpi-halle.mpg.de the relatively high exfoliation energy of bulk MX materials. As shown in Table have reached the limit of a single monolayer. For an overview, Table For experiments concerning 2D materials, mechanical exfoliation is usually the most straightforward approach to create atomically thin flakes, especially in the early stage of material characterization. However, simple mechanical exfoliation experiments using standard scotch tape methods have only yielded MX flakes that are tens of nanometers thick, Since it is difficult to obtain monolayer MX flakes through "top-down" exfoliation methods, "bottom-up" synthesis methods, including solution-phase and vapor-phase routes, have also been extensively studied recently. By controlling the conditions of chemical reactions in solution, one can generate either colloidal MX nanoparticles Vapor phase synthesis routes include physical vapor deposition (PVD): gaseous MX molecules are directly deposited onto a substrate; chemical vapor deposition (CVD): chemical reactions yielding MX thin flakes happen at the surface of a substrate; and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE): which features ultra-high vacuum deposition through either a physical or chemical process. Usually carried out in tube furnaces, PVD and CVD methods can be carried out at high vapor pressures and create several-nm thick, several-μm wide MX flakes. Before we begin detailed discussions, it is very important to clearly define the notations that we use here since different notations have been used in the literature. In this Perspective, the orthogonal vectors a 1 and a 2 are the crystalline basis along the armchair and zigzag directions of a MX monolayer, as shown in Fig 1 . Even the definition of a "monolayer" or "a single layer" varies in the literature. Here, we shall use the description of "a monolayer" (1 ML) to refer to a van der Waals layer, or two atomic layers (AL), which is the smallest possible thickness of MX materials. One "unit cell" contains two MLs, or four ALs. In the forty years' history of the MBE growth of MX materials, studies mainly focused on the (001)-and (111)-oriented lead monochalcogenides (PbS, PbSe and PbTe) with rock salt structures, because of their importance as narrow-bandgap semiconductors for mid-infrared lasers and sensors. Very recently, monolayer SnSe nanoplates have also been successfully prepared through a two-step MBE growth recipe, also on graphene/SiC substrates. The choice and treatment of substrates is highly important for the MBE growth of atomically-thin materials. Compared with other substrates, the graphene surface is extremely smooth and has no dangling bonds, which guarantees a van der Waals epitaxial growth. Since the graphene substrates used for MBE experiments should be uniform and single-crystalline across the surface, monolayer or bilayer graphene, epitaxially grown on the surface of Si-terminated 6H-SiC(0001) substrates were used. There are three approaches to prepare the graphene/SiC substrates: (i) annealing SiC in an H 2 /Ar gas mixture; 101 (ii) annealing doped SiC in an ultra-high vacuum environment by passing direct current through the substrate in a Si molecular flux; 102 (iii) flash annealing SiC in ultra-high vacuum by direct current heating. On properly graphitized SiC substrates, monolayer SnTe nanosheets as large as ∼1 μm and monolayer PbTe nanosheets of ∼300 nm in size have been grown, as shown in Fig. Neither SnTe nor PbTe has a preferred crystalline orienta- tion on graphene, which is another strong indication of van der Waals bonding. At the substrate temperature of 200 • C, the monolayer nanosheets have nearly rectangular shapes, with atomically smooth edges along the 11 directions. The nucleation rate increases exponentially as the substrate temperature decreases. It is usually impossible to mechanically exfoliate ultrathin SnTe flakes from bulk materials, because it has a threedimensional (3D) rock salt structure (space group Fm3m) at room temperature. However, in the aforementioned MBE experiments, the growth of ultrathin SnTe and PbTe nanosheets exhibit strong 2D character. This is the result of a thicknessdependent structural phase transition, as shown in Fig. All the 1-ML, 2-ML and nearly all the 3-ML thick SnTe nanosheets take up the γ phase, while above 4-ML, the ratio of the α/β phase gradually increases. There is not a certain critical thickness for the structural phase transition, because The discovery of a structural phase transition in SnTe nanosheets unambiguously bridges monolayer SnTe with the monolayers of other ferroelectric group-IV monochalcogenides, which have been theoretically predicted since 2013 Although bulk SnSe itself has a layered structure, it is nevertheless difficult to grow large-area monolayer SnSe nanoplates on graphene/SiC substrates with a single deposition process, probably because of a higher surface energy in SnSe, induced by a larger lattice buckling compared with that of γ-SnTe. Very recently, a two-step MBE growth recipe has been de-veloped to prepare monolayer SnSe nanoplates with widths above 100 nm. Interestingly, because of the coincidental lattice matching between graphene (a g = 2.46 Å) and the a 2 of monolayer SnSe (4.26 Å, which is √ 3 times as large as a g ), the monolayer SnSe nanoplates follow a highly oriented growth mode, which is very different from monolayer SnTe and PbTe. According to both reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns and atom resolved topography images recorded by STM, the a 1 direction of SnSe is always parallel to the zigzag direction of graphene. It should be noted that the phase diagram of SnSe 106 has a significant difference compared with those of either SnTe 107 or PbTe. 108 Sn (Pb) and Te form only one stable binary compound, which is Sn(Pb)Te; however, Sn and Se can form both SnSe and SnSe 2 . Therefore, when growing SnTe (PbTe) from separate Sn (Pb) and Te evaporation sources, it is safe to apply extra Te flux, as the excessive Te molecules will re-evaporate at sufficiently high substrate temperatures. Nevertheless, if SnSe is grown in this way, the Se flux must be carefully controlled to prevent the formation of SnSe 2 . Another simpler solution is to directly evaporate SnSe molecules from high-purity SnSe granules, which is the method adopted in the two-step growth process described above. In principle, other MX monolayers, such as GeS, GeSe and SnS, can also be grown in a similar way as SnSe, if their nuclei are also 1-ML thick at certain temperatures. However, given that these materials have larger lattice buckling than SnSe, the size of nuclei islands in the first step probably needs to be further reduced. Currently, the lateral size of SnSe nanoplates prepared by this method is mainly limited by the distance between neighboring nuclei. Controlling the density of nucleation centers on graphene substrates is an important topic for further studies. In 2017, Jiang et al. reported a two-step growth-etching method of obtaining monolayer SnSe flakes that are tens of μm wide, as shown in Fig. The mechanism behind this etching process is intriguing. The authors have tried different types of etching gases, including pure Ar, an Ar/H 2 mixture, and pure H 2 . The etching effect of pure Ar is very weak, while pure H 2 causes severe deterioration at the surface of the flakes. An Ar/H 2 mixture has a similar etching effect as nitrogen, but the latter is safer since it is not flammable. Furthermore, according to the experiments in which the etching times were varied from 1 to 20 min, there is, likely, a self-limiting mechanism: the etching halts once the whole flake is uniformly 1-ML thick. This mechanism is especially ideal for the fabrication of devices based on large monolayer SnSe flakes. The reason for this self-limiting etching process is still not clear. Nevertheless, the etching process is not layer-by-layer, but rather starts from the edges of a flake, which hinders precise thickness control for creating uniform several-ML thick flakes. Etching using a high-power laser is another approach that can etch the mechanically exfoliated MX flakes down to atomic thicknesses. In 2018, Zhao et al. and Mao et al. reported the laser etching of GeSe flakes, from over 100 nm to a lowest thickness of 1.5 nm, as illustrated in Fig. However, it should be noted that, although the authors as- cribe the thinnest GeSe (1.5 nm) to a single monolayer, this thickness is not consistent with other reports: both the MBE grown and nitrogen etched monolayer MX flakes reviewed above show thicknesses of 0.5 ∼0.6 nm in STM or AFM measurements, and the other 2-ML thick MX flakes that will be discussed below are 1.0∼1.1 nm thick from AFM studies. Further studies are needed to clarifying this thickness mystery and the detailed mechanisms of laser etching. Since a simple scotch tape exfoliation method has not yet been shown to generate atomically-thin MX flakes, liquid phase exfoliation recipes have been developed, which include three main steps, as illustrated in Fig 7 (a). In a first step, bulk MX crystalline granules or powders are ultrasonicated in a solvent, during which the cavity bubbles generated by the intense sound waves will collapse to form a high energy jet, which breaks the bulk layered compounds into thin sheets. Several factors are important in determining the yield from liquid phase exfoliation procedures. First, the surface tension and polarity of the solvents, which influence the rate of re-stacking of the nanosheets, play essential roles in the exfoliation processes. Furthermore, given that MX materials are promising for lithium-ion batteries because of their high energy capacity, 110 high Li + diffusion coefficient 111 and low diffusion barrier, 112 there have been a series of studies concerning liquid phase exfoliation after Li ion intercalation into bulk MX materials, As a fast and low-cost method for producing nanomaterials for large scale industrial applications, the solution phase synthesis of MX nanosheets has drawn significant attention. Because of the highly anisotropic crystalline structure of MX materials, colloidal thin flakes can be generated through chemical reactions that take place in organic solvents With this procedure, one can usually obtain several-nmthick nanosheets with lateral sizes of several hundred nanometers. Specifically, in 2013, Li et al. reported the synthesis of ∼300 nm-wide and 2-ML thick SnSe nanosheets (referred to as "single-layer" in the article, which actually means a single unit cell, or 4 atomic layers) using a one-pot recipe, which was the thinnest MX nanosheet that had been formed at that time [Fig. In Fig. Based on current studies, there are two possible routes to solve this dilemma. First, since this limit originates from the intrinsic properties of MX, one can introduce extrinsic factors to enhance the anisotropy of MX flakes. Proper choice of substrates and synthesis recipes could make the tendency for lateral growth stronger. For example, monolayer nanosheets of SnTe, over 1 μm in extent, have been found using MBE growth. In this Perspective, we have reviewed experimental approaches that have successfully created monolayer MX, as well as those that could be used to generate monolayer MX in the near future. Currently, clear reports of the creation of MX monolayers include MBE grown SnTe, PbTe and SnSe (among which the growth of monolayer SnSe adopts a two-step recipe), and SnSe flakes that are synthesized by CVD and then etched in a nitrogen atmosphere. Laser etching of mechanically exfoliated GeSe nanoflakes can also achieve a stable thickness of 1.5 nm. Despite them being claimed as monolayers, the actual thickness of the laser thinned samples needs to be cross-checked by further experiments. Both the chemical nitrogen etching and physical laser etching processes exhibit self-limiting mechanisms, which allow large windows for the etching parameters. Furthermore, 2-ML thick MX flakes can be created through liquid phase exfoliation and solution phase synthesis. We have quantitatively compared the dimensions of the MX flakes fabricated in various approaches, and suggest that the introduction of extra anisotropy during synthesis or by using post-etching techniques are the keys to the creation of large-size monolayer MX flakes. Note added: We noticed that a study of the PVD growth of monolayer SnS and the demonstration of its in-plane ferroelectricity was published during peer review. a [C] Calculations; [E] Experiments.