Solution processed quantum dot (QD) lasers are one of the holy-grails of nanoscience. They are not yet commercialized because the lasing threshold is too high: one needs > 1 exciton per QD, which is hard to achieve due to fast non-radiative Auger recombination. The threshold can however be reduced by electronic doping of the QDs, which decreases the absorption near the band-edge, such that the stimulated emission (SE) can easily outcompete absorption. Here, we show that by electrochemically doping films of CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs we achieve quantitative control over the gain threshold. We obtain stable and reversible doping more than two electrons per QD. We quantify the gain threshold and the charge carrier dynamics using ultrafast spectroelectrochemistry and achieve quantitative agreement between experiments and theory, including a vanishingly low gain threshold for doubly doped QDs. Over a range of wavelengths with appreciable gain coefficients, the gain thresholds reach record-low values of ~10 -5 excitons per QD. These results demonstrate an unprecedented level of control over the gain threshold in doped QD solids, paving the way for the creation of cheap, solution-processable low-threshold QD-lasers. Colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are attractive materials for solution-processable and color-tunable lasers To overcome these limitations, prolonged Auger lifetimes up to a nanosecond have been achieved in QD heterostructures. A potentially more controllable method to suppress absorption employs QD charging Modelling the effect of state filling, stimulated emission and carrier relaxation on optical gain, we get good agreement between the predicted and experimentally determined gain threshold and gain lifetime as a function of <n 1S(e) >. This demonstrates that we have quantitative control over the optical gain in these QD solids. We synthesized wurtzite core-shell-shell CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs for the experiments presented here. Details regarding the synthesis To benchmark these QDs we first measure the optical gain threshold in solution. We determine the absorption cross section (σ = 3.6±0.2 •10 -14 cm 2 at the 400 nm pump wavelength) of the QDs, from the fluence dependence of Auger recombination The electronic transitions leading to optical gain in intrinsic and doped QDs are schematically depicted in Figure To quantitatively evaluate the optical gain, we spectrally average the TA spectrum over the band-edge transition at 5 ps time delay [dashed vertical lines in Fig To quantify the relationship between optical gain and electronic doping, we need precise control over the doping density inside the QD film. Using spectroelectrochemical (SEC) measurements, we controllably inject carriers into the QD films, monitoring changes in the photoluminescence and absorption of the film to determine the doping density. We prepared QD-films by spincoating a QD dispersion in toluene on a conductive ITO-on-glass substrate, followed by crosslinking the QDs with 1,7-diaminoheptane, to ensure the films have a good electron mobility (see Methods). The magnitude of the band-edge bleach is equal to the ground state absorption (A 0 ) at roughly -1.4V, indicating that the 1S(e) level is completely filled. Figure The top row of Figure From left to right the excitation density increases. Figure (e) a zoom-in of (d) the spectral region from 600-700 nm, plotted on a logarithmic scale. We observe <N gain,λ > = 10 -3 -10 -5 in regions with significant negative absorption. (f) Gain coefficient at 605 nm for various doping densities. The gain coefficients saturate around 800 cm -1 . Finally, we combine all experiments shown above to develop a model that quantitatively describes optical gain in doped QDs. We model the excited state absorption in a QD film using the transition model counting model discussed in the SI, section 1.1-1.5, and in ref We define the optical gain lifetime as the amount of time after photoexcitation that the average excited state 1S absorption remains negative. The extracted gain lifetimes increase with both increasing <N X > and with increasing <n 1S(e) >. For undoped QD films the highest gain lifetime is ~0.5 ns, while for doped QD it reaches ~1 ns. To model the gain dynamics, we set up a system of coupled differential equations that take Auger decay of (charged) multiexcitons into account (see SI, section S1.5). From the fluence-dependent fsTA data, we extract a biexciton lifetime of 310 ps (see SI). We assume that Auger rates scale with the number of electrons and holes as outlined by the group of These results demonstrate the possibility to use our analytical model to accurately describe the relationship between the carrier population and optical gain in QD solids. Furthermore, complementing the transition counting model with a description of excitonic decay allows a precise prediction of the gain lifetime. Having been validated on this dataset, the model provides useful insight on the lasing characteristics of different QD materials of known band-edge degeneracies and Auger lifetimes, and can be used to direct the development of novel devices. So far, we have focused on the spectrally averaged gain threshold <N gain,1S >, as this is most insightful to study the effects of state filling on absorption and stimulated emission, without complications from spectral shifts that result from doping or optical excitation. However, for practical applications, a more relevant value is the gain threshold at a single wavelength, where light amplification is to take place, <N gain,λ >. In Figure The decrease of the optical gain threshold is clearly visible for the 1S transition, highlighted with the yellow area in the graph. For comparison, the gain coefficient spectra (at a fluence of <N X > = 5.9) are also plotted in the same figure. These are obtained from the excited state absorption spectra and the film thickness d = 116 ± 13 nm (see Methods), as g = 12 * 34()/) . Figure Figure We have demonstrated precise experimental and theoretical control over the optical gain threshold in QD solids, via controlled and reversible electrochemical doping. After electrochemically injecting on average two electrons per QD into the 1S(e) electron level, we show that the spectrally integrated 1S gain threshold is as low as 0.09 excitons per QD. We achieve record low single wavelength gain thresholds down to ~10 -5 excitons per QD, gain coefficients up to 800 cm -1 , and a gain lifetime of ~1 ns. Furthermore, we are able to model the gain threshold reduction for the electrochemical charging and the resulting gain lifetimes quantitatively. These results pave the way to achieve optically pumped QD lasers operating at low excitation fluences. The CdSe core nanocrystals were synthesized according to a method by Chen et al. The mixture was slowly stirred (it prevents the CdO from creeping up the inside of the flask) and degassed at this temperature for one hour. The mixture was heated up to 320 o C, where the liquid turned into a clear and colorless solution. Note that depending on the batch of QDs the time it took for the solution to become clear varied from 20 minutes to 4 hours; this has likely something to do with the impurities in one of the chemicals. 1 mL of trioctylphosphine (TOP) was added to the solution, and the temperature was raised to 380 o C, at which point 0.5 mL of a Se-precursor solution (60mg Se in 0.5mL TOP) was swiftly injected. After a specific growth time the reaction mixture was cooled with an air-gun to room temperature. For the CdSe cores in this work, we used a growth time of ±25 seconds. The crude product is washed once by addition of a 1:1 volume ratio of methyl acetate, followed by centrifugation at 3000 rpm, and redispersion into hexane. Solution is then filtered through several milipore filters (the polymerized ligands clog the filters easily) with a pore diameter of 0.2 μm. The filtered solution is washed and centrifuged again as described above, redispersed in hexane and the resulting sample is stored in a nitrogen purged glovebox for further use. The solution was washed twice by addition of methanol:butanol (1:2), centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes, and once with methylacetate followed by centrifugation at 3000 rpm. The precipitate was each time redispersed in hexane. Finally, the solution was filtered through milipore filters with a pore diameter of 0.2 μm and stored in a nitrogen purged glovebox for further use. Using the above method, we synthesized a batch of core-shell-shell CdSe/8CdS/2ZnS QDs. QDs-on-ITO film preparation. We prepared a concentrated solution (roughly 20 mg/mL) of QDs in toluene. Before spincoating, the ITO slide is cleaned by sonication in isopropanol and rinsing with ethanol and acetone, followed by drying with an airgun. The slide is placed inside a UV-Ozone cleaner for 30 minutes prior to spincoating, to increase the wetting of the QD solution on the ITO. The spincoating was performed by gently dropcasting 40 μL of the QD dispersion on the ITO slide, followed by spincoating for 1 minute at 1000 rpm (with a ramp rate of 200 rpm/s). The film is taken inside a N2 purged glovebox, where we dropcast a solution of 0.5 M 1,7-diaminoheptane in methanol on top of the ITO slide, letting the methanol of this solution evaporate, followed by submerging the substrate into clean methanol. This ligand exchange/stripping procedure is repeated two more times, to ensure proper ligand exchange/stripping. Without performing this treatment, we are not able to electrochemically inject any electrons into the 1S(e) conduction band state of the QD film, as the film is not conductive enough and the electrons cannot hop from QD to QD. absorption term, rather it will not contribute to the band-edge transition's oscillator strength. There are subtle differences between equations S3 and S4 after going from a single particle picture to an ensemble picture. Both equations S3 and S4 are plotted in Figure Again, the above equations in practice holds for a single QD. We use g e = 2 and g h = 4 unless mentioned otherwise. In an ensemble of QDs, e.g. in solution or in a film, we create a Poisson distribution of excitations, and generate a certain average number of excitons per QD, <N>. For each <N> we can calculate the Poisson distribution, and calculate the absorption for each N, and sum them up weighted by their relative Poissonian probability; (eq. S5) Note that <N> and N are separate variables. The summation runs over all populations that have an N number of excitons. Care needs to be taken into account that the summation over N runs up to higher values than one wants to quantify for <N> (in our case we run our summation up to i = 20, and our experimental data goes up to <N> = 9). In reality, one can also omit N's for which the Poissonian weight becomes less than 1%. The gain threshold, the average number of excitons needed per QD in order to set A*(<N>) = 0, can be obtained numerically, and equals The absorption for QDs charged with additional electrons can be calculated by adjusting equation S2/S3. We omit noting g from now on and will always calculate the absorption in units of g; With n ! = N + n !;6!$ , the total number of electrons in the 1S(e) state being equal to the number of excitons optically excited in the QD plus the number of electrochemically injected electrons into this state. Using the same formalism as above, we take into account that when more electrons (or holes) than the degeneracy of the band-edge states are present, they should not contribute to absorption and stimulated emission terms of the band-edge transition; A * (N, n )*+), ) = Max(g + -N, 0)Max(g ) -N -n )*+), , 0) -Min(N, g + )Min(N + n )*+), , g ) ). (eq. S6) Equation S6 is equal to equation 1 in the main text. This equation assumes that there is no distribution in doping levels, i.e. every QD in the ensemble has exactly n echem electrons in their 1S(e) level. The results of equation S6 (on an ensemble level, i.e. plugged into equation S6, are plotted in Figure In the discussion above we assumed that there was no distribution of electron occupancies. A more realistic approach would be to assume a Fermi-Dirac distribution of the electrons throughout the 1S(e) state; Where n i will give the fractional occupancy of state i, e i is the energy of state i, μ is the chemical potential, k B is Boltzmann's constant, T temperature. To get the total number of electrons in state i, we can multiply n i with the degeneracy of the state (g e = 2). However, we obtain information on a macroscopic scale, not on the microscopic occupancy of the state, i.e. we cannot obtain the fraction of neutral, singly charged and doubly charged through this formalism. These can be obtained as follows; we start by calculating the grand canonical partition function, in which the system can exchange both energy and particles, which has the general form: Z = ∑ g : e =(-. >1? . ) : (eq. S7) Where the sum runs over all microstates where N i particles have energy e i in contact with a heat reservoir with b = 1/k B T, and g i the number of microstates with the same energy e i . We rewrite the equation in units of potential instead of chemical potential (V=μ/e, with e the elementary charge) and the energy of state i as a potential difference (e i = eV i ); Z = ∑ g : e =!(-. @1@ . ) : (eq. S8) We now write the partition function for all three microstates; neutral (I), singly charged (II) and doubly charged (III) species: I. Neutral quantum dots. We inject zero electrons, so N 0 = 0 and we set V 0 = 0. The degeneracy of this microstate g 0 = 1 and partition function becomes Z 0 = 1. Singly charged QDs. Since we inject one electron, N 1 = 1, and we set V 1 = V 1S , the potential of the 1S(e) electron state. Since we can fill either state from the twofold degenerate 1S(e), the degeneracy of this microstate g 1 = 2. The partition function for this microstate becomes Z 1 = 2e =!(@1@ 45 ) . III. Doubly charged QDs. We completely fill the 1S(e) level with electrons; N 2 = 2, and V 2 = 2V 1S . There might be some charging energy V C related to injection of the second electron into the 1S(e) state, which we can take into account as V 2 = 2V 1S + V C . The degeneracy for this microstate g 2 = 1, so the total partition function becomes The total partition function for our 1S(e) level is equal to the sum of I, II and III and becomes Z = 1 + 2e =!(@1@ 45 ) + e =!(0@10@ 45 1@ 6 ) (eq. S9) The fraction of neutral f 0 , singly charged f 1 and doubly charged f 2 QDs as a function of applied potential can be now calculated using g : e =!(-. @1@ . ) (eq. S10) and we obtain for the three fractions (as shown in I, II and III) ) Z e =!(0@10@ 45 1@ 6 ) (eq. S11-S13) The average number of electrons at each potential can be written based on these fractions; We fitted equation S14 to the data showing <n e > versus potential to the data presented in Figure One could b as a fit parameter for the potential vs. <n e > data, where the effective temperature will act as measure for the disorder, and hence the width of the graph. We think the more physical approach is to fix b (to room temperature, which is » 40 eV -1 ) and instead write the 1S(e) state as a broadened normal distribution; e 78/8 45 9 :; 45 : (eq. S15) Where s 1S now contains the width of the curve. We could fix s 1S to the width of the absorption peak of the 1S transition (» 50 meV), but we choose to keep it as a fit parameter. Next to the linewidth of the 1S absorption transition, it now also contains other sources of disorder in the system (e.g. local variations of (dielectric) environment around QDs, electrostatic disorder, etc.). We now have to integrate equation S14 over the potential; 78/8 45 9 :; 45 We fit a numerical form of this integral and use V 1S , V C and s 1S as fit parameters. When either equation S14 or equation S16 are fitted, we obtain the same result, as shown in Figure Instead, now using the width of the normally distributed 1S level, we obtain a width of s 1S = 110 mV. This is significantly broader than the width of the 1S absorption transition (» 50 meV); we hypothesize that this additional broadening is due to electrostatic (and other forms of) disorder. We varied the charging energy V C that we obtain from the fit (5 meV) and plot the results in Figure We now outline the model for acquiring an optical gain threshold for each doping density. The workflow of the model is schematically illustrated in Figure Each term in equation S17 corresponds to equation S6, with a varied number of electrochemically injected electrons into the 1S(e) state n echem = 0, 1, or 2. The absorption is calculated according to equation S5 (which takes into account the Poissonian excitation of the QD film), where we plug in equation S17. The excitation density at which the absorption becomes zero, i.e. <N gain >, is found numerically, and the process is repeated for different levels of <n e >. Summarizing, the full equation for computing the absorption as a function of the number of excitons and electrochemically injected electrons into the 1S(e) level can be computed as: " ,-.,* A-(eq. S17) We now adapt the models of section 1.3 and section 1.4 to predict the time-dependent evolution of the absorption based on the experimentally obtained Auger rates for the decay of the biexcitons and triexcitons in the film. After photoexcitation, the average number of excitons per QD, <N>, starts decreasing, as a consequence of Auger recombination. To predict the time-dependence of the excited state absorption we need to compute the initial fraction of the QD population in each multiexciton state, and then compute the evolution in time of those fractions as Auger recombination takes place. To compute the initial fraction of QDs in each multiexciton state, we first used Poisson statistics to calculate the fraction of QDs photoexcited with N i excitons given an average number <N> of excitons in the QD ensemble, f P (N i ,<N>) for N i =0,..., N max , as described in Section 1.1. We then computed the fraction of QDs with 0, 1 and 2 electrochemically injected electrons, f FD (n e ) for n e =0,1,2, as described in Section 1.3. Finally, the fraction of QDs that can be found at t=0 in the multiexciton state characterized by N i photoexcited exciton and n e electrochemically injected electrons will be given by: f(N : , n ! , t = 0) = f F (N : , 〈N〉) * f GH (n ! ) (eq. S18) In order to evolve the multiexciton population in time, we need to solve a system of differential equations coupling together different multiexcitonic states. Since Auger recombination results in the recombination of one or more of the excitons in a QD, the imbalance between negative and positive charges, set by the initial number of electrochemically injected electrons, is conserved throughout the recombination. Therefore, we can split the system of differential equations in three coupled systems, characterized by the number of electrochemically injected electrons (i.e. multiexcitons with different n e are not coupled to each other): where N max is the highest number of photoexcited excitons that is taken into account in the model, as explained in Section 1. If a multiexciton has e electrons and h holes, the number of electron-hole pair that can recombine via Auger recombination is e*h, while the number of remaining carriers that can accept the energy of the recombining pair is max(e-1,0)+max(h-1,0). Therefore, the total number of Auger transitions is: In our experiment, all holes are photogenerated, while a certain number of electrons (0, 1, or 2) can be injected electrochemically. Therefore, the formula for the number of Auger transitions in a multiexciton with N photoexcited excitons and n e electrochemically injected electrons is: Therefore, the recombination rate of the multiexciton will be: We first define fractions of absorbed, reflected and transmitted light; S @ (eq. S23) (eq. S24) (eq. S25) Where F A , F R and F t are the fractions of absorbed, reflected and transmitted light respectively. I 0 is the incoming light intensity, and I A , I R and I t stand for reflected, absorbed and transmitted light intensity. As mentioned before, we assume the films do not scatter, and the following relations should hold; F L + F 2 + F T = 1 (eq. S26-1) When the film has a reflectance of 0, i.e. F R = 0, we can write that F t = 1 -F A and A = -log (1 -F 2 ) )/ = -log (F L ) )/ (eq. S27) or F A = 1 -F t = 1 -10 -A . When a substrate has a finite reflectance, this is no longer valid, since not all the light that reaches the detector (the transmittance) is lost due to absorption; F T + F L = 10 12 = 1 -F 2 (eq. S28) Note that now the fraction of absorbed light only depends on the absorbance (r.h.s. of equation SXX). The differential absorbance that is regularly computed in a TA experiments (DA * ), i.e. from equation S27, and the corresponding differential reflectance (DR) are given by; (eq. S30) Where I t,on , I t,off , I R,on and I R,off are the transmitted probe light with (on) or without (off) and the reflected probe light with (on) or without (off) respectively. We now compute the absorption, when taking into account reflectance of a substrate, i.e. we plug equations S26-1 and S26-2 into equation S27 to obtain: (eq. S31) The true differential absorption, DA, is now given by: We continue rewriting this expression; (eq. S32) Equation S32 only contains static variables (all containing pump-off intensities), so we should be able to rewrite this in terms of measurable quantities, i.e. fractions of reflected and absorbed light. Multiplying both fractions in the logarithm with I 0 / I 0 yields (eq. S33) Where we have rewritten the fraction of transmitted light F t in to fractions of absorbed and reflected light (as measured in absorption spectrometers with integrating spheres). Using the above equation, we are able to correct the DA * signal into a true change in absorption after photoexcitation (DA) by measuring the DR, F R and F A spectra. We note that in our current experimental setup, it is not possible to measure the change in reflectance (nor the steady-state reflectance spectrum) in our spectroelectrochemical cell -we cannot obtain enough reflected probe light on our detector to do these measurements. We therefore approximate the change in reflectance at a certain applied potential with the change in reflectance at the open circuit potential. We think this is justified, since the band-edge DA amplitude at the open circuit potential is not changed significantly, whereas the sub-bandgap signal (mostly caused by changes in reflection of the sample) is reduced to zero after the correction. The lifetime of the multiexcitonic species (biexciton and triexcitons) were obtained by fitting the data with an increasing number of exponentials. The lowest fluence data was fitted with a single exponential decay. The decay rate r i was fixed for higher order exponential functions, and the amplitude A i was allowed to vary; -∆A(t) = BG + ∑ A : e 1\ . L X :.) (eq. S35) We used a constant background (BG), as the signal does not decay fully in our pump-probe delay time window. We fitted up to three exponential terms for increasing fluences and interpret each increasing term i as originating from a higher order excitonic species (i.e. i = 1: exciton decayà i = 2: biexciton decay à i = 3: triexciton decay). and 1.6 mL of OLAM. The oleylamine serves as a stabilizing ligand for the Zn-oleate, since this has the tendency to solidify out of solution at room temperature otherwise. The mixture was heated up in a 20 mL vial inside o C under nitrogen flow and magnetic stirring. During the heating, when the temperature reached 240 o C, a desired amount of Cdoleate (diluted in ODE) and 1-octanethiol (diluted in 8 mL ODE) were injected dropwise into the growth solution at a rate of half a CdS monolayer per hour using a syringe pump. We define one CdS monolayer as one full layer of Cd and one full layer of S on the NC surface (i.e. half a unit cell). After the addition of the CdS shell-precursors was finished, but before the growth of the ZnS shell, the core-shell QDs containing solution was degassed at a pressure of 0.5 mbar for one hour at 120 o C. 1.6 Obtaining the true Transient-Absorption signal: correcting the Transient-Transmission data for changes in reflection of the sample upon photoexcitation ............................................................... Solution TA data ......................................................................................................................... Absorption cross-section determination in solution .......................................................................... TA data film ................................................................................................................................ Dataset on second batch of QDs with lower PLQY ................................................................... Error calculations throughout the paper ................................................................................... SUPPLEMENTARY REFERENCES ................................................................................................. mentioned. Acetonitril was dried before use in an Innovative Technology PureSolv Micro column. All other chemicals were used as received, unless specifically mentioned.