We use first-principles calculation within the density functional theory (DFT) to explore the electronic properties on stage-1 Li-and Li+-graphite-intercalation compounds (GIC) for different concentrations, LiCx/Li+Cx with x= 6,12,18,24,32 and 36. The essential properties, e.g. geometric structures, band structures and spatial charge distributions are determined by the hybridization of orbitals, the main focus of our works. The band structures/density of states/spatial charge distribution display that the Li-GIC possesses blue shift of fermi energy and just like metals, but the Li+-GIC still preserves as original graphite or so-call semimetal possessing the same densities of free electrons and holes. According to these properties, we find that there exists weak but significant van der Waals interactions between interlayer of graphite, and 2s-2pz hybridization between Li and C. There scarcely exists strong interactions between Li+-C. The dominant interaction between the Li and C is 2s-2pz orbital-orbital couple; the orbital-orbital couple is not significant in Li+ and C case but the dipole-diploe couple. Green energy is one of the most important issues in the whole world. The limited resource, such as fossil fuel, will be consume eventually. Besides that, the concomitant environmental pollution is also inevitable. Therefore, it gives rise to the efficient storage of electrical energy. Apart from the resources on earth, the solar power is the most potential energy for human. Years passed, to dealing with the problems of energetic storage, the rechargeable batteries emerged, which possess anodes, cathodes and electrolytes. Many previous theoretical and experimental studies are focused on lithium batteries and lithium-ion batteries because of the low costs, high safety and long cycle life. For the most part, the anodes are composed of carbon and non-carbon materials. The former is the well-known graphite, and the latter can be lithium, sodium or other ionic clusters. This kind of anodes are almost performed as graphite-intercalation compounds (GIC), that is to say, the lithium atoms (or other atoms) are intercalated into the graphite layers. Graphite with layered structures is easily intercalated by alkali-metal atoms. The carbon-layered system is purely composed of the hexagonal symmetric lattice, in which there exists week but significant van der Waals (vdW) interactions. The vdW interactions modify the low-lying energy band structures and dominate the essential physical properties of graphite of GIC. The electronic properties strongly depend on the stacking configurations the graphitic layers perform. In general, there are three well known kinds of stacking configurations: AA (simple hexagonal), AB (Bernal), ABC (rhombohedral) The comparisons between Li-GIC and A-GIC are widely discussed in the past years, but few theoretical and experimental researches on Li-ion-GIC and alkali-ion-GIC are explored. In this work, we mainly focus on the orbital hybridizations in lithium and lithium-ion GICs by presenting the essential structural and electronic properties. We consider the different concentrations on uniform situation of intercalations, i.e., this paper only covers the stage-1 type for different concentrations. In addition, the optimal adatom positon is located in the hollow site The density functional theory (DFT) The first Brillouin zone is sampled in a Gamma scheme by 10 × 10 × 10 k-points meshes for optimization and 30 × 30 × 30 k-points meshes for electronic structures. The energy convergence is set to be 10 -5 eV for two simulation steps. The maximum Hellmann-Feynman force on each atom is less than 0.01 eV/ Ȧ. The details of calculation processes are in the flowchart [Fig. The geometric symmetries of graphite are diversified by the chemical intercalation. The Li/Li+ can be easily intercalated into the interlayer spacing because of the week but significant van der Waals interactions. There are three frequent types of absorptions positions, hollow site, top site and bridge site, for intercalant atoms. The hollow-site position possesses the lowest ground energies, that is to say, the hollow-site position is the most stable geomet-ric configuration The heights of LiCx and Li+Cx decrease with the higher concentrations. Apparently, compared to the pristine graphite lattice with experimental interlayer distance of 3.550 Ȧ The pristine AA-stacking graphite possesses an unusual electronic structure, including the same amounts of free electrons and holes within -0. For intercalations of Li atom, the asymmetry of electron and hole bands becomes much notable. Apparently, the Fermi level presents the blue shift, compared to the pristine graphite, and does not intersects with any valence bands [Fig. For the intercalations of Li+ ions, it is quite different from the Li case. The band structures do not exhibit the apparent shift of Fermi level, estimated to be 0.088 eV, 0.042 eV, 0.036 eV, 0.026 eV 0.018 eV and 0.026 eV for x=6, 12, 18, 24, 32 and 36, seen in Fig. that is, the Fermi level maintains the situation similar to the pristine graphite. Moreover, the initial σ bands, displaying as shoulder structures in the orbit-projected density of states near -2.6 eV∼-2.9 eV at Γ point, present blue shift relatively to the Li ones; in the other words, the bands are deeper or more stable in the Li intercalations than in the Li+. The spatial charge distributions (ρ) and variations (∆ρ) of Li-and Li+-GICs are illustrated in Fig. For Li+-ion intercalations, the variations present quite different characteristic. The ∆ρ between Li+ ions and C atoms are broader and lighter than the Li-atom cases with light green and yellow colors in Fig. the Li+-GICs exhibit the charge transfers of for Li+C6, Li+C12, Li+C18, Li+C24, Li+C32 and Li+C36, respectively. Seen in Table In summary, we present the current work from first-principles calculations within GGA method. The previous studies 