The influence of strain amplitude, glass stability and thermal fluctuations on shear band formation and yielding transition is studied using molecular dynamics simulations. The model binary mixture is first gradually cooled below the glass transition temperature and then periodically deformed to access a broad range of potential energy states. We find that the critical strain amplitude becomes larger for highly annealed glasses within about one thousand shear cycles. Moreover, upon continued loading at a fixed strain amplitude, the yielding transition is delayed in glasses mechanically annealed to lower energy states. It is also demonstrated that nucleation of a small cluster of atoms with large nonaffine displacements precedes a sharp energy change associated with the yielding transition. These results are important for thermal and mechanical processing of amorphous alloys with tunable mechanical and physical properties. Understanding how the disordered atomic structure of amorphous alloys evolves under thermal or mechanical treatments is important for predicting their physical and mechanical properties In recent years, the structural relaxation dynamics and yielding transition in amorphous materials under periodic loading conditions were extensively studied using atomistic simulations . Remarkably, it was found that following a number of transient deformation cycles, the particle trajectories in a disordered solid at zero temperature become exactly reversible and fall into the so-called 'limit cycles' In this paper, the effects of temperature, degree of annealing, and strain amplitude on the yielding transition in amorphous alloys are investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. The model glass is represented by the binary mixture, which is gradually cooled below the glass transition temperature and then further annealed via small-amplitude cyclic loading to progressively lower energy states. It will be shown that the critical strain amplitude increases for more stable glasses loaded during about one thousand cycles at finite temperatures. On the other hand, the yielding transition is delayed in lower energy glasses subjected to thousands of shear cycles with a fixed strain amplitude. The contents of this paper are as follows. We describe the details of molecular dynamics simulations and the deformation protocol in the next section. The numerical results for the mechanical annealing, potential energy, mechanical properties, and shear band formation during the yielding transition in periodically driven binary glasses are presented in section III. The brief summary is given in the last section. The composition of the amorphous alloy consists of (80:20) binary mixture with strongly non-additive interaction between different types of atoms, which suppresses crystallization upon cooling with the parameters: ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AA = 1.0, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, and m A = m B The binary mixture was first thoroughly equilibrated at the temperature T LJ = 1.0 ε/k B and density ρ = ρ A +ρ B = 1.2 σ -3 . Here, k B denotes the Boltzmann constant. For reference, the critical temperature of the KA model at this density is T c = 0.435 ε/k B Following the equilibration period, the system was linearly cooled below the glass transition at the rate 10 In order to access lower potential energy states, periodic shear deformation along the xz plane was imposed as follows: where γ 0 is the strain amplitude and T = 5000 τ is the oscillation period. The cyclic loading was first applied at T LJ = 0.30 ε/k B and the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.035. It was previously shown that this value of strain amplitude is below the yielding strain at , and the relaxation rate (the potential energy decrease over time) is relatively large Amorphous alloys like metallic glasses are typically formed upon rapid cooling across the glass transition temperature, and, due to the absence of topological defects, the yield stress during deformation is relatively large In particular, it was recently shown that the critical strain amplitude increases in well annealed glasses subjected to athermal quasistaic cyclic shear deformation The potential energy per atom at the end of each cycle is reported in Fig. Next, after a certain number of cycles when strain is zero, the binary glass was cooled from T LJ = 0.30 ε/k B to either T LJ = 0.10 ε/k B or 0.01 ε/k B during the time interval 10 4 τ . The resulting energy levels at the selected cycles are shown in Fig. We first evaluate the mechanical properties of steadily sheared glasses and their dependence on the degree of annealing. After the amorphous system was brought from specifically, the critical strain amplitude of the yielding transition is in the range 0.054 < γ 0 < 0.056 in Fig. It should be mentioned that the characteristic increase in potential energy above the critical strain amplitude, which is associated with the formation of a system-spanning shear band, was repeatedly reported in the previous MD studies We next report the potential energy as a function of the number of cycles at the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.060 and temperature T LJ = 0.1 ε/k B in Fig. Similar results are also observed in Fig. For reference, the lowest potential energy in the KA glass cooled at 10 -2 ε/k B τ and then periodically deformed during thousands of shear cycles at As shown in Fig. As discussed below, the slight increase in the potential energy is associated with nucleation of small clusters of atoms with irreversible trajectories. Further insights into the microscopic dynamics of atoms during cyclic deformation can be gained by inspecting the so-called nonaffine displacements. Briefly, the deviation from the affine deformation for a group of atoms can be quantified via the nonaffine measure D 2 (t, ∆t), which is defined via the transformation matrix J i as follows: where ∆t is the time interval between successive positions of N i atoms, and the sum is taken over nearest neighbors of the i-th atom elastostatic loading The sequence of snapshots of atomic configurations are presented in Fig. Qualitatively similar results were observed during cyclic loading with the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.080 at the lower temperature T LJ = 0.01 ε/k B . The selected snapshots in Fig. In summary, molecular dynamics simulations were performed to investigate the influence of glass stability, temperature, and strain amplitude on reversibility and yielding transition in cyclically loaded amorphous materials. The model glass consists of a mixture of two types of atoms with strongly non-additive interactions, which forms a disordered solid when gradually cooled below the glass transition temperature. A wide range of potential energy states were accessed via small-amplitude periodic deformation during thousands of shear cycles. It was shown that both the shear modulus and peak value of the stress overshoot increase in more stable glasses. Furthermore, we found that the critical strain amplitude increases in glasses mechanically annealed to lower potential energies when periodically deformed for about one thousand shear cycles at a finite temperature. At the same time, if the strain amplitude is fixed, the yielding transition is delayed in highly annealed glasses deformed over thousands of cycles. The spatial analysis of nonaffine displacements elucidates the process of strain localization, which includes a nucleation of a small cluster of atoms with irreversible trajectories, followed by propagation of a shear band along a plane. 