Proper characterisation of investigated samples is vital when studying superconductivity as impurities and doping inhomogeneities can affect the physical properties of the measured system. We present a method where a polarised neutron imaging setup utilises the precession of spin-polarised neutrons in the presence of a trapped field in the superconducting sample to spatially map out the critical temperature for the phase transition between superconducting and non-superconducting states. We demonstrate this method on a superconducting crystal of the prototypical high-temperature superconductor (La,Sr) 2 CuO 4 . The results, which are backed up by complementary magnetic susceptibility measurements, show that the method is able to resolve minor variations in the transition temperature across the length of the LSCO crystal, caused by inhomogeneities in strontium doping. More than 30 years after Bednorz and Müller's discovery of superconductivity (SC) at temperatures above 30 K One of the many advantages of using neutrons as a probe is their charge neutrality, which makes them interact rather weakly with most matter In this paper, we demonstrate the use of polarised neutron imaging The sample used throughout this study is a cylindrically shaped (17.9 mm height, 4.75 mm diameter and ∼5 g mass) non-annealed LSCO sample with nominal Sr doping x = 0.08. The crystal has been grown using the Travelling Solvent Floating Zone technique (TSFZ) Previous experimental studies have revealed a strong critical temperature anisotropy in LSCO superconductors. Measurements performed with applied magnetic field parallel to the a-b plane show a higher critical temperature as well as an unexpected paramagnetic Meissner effect, recorded in the field cooled process under low applied magnetic fields In order to probe the doping distribution along the entire length of the crystal in a non-destructive manner, we have performed polarised neutron imaging experiments at the PONTO-III (V21) instrument at the BER II nuclear reactor in Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin. The instrumental set-up is shown in Figure In a polarised neutron imaging experiment there are two main methods of determining the superconducting critical temperature: by probing the Meissner transition or by imaging the trapped magnetic flux inside the superconductor as a function of temperature The single crystal used in this study was aligned in the (b-c) plane and mounted on an aluminium sample holder inside a closed cycle refrigerator which was able to reach temperatures as low as 4.5 K. During the cooling procedure, a pair of Helmholtz coils were used to apply a horizontal magnetic field parallel to the c-axis of the sample and perpendicular to the neutron beam direction. The sample was slowly cooled from room temperature down to 100 K with a rate of 2 K/min followed by a higher cooling rate of 5 K/min down to 40 K. An external magnetic field was applied and the sample was further cooled below its superconducting critical temperature down to the base temperature of the closed cycle refrigerator, thus trapping the magnetic flux inside the sample. The external magnetic field was then switched off and radiographs were recorded, by a scintillator -CCD camera detection ensemble (camera: Andor DV 434-BV, effective pixel size: 77 μm, 6 LiFZnS scintillator thickness: 400 μm Each image registers the polarisation of the neutron spin, in modulo 360 • , analysed by the second super-mirror polariser placed between the sample and the scintillator. As the neutron passes through the magnetic field trapped inside the superconducting material, the spin will undergo a so-called Larmor precession. The precession angle (φ) is dependent on the strength of the applied magnetic field and the time spent by the neutron inside it, which in turn is dependent on the neutron velocity (and thereby on its wavelength) as well as the length of the path through the magnetic field Here, γ L = -1.83247179(43) × 10 8 rad s -1 T -1 is the neutron's gyromagnetic ratio, h = 6.62607015 × 10 -34 J s is Plank's constant, m = 1.674927471(21) × 10 -27 kg is the mass of a neutron and B, L and λ are the strength of the applied magnetic field, the length of the neutron trajectory inside the field and the neutron wavelength respectively. The magnitude of the applied magnetic field was of the order of a few milli-tesla, and was tuned to provide the most contrast while keeping the maximum precession angle below 180 • in order to avoid ambiguity, as the measured polarisation is the cosine of the (ensemble average of the) neutron spin precession angle: In our experiment the maximum measured precession angle was ∼ 105 • . Radiographs were recorded in two spin configurations: spin up and spin down, with the spin of the neutron in both being perpendicular to the beam direction. Spin down was selected by using an additional magnetic field to add a neutron spin precession angle of 180 • before the analyser. For normalisation purposes, dark frame images (DF) without neutrons and in zero applied magnetic field were recorded at room temperature (which means no trapped field in the sample) so that noise in the detector systems could be corrected for. Open beam images (OB) were recorded as well at room temperature, in the absence of both the sample and the applied magnetic field, so that imperfections in the polarisation setup could be corrected for. The dark frame radiographs were subtracted from all the corresponding images, including the open beam ones. The measuring time was 10 minutes per image (composed of 4 exposures of 150 s combined after DF subtraction). The open beam polarisation was calculated as: where ↑ and ↓ indicate the radiographs taken with spin up and down configuration, respectively. The uncorrected polarisation signal with sample, P U C , was measured and calculated in the same way, whereafter the open beam corrected polarisation, P , was calculated as: 4 Results and discussion Figure In order to quantitatively assess the superconducting transition temperature, T C , for each pixel within the sample region, we first convert the polarization data to spin precession angle through φ = arccos (P ), for each temperature, T . Values for pixel polarisations that due to noise were (slightly) larger than 1 were set to 1. Next, a logistic curve was fitted to the precession angle data, as the logistic function describes the sigmoidal nature of the phase transition between superconducting and non-superconducting states, such that values for the critical transition temperature can be extracted: φ min and φ max are the low and high asymptotes, respectively, T mid is the temperature at the inflection point of the slope, and n H is Hill's coefficient, giving the steepness of the curve. A fitting example for the centre-most pixel of the sample is shown in Figure following the slope at the inflection point down to the lower asymptote as indicated by the dotted lines in the figure. The shaded area indicates the uncertainty interval of the estimated T φ C , where the error estimate was obtained from error propagation of the errors from the least square fit of the data, which was weighed using the error from the counting statistics of the measurement. Note that the low asymptote is non-zero, since a background magnetic field from the experimental set-up was present for the experiments at the given temperatures. The same fitting procedure was used to find T φ C for every pixel covered by the sample. The result is shown in Figure In order to rule out a possible temperature gradient, the polarised imaging data was analysed to confirm that the temperature had stabilised before exposures and that no fluctuations were seen afterwards. Previous studies, with the same cryogenic setup, mention temperature variations of maximum 0.01 K Using the polarised neutron imaging method we were able to identify the precise pattern of the critical temperature gradient, and implicitly the doping distribution, along the entire 17.9 mm length of the sample, in the growth direction. Considering that, within the TSFZ method, the molten zone is continually mixed and the material crystallises layer by layer, we do not expect a significant doping gradient in the radial direction. This can however be investigated using the tomography capabilities of a polarised imaging set-up. One of the advantages of using highly underdoped LSCO samples for this type of investigation is the fact that in this region of the phase diagram T C varies steeply with doping, meaning that a small variation in Sr concentration corresponds to a significant critical temperature difference. However, using a high accuracy temperature control one would be able to determine the doping variation in sample across the entire superconducting dome, except the range x = 0.14 -0.18, where T C is essentially constant. We have also benchmarked our imaging results against magnetic susceptibility (χ(T )) data. In Figure Where the susceptibility method is more accurate (uncertainty around 0.1 K) than the polarised imaging method (uncertainty around 0.5 K), the latter method yields a complete picture of the sample and is furthermore non-destructive. For this reason, we can imagine polarised imaging to be an interesting alternative to susceptibility measurements for investigating the spatial variations in transition temperatures, and doping implicitly, in samples of centimetre sizes. Furthermore, by upgrading the instrumental components and extending the exposure time (and/or neutron flux) the precision of the measured transition temperature can be improved as it is currently limited by counting statistics. The spatial resolution can be improved as well down to 100 μm Homogeneity of a sample is important when investigating the superconducting properties, especially when performing bulk measurements. We have shown that through spin-polarised neutron imaging it is possible to directly map out the spatial distribution of the critical temperature thereby providing a characterisation method capable of eliminating uncertainties and sources of error related to -in this case -variations of the distribution of Sr doping in a La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 high temperature superconductor. The results have been substantiated by magnetic susceptibility measurements showing the same trend for the T C variation between the two ends of the sample. Furthermore, as we are simply measuring a scalar property, our presented method for mapping the T C distribution, can easily be expanded to three dimensional investigations using standard filtered backprojection methods for tomographic reconstructions.