It is shown that the three-fold rotational symmetry in transition metal dichalcogenides leads to a Coulomb induced renormalization of the effective electron and hole masses near the K-points of the Brillouin zone. The magnitude of the renormalization depends on the dielectric configuration. The effective exciton mass m = 0.4m0 of a freely suspended MoS2 monolayer changes to m = 0.35m0 with hBN encapsulation. The mass renormalization increases the excitonic binding energy and reduces the exciton diamagnetic shift and cyclotron frequency. Detailed comparisons with high field measurements of the excitonic diamagnetic shift show excellent agreement. With the ability to create them as monolayers, van der Waals bonded layers have emerged as a new material class, including graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs). In particular, TMDC monolayers have attracted considerable attention, partly because of their extraordinary strong light-matter interaction and excitonic effects, but also because of their potential application in valleytronic devices. Common to TMDCs and other layered van der Waals materials is the arrangement of the atoms within the layers into a honeycomb lattice, with the atoms located at the corners of the hexagon. In reciprocal space, the first Brillioun zone also has honeycomb geometry with direct band gaps occurring at the six corners of the hexagon. Since neighboring K and K valleys are related by the parity or time reversal transformation, these are addressed with oppositely circularly polarized light. This fascinating feature has lead to fascinating new physics, in particular the novel concept of valleytronics Whereas the valley dependent optical selection rules are correctly predicted by density functional theory (DFT), the optical selection rules and the coupled spin-valley dynamics has been explained in a very elegant and intuitive manner by assigning relativistic quasi-particles with a pseudo-spin to the K and K valleys. Since its proposal in the original work In its original form, the MDF Hamiltonian is given by where ∆ sτ is the spin and valley dependent gap, v F = ta is the Fermi-velocity, a is the lattice constant, Here, Lz = -i ∂ ∂θ k and σz is the z-component of the pseudo-spin. Hence, the light-matter interaction is given by and σ± are the ladder operators. The optical selection rules are then given by Ψ j |H I |Ψ j ∝ A -τ δ j,j +τ + A τ δ j,j -τ , showing that excitation with right(left)-handed circular polarized light increases (decreases) the angular momentum ĵz by . Since the MDF Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 does not display the full three-fold lattice rotational symmetry and does not account for the angular momentum change -2τ of the basis functions upon absorption, we propose to modify Eq. 1 by incorporating the three-fold rotational symmetry via (3) This modified massive Dirac Fermion (mMDF) Hamiltonian has the same relativistic dispersion as the original MDF Hamiltonian and the eigenstates have the general form Using the minimal substitution, the light-matter interaction is obtained as yielding the optical excitation rules Ψj | HI | Ψj ∝ (A -τ ) 3 /A 2 δ j,j +3τ + (A τ ) 3 /A 2 δ j,j -3τ . Hence, excitation arXiv:2006.03037v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 4 Jun 2020 with σ ± polarized light increases the angular momentum associated with the geometric phase by ±3 , while simultaneously the angular momentum associated with the basis functions is decreased by ±2 , in agreement with the conservation of the total angular momentum. Furthermore, for linearly polarized light, a rotation of the polarization angle by 2π/3 does not alter the optical spectra, thus reflecting the three-fold lattice symmetry. Although the eigenstates of our new mMDF Hamiltonian have the same unrenormalized dispersion as H 0 , the Coulomb matrix elements contain the electron-hole overlap matrix elements and hence differ in their geometric phases. In particular, the electron-hole Coulomb matrix element relevant for the description of the excitonic properties is given by Here, W k-k is the screened quasi-two dimensional Coulomb potential and , and m = 1 and m=3 for the MDF and mMDF Hamiltonian respectively. As a consequence, the Coulomb-renormalized band structure can be computed from the modified gap equations with m = 3 instead of m = 1. To calculate the renormalized dispersion from the gap equations, we computed the band structure and dipole-matrix elements via density functional theory (DFT) As shown in Ref. In Fig. To further investigate the consequences of the mass renormalizations predicted by the mMDF model, we compute the diamagnetic shift of the exciton resonances in TMDC systems. As has been suggested by Goryca et al. In a constant, perpendicular magnetic field, the exciton equation is given by Here, m r is the (unrenormalized) reduced mass of the electron-hole pair, lz is the angular momentum operator, r = i∇ k is the position operator, W cννc k-k is the statically screened electron-hole Coulomb matrix element and E e/h k [B] the renormalized single-particle dispersion that contains a Zeeman shift of the atomic orbitals contributing to the valence and conduction band. In general, the term ∝ lz leads to a Zeeman shift of the exciton states, however, for the s-type bright states this term does not contribute. The orbital angular momentum of d-type orbitals with m z = ±2 leads to a Zeeman shift of ±2μ B B of the valence band maxima, where μ B = e /2m 0 c is the Bohr magneton, and a corresponding splitting between the K ± valleys. The Zeeman shift of the atomic orbitals enters the unrenormalized gap in Eq. 6 and is slightly enhanced by the gap-renormalization, leading to g-factors with an absolute value slightly larger than 4. In the low magnetic field regime, the term ∝ B 2 can be treated perturbatively, leading to a quadratic shift of the exciton resonance energy, which is the diamagnetic shift. In the high field limit and for a quadratic dispersion p 2 /2m * r , the term quadratic in B leads to the formation of Landaulevels with E n = ω * c (n + 1/2), with a cyclotron frequency √ m r m * r c. Hence, in the high field limit the slope of the eigenvalues gives direct access to the mass renormalization, provided the dispersion is quadratic. In Fig. In conclusion, we introduced a modification of the original massive Dirac Fermion Hamiltonian that accounts for the three-fold rotational symmetry of the TMDC lattice. We show that this modified Hamiltonian leads to a curvature change in the computed energy band dispersion that depends on the dielectric environment. This renormalization of the effective mass manifests itself in the values of the predicted exciton binding energies and their magnetic field induced shift. We demonstrate excellent quantitative agreement with experimental data. Hence, we expect that the proposed modified massive Dirac Fermi Hamiltonian will find widespread use in future experimental analysis and TMDC design applications.