Thermoelectric materials (TMs) can uniquely convert waste heat into electricity, which provides a potential solution for the global energy crisis that is increasingly severe. Bulk Cu2Se, with ionic conductivity of Cu ions, exhibits a significant enhancement of its thermoelectric figure of merit zT by a factor of ~3 near its structural transition around 400 K. Here, we show a systematic study of the electronic structure of Cu2Se and its temperature evolution using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Upon heating across the structural transition, the electronic states near the corner of the Brillouin zone gradually disappear, while the bands near the centre of Brillouin zone shift abruptly towards high binding energies and develop an energy gap. Interestingly, the observed band reconstruction well reproduces the temperature evolution of the Seebeck coefficient of Cu2Se, providing an electronic origin for the drastic enhancement of the thermoelectric performance near 400 K. The current results not only bridge among structural phase transition, electronic structures and thermoelectric properties in a condensed matter system, but also provide valuable insights into the search and design of new generation of thermoelectric materials. Thermoelectric (TE) materials encapsulate unique capability to harvest waste heat and deliver electric energy, which provides broad and versatile application potential in energy, electronics and semiconductor industries Following this strategy, different TE materials have been discovered or created in various forms, such as nanostructured alloys of chalcogenides, filled skutterudites and clathrates, half-Heusler compounds, oxides, organic materials and ionic conductive materials Correspondingly, various mechanisms are proposed to explain the enhancement of the TE efficiency, including band convergence Among various TE materials, superionic Cu2Se, has attracted considerable research attention due to its simple chemical compositions and high zT value (~ 1.5 at 1000 K, among the highest values in bulk materials) Nevertheless, previous experimental efforts mainly focus on the structural properties such as superionic behavior of Cu ions, while the other crucial ingredient in the system, the electrons, are largely ignored. Especially, the crucial electronic band structure is only investigated by theoretical calculations up to date In this Letter, using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we systematically investigated the electronic structure of Cu2Se and its temperature evolution. Around the structural transition, we observed an abrupt formation of an energy gap at the Γ ̅ point near 400 K, together with a sudden change of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak position, suggesting a first-order nature of the  structural transition, which may be associated with a sudden change of lattice constants Single crystals of Cu2Se were synthesized by a melting-annealing-sintering process. Then the crucible was sealed in evacuated quartz tubes, which was slowly heated to 1423 K in 12 h, dwelled at this temperature for 24 h, slowly cooled to 1073 K in 50 h, and annealed at this temperature for 8 days. The obtained ingots were crushed into powders and then sintered at 753 K under a pressure of 65 MPa using a spark plasma sintering (Sumitomo SPS-2040) apparatus. Boron nitride was sprayed on the inner surfaces of graphite die to prevent currents going through the samples. Highly dense pellet samples with 10 mm in diameter and ~5 mm in thickness were finally obtained, and single crystals of Cu2Se with typical size of 0.5~1 mm for ARPES measurements were separated from the pellet samples. Radiation Facility (SSRF), China, beamline BL13U of National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (NSRL), China, Surface/Interface Spectroscopy (SIS, X09LA) beamline at the Swiss Light Source (SLS) -Paul Scherrer Institute, Swiss and He-lamp based system in Tsinghua University and Peking University, China. The samples were cleaved in-situ and measured under ultra-high vacuum below 6×10 -11 mbar. Data were collected with Scienta R4000 electron analyser at SSRF and NSRL, R2000 at SLS and DA30 analyser at Tsinghua and Peking University. The overall energy and angle resolutions were better than 20 meV and 0.2°, respectively. STM measurements were performed at ShanghaiTech University, China. Cu2Se single crystals were cleaved in sample preparation chamber and transferred to STM chamber for measurement under ultra-high vacuum below 1.5×10 -11 Torr. Data were collected at room temperature using PtIr tips that were calibrated by silver islands grown on Si (111)-7×7 surface. The Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity were measured using our newly developed system based on the thermal expansion equipment (Netzsch DIL 402C) The electrical resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe method. The Seebeck coefficient was calculated from the slope of the ΔV vs ΔT curve with a heating rate of 0.02 K/min, where ΔV and ΔT are the Seebeck voltage and temperature gradient, respectively. The Seebeck voltage ΔV was measured with a Keithley nanovoltmeter and further corrected for the thermopower of Pt. The temperature dependence of Seebeck coefficient was measured under a very small temperature step (around 0.1 K) between 320 K and 450 K. In the high temperature -phase, Cu2Se crystallizes in a face-centred cubic sublattice of Se atoms with superionic Cu ions diffusing inside The electronic structure of -Cu2Se is investigated by ARPES at 15 K. Fig. The intriguing transition of Cu2Se is investigated by the temperature evolution of both crystal and electronic structure. Our temperature dependent single crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements along [001] (or While the sudden change of the XRD pattern alludes a first-order character of the structural transition near 400 K, the band structure exhibits a more complex temperature evolution. Fig. Temperature dependent measurements on both band and crystal structures indicate that the  transition consists of a first-order structural transition and a much slower continuous process. Upon cooling below 400 K, the crystal undergoes a sudden expansion along c and the Cu ions are almost "frozen" with suppressed hopping rates through the first-order transition forming the back-folded bands near the K ̅ point. The proposed scenario may provide a microscopic interpretation for the exotic temperature evolution of the thermal conductivity of Cu2Se The observed band reconstruction indicates a change of the chemical potential in the system during the structural transition, which can play a crucial role in the TE properties of Cu2Se that are sensitive to the density of states near EF where k B , e and N(E) are Boltzmann constant, electron charge and carrier density of states, respectively. It is worth noting that a rough approximation σ ∝ {N(E F )} 2 was adopted in equation 1, where σ denotes the electrical conductivity In Fig. We present a comprehensive investigation of Cu2Se using high-resolution ARPES and XRD. Our results reveal the disentangled structural evolution of Cu and Se sub-lattices during the structural transition. We conclude that the band reconstruction plays a dominant role in the enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient, which together with the suppression of the lattice thermal conductivity due to Cu + disordering, significantly improve the TE performance of Cu2Se near the structural transition. Our results provide important insights into not only the peculiar electronic and structural phase transitions in Cu2Se, but also the excellent TE efficiency of Cu2Se, which will further shed light on its application in the TE devices. (g,h) the same as (e,f) but near the Z point. Data in panels (e) and (f) were collected at 50 eV, while data in panels (g) and (h) were collected at 62 eV. 