The accuracy of contact resistance values of two-dimensional field-effect transistors extracted with the Y-function considering the impact of the intrinsic mobility degradation is evaluated here. The difference between methodologies that take this factor into account and ignore it is pointed out by a detailed analysis of the approximations of the transport model used for each extraction. In contrast to the oftenly used approach where the intrinsic mobility degradation is neglected, a Y-function-based method considering a more complete transport model yields contact resistance values similar to reference values obtained by other intricate approaches. The latter values are more suitable also to describe experimental data of two dimensional devices of different technologies. The intrinsic mobility degradation factor of two-dimensional transistors is experimentally characterized for the first time and its impact on the device performance is described and evaluated. The contact resistance R C of a field-effect transistor (FET) can be extracted from a relation of a transistor's drift-diffusion (DD) drain current I D at the linear regime to its transconductance g m . This relation is generally known as the Y -function such as Y = I D g -0.5 m YFMs are an immediate alternative to test-structure based extraction approaches which robustness is still under discussion for 2D FETs, e.g., the transfer length method (TLM) In general, the internal electron drain current can be described within the DD approach at the linear regime as where k = μ eff C ox w g /L with μ eff as the effective mobility, C ox the oxide capacitance, w g the gate capacitance and L the channel length, V th is the charge threshold voltage and the total resistance R tot can be expressed as where β = μ 0 C ox w g /L with the low field mobility μ 0 and θ = θ ch + θ C is the extrinsic mobility degradation coefficient In contrast to other approaches in 2D FETs where the potential is considered constant along the channel at low fields For YFM 1 , θ ch has been neglected in Eq. ( In YFM 2 , θ ch has been considered in Eq. ( βV DS , yields a value for θ. Values for θ ch and R C,2 are obtained from the intercept and slope, respectively, of θ as a function of β built for at least two different V DS . Notice that the channel resistance obtained with YFM 2 , i.e., with Eq. ( As pointed out by The above methodologies are also applicable to p-type transistors by considering hole transport in Eqs. ( The YFMs discussed above have been applied to fabricated 2D FET technologies The YFM 1 -related condition of θ ch θ C A factor of θ ch / [β(V GS -V th -∆)] missing in the device total resistance R tot obtained with the YFM 1 -related simplification of Eq. ( The mean absolute error (M) of Eq. ( [30] [31] The contribution of the channel properties and contact properties to the total devices performance (R tot = R ch + R C and θ) has been evaluated via the ratio of resistances R ch /R C and mobility degradation factors θ ch /θ C as shown in Fig. Two different Y -function-based methods for the extraction of contact resistance values in 2D transistors have been described and analyzed and their results have been discussed. YFM 1 , the most common methodology used for 2DFETs in which the intrinsic mobility degradation factor has been neglected, overestimates the contact resistance in comparison to results obtained with YFM 2 which considers θ ch in the underlying transport equation used for the extraction. In contrast to YFM 1 , results of YFM 2 are comparable to other physics-based and experimental approaches and they are better suited to describe the experimental I D within the bias region where the method has been applied. Furthermore, the factor θ ch of 2D FETs has been extracted with YFM 2 and it has been shown to be relevant for a proper description of R C and R ch . YFM 2 has been revealed as a more rigorous and accurate methodology for the characterization of contacts of 2D FET technologies than the one usually used for these emerging transistors.