Large charge-to-spin conversion (spin Hall angle) and spin Hall conductivity are prerequisites for development of next generation power efficient spintronic devices. In this context, heavy metals (e.g. Pt, W etc.), topological insulators, antiferromagnets are usually considered because they exhibit high spin-orbit coupling (SOC). In addition to the above materials, 5d transition metal oxide e.g. Iridium Oxide (IrO 2 ) is a potential candidate which exhibits high SOC strength. Here we report a study of spin pumping and inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE), via ferromagnetic resonance (FMR), in IrO 2 /CoFeB system. We identify the individual contribution of spin pumping and other spin rectification effects in the magnetic layer, by investigating the in-plane angular dependence of ISHE signal. Our analysis shows significant contribution of spin pumping effect to the ISHE signal. We show that polycrystalline IrO 2 thin film exhibits high spin Hall conductivity and spin Hall angle which are comparable to the values of Pt. The field of "spintronics", where both charge and spin degrees of freedom are exploited, has been a topic of active research since the past few decades. With charge based electronics reaching their limitations, more attention is now being given to devices and materials which employ spin currents. A radical shift from the conventional electronic paradigm, devices based on spintronics have shown potential application in data storage, non-volatile magnetic random access memories (MRAMs) Spin pumping is the phenomenon of transfer of spin angular momentum from a ferromagnet (FM) to an adjacent nonmagnetic (NM) material in the presence of an external magnetic field and an excitation microwave field Here g ↑↓ e f f is the effective spin mixing conductance and m is the magnetization unit vector. If the NM has a high SOC, then due to ISHE, the spin current may be detected electrically. As spin pumping opens up an additional channel of angular momentum dissipation, the intrinsic damping of the FM increases Here ∆α is the difference between the Gilbert damping of the FM/NM bilayer and the reference FM single layer. M s is the saturation magnetization of the bilayer, g is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ B is the Bohr magneton and d FM is the ferromagnetic thickness. g ↑↓ e f f denotes the effective spin mixing conductance, an important parameter that characterizes the efficiency of transfer of spins through the FM/NM interface. However, damping may also increase due to inhomogeneities in the sample, interfacial defects, magnetic proximity effects, presence of capping layer As SOC is proportional to Z 4 (Z being the atomic number), usually heavy metals such as Pt (Z=78) The thin films have been prepared on Si p-(100) substrates with native oxide, in a high vacuum chamber (manufactured by Mantis Deposition Ltd. UK) with base pressure better than 1.1 ×10 -7 mbar. We name the samples as S1, S2, S3, S4 and S5 for Si/Co 40 Fe 40 B 20 (10) Co 40 Fe 40 B 20 (CoFeB) and Ir were deposited via DC magnetron sputtering. For CoFeB the deposition pressure was ∼7 ×10 -4 mbar. The substrate was rotated at 20 rpm while deposition of all the layers, in order to provide sample uniformity. The deposition rate was 0.021 nm/s. For deposition of iridium oxide (samples S2-S4), we followed the below procedure We performed frequency dependent FMR measurements (Phase FMR manufactured by NanoOsc, Sweden) on these samples to determine the intrinsic Gilbert damping. We have used a coplanar waveguide FMR (CPW-FMR) set up, the schematics of which is shown in Figure The TEM image in Figure FMR spectra were recorded over a frequency ( f ) range of 4 to 12 GHz, with an interval of 0.5 GHz for all the three samples. The FMR spectra are shown in Fig. Here H k is the uniaxial anisotropy field, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and M e f f is the effective demagnetization. We used the value of γ obtained from Equation where ∆H 0 is the inhomogeneous linewidth broadening. From the best fits (Figure In-plane angular dependent voltage measurements were performed in order to quantify the contribution of different spin rectification effects like anomalous Hall effect (AHE) and anisotropic magneto-resistance (AMR) to the obtained voltage signal. From the spin pumping effect, we have performed in-plane angle dependent measurement of the V meas at f = 7 GHz at 5 • intervals. The angle φ is defined as the angle between the h r f and the external magnetic field, which is 90 • in our case. We plot the symmetric and anti-symmetric components vs Φ for samples S2-S4 (figure where Φ is the angle between the line of contacts on the sample and applied magnetic field. From the fitted plots, we see that for sample S2, there is nearly equivalent contribution from both symmetric and antisymmetric components. At a r.f. power of ≈ 11mW, the spin pumping (V SP ) was found to be 2.79 ± 0.09 μV . The AHE voltage (V AHE ) was 1.64 ± 0.06 μV . The AMR contribution is calculated as: For sample S2, V AMR-= 0.23 ± 0.10μV and V AMR-⊥ = 1.2 ± 0.08μV . The value of V AMR-is one order less than the V AHE or V SP . V AMR-⊥ has a significant contribution to the voltage signal. However, the model could encapsulate the observed behavior satisfactorily with minimal deviations. Similarly, for S3 and S4, we obtain V SP = 2.65±0.02μV and 1.55 ±0.01μV and V AHE = 1.62±0.01μV and 0.361±0.002μV respectively. In all the three samples, V SP had the highest contribution to the ISHE signal. FIG. We have calculated the spin mixing conductance (g ↑↓ e f f ) using the following equation This was then used in evaluation of the spin Hall angle (SHA) of the three samples. The saturation magnetization M s was measured by a SQUID magnetometer. For S2-S4, it is ≈ 704.32 ±2.12 emu/cc, 665.68 ±3.20 emu/cc and 696.59 ±1.45 emu/cc, respectively . From Equation Further, we have calculated the spin Hall angle (θ SHA ) for samples S2-S4. θ SHA is the figure of merit of any spintronic device and shows the ratio of conversion of spin current to charge current. θ SHA is related to the V ISHE by the following relation 32 where J s is given as: g ↑↓ r is the real part of g ↑↓ e f f (Equation With ρ IrO 2 = 100.5 ± 0.9μΩcm and ρ CFB = 700.1 ± 0.9μΩcm, the θ SHA for S2-S4 is found to be ∼ 0.19 ±0.02, 0.05±0.01 and 0.02±0.01, respectively. The value of SHA decreases with increasing thickness of IrO 2 . As the spin diffusion length of IrO 2 is 3.8 nm The spin Hall conductivity is given as σ SH = θ SHA ρ C × h 2e . In our case, the values obtained are 1.93±0.21 × 10 5 h 2e Ω -1 m -1 , 0.54±0.12 × 10 5 h 2e Ω -1 m -1 and 0.20±0.04 × 10 5 h 2e Ω -1 m -1 for samples S2-S4, respectively. The σ SH values obtained for IrO 2 2nm is higher as compared to many other high SOC materials like Pt, W, Ta, Bi 2 Se 3 etc. To summarize, we have successfully fabricated samples of IrO 2 /CoFeB bilayers and have confirmed the same by XRD and TEM measurements. The IrO 2 formed is polycrystalline in nature. We could get ISHE signals with r.f power as low as 6 mW. This shows that the present system is highly receptive to low magnitude of spin current. Occurrence of spin pumping was indicated by enhancement of α and was subsequently quantified by in-plane angle dependent ISHE experiments. Spin pumping was shown to have the dominant contribution. We further determine the θ SHA ranging from ≈ 0.19 to 0.02 depending on the thickness. The largest spin Hall conductivity was determined to be 1.93×10 5 Ω -1 m -1 for IrO 2 of 2 nm thickness. The high value of θ SHA may be due to backscattering and reflection of spins at the interface. Further experimental and theoretical efforts are required to understand the occurrence of the high spin Hall angle in IrO 2 . Moreover, due to presence of Dirac Nodal Lines (DNLs) 