The combination of different exotic properties in materials paves the way for the emergence of their new potential applications. An example is the recently found coexistence of the mutually antagonistic ferromagnetism and superconductivity in hydrogenated boron-doped diamond, which promises to be an attractive system with which to explore unconventional physics. Here, we show the emergence of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) bands with a spatial extent of tens of nanometers in ferromagnetic superconducting diamond using scanning tunneling spectroscopy. We demonstrate theoretically how a two-dimensional (2D) spin lattice at the surface of a three-dimensional (3D) superconductor gives rise to the YSR bands, and how their density-of-states profile correlates with the spin lattice structure. The established strategy to realize new forms of the coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity opens a way to engineer the unusual electronic states and also to design better performing superconducting devices. The interplay between different coexisting physical properties induces emergent phenomena, opening a way to design new electronic devices. The investigated mutual interactions between electrical conductivity/superconductivity and magnetism give rise to, for example, colossal magnetoresistance in manganese oxides In order to assess the effect of magnetic perturbation on superconductivity, one powerful approach is the analysis of the influence of individual magnetic impurities or groups of impurities on the superconducting state. Their effect has been extensively revealed in various superconductors Here, we performed STM/S measurements on ferromagnetic superconducting diamond. In contrast to conventional YSR states localized within few nanometers, we find YSR states with a spatial extent of tens of nanometers, indicating strong delocalization of the electronic excitations. We model the hydrogenated boron-doped diamond as a 3D superconductor with a 2D spin lattice at the surface. In order to reproduce the STM/S results within the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) theory, we assume that hydrogen atoms adsorbed at the surface of boron-doped diamond nanocrystallites arrange in islands of ordered 2D lattices, giving rise to correspondingly ordered islands of magnetic impurities. The resulting impurity states correspond to YSR bands, whose properties strongly depend on the structure of the underlying lattice of localized spins. Hence, systems such as hydrogenated boron-doped diamond are good platforms for hosting such YSR bands. Heavily boron-doped polycrystalline chemical vapor deposited (CVD) diamond films with a hydrogen-terminated surface were used for this research. Structural and compositional analyses indicate that the polycrystalline diamond films are metal-free The onset of the superconducting state ( = 0) takes place at 2.7 K in the hydrogenated boron-doped diamond. To gain insight into the dimensionality of the system, we measured the resistive superconducting transition (T) in different magnetic fields, μ0H, which were applied perpendicular and parallel to the sample (see Fig. The magnetization hysteresis loops measured below the superconducting transition temperature show characteristics of both superconductivity and ferromagnetism (see Fig. The substantial distinction between the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetization loops indicates the in-plane easy axis of magnetization (see Fig. As revealed by STM/S measurements performed at 0.5 K on the surface of the hydrogenated boron-doped diamond (see Fig. The observed YSR bands demonstrate a variety of DOS profiles (see Fig. In order to give insights into the origin of the various DOS profiles (see Fig. The electronic bands in the presence of a spin lattice were calculated with a tight-binding BdG approach with the localized YSR states on spin sites as the basis where wk stands for the quasi-particle states characterized by wave vector k, w(Rj) indicates the localized YSR state at site j, E is energy, k is the free electron energy with respect to chemical potential, J is the exchange coupling parameter, S = 1/2 is spin, and  is the superconducting order parameter. We transformed this equation into the tightbinding form on the basis of localized YSR states, and then calculated the quasi-particle bands (see Methods). To reproduce the experimental DOS, we treated the dimensionless exchange interaction  = 0JS between the spins and conduction electrons (0 is the DOS of the electronic band at the Fermi energy) and the distance between the spin sites as variables. Among the experimentally obtained DOS, we focused upon S1, S2 and S3 which clearly show the band nature (Fig. In summary, we unveiled the presence of long-range coherent YSR bands in a 3D ferromagnetic superconductor, heavily boron-doped diamond with hydrogen-terminated surface. In contrast to localized YSR states, the observed YSR bands show a spatial extent up to tens of nanometers. Limited by the resolution of STM/S measurements on polycrystalline diamond, the spatial distribution of magnetic impurities cannot be extracted from our experiments. By developing a microscopic theory for a 3D superconductor with a 2D spin lattice at its surface, we reproduced the experimental DOS profiles of the observed YSR bands in ferromagnetic superconducting diamond reasonably well. Apart from the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state The heavily boron-doped and hydrogenated polycrystalline diamond films were grown using hot filament chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The substrates were undoped singlecrystal Si (100) with a 30 nm-thick layer of SiO2 on the surface. The wafers were seeded with a colloidal suspension of diamond nanoparticles (diameter ~20 nm) using an electrospray process The electrical transport properties and magnetization of the samples were measured using a Heliox 3 He cryostat and a MPMS3 system, respectively. The differential tunneling conductance spectra were acquired by means of a home-made scanning tunneling microscope The Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation was transformed into the tight-binding form on the basis of localized YSR states 4 ( ) where ). These integrals were evaluated under the condition of (ħkF) 2 /2me >> ħωD >> Δ > E as ( ) ( ) where ħ is the reduced Planck constant, kF and F are the wave vector and velocity at the Fermi energy, respectively, me is the mass of electron, D is the Debye frequency, and Si(x) is the sine integral. The electron attraction and Δ are assumed to be finite when |k| < D. The expression of I1 was improved so that small distances can be accurately treated in comparison with the previous work based on asymptotic treatment When there is only one impurity, the eigenvalues E of Eq. ( where  = 0JS. The energy levels appear within the superconducting gap. Assuming the periodicity of the impurity centres, Eq. ( -  q q q q q q q q q q q q q q w w w Here, w′q = ∑j w(Rj) exp(-iq•Rj) is the Fourier transformation of w(Ri), λq = E/, Ĩn,q (n = 0,1) is defined by (5) Neither spin-orbit coupling nor edge of the lattice is considered in our theory, and hence, the scenario of the emergence of exotic edge states discussed in Ref. 5 does not apply. By numerically solving this equation, we obtained the quasi-particle energy band. For the simulations, kF  1-3 × 10 9 m -1 and F  7-8 eV Å were taken from Ref. 32, and a = 3.57 Å and D  160 meV for diamond were taken from Ref. 33. With these parameters, kF a  1, ħF/a  2 eV, D/(F/a)  0.08, and /(ħFkF)  0.0005. The shape of the impurity lattice is either a rectangle or regular triangle. The DOS was convoluted with Gaussian function with standard deviation σ/ = 0.14, 0.10, 0.09 for S1, S2 and S3, respectively. The height of the DOS, which depends on the distance between the STM tip and the surface 