Radio-Sterometric-Analysis (RSA) and x-ray fluoroscopy require dedicated software to reconstruct the radiological scene and the position of the objects in space. It is important to have a reliable validation to correctly use these softwares. The two major regulations that deal with the definition of "accuracy" are the ISO-5725 and the GUM 1995. The aim of this work, is to present a protocol for the evaluation of the accuracy of a radio stereometric software in terms of "trueness" and "precision", according to the standard ISO-5725. The protocol consisted in a series of computer simulations of the radiological setup. Each simulation changed the position and orientation of the x-ray sources, detectors and objects. Then, radiological images were generated. The noise level of the images was also changed in order to evaluate the accuracy with different image qualities. Then, the images can be processed with RSA softwares to evaluate their accuracy. The protocol was tested on a custom RSA software developed at the Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli and the accuracy of the results was evaluated. The radiological scene reconstruction accuracy was found of the order of (0.092 ± 0.14) mm for tube position and (0.38 ± 0.31) mm/(2.09 ± 1.39) deg for detectors in the direction other than the source-detector direction. In that case, in fact, the accuracy is of the order of (2.68 ± 3.08) mm for the tube position and (0.16 ± 0.27) mm/(0.75 ± 1.16) deg for detectors. This fact is an intrinsic limitation of the scene reconstruction technique and it is widely discussed in the literature. The model positioning and orientation evaluations was also very accurate: (0.22 ± 0.46) mm/(0.26 ± 0.22) deg. No differences were highlighted about the noise level. The accuracy remains the same independently from the the noise of the images. The protocol was also useful to detect and fix hidden bugs in the software and optimize the algorithms. The Radio-Stereometric-Analysis (RSA) is a technique to evaluate the micro-motions between bones and prosthesis The framework of technical regulations includes the evaluation of the accuracy since the middle of the 1990s. The two major regulations that face the definition of "accuracy" are the ISO The aim of this work is to present a protocol for the evaluation of the accuracy of a RSA and fluoroscopy softwares. Then we want to use the protocol to evaluate the accuracy of the output data processed with the custom software developed at the Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR), Bologna, Italy. The software reconstructs the radiological scene, and the position of a model in space according to the acquired images (Model-Based RSA, Our hope is to provide a useful tool that can standardize the evaluation of the accuracy and allow an easier comparison between different data processing systems. A simulation software was developed to evaluate the accuracy of radio metric (uniplanar and biplanar) data processing softwares. The simulation software was composed of 4 parts: x-ray source simulator, x-ray detector simulator, object in space simulator, and the x-ray beam tracer. The software received as inputs the position and orientation of the x-ray sources, detectors and objects. Then the output was a set of images that represents the objects according to the setup. The figure The x-ray tube was simulated as an ideal monocromatic point-like source. It was characterized only by its position in space and had the scope to be the starting point of the x-ray beam. The detector was a matrix of the end points of the x-ray beam. Its input parameters were the bits per pixel of the image (bpp), the number of pixels in the matrix and the reference system to determine its position and orientation in space. The beam tracer scanned the matrix, and for each matrix element, calculated the ending point of the x-ray beam and, using the x-ray source position, defined the beam path. The object in space was a phantom whose input was the position/orientation parameters. The material was not important. The beam tracer calculated if the beam path crossed the object. If yes, the value I max was assigned to the corresponding pixel. The I max was calculated from the bbp assigned to the detector and it was I max = 2 bpp -1. Because the theme of this work is RSA, the phantom can be a set of markers, or a bone model, or a prosthesis model according to the different tested methodology. The user choses the proper phantom. Once the scanning of the detector was completed and the image of the object was created, the simulator added the noise to the image. The noise average level was added to change the contrast of the image and analyzes the performances of the software with different image conditions. The noise level was set by the user as percentage of the I max . Thus, using the set noise level as average parameter, a random Poisson value was added to all the pixel of the image that did not contain the model. The core of the accuracy defined by the ISO-5725 is the evaluation of trueness and precision. The first is the distance from the true value, while the second is the spread (repeatability) of the data. These two quantities have to be evaluated both for the radiological scene reconstruction and for the object position. To evaluate these quantities, a simulation evaluation protocol was set according to the following steps: 1. Simulation setup: number of sources detectors, calibration tools, objects, and image sizes 2. Simulation run: 5 set of 20 simulation runs were performed 3. Each set of simulations changed the noise level from 0.0% (ideal image), to 90% (high noise level), with increment steps of 22.5% in order to have 5 set of images. Each run posed the sources and the detectors at random positions and orientations 4. Each simulation returned 2 set of data: the first was the scene calibration, the second was the image of the projected object 5. From the calibration data, the trueness and precision of the radiological scene reconstruction were evaluated 6. From the object images, the trueness and precision of the object position was calculated The step 5 and 6 of this procedure were let generic on purpose, because the calibration of the scene changed case-by-case. The steps from 1 to 4 were handled by the simulator, while the steps 5 and 6 were handled by the image processing software under test. The choice of changing the setup and the object positions and orientations at every run were made because presenting always the same simulation to the software and to the operator could trigger some automatism that affects the correctness of the results. Because the core of the accuracy evaluations was the differences between the set and obtained values, these can be calculated at every run and are independent from the setup of the simulation. The trueness was defined as the mean of the residuals (∆) between the true values (t xi ), set by the simulator, and the obtained values (x i ) calculated by the data software (equation 1). According to the ISO (2) where the symbol x indicates one of the position/orientation parameters. The notation ∆ was used because the difference depends on the parameter type: position or orientation. The constant τ is the t-value calculated on N random variables (∆) normally distributed. In this case, for 20 simulations, its value was 1.73. These equations represent the mean distance with sign from the true value. This is because it is important to know if the bias is greater or lesser than the true value. A root mean distance, as used by The position accuracy can be evaluated by comparing the coordinates of the obtained and of the true values setting ∆(x, t) = (xt). A more complex problem was the evaluation of the accuracy of the orientation. In this case, two orthonormal matrices have to be compared. Because it is easier, and more clear, to work with numbers, the matrix differences have to be transposed in representative numbers. The procedure started from the calculation of the transformation matrix (M) between the reconstructed (R rec ) and the true matrix (R true ) (equation 4). This matrix M represents the difference between the true and the evaluated orientation. Then the Eulerian decomposition of M was calculated, according to the 3 axes: In this way, the 3 angles, α, β and γ represented the ∆ around the reference axes. Concerning the presentation of the results, a special notation was used. Because the two beamlines had different orientations (figure The described protocol was used to test the custom RSA software developed at IOR. The simulated scene was composed by two sources and two detectors that make two orthogonal beamlines. The detector dimensions were 43 × 43 cm with a pixel matrix of 1440 × 1440 pixels. Each beamline had the sourceto-detector distance set to 180 cm. The coordinates reference system assigned to the radiological setup is showed in table 3. The beamline 1 lies along the Z axis, while the beamline 2 lies along the X axis. The arrows show the positive rotation direction of the Euler angles determined for the orientations. When the radiological scene was defined, the RSA protocol was simulated. The aim was the acquisition of the simulated images of the calibration box and of a model (figure The tested software was written in MATLAB ® (R2017a, The MathWorks Inc, Natick, MA, USA). The software acquired the images of the calibration box and of the prosthetic model. Then it used images of the calibration box to reconstruct the position of the sources and detectors. The model position was reconstructed in two steps. The first step consisted of the segmentation of the images acquired by the simulator. Then a cad model of the segmented object was posed in space to fit the edges extracted from the images Because the software had semi-automatic algorithms, an expert human operator analyzed all the images as they were generated by a common RSA exam. Then, according to the described protocol, the radiological scene and the model position was evaluated for each run of the simulator and the trueness and the precision were evaluated. The results of the accuracy evaluation are showed in the following table. By convention, all the results are showed with two decimal digits. An example of the images generated by the simulator is showed in figure The first results are the accuracy of the radiological scene reconstruction, i.e. the position and orientation of x-ray sources and detectors, as a function of the image contrast of the calibration box. The results of the accuracy evaluation of the x-ray tube positions are showed in table 1. The table lists the (trueness ± precision) of the positions of the two simulated x-ray sources as a function of the image noise level. The orientation of the sources was not calculated, because they were considered as pointlike. The detector position/orientation accuracies are showed in tables 2 and 3. The figure The proposed protocol has the aim to evaluate the accuracy of a image processing software dedicated to RSA, or in general to radio metric softwares. The results of the protocol are compliant with the ISO-5725 in order to have a standard reference and compare the performances of different softwares and results. The software accuracy was divided in scene reconstruction and model positioning. The simulation of different levels of image noise gives the opportunity to explore the behaviour of the algorithms in ideal conditions (low noise) and in critical conditions (high noise). This could allow developers to optimize their codes, or to discover unwanted and hidden bugs. Concerning the scene reconstruction, the table 1 shows that the tube position evaluation has a sub-millimetric accuracy in the directions different from the source-detector direction. In the source-detector direction, the accuracy is more rough and tube 1 tube 2 Noise x r (mm) y c (mm) z s (mm) x s (mm) y r (mm) z c (mm) 0% -0.036 ± 0.093 0.020 ± 0.22 -1.11 ± 2.46 -6.22 ± 5.47 0.054 ± 0.23 -0.020 ± 0.022 22.5% 0.0069 ± 0.081 0.083 ± 0.16 -0.28 ± 1.93 -3.84 ± 4.03 0.12 ± 0.18 -0.091 ± 0.17 45.0% 0.027 ± 0.085 0.075 ± 0.14 -0.31 ± 1.66 -2.82 ± 3.55 0.098 ± 0.15 -0.13 ± 0.15 67.5% 0.034 ± 0.077 0.074 ± 0.12 -0.66 ± 1.58 -2.25 ± 3.16 0.12 ± 0.15 -0.16 ± 0.14 90.0% 0.055 ± 0.077 0.079 ± 0.12 -0.26 ± 1.57 -1.87 ± 2.97 0.13 ± 0.14 -0.17 ± 0.12 uses the order of millimeters for the trueness and centimeters for the precision. This difference is also reported in the literature Concerning the detectors, the same situation happened on the orientation along the "c" direction in the detector 2. This is surely correlated with what happened in tube 2, and the reason is still unknown. However, the trueness and precision in both the detectors are sub-millimetric. Also the orientations are very accurate and do not show any remarkable difference. The advantage of RSA is the double projection. In this way, the rough accuracy in the source-detector direction of each beamline is compensated by the other and it is theoretically possible to identify the position of an object in space isotropically. This is evident in the model position (table 4: position), where the position accuracy is sub-millimetric. The same was obtained for the orientations, where the accuracy is very high. The negative sign in the position trueness means that the model was positioned with a tiny bias to the source position. The marked cells in the tables represents the values that have a significant inaccuracy. The red cells represents values that are greater than zero, and the blue cells the values less than zero. The white cells are the values that include 0 within their interval of precision. The highest concentration of colored cells is in the detectors. Looking at the tables, it is clear the high precision of the evaluations. This fact makes evident inaccuracies in the scene reconstruction. These inaccuracies are an effect of the protocol that highlighted the limits of the algorithms used to reconstruct the scene. Moreover there is a correlation between the trueness and the precision. The bigger is the trueness, the bigger is the precision. Without entering in the algorithm details, the computation of the tube positions is very simple and this introduce few possibilities of error propagation. The tube position, in fact, had only two border line inaccurate cells. The calculation of the detector positions/orientations had, on the contrary, a more complex structure and this lead to an important error propagation, making evident the error sources. The internal sources are the approximation errors within the algorithm. The external sources are the inaccuracies in the calibration box marker center identification. However the biases evaluated in the positions/orientations can be used as a correction map to reduce systematic errors of the reconstruction algorithms. It is important to cite the fact that all the presented results of this work represent the best case. The evaluated accuracy is the best limit, while the real experimental accuracy is surely rough. x s (mm) y r (mm) z c (mm) 0% -0.12 ± 0.49 -1.15 ± 0.36 -0.020 ± 0.016 0.79 ± 0.25 -0.29 ± 0.13 -729 ± 3.47 22.5% -0.18 ± 0.40 -0.47 ± 0.41 -0.024 ± 0.013 0.79 ± 0.18 -0.21 ± 0.11 -3.94 ± 2.97 45.0% -0.27 ± 0.36 -0.20 ± 0.40 -0.024 ± 0.011 0.81 ± 0.15 -0.17 ± 0.10 -2.75 ± 2.60 67.5% -0.26 ± 0.33 -0.12 ± 0.36 -0.025 ± 0.011 0.79 ± 0.14 -0.16 ± 0.089 -2.15 ± 2.36 90.0% -0.23 ± 0.33 -0.77 ± 0.34 -0.022 ± 0.010 0.78 ± 0.13 -0.17 ± 0.085 -1.76 ± 2.31 This is because in a real setup many unknown and unpredictable variables affect the accuracy, such as, the image bluring, the over-or under-exposure of the image. Because every real experimental measurement has its own accuracy, it is impossible to evaluate it every time. For this reason the best value is reported, and in a real RSA examination it is necessary to keep in mind that the real accuracy is unknown. What it is assessable, in that case is the uncertainty, according to the GUM definition. The obtained truenesses are better than the accuracies reported by other motion capture systems, such as Vicon (Vicon Inc., Denver, CO, USA) During the test on the custom software developed at IOR, some hidden bugs in the scene reconstruction were found and corrected. These bugs affected the calibration box markers detection (see figure The protocol presented in this work was created to be a tool for the evaluation of RSA algorithms. It also can be used to compare different softwares. At last, this simulation system can be used to analyze hidden bugs in algorithms and correct them. Just like it happened to us during the validation tests of our software. Another open concern is the different accuracy in the tube reconstruction position and in the detector orientation in the beamline 2. The answer to this fact deserves a deep analysis of the reconstruction procedure. This simulator was a first version. We think that the simulation is the best way to test the data processing codes. Further improvements will be developed to have more and more realistic simulations, in order to explore setups that are closer to reality and analyze the performances of the algorithms in controlled and specific conditions. (trueness ± precision) of detector reconstruction accuracy in beamline 1, as a function of the image contrast.