The spin ice materials Ho2Ti2O7 and Dy2Ti2O7 are experimental and theoretical exemplars of highly frustrated magnetic materials. However, the effects of an applied uniaxial pressure are not well studied, and here we report magnetization measurements of Ho2Ti2O7 under uniaxial pressure applied in the [001], [111] and [110] crystalline directions. The basic features are captured by an extension of the dipolar spin ice model. We find a good match between our model and measurements with pressures applied along two of the three directions, and extend the framework to discuss the influence of crystal misalignment for the third direction. The parameters determined from the magnetization measurements reproduce neutron scattering measurements we perform under uniaxial pressure applied along the [110] crystalline direction. In the detailed analysis we include the recently verified susceptibility dependence of the demagnetizing factor. Our work demonstrates the application of a moderate applied pressure to modify the magnetic interaction parameters. The knowledge can be used to predict critical pressures needed to induce new phases and transitions in frustrated materials, and in the case of Ho2Ti2O7 we expect a transition to a ferromagnetic ground state for uniaxial pressures above 3.3 GPa. Higly frustrated magnets display a rich variety of exotic groundstates and excitations In order to explore the vast parameter space of frustration there is a constant drive to synthesize new and promising frustrated materials In the present study, we apply uniaxial external pressure to increase the parameter space we can explore using the parent material HTO. The physical properties of the multiaxial Ising materials HTO and DTO show a strong directional dependence on, for example an applied magnetic field Over the last 15 years HTO and DTO have become model compounds for studying classically frustrated systems featuring residual ground state entropy 14 , topological magnetic monopole excitations 2 , and slow lowtemperature dynamics One shortcoming of the previous study High-quality samples are essential in high-pressure studies, and we synthesized HTO single crystals using the floating zone technique at the image furnace at Lund University. The crystals were grown from the bottom up with a growth rate of 3 mm/hr. Visual inspection of the as-grown crystals revealed no color change along the growth direction as seen by others. Magnetic neutron diffraction experiments were performed at the Institut Laue Langevin (ILL) using the polarized diffuse scattering instrument, D7 Figures Figure A theoretical model for the evolution of the interactions in classical spin ice under uniaxial pressure was proposed in an earlier investigation ( FIG. The strength of the dipolar interactions is taken to be D = 1.41 K 35 , a is the nearest neighbor distance, r i is the position of spin S i and r ij = r ir j . The angled brackets in the first sum denotes summation over nearest neighbors. The antiferromagnetic nearest neighbor interaction J(i, j) is caused by oxygen-mediated superexchange. The value of J at ambient pressure is set to J p=0 = 1.56 K At this point, a discussion of the crystal field effects in HTO is necessary. The ionic state of the Ho 3+ ion depends on the local electric fields of the surrounding ion. Shifting their position by applying pressure could affect the ionic ground state, on which our present analysis is based. Under ambient pressure, the electronic 5 I 8 ground state of a single Ho 3+ is lifted by the trigonal field of the surrounding oxygen atoms. Fitting the crystal field parameters to susceptibility and inelastic neutron measurements yields an almost pure |J, M J = |8, ±8 non-Kramers ground state doublet, with an excitation gap of more than 200K, and an almost full magnetic moment of about 10 μ B Monte Carlo (MC) simulations using the Metropol-isHastings algorithm and single spin flip updates are used to investigate a number of different system sizes with periodic boundary conditions. Since the lowest temperature used in the experiment was 1.5 K, monopole excitations are still prevalent and loop flips The DSPM describes the changes in the magnetic moment observed in measurements In this study, we attempt to explain this previously noted discrepancy for the measurement in the [110] crystalline direction and speculate that it can be an experimental artefact due to misalignment of the crystal. Next, we outline a brief discussion of what effects might be expected from crystal misalignment. When measuring the magnetic moment of a single crystal under uniaxial pressure, there are three quantities that need to be aligned: the crystalline direction, the direction of the uniaxial pressure and the direction of the magnetic field. In order to investigate the influence of misalignment, we consider the possibility that the crystalline direction matches the direction of pressure perfectly, and that the magnetic field is misaligned with respect to the direction of pressure. This assumption minimizes the number of new parameters introduced to the theoretical model, and we believe that it still captures the essential effects of misalignment. In the experiment, on the other hand, we may expect the misalignment between the crystal direction and the applied pressure to be more significant. Since the crystal is surrounded by more compressible Stycast it is also possible that this misalignment may change during a series of compressions. See appendix A for further discussion. Misalignment has particularly strong effects when the measurement is conducted with pressure along the [110] (a) . We assume that the misalignment angle δφ can vary with application of pressure. For a field in this direction there are two degenerate ground states for perfect alignment (double headed arrows in (a)), and only one ground state when the field is misaligned (b). We denote the misalignment at ambient and applied pressure by δφ 0 and δφ p respectively. direction In order to account for the macroscopic boundary effects, we perform a demagnetizing transformation. The samples used were cylindrical with an aspect ratio of γ ≡ height diameter = 1.50 ± 0.05 at ambient pressure. However, as the the sample is compressed, the aspect ratio decreases. By fitting κ to the change in saturated magnetic moment we determine γ. An important aspect, of-ten overlooked, is that the demagnetization factor N is a function of both γ and the internal volume susceptibility χ V int , N = N (γ, χ V int ) as has been recently calculated and verified where the intensive quantities M V and χ V are the magnetization and volume susceptibility respectively. It is important to differentiate these from the external extensive quantities M = M V V (γ(p)) and , measured in the experiment. The Monte Carlo calculations, performed using periodic Ewald boundary conditions, yield internal quantities. Since the susceptibility of classical spin ice is isotropic the susceptibility dependence of N calculated in Ref. 42 can be used for HTO, as demonstrated in Ref. 43. Using the tabulated values of N (γ, χ V int ) we perform an interpolation using cubic splines FIG. For the susceptibility measurements, we define the relative change in the susceptibility with respect to the applied pressure as ∆χ ext /χ ext ≡ (χ p extχ 0 ext )χ 0 ext . We measured the relative change ∆χ ext /χ ext as a function of temperature. This quantity is highly sensitive to changes in J and κ, and in order to gain some physical insight, we consider the high-temperature limit, T → ∞. In this non-interacting limit the relative change depends only on κ. For the crystalline directions along which measurements were performed we find that lim where the superscripts denote the crystalline direction of pressure and field. From these formulae, we see that in both directions, the susceptibility at high temperature is reduced under application of pressure. This is a purely geometrical effect stemming from the fact that the Ising moments tilt away from the axis of pressure when the lattice is compressed. We calculate theoretical predictions for the spin-flip magnetic structure factor according to where the scattering wavevector is denoted by Q, the normalized polarization vector of the incident neutron beam is given by P ⊥ Q. The component of the spin perpendicular to the wave vector is defined as N is the number of particles in the supercell and f (|Q|) is the magnetic form factor for Ho 3+ . The angled brackets • • • denote the thermal average which is calculated using the MC method. In Fig. Figure As discussed in section III B, we speculate that the high-field unsaturated behavior can be due to misalignment of the crystal, since measurements are particularly sensitive in the [110] direction. In Fig. If we introduce crystal misalignment according to section III B, we can partially reproduce the high-field trend observed in the measurement. Within this framework, we have two additional parameters δφ 0 , δφ p as discussed in section III B for the misalignment of H with respect to the direction, at zero(0) and applied pressure(p) respectively. To get a decrease in magnetic moment when pressure is applied, we find it necessary that the field couples stronger to the perpendicular spins in the reference measurement. Hence, to keep the model as simple as possible, we set δφ p = 0 • . We then adjust δφ 0 in order to fit the experimental curve above 1 T. We find that δφ 0 = 0.75 • gives the best fit. We do not get the exact same features as those observed, but we do demonstrate that the decrease in magnetization above 1 T could be due to misalignment. For further discussion of more elaborate misalignment models under pressure we refer to appendix A. Finally, we use our obtained values of J and κ to predict the change in susceptibility as a function of temperature. In Fig. Due to the fluctuations in the [001] measurement, Fig. For the [111] direction there is a more significant mismatch between theory and experiment. In particular, theory would predict a maximum in ∆χ/χ near 5 K, which is not present in the experiment. We would also expect from theory that the relative change should saturate to a lower value. Indeed, with the assumption of Ising spins it directly follows from Eq. ( The parameters extrapolated from the measurements of the magnetic moment can be used to compute the thermal spin-spin correlation function and hence the magnetic structure factor, Eq. ( A key result of this study is therefore that the scattering profile calculated from the parameters obtained from the fit to the magnetic moment, Fig. the experimental neutron data, as was done in the previous study Using the straight forward magnetization measurements we can obtain the model parameter dependence on pressure. In Fig. In order to extrapolate our results to higher pressure we use linear extrapolations for the parameters in the [111] and [110] directions: For κ this is motivated by Hooks law, while the true pressure dependence on J may deviate from our linear model, but we proceed with p * as the highest measured pressure for the respective direction. For the [111] direction, we find that the dipolar chain ground state is stable up to pressures of at least 4 GPa. In the [110] direction, on the other hand, we find a transition to the previously mentioned ferromagnetic state at a critical pressure of 3.3 GPa. In DTO this state is expected when applying pressure in excess of 3.4 GPa in the [001] direction We have performed measurements of the field-induced magnetic moment, magnetic susceptibility and neutron structure factor of HTO under applied uniaxial pressure. Through extensive MC calculations we demonstrate that a dipolar spin ice model, with a pressure-tuned nearest neighbor interaction is able to capture the most essential features of the measurements of HTO. The framework is extended to include effects of misalignment, and we have found that misalignment can, to some extent, describe the anomalous effects observed in the magnetic moment for the [110] direction in both HTO and DTO. The T -dependent pressure induced changes in the susceptibility turns out to be a more sensitive quantity to both measure and model than the field-induced magnetic moment. The low field used experimentally results in a weak signal which is easily overshadowed. Theoretically, the susceptibility of spin ice has proven to be a sensitive function of the intrinsic competing interactions Our main result is that the model parameters derived from the measurement of the magnetization also captures the most salient features of the pressure induced change in the neutron scattering structure factor. That the same model describes both bulk properties and spin-spin correlation functions lends credibility to the theory. Therefore we hope that using relatively straight forward magnetization measurements to determine the pressure dependence of interaction parameters can prove useful also when it comes to other classes of frustrated materials. Increased theoretical predictive power supporting demanding neutron experiments under high pressure would benefit many investigators in the field. With new, and more intense, neutron sources under construction we expect this to be a research topic of increasing importance in the near future. The main text discusses the influence of misalignment of the applied field. Of even greater importance is probably a misalignment of the crystalline axis with respect to the applied pressure and field. Our basic analysis for the magnetization measurements suggests that the [001] and [111] directions are not sensitive to a slight misalignment. The [110] direction, on the other hand, is much more sensitive due to the large subset of spins that are perpendicular to the field under perfect alignment. We suspect that this result holds also in more elaborate models of crystalline axis misalignment. A more general description than provided in the main text introduces up to six independent exchange parameters since there are six different types of nearest neighbor bonds in a tetrahedron. Figure 