Vanadium oxides are strongly correlated materials which display metal-insulator transitions as well as various structural and magnetic properties that depend heavily on oxygen stoichiometry. Therefore, it is crucial to precisely control oxygen stoichiometry in these materials, especially in thin films. This work demonstrates a high-vacuum gas evolution technique which allows for the modification of oxygen concentration in VO X thin films by carefully tuning thermodynamic conditions. We were able to control the evolution between VO 2 , V 3 O 5 , and V 2 O 3 phases on sapphire substrates, overcoming the narrow phase stability of adjacent Magnéli phases. A variety of annealing routes were found to achieve the desired phases and eventually to control the metal-insulator transition (MIT). The pronounced MIT of the transformed films along with the detailed structural investigations based on x-ray diffraction measurements and reciprocal space mapping show that optimal stoichiometry is obtained and stabilized. Using this technique, we find that the thin film V-O phase diagram differs from that of the bulk material due to strain and finite size effects. Our study demonstrates new pathways to strategically tune the oxygen stoichiometry in complex oxides and provides a roadmap for understanding the phase stability of VO X thin films. FIG. 5. Formation of V 2 O 3 Phase from VO 2 thin film on (012) r-cut sapphire substrate. (a) Resistance as a function of temperature of VO 2 film and resulting V 2 O 3 film. (b) Roomtemperature XRD scans. Evolution of different peaks corresponding to VO 2 phase (asdeposited) and V 2 O 3 phase (following annealing route IV). AFM images revealed the surface morphology of (c) as-deposited film and (d) annealed film. (e) Wide-range RSM of the transformed V 2 O 3 film. Both in-plane and out-of-plane crystallographic orientations of the V 2 O 3 film strongly followed the r-cut sapphire substrate orientations, suggesting the formation of epitaxial structures after gas evolution. Q ┴ denotes the out-of-plane orientation (012) of Al 2 O 3 . FIG. 6. V-O phase diagram for thin film. Circles represent the tested annealing condition. Metal-insulator transitions (MITs) in oxides have been of special interest in condensed matter physics Vanadium oxides are very sensitive to changes in oxygen stoichiometry. Vanadium is a multivalent element displaying oxidation states between V 2+ and V 5+ , which gives rise to a series of compounds known as Magnéli (V n O 2n-1 ) and Wadsley phases (V n O 2n+1 ). In this study, we achieved control over oxygen stoichiometry in vanadium oxide thin films by using a high-vacuum gas evolution system. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. Figure Figure The AFM images demonstrate differences in surface morphology and roughness between the as-deposited V 2 O 3 (Fig. Due to the numerous possible oxidation states, vanadium oxides are very sensitive to changes in oxygen content. Here, we show that oxidation of V 2 O 3 to form the V 3 O 5 can be achieved on c-cut and r-cut sapphire by slightly increasing the PO 2 at ~840 °C. Figure Figure Interestingly, a large difference in the annealing times required to form V 3 O 5 is observed for the two different substrates (012) and (001) Al 2 O 3 . This indicates the crystallographic orientation of the film significantly affects thermodynamic kinetics and oxygen diffusion processes. As we observe from our x-ray diffraction measurements (Fig. In addition to the controlled oxidation of as-grown V 2 O 3 thin films, we have also demonstrated and studied the controlled reduction of as-grown VO 2 thin films on r-cut sapphire. Figure For the transformation of as-grown VO 2 films into single-phase V 2 O 3 , it takes 12 hours (point F in the PO 2 -T diagram shown in Fig. Our technique can provide excellent control over a wide-range of temperatures and oxygen partial pressures, allowing us to explore a more complete picture of thin film phase diagram. It is worth noting that the V-O phase diagram (Fig. In summary, we have developed a high-vacuum gas evolution technique that allows for the precise modification of oxygen stoichiometry in VO X thin films. Using temperaturedependent electrical transport measurements, x-ray diffraction and reciprocal space mapping, we show that optimal oxygen stoichiometry is obtained in each of the transformed films. Based on our technique, the thermodynamic phase diagram can be well-defined and elucidated for the V-O system when scaling down the VO X from bulk into thin film form. Our results may play an important role in improving and controlling transport properties across the MIT in oxide-based devices. It may open a new way to synthesize exotic or Magnéli phase oxide films which cannot be directly grown by standard deposition techniques. We hope our work will encourage the use of gas evolution methods in other complex oxide systems. produces high-quality VO 2 thin films with sharp metal-insulator transitions. The ability to continuously and gradually control both PO 2 and T is important for maintaining thermodynamic equilibrium in the thin film sample at all times so as to prevent the formation of possible secondary phases during the process.