The electronic and superconducting properties associated with the topologically non-trivial bands in Weyl semimetals have recently attracted much attention. We report the microscopic properties of the type-I Weyl semimetal TaAs measured by 75 As nuclear magnetic (quadrupole) resonance under zero and elevated magnetic fields over a wide temperature range up to 500 K. The magnetic susceptibility measured by the Knight shift K is found to be negative at low magnetic fields and have a strong field (B) dependence as lnB at T = 1.56 K. Such nonlinear field-dependent magnetization can be well accounted for by Landau diamagnetism arising from the 3D linearly dispersed bands, and thus is a fingerprint of topological semimetals. We further study the lowenergy excitations by the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 . At zero field and 30 K ≤ T ≤ 250 K, 1/T 1 T shows a T 2 variation due to Weyl nodes excitations. At B ∼ 13 T, 1/T 1 T exhibits the same T -dependence but with a smaller value, scaling with K 2 ∝ T 2 , which indicates that the Korringa relation also holds for a Weyl semimetal. Analysis of the Korringa ratio reveals that the energy range of the linear bands is about 250 K in TaAs. Recently, a new class of topological materials whose low energy excitations are massless chiral fermions, called Weyl semimetals (WSM), has triggered intensive interest in both fundamental physics and applications One alternative attempt to obtain bulk properties is through magnetization measurements. Quantum oscillations of the magnetization have been used to study the Fermi surface topology Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a local probe suited for addressing the above issues. Firstly, the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 is suited for detecting the excitations in topological materials TaAs is a typical Weyl semimetal whose Weyl nodes are very close to the Fermi level, one set of which is only 1.5 meV away The TaAs single crystal samples used in this study were grown by the chemical vapor transport method. The detailed crystal growth method can be found in Ref. , where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and f 2nd is the second-order quadrupole shift related to the electric field gradient (EFG) tensors that can be directly obtained from the spectra shown in Fig. The observed field dependence is related to the linear bands. Under magnetic fields, the total energy of the system will be raised by the electrons from the continuous linear bands that shrink to the zeroth Landau level, leading to a negative χ orb . Besides, the linear response theory is easily broken for a large magnetic scale (the energy difference between the zeroth and first Landau Level) of the linear dispersed bands even under a moderate magnetic field The nonlinear magnetization is a result of a failure of the linear response approximation as elaborated below. The linear bands in TaAs with Fermi velocity 10 5 ∼ 10 6 m/s give a magnetic energy scale to be v F √ 2e B > 65 K for B = 2.5 T, being far greater than 1.56 K. This is why the observed nonlinear behavior of the magnetization is strong. Indeed, the field dependence of K c is strongly suppressed at T = 60 K and 30 K compared to that at T = 1.56 K, as can be seen in Fig. Figure Next, we turn to the spin-lattice relaxation rate to investigate Weyl Fermions excitations. Figure We start with the zero-field results. Usually, for 3D bands with point nodes, the density of states (DOS) N(E) ∼ E 2 , and 1/T 1 is proportional to The two straight lines show the Korringa ratio S =1.5 and 0.6, respectively (see text). The insets sketch the occupancy of the electrons near the Weyl point under zero magnetic field at low temperature (left) and high temperature (right), respectively. The color of shade represents the occupancy probability of electrons. nated by spin hyperfine interaction which is a constant. Over a wide temperature range 30 K ≤ T ≤ 250 K, however, we find that 1/T 1 T is proportional to T 2 . The same behavior was also reported for 30 K ≤ T ≤ 100 K by 181 Ta-NQR in TaP Below T cross ∼ 20 K, 1/T 1 T starts to increase with decreasing temperature. The upturn of 1/T 1 T at low temperatures was also observed in TaP by 181 Ta-NQR The 1/T 1 T measured at B = 12.95 T happens to have a T 2 behavior as well in the temperature range 30 K ≤ T ≤ 250 K, as can be seen in Figure In order to obtain further insight, we plot √ 1/T 1 T vs K c as shown in Fig. For a non-correlated metal with trivial bands, theoretically S equals to 1. In reality, S can deviate from 1. For example, S ∼0.6 for simple metals such as Li, Na, and Cs. As seen in Fig. In summary, we have performed the microscopic investigations on the Weyl semimetal TaAs. Remarkably, we observed a clear lnB dependence of the 75 As Knight shift K c at T = 1.56 K, which can only be explained by the exotic orbital diamagnetism due to the distinctive Landau levels of the 3D linear bands. Our results demonstrate that such peculiar orbital diamagnetism is a fingerprint of topological semimetals. At zero filed, our observation of the T 2 variation of 1/T 1 T over a wide temperature range 30 K ≤ T ≤ 250 K is a manifestation of the anomalous orbital hyperfine coupling due to linearly dispersed bands and the E 2 dependence of the DOS associated with the Weyl excitations. We further find that, at B = 12.95 T, 1/T 1 T follows the same T -dependence but with a smaller value. The scaling between 1/T 1 T and K 2 c under a high magnetic field indicates that the Korringa relation also holds for a Weyl semimetal. The Korringa ratio due to the linear bands that have an energy range of ∼ 250 K is enhanced by a factor of 2.5 over that due to the trivial bands.