Active learningthe field of machine learning (ML) dedicated to optimal experiment design, has played a part in science as far back as the 18 th century when Laplace used it to guide his discovery of celestial mechanics 1 . In this work we focus a closed-loop, active learning-driven autonomous system on another major challenge, the discovery of advanced materials against the exceedingly complex synthesis-processes-structure-property landscape. We demonstrate autonomous research methodology (i.e. autonomous hypothesis definition and evaluation) that can place complex, advanced materials in reach, allowing scientists to fail smarter, learn faster, and spend less resources in their studies, while simultaneously improving trust in scientific results and machine learning tools. Additionally, this robot science enables science-over-thenetwork, reducing the economic impact of scientists being physically separated from their labs. We used the real-time closed-loop, autonomous system for materials exploration and optimization (CAMEO) at the synchrotron beamline to accelerate the fundamentally interconnected tasks of rapid phase mapping and property optimization, with each cycle taking seconds to minutes, resulting in the discovery of a novel epitaxial nanocomposite phase-change memory material. Technologies drive the perpetual search for novel and improved functional materials, necessitating the exploration of increasingly complex multi-component materials Structural phase maps, which describe the dependence of materials structure on composition, serve as blueprints in the design of functional and structural materials, as most materials properties are tied to crystal-structure prototypes. For example, property extrema tend to occur within specific phase regions (e.g. magnetism and superconductivity) or along phase boundaries (e.g. caloric-cooling materials and morphotropic phase-boundary piezoelectrics). Structural phase maps, and more specifically equilibrium phase diagrams, were traditionally generated over years with point-by-point Edisonian approaches involving iterative materials synthesis, diffraction-based structure characterization, and crystallographic refinement. Machine learning (ML) is transforming materials research before our eyes Active learning We demonstrate CAMEO in real-time control of X-ray diffraction measurement experiments over composition spreads at the synchrotron beamline and in the lab. The algorithm accelerates phase mapping and materials discovery of a novel solid-state material, with a 10-fold reduction in required experiments, each iteration taking tens of seconds to tens of minutes depending on the experimental task. It uses an active-learning campaign that exploits physics knowledge (e.g. Gibbs phase rule) and combines the joint objectives of maximizing knowledge of the phase map P(x) with hunting for materials x * that correspond to property F(x) extrema, while also exploiting the shared information across these tasks via function g (See Eq 1). Here x ∈ R d is the set of d materials-composition parameters. This allows CAMEO to target its search in specific phase regions or to search near phase boundaries, thus exploiting the dependence of materials property on structure. We demonstrate that this physics-informed approach accelerates materials optimization compared to general optimization methodologies that focus on directly charting the high dimensional, complex property function. Eqn (1) Here, we explored the Ge-Sb-Te ternary system to identify an optimal phase-change memory (PCM) material for photonic switching devices CAMEO satisfies many attributes of a robot scientist, as diagrammed in Figure data from the AFLOW.org For this task, scanning ellipsometry measurements were performed on the spread wafer with films in amorphous (initial) and crystalline states ahead of the CAMEO run, and the raw ellipsometric spectra data were incorporated as a phase-mapping prior (See Methods). Thus, the algorithm makes use of information regarding phase distribution across the spread that is "hidden" in the unreduced complex spectroscopic data, which vary non-trivially across the spread. At each iteration, CAMEO identifies the next material to query, indicates the material to the experimentalist (human-in-the-loop) who performs the intensive task of processing the raw optical data to extract ΔE g . In parallel, CAMEO remotely controls scanning of the synchrotron beam to collect X-ray diffraction data from the spread wafer with films in the crystalline state. CAMEO first seeks knowledge of the phase map until 80% convergence, and then switches to material optimization (See Methods section M1). This procedure identified the material with the largest ΔE g over 19 iterations taking approximately 10 hours, compared to over 90 continuous hours for the full set of 177 composition spots. CAMEO provides an approximate maximum average 20-iteration lead over the best alternative Gaussian Process -Upper Confidence Bounds (GP-UCB) focusing on ΔE g optimization in the composition space, and random sampling, both common benchmarks in BO. As seen in Fig. As seen in the figure, the phases have grown coherently with the relationship GST Fm-3m (111)//SbTe (001). (See Methods for details.) This boost in ΔE g indeed directly leads to large enhancement in optical contrast as captured in Δk = k c -k a , the difference in the extinction coefficient (between amorphous (k a ) and crystalline states (k c )) extracted from the ellipsometry data at different wavelengths (Fig. We have fabricated photonic switching PCM devices based on the discovered GST467 nanocomposite. With a sequence of laser pulses (energy and pulse width) with varying amplitude sent through the device, the material can be switched between the crystalline and amorphous phases (Fig. Recent reports of nanostructured PCM materials including multilayer and superlattice thin films have highlighted the crucial roles interfaces and defects play in their switching mechanisms leading to faster switching speed and lower switching energies The discovery of a novel PCM material demonstrate that systems similar to CAMEO will fulfill the primary goals of materials design by accelerating the discovery and collection of materials knowledge, streamlining the experiment cycle, improving control over experimental variability, and improving reproducibility, thus improving trust in scientific results. They will also generate reference and benchmark datasetsautomatically processed, analyzed, and converted to actionable knowledge with all associated metadata, for developing and improving trust in machine learning tools. Further benefits include automatic knowledge capture to maintain institutional knowledge, maximizing information gain, and reducing use of consumable resources such as expert time, freeing up experts to work on higher level challenges. Research at the synchrotron exemplifies these resource demands and limitations, where obtaining scientist and equipment time is difficult or expensive. And potentially most impactful, placing labs under the control of AI may greatly reduce the technical expertise needed to perform experiments, resulting in a greater 'democratization' of science A description of the closed-loop, autonomous system for materials exploration and optimization (CAMEO) scheme can be found in M1 beginning with a detailed description of results and a description of materials and device synthesis and characterization in section M2. The description of CAMEO is broken down into the subsections: M1a Detailed results, M1b Initialization and data preprocessing, M1c Phase mapping, M1d Knowledge propagation, M1e Active learning, M1f Statistics and performance measures. The materials and device section is broken down into the subsections: M2a Sample fabrication, M2b Mapping of phase-change temperature, M2c Structural Mapping, M2d High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) of Ge4Sb6Te7 (GST467) , M2e Modeling and calculation of the ellipsometry spectra, M2f ST467 photonic device fabrication and measurement. CAMEO's methodology follows the diagrams of Figure In parallel, results and predictions are presented to the expert user and pertinent knowledge is captured from the expert. All gathered knowledge is then stored in a database. A description of the capabilities of CAMEO are presented in Table CAMEO's specific implementation of Eqn 1 is shown in Eqn M1: The first set of iterations maximize phase map knowledge until the estimated phase map convergences to the user defined threshold c, at which point the system switches to materials property optimization. A separate Gaussian Process is fit to each individual phase region for the functional property, allowing for phase region dependent hyperparameter optimization. This exploits the CSP relationship to improve functional property prediction accuracy, accelerate materials optimization, and provide potential computational resource savings. The phase regions are then ranked by the maximum expected functional property value and the top R regions are selected for optimization, with R a user defined variable. Here R is set to 1. Optimization balances exploitation and exploration through the mean μ(x r ) and weighted variance βσ(x r ) (the iteration dependent β follows [27] and is described below). The optimization acquisition function also allows the user to target points closer or further from phase boundaries via γd(x r ), where d(x r ) is the distance from point x r to the nearest phase boundary and γ is a user defined parameternegative (positive) to emphasize points near the edge (center) of the phase region. Here the value is set to 10. Myopia to particular phase regions can be removed with an additional exploration policy. Pre-synthesized (pseudo) ternary combinatorial spreads are used to provide a pool of hundreds of materials to investigate. While for this demonstration the autonomous system must select samples from the given pool of pre-synthesized samples, this is only a limit of the current physical experimental system and not a limit of the presented ML methodology. CAMEO was benchmarked on a material system previously extensively studied by the authors Efficacy was compared to a range of alternative methods as shown in Fig. Once tuned, CAMEO was placed in active control over the high-throughput X-ray diffraction system at SLAC and a commercial in-house diffraction system. Here, the material optimization goal was to identify an optimal phase change material in the Ge-Sb-Te system, characterized by maximizing ΔE gthe difference between the amorphous and crystalline optical bandgap. Scanning ellipsometry measurements were performed on the spread wafer in amorphous and crystalline states ahead of the CAMEO run, and we fed the unprocessed ellipsometric spectra as a prior for building the phase map model. At each iteration, the query material was indicated to the experimentalist (human-in-the-loop) who then performed the intensive task of processing the raw optical data to obtain ΔE g and provided this data to CAMEO (See section M2e for full description). This procedure identified the material with the largest ΔE g over 19 iterations taking approximately 10 hours, compared to 90 hours for the full set of 177 materials. A post-analysis is shown in Fig. The system is initialized by loading the composition spread into the X-ray diffraction system, either the Bruker D8 or the SSRL diffraction synchrotron beamline endstation. For the SSRL system, a network connection is used for sending commands to the X-ray diffraction system via the SPEC interface The user first indicates the material system of interest. A database of known stable phases, derived from past phase diagrams, is then used to automatically identify pertinent phases. Structure data is then automatically assembled for these phases from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)a database of critically evaluated experimental structures, and the AFLOW.org Phase mapping is initialized with a user-selected expected number of phase regions for the material system, 5 for Fe-Ga-Pd and 10 for Ge-Sb-Te. While this number is used to initialize the phase map model, the phase mapping technique will converge to either a larger or smaller number of phase regions as described in the GRENDEL (graph-based endmember extraction and labeling) section. All other phase mapping hyperparameters were optimized on the benchmark system, and these values were used without modification for the Ge-Sb-Te system. Other default parameters include: graph distance multiplier is 1.2 and max number of iterations is 100. If prior material structure data is imported, such as data from AFLOW.org, that knowledge is used to initialize phase mapping (see Incorporating Prior), with the active learning criterion used to select the most informative material to query next. However, if no such prior data is used, the first sample queried can be selected randomly or using some other informative process. For benchmarking, the initial material was selected at random with uniform probability. For the live application to the Ge-Sb-Te system, the first sample was selected to be the one at the composition center of the materials on the composition spread. This sample was selected as it is potentially the most informative, given no other knowledge of the samples. The live run for the Ge-Sb-Te system completed after all the materials were measured, allowing for later analysis of active learning methodologies. To compare these methods, the initial material was again selected at random with a uniform prior. Once the next query material has been identified, the system then measures the query material for X-ray diffraction using a programmatically generated script via SPEC for the SLAC highthroughput system or a GADDS script for the Bruker system. For the Bruker system, the diffraction image is integrated into a diffraction pattern automatically, and for the SLAC system, integration is performed The background signal from sample to sample can vary significantly, requiring a background subtraction method capable of handling these variations. For both the SLAC and Bruker diffraction measurements, Matlab's envelope function with the 'peak' setting and the parameter value of 50 was used to identify and remove the background curve. Phase mapping was performed using the physics-informed phase region and constituent phase identification method described in [32]. This method represents the material composition space as a graph, where each material is represented by a vertex that is connected by edges to neighboring materials in composition space (or wafer x-y coordinate). Neighboring materials are defined by Voronoi tessellating the composition space This method identifies a phase map for hundreds of samples in tens of seconds, on the same order of X-ray diffraction measurements at SSRL which typically takes 30 seconds, and measurements on the Bruker D-8* which takes over 10 minutes. GRENDEL hyperparameters include the MRF segmentation (i.e. graph cut) weight and the balance between the material-phase region matrix based on clustering and that based on phase mixture During the GRENDEL process, if the number of clusters drops below 90 % of the number of clusters used when starting the process, GRENDEL is terminated and the computed phase map labels and constituent phases from the previous internal GRENDEL iteration are output. Phase mapping performance of GRENDEL is compared to phase labels identified with Agglomerative Hierarchical Cluster Analysis, where samples of similar diffraction patterns are grouped together into clusters which are then associated with the underlying phase regions. A user defined number of phase regions (i.e. clusters) is used as well as the cosine metric and the average method for computing cluster-cluster dissimilarity. Material property data is incorporated into the MRF model as a prior through the edge weights of the composition graph G, where the original edge weights of G are modified by a functional property graph G p with edge weights of 0 (disconnected) or 1 (connected) and f: E, E p → E. If e ∈ E ∩ E p then e = 1 + Δ e else e = 1 -Δ e . The value of Δ e was varied for the benchmark material system and the value of Δ e = 0.5 selected as it demonstrates clear improved phase mapping performance during the first active learning selected measurements and worse performance near the end of the run. This is to be expected as prior knowledge can benefit initial analysis but can overwhelm knowledge gained from data if the prior is weighted too heavily. A smaller (larger) value of Δ e demonstrates a smaller (larger), similar effect. For the benchmark system an AFLOW.org based phase map prior was used, as shown in Figure For the Ge-Sb-Te material system, the prior was determined based on optical data collected. For each material, the complex reflectance ratio amplitude ψ and phase difference Δ for the amorphous and crystalline phases were collected for the set of angles θ = {50°, 55°, 60°, 65°, 70°} relative to the laser's plane of incidence, creating 20 spectral measurements for each material consisting of different measurement types m ∈ {ψ crystalline , ψ amorphous , Δ crystalline , Δ amorphous }. Example optical data used for the prior is shown in Fig. To define a prior for the phase diagram, the set of all spectra are reduced into a set of similarity weights defining a similarity of 0 or 1 for each pair of samples, which can then be used to evaluate E p . The following equations are used for mapping of spectra to similarity values. First the Euclidean difference between each set of materials (i, j) is computed for each spectral measurement type and angle {m, θ}. These differences are then averaged for each pair of samples (i, j) over the set of angles θ and then normalized to between 0 and 1 for each measurement type m. These values are then averaged again over measurements m, resulting in a final dissimilarity value for each pair (i, j). A threshold is then used to convert the continuous dissimilarity values to 0 or 1, defining whether an edge between (i, j) exists (1) or does not (0). The threshold of D Threshold = 0.07 was selected to achieve a ratio of |E p |/|E| = 0.49 ≈ 0.5, i.e. the prior removes approximately half the edges from the initial graph. Once the phase map has been identified for the given data, the phase region labels must be propagated to the materials that have yet to be measured for structure. To exploit the graphdescribed data manifold, the semi-supervised learning technique Gaussian random field harmonic energy minimization The phase mapping knowledge propagation harmonic energy minimization method is compared to the use of 1-nearest neighbor, where any material without a phase region label takes on the label of its 1 st nearest neighbor with a label. First nearest neighbor was implemented using MATLAB's knnsearch function with default parameters. GPR was implemented using MATLAB's 'fitrgp' function with default parameters. In the Bayesian optimization 36 literature, the following formalism is used: where y is the target property to be maximized, x ε R d is the set of material synthesis and processing parameters to be searched over, f(x) is the function to optimize, ε is typically independent stochastic measurement noise, and x * defines the material synthesis and processing parameters that result in the maximal material property (for the minimum, replace argmax with argmin). When f(x) is unknown, a surrogate model is used to approximate it based on given data. surrogate function is then used to identify the best next material to study. Each subsequent material is selected to identify the optimal material x * in the smallest number of experiments possible. Identifying extrema of a function involves a balance between exploiting prior data to identify nearby extrema and exploring to identify extrema far from prior data. An alternative active learning objective is to select experiments that will best improve the overall prediction accuracy of the surrogate model, or in other words, select experiments to most efficiently learn the unknown function f(x). Such a campaign learns the general trends of f(x), which is highly useful when attempting to quantify anomalous behavior of novel materials. The active learning method used to select the next material to query for phase mapping is based on risk minimization Active Learning Comparison Methods: Random, Sequential, and 10 % Sampling The risk minimization method is compared to 1) random samplingselecting each subsequent material at random from the wafer, with a uniform prior, 2) sequential samplingwhere each sample is selected in the order it appears on the wafer, and 3) where 10 % of the materials are selected in a pre-determined design. Random sampling is expected to provide increasingly poor performance relative to active learning as the search space increases in dimension due to the curse of dimensionality The Fe-Ga-Pd composition spread contains 278 samples. For the 10 % sampling, the 28 samples are indicated in Fig. For CAMEO and GP-UCB the iteration dependent weight parameter β is used Where D is the total number of samples, I is the current iteration number, and λ = 0.1. The phase maps identified at each iteration i is compared to the iteration (i -4) using the FMI performance measure. Convergence is defined as FMI >= 80 %. The target optimization for the benchmark system is maximizing remnant magnetization. One modification was made to the remnant magnetization signal: The signal saturates over a large range of the composition spread. For BO benchmarking, it is preferred that one material is identified as the optimum. As such, the saturated values were modified with a squared exponential function, in effect "hallucinating" the remnant magnetization values as if sensor saturation had not occurred, converting the signal from Fig. The 95 % confidence interval was computed for the variable of interest over 100 experiments at the given iteration with: Where F -1 is the inverse of the Student's t cumulative distribution function, σ is the standard deviation, n = 100 is the number of experiments, p = {2.5 %, 97.5 %}, and ν = 99 is the degrees of freedom. Phase mapping performance is evaluated by comparing phase region labels determined by experts with those estimated by CAMEO for the entire phase map (after the knowledge propagation step). To evaluate system performance, the Fowlkes-Mallows Index (FMI) is used, which compares two sets of cluster labels. The equations are presented below for the expert labels l ∈ L and the ML estimated labels l ̂∈ L ̂, where the labels are enumerated L → N and L ̂→ N. If the number of phase regions is taken to be too large by either the user or the ML algorithm while the phase mapping is correct, some phase regions will be segmented into sub-regions with the dominant phase boundaries preserved. For example, peak shifting can induce phase region segmentation Fowlkes-Mallows Index: FMI = TP √(TP + FP)(TP + FN) ⁄ TP Amorphous thin-film composition spreads encompassing a region of the Ge-Sb-Te ternary (separated into 177 samples using a gridded physical shadow mask) were fabricated on 3-inch silicon wafers with SiO2 layers (2 m) by co-sputtering Ge, Sb, and Te targets at room temperature. Different (average) thickness composition spreads (covering the same composition range) were fabricated for different measurements: they were 20 nm, 100 nm, 200 nm, and 500 nm for optical, structural, resistance, and composition mapping, respectively. To obtain a crystalline state, some of the wafers were annealed at 300 o C for 10 min following their characterization in the amorphous state. The composition mapping of the spreads is measured using the wavelength dispersion spectroscopy. For every separated sample region on a spread, three random spots are measured, and the average composition value is used for the actual stoichiometry mapping in Fig. Upon increasing the temperature, a phase-change memory material undergoes a structural transition from amorphous to crystalline states with up to four orders of magnitude in the change of resistance. The temperature at which the resistance drop takes place can be taken as the phasechange temperature, Tcp (Fig. Synchrotron diffraction on crystallized spreads was carried out at Beamline 10-2 at SLAC. In addition to the remote-controlled CAMEO run, we have also carried out diffraction of entire spreads in order to obtain the complete structural phase mapping of the probed Ge-Sb-Te region and to verify the accuracy of the phase diagram determined by CAMEO. Fig. SbTe (R3 ̅ m), Sb2Te2 (P3 ̅ m), and Sb2Te3 (R3 ̅ m) all have very similar diffraction patterns and atomic projections of the [100] zone-axis, except for different lattice periods along the [001] direction. These three phases are present across the Sb-Te region depending on the local composition on our spread. The predominant Sb-Te phase in GST467 is SbTe (below). We have performed cross-sectional High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) measurements on the GST467 thin film and found that there are nanometer-sized SbTe regions grown coherently inside the distorted cubic GST matrix as shown in Fig. The experimental ellipsometry data (J. A. Woollam company) of the combinatorial Gs-Sb-Te spread was analyzed in the range from 200 to 1000 nm using the CompleteEASE software. The dielectric function ε(ω) used in the model contains For the Drude model: where ω p = √ N⋅e 2 m⋅ε 0 , and ω p is the plasma frequency, Γ is the collision frequency. For the Tauc-Lorentz model: Where A is the prefactor, E o is the peak in the joint density of the state, E g is the optical bandgap, and Γ is the broadening parameter. The optical parameters, e.g. refractive index n and extinction coefficient k, as well as the optical bandgap, can be extracted from these models. In order to confirm the accuracy of the optical parameters, one needs to check if the fitting curves as well as a set of fitting parameters, e.g. thickness, carrier density, and surface roughness, can be used to analyze the experimental data of the samples for the entire spread wafer. Typically, a fitting procedure requires repeated steps in order to fine-tune the parameters manually to optimize the results, and some samples require more manual fitting steps for setting the range and the starting values of the parameters than others. For the CAMEO run, the unprocessed raw ellipsometry data taken at each composition spot (for crystalline and amorphous states) are used as the prior. Once a spot is identified as a possible composition with enhanced ΔE g (the difference in the optical bandgap between the amorphous and crystalline state), the fitting procedure above is carried out on the raw data, and the value of ΔE g is computed, the process of which includes manual inspection of fitting parameters. Depending on the number of repeated steps, each computation can take up to 20 min. at a composition spot, and the ΔE g value is then fed back to the CAMEO algorithm. The complete mapping of the optical bandgap of amorphous and crystalline states measured and calculated from one spread are shown in Fig. Photonic switching devices were fabricated out of GST467 films (Fig. A symmetric multi-level switching of the photonic device was investigated as shown in Fig. In order to provide and precisely control the pump pulses to quench or anneal the GST467 thin film in steps, pulses from a CW pump laser were first modulated by an electro-optic modulator and then sent into an erbium-doped fiber amplifier followed by a variable optical attenuator. The output of the optical signal was collected with a photodetector. During the annealing process, a sequence of pump pulse (50 ns, 2 mW) train was applied to the photonic device. In the quenching process, a sequence of 50 ns pump pulses with gradually increased amplitude was sent into the waveguide. NIST disclaimer * Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this report in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 