An experimental method to calculate lift using static pressure ports on the wind tunnel walls and its associated limits has been explored in this paper. While the wall-pressure measurement (WPM) technique for lift calculation has been implemented by other researchers, there is a lack of literature on the sensitivity of the WPM method to test section size, airfoil chord, and model thickness. Chord sensitivity studies showed that the airfoil chord plays an important role in the accuracy of the measurements and needs to be appropriately sized for a given test section dimensions for optimum performance of the WPM method. A chord sensitivity parameter (CSP ) was formulated and a lower limit (= 0.025) was established to relate the ideal chord-length to wind tunnel test-section dimensions to ensure best lift measuring capabilities. Finally, a combination of symmetric and cambered airfoils with thicknesses varying from 6% -21% were tested and successfully validated against reference data for a freestream chord Reynolds number range of 100,000 to 550,000. The WPM method was found to be sensitive to varying surface flow conditions and airfoil thickness and has been shown to be a viable replacement to traditional lift measurement techniques using load balances or surface pressure ports. In aerodynamics, the calculation of lift is important as it greatly influences the design of aerial vehicles. Conventionally, lift on an airfoil is measured in wind tunnels using either load balances or airfoil surface pressure ports. While the load balance method is popular, the method requires constant calibration to ensure the accuracy of the force results being measured The Wall Pressure Measurement (WPM) method to measure airfoil lift has been successfully implemented in the Stuttgart University As the setup used for the WPM method is on the walls of the wind tunnel and not directly on the airfoil, as in the Surface Pressure Measurement (SPM) method, or attached to the airfoil, as in the Load Cell Measurement (LCM) method, the WPM method provides a very non-intrusive way of obtaining the airfoil lift without affecting the flow near the airfoil. Literature shows that the WPM method has also been effectively used to study wind tunnel blockage effects and corrections for velocity, pressure, lift and drag for vertical axis wind turbines (VAWTs), rotorcrafts, and other 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional bodies In spite of the WPM method's popularity and possibilities, little to no literature exists on the sensitivity and predictive capabilities of the WPM method to the airfoil geometry, test section dimensions, and flow conditions. Parametric studies exploring the above conditions will help inform researchers of the testing limits and capabilities of the WPM system. In the current research, a WPM test bench is retrofitted and validated in the NCSU low-speed wind tunnel. Initial efforts were focused on conducting a chord sensitivity study to determine the optimal airfoil chord to test section dimensions ratio that will allow for the WPM system to be accurate and feasible to implement. A consistent parameter and its associated limits are explored that can relate test-section dimensions to airfoil section sizing for optimal performance of the WPM system. Subsequent efforts were focused on validating the C l measured using the WPM test bench against Surface Pressure Measurement (SPM) and Load Cell Measurement (LCM) data for eight airfoil sections with varying thickness and camber. Additionally, the prediction accuracy of the WPM method in the presence of auxiliary surfaces on the airfoil such as tripwires, vortex generators, etc., was tested. The following section (Section 2) discusses the theory behind the WPM technique and its implementation at the NCSU wind tunnel facility. Sections 3 and 4 present the results from the chord sensitivity and the validation studies, respectively. The final section (Section 5) presents the conclusions drawn and suggests possible future directions for the current research. In this section, the methodology behind the WPM method in calculating static airfoil lift is described. Details with regard to the wind tunnel, the theory and equations used and the implemented WPM setup are presented in subsections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 respectively. Experimental investigations were conducted in the North Carolina State University's closed-circuit, subsonic wind tunnel facility which has a 3:1 contraction ratio and a test section measuring 46 × 45× 32 inches (length × width × height). The wind tunnel is capable of reaching freestream velocities of up to 90 mph via a 3-blade, varying pitch propeller driven by a 250 horsepower electric motor. The settling chamber is equipped with a honeycomb screen and two anti-turbulence screens to ensure good flow quality. The turbulence intensity, based on turbulence sphere and hot-wire anemometry tests, has been measured to be 0.3%. Pressure measurements were made using three, 16-port Scanivalve DSA3217 systems with a ±0.05% accuracy The method for deducing the airfoil lift using wall pressure ports is similar to that using surface pressure ports, with the added advantage of inexpensive airfoil models that can be rapidly manufactured. The static pressure gradient caused by the airfoil's upper and lower surfaces are measured and integrated to calculate the non-dimensionalized net upward force, or the lift coefficient, of the airfoil. However, as the circulation of the airfoil theoretically extends to infinity but the integration is performed only over the restricted length across which the pressure ports are distributed along the wind tunnel walls, correction factors as described by On obtaining the static pressures from the upper (P upper ) and lower (P lower ) wind tunnel walls, parallel to the airfoil chord, the uncorrected coefficient of lift of the airfoil can be calculated as: where m and n are the horizontal distances from the airfoil center to the left-and right-most wall pressure ports, respectively, and l is the distance between the first and last wall pressure ports, as illustrated in Fig. To translate the lift coefficient based on the wall pressure measurements (C l,wall ) to the actual airfoil lift coefficient (C l,corr ), two correction factors, commonly referred to as the Althaus factors 4 , need to be applied. These factors, determined by decomposing the airfoil's pressure distribution at the wall into a basic, constant distribution and a distribution due to the effect of the airfoil's angle of attack, are calculated using the equations, point-of-interest and the airfoil's half-chord point (x), width of the wind tunnel (w), airfoil chord (c), and wall pressure port distribution length (l): The corrected airfoil lift coefficient can then be obtained using the equation, where C li is the design lift coefficient of the airfoil. On calculating the Althaus correction factors for the current test section dimensions using Eqns. 2 and 3, it was observed (from Fig. Additional wind tunnel corrections to account for turbulence and blockage effects are applied to the C l,corr to get the final airfoil lift coefficient. In the current experimental investigations, turbulence effects were accounted for by adjusting the freestream velocity based on the wind tunnel turbulence factor while blockage effects on the lift coefficient were corrected for using the equation described by Havelock where d is the distance between the airfoil's mid-point to the wind tunnel wall, which in the current work is w/2. C l is the final lift coefficient value that is obtained after applying all the necessary corrections. Guided by implementations of the WPM method in literature Upon setting up the WPM test bench, initial efforts were focused on validating the setup and conducting a study to test the sensitivity of the WPM predictions to airfoil chord in order to set the test limits for the airfoil chord length (c) to test section length ratio (l), represented as a scaling ratio (sr), so as to guide subsequent validation studies and operation. A custom 12% thick Low Reynolds Number (LRN) cambered airfoil was taken as the baseline geometry as a 12-inch chord version of the airfoil model with 44 surface pressure ports was available at the NCSU wind tunnel facility, thereby providing a commensurable way to compare the WPM predictions with SPM results. The symmetric, 12% thick NACA 0012 airfoil was also considered for the initial validation and chord sensitivity study as a plethora of LCM datasets were available 19-24 at the required Reynolds number range. Four versions of each of the two airfoils with 6-,8-,10-, and 12-inch chord lengths were 3D printed using ABS plastic with two support rods at the quarter-and threequarter-chord locations to prevent bending or warping. The Althaus correction factors and the scaling ratios for each of the chord length's is listed in Table Figure where C l,exp is the expected lift coefficient value obtained from reference data, C l is the lift coefficient from the WPM method and N is the number of data points considered for taking the SSE. Observations from Fig. This can be further verified from observations of Fig. C l versus α and associated errors between the WPM predictions and LCM data for the NACA 0012 airfoil at Re = 330, 000 for different chord lengths are plotted in Fig. As one of the aims of the current work was to establish chord-sizing rules to accurately test airfoils using the WPM method, efforts were focused on defining a parameter that can be used to inform researchers on the optimal airfoil chord length for a given wind tunnel test section dimensions. From the above chord sensitivity study, it was seen that for the NCSU wind tunnel, the WPM method results were most accurate for sr values above 20. However, the sr value for the WPM setups at the NASA Langley was defined. Based on Eqn. 9, the lower limit of CSP was evaluated to be 0.0389 for the current wind tunnel setup. While the limit in CSP agreed with the NASA wind tunnel setup (CSP = 0.041), it did not do so with that of the Oldenburg wind tunnel (CSP = 0.025). It is recognized that, due to the restriction for the NCSU wind tunnel, more combinations for c, w and l could not be considered. Given this being the case, we define the lower limit of the CSP to be equal to that corresponding to the Oldenburg wind tunnel and conclude that for the WPM setup, the airfoil chord should be modeled such that the CSP ≥ 0.025. While no upper limit can be established with current knowledge, there will exist one as larger airfoil-chords will have the tendency to affect wall pressures beyond the tunnel length and failing to capture them will result in incorrect C l predictions. In order to thoroughly validate the WPM setup, a combination of eight symmetric and cambered airfoils with thicknesses ranging from 6% to 12% were tested. Additionally, three airfoils were also tested in trippedflow conditions. Subsection 4.1 provides details of the airfoil geometries tested along with the associated freestream conditions. Comparison of the C l results from the WPM method with SPM and LCM data from the current research and literature are discussed in Section 4.2 to determine the validity of the current WPM setup. Based on the chord sensitivity study (Section 3), eight 8inch chord wing models with different airfoil sections were manufactured with ABS plastic using 3D printing techniques and were reinforced with support rods spanning the length of the model. Table The current section presents the lift coefficient results predicted by the WPM test bench and validates them against experimental SPM and LCM data. For all of the validation study results shown in this section, C l vs α plots are shown for two or more Reynolds numbers for α varying from -10 degrees to 25 degrees. Additionally, the error bars for the lift coefficient at every alternate angle of attack are plotted. ) Results of the 8-inch WPM model compared to those obtained by integrating the surface pressure measurements of the LRN 12-inch, surface pressure model for Reynolds numbers ranging from 250,000 to 500,000 are presented in Fig. ) WPM results were compared with experimental C l data from LCM methods The SA7024 is a 6% thick airfoil designed for low Reynolds number flows. Reference lift data for the SA7024 was collected in the UIUC lowspeed wind tunnel and the lift measurements were made using a load balance -10 0 10 20 30 -0.5 0 0.5 Re = 100, 000 as compared to Re = 300, 000 and could be attributed to higher model vibrations at lower flow velocities once the airfoil has stalled. Overall, the WPM results match with reference data. Results for the current case study also show that, even though the airfoil is only 6% thick, the flow perturbations are being accurately sensed and captured at the wind tunnel walls. The Eppler 387 airfoil, commonly used in remote controlled aircraft and ultra-light powered aircraft 32,33 , was tested with and without a tripwire at Reynolds numbers of 200,000 and 500,000 and compared with LCM data from Selig and McGranahan 26 . For the tripwire cases, trips sized at 0.11% of the chord in thickness were placed at a 2% chord length distance from the leading edge on the upper surface and 5% chord length distance from the leading edge on the lower surface. Figure -10 0 10 20 30 -0.5 0 0.5 attack, while predictions for the clean flow case match very well with expected results, tripped flow results underpredict the lift for 9 ≤ α ≤ 14. C l is also slightly underpredicted at the negative angles of attack for both surface flow conditions. The WPM method doesn't perform so well for the clean airfoil case at Re = 500, 000 (Fig. ) Clark Y is a flat-bottomed, 12% thick airfoil for low-Reynolds number applications and is very commonly used for model aircrafts. The Clark Y tests were conducted at freestream Reynolds numbers of 300,000 and 400,000, with and without a tripwire. For the tripwire cases, trips sized at 0.19% of the chord in thickness were placed at a 2% chord length distance from the leading edge on the upper surface and 5% chord length distance from the leading edge on the lower surface. WPM C l predictions compared with LCM results from Selig 27 are plotted in Fig. Overall, the WPM method accurately captures the C l behavior for the Clark Y airfoil, both qualitatively and Prepared using sagej.cls for Gemini airfoil at (a) Re = 200,000 and (b) Re = 300,000 quantitatively, at all tested operating conditions, with a slight deviation in the maximum lift coefficient and stall characteristics for the tripwire case at a Reynolds number of 300,000. Once again, the WPM method was successful in demonstrating its sensitivity by correctly predicting the C l behavior when the surface flow was tripped. The Gemini is a 15% thick airfoil used in sailplanes applications and was tested at Reynolds numbers of 200,000 and 300,000. LCM data for the tests was referenced from Selig et al. The symmetric, 18% thick NACA 0018 airfoil was tested at Reynolds numbers of 250,000 and 500,000 and validated against results from Boutilier et. al 29 and Timmer et. al 30 , respectively. WPM results at Re = 250, 000 (Fig. The S823 is a 21% thick airfoil used for wind-turbine blades. For the S823, tests were conducted with and without a tripwire for Reynolds numbers of 300,000 and 400,000, and were compared with reference data from Selig et al. This research paper discussed the implementation of the Wall Pressure Measurement (WPM) technique to calculate lift as a feasible and quick method to experimentally measure airfoil lift behavior. Though the WPM technique has been implemented in other wind tunnels, little literature exists with regard to the sensitivity of the method to variation in airfoil chord length and thickness. Initial efforts were focused on conducting a chord sensitivity study to get the optimum airfoil chord to wind tunnel test section length ratio for effective performance of the WPM method. This was followed by a detailed validation study at freestream Reynolds number conditions ranging from 100,000 to 550,000, to test the effectiveness of the WPM test bench in predicting lift data for various airfoil geometries with varying maximum thicknesses and camber. Results from the chord sensitivity study showed that the WPM method is highly sensitive to the chord of the airfoil and the best results were obtained in the NCSU wind tunnel when the airfoil chord was above 20% of the test section length. However, the 20% scaling ratio did not agree with other implementations of the WPM method and indicated that merely the airfoil chord and test section length were not enough to effectively represent the sensitivity of the WPM method to test section and model geometry. A new design parameter called CSP was formulated, taking into account the width of the test section, and was successful in setting a lower limit on the ideal chord-length of the airfoil that would produce the best WPM results for any test-section dimensions. Based on current work and literature, the lower limit of CSP was found to be 0.025 which provides a good starting point to model the WPM setup for optimum performance. Validation study results showed that the C l predicted by the WPM method is comparable to those measured using the SPM and LCM methods for airfoil geometries with thicknesses ranging from 6% to 21%, with the added advantage of testing with a cheaper and simpler setup that can capture all aerodynamic features without introducing any surface roughness, flow intrusions and arduous calibration procedures. WPM results showed good comparison for cases with tripped flow, implying that even minute flow perturbations were accurately being captured by the method. In a few cases, an increase in Reynolds number resulted in smaller deviations in the results from expected values. In conclusion, the WPM method can serve as a viable, non-intrusive, and inexpensive replacement to existing lift measurement techniques. Future iterations of this research work will focus on setting an upper limit to the CSP with possible extensions focusing on backing the airfoil surface C p from the wall pressures using theoretical panel methods and machine learning approaches. Implementing the WPM technique for unsteady lift measurements and obtaining the effective shape of the airfoil in unsteady flows can also be explored. North Carolina State University, USA North Carolina State University, USA Prepared using sagej.cls Proc. IMechE Part G: J. Aerospace Engineering XX(X)