Recent advances in guiding and localizing light at the nanoscale exposed the enormous potential of ultra-scaled plasmonic devices. In this context, the decay of surface plasmons to hot carriers triggers a variety of applications in boosting the efficiency of energy-harvesting, photo-catalysis and photodetection. However, a detailed understanding of plasmonic hot carrier generation and particularly the transfer at metal-semiconductor interfaces is still elusive. In this paper, we introduce a monolithic metal-semiconductor (Al-Ge) heterostructure device, providing a platform to examine surface plasmon decay and hot electron transfer at an atomically sharp Schottky nanojunction. The gated metal-semiconductor heterojunction device features electrostatic control of the Schottky barrier height at the Al-Ge interface, enabling hot electron filtering. The ability of momentum matching and to control the energy distribution of plasmon-driven hot electron injection is demonstrated by controlling the interband electron transfer in Ge leading to negative differential resistance. Plasmonic-metal nanostructures have become a powerful tool to concentrate and manipulate light below the diffraction limit, paving a pathway to couple optical energy effectively to nanoscale systems. In this work, we investigate surface plasmon-driven electron transfer processes at an atomically sharp M-S nanojunction of a monolithic Al-Ge nanowire (NW) heterostructure. Figure The omega-shaped top gate at the M-S interface enables tuning of the Schottky barrier height at the M-S heterojunction. In fact, the electrical characteristic of the heterojunction can be tuned between Ohmic and Schottky behaviors (supporting Figure For increasing gate voltage, corresponding to a lowering of the Schottky barrier height, less energetic electrons can surpass the junction and contribute to the SP-current, even when the photon energy coupled into the c-Al waveguides is below the bandgap energy of Ge. This sub-bandgap photodetection rules out a mechanism based upon direct photogeneration at the M-S interface. Assuming that the plasmon-induced near field drives the hot electron generation, The ability to control the energy and momentum of plasmon-driven hot electrons injected into the Ge enables us to induce negative differential resistance (NDR), According to the Ridley-Watkins-Hilsum theory It is important to note that our measurements provide substantial experimental evidence that the momentum of hot electrons originating from surface plasmon decay is suitable for scattering into the lower mobility Δ-valley of Ge. In contrast, no signs of NDR could be found for directly focusing the laser onto the Ge segment (see supporting Figure In conclusion, we have demonstrated a near-field electrical SPP detector providing a platform to independently examine plasmon-induced hot carrier injection and photoexcitation. The system is based on a monolithic axial M-S-M heterostructure that features a precise control of the injection barrier height at an abrupt M-S interface, enabling the probing of the hot electron injection from SPP decay. This architecture allows an investigation of hot electron transport effects initiated by SPP decay at an atomically sharp M-S heterojunction. By precisely controlling the injection barrier and SPP excitation, we demonstrated SPP momentum induced NDR. In contrast, no signs of NDR could be found for directly focusing the laser onto the Ge segment. Thus, the demonstrated investigations provide a route to a better understanding of plasmonic hot electron devices and may pave the way for novel device concepts based on a plasmon-induced NDR. The starting materials were VLS grown Ge NWs with diameters between 30-50 nm coated with 20 nm high-k Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition. The Ge NWs were drop casted onto 40 nm thin Si3N4 membranes CrossBeam system was used to pattern the FGC in the Si3N4 membranes. The milling current was set to 50 pA. HAADF STEM was performed on Al-Ge-Al NW heterostructures fabricated on 40 nm thick Si3N4 membranes The biasing of the proposed Al-Ge-Al NW heterostructures was performed using a Keysight B1500A semiconductor analyzer. For optical excitation, a frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser emitting linearly polarized light at λ = 532 nm was coupled into a WITec Alpha300 and focused on the device through a Zeiss 100x objective (NA = 0.75, WD = 4 mm) enabling a diffraction limited spot size of ~865 nm. The output power of the system was set to have negligible laser heating effects in the NW. For investigating the spectral response of the plasmon current, the white light from a broadband laser source (SuperK Extreme, NKT) fiber was coupled to a monochromator (SuperK Select, NKT). The output of this system is supplied to a NKT SuperK Select acoustic-optical tunable filter (AOTF). The system consists of three AOTFs, which act as monochromators with separated channels for visible (λ = 500 nm -700 nm), near-infrared (λ = 600 nm -1100 nm) and infrared (λ = 1100 nm -2000 nm) light. The output from the ATOFs is coupled into a WITec Alpha300. The beam is passing a 50-50 beam splitter and is focused on the sample through a Zeiss 100x objective (NA = 0.75, WD = 4 mm). The output is focused on the device with power densities chosen to have negligible laser heating effects in the NW. Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement N° 758385) for the e-See project.