We demonstrate that rotationally symmetric chiral metasurfaces can support arbitrarily sharp resonances with the maximum optical chirality determined by precise shaping of bound states in the continuum (BICs). Being uncoupled from one circular polarisation of light and resonantly coupled to its counterpart, a metasurface hosting the chiral BIC resonance exhibits a narrow peak in the circular dichroism spectrum. We propose a realization of such chiral BIC metasurfaces based on pairs of dielectric bars and validate the concept of maximum chirality by numerical simulations. Chirality refers to a global property of many systems which do not coincide with their mirror images. Photonic structures made of chiral elements exhibit chiroptical effects such as optical dichroism for left and right circularly polarized light, the property highly suitable for chiral nanophotonics Recently, all-dielectric metasurfaces have been employed to achieve sharp optical resonances empowered by the physics of bound states in the continuum (BICs) when light at the resonance remains localized in the metasurface even though the state coexists with a continuum of electromagnetic waves In this Letter, we introduce the concept of highly transparent chiral metasurfaces by shaping BICs into q-BICs of maximum optical chirality delivering arbitrarily narrow peak of unit height in the circular dichroism spectrum. We propose a design based on dimers of dielectric bars and validate the maximum chirality of its q-BIC resonance by numerical modelling. We consider a metasurface shown schematically in Fig. For waves propagating in the positive z direction, e + and e -correspond to the right circular polarization (RCP) and left circular polarization (LCP) respectively. For waves in the negative z direction, the opposite is true. Most generally, this transmission-reflection problem is described by an S-matrix equation (see Supplemental Material Fundamental principle of reciprocity together with the rotational symmetry put substantial restrictions on the arXiv:2006.15884v1 [physics.optics] 29 Jun 2020 metasurface transmission and reflection The reciprocity also determines that the reflection amplitudes r and r are helicity independent, which directly relates the CD with the energy dissipation. Indeed, absorbed parts of the energy of incident RCP or LCP waves, The inherent connection of the CD with dissipation naturally determines a quantitative condition of maximum optical chirality: it is achieved when the metasurface is fully transparent for one circular polarization and totally absorbs its counterpart. To specify a feasible route to the maximum chirality, we employ the phenomenological coupled-mode theory (CMT) allowing expressing abstract scattering amplitudes in terms of physically meaningful parameters In CMT, transmission and reflection are split into background and resonant channels with the latter determined by excitation and irradiation of certain eigenstates hosted by the structure. Note that the particular eigenstate normalization is not required where τ is the background transmission amplitude, the resonance frequency ω 0 and damping γ 0 are helicity independent, and m ± are the parameters of coupling of the eigenstates to the waves of corresponding helicity incident on one metasurface side, and m ± are those for the other side. Accordingly, the optical chirality (3) is determined by the chirality of eigenstate coupling to the free-space continuum. All losses contribute to the damping γ 0 = γ d + γ r , where γ d is its dissipative part, and the radiative part is determined by the coupling: ( The difference of transmittances expressed as emphasizes the crucial role of dissipation for the CD. Consider, for definiteness, how to maximize the optical chirality by enhancing |t R | and suppressing |t L |. Eq. ( For example, we set m + = 0 and, according to with the minimum reached at the resonance, ω = ω 0 : where the radiative damping ( Therefore, the maximum chirality requires m + = m -= 0, i.e., eigenstates selectively decoupled from the free-space continuum. The second condition reduces by Eq. ( which is a classical critical coupling regime To summarize, CMT unambiguously points out that for the maximum optical chirality a metasurface has to: • host eigenstates selectively coupled to circularly polarized waves: e.g. the "+" state uncoupled from the RCP waves incident on one side and the "-" state uncoupled from the LCP waves incident on the other side; • fully absorb the light of opposite circular polarizations in the critical coupling regime. Note that the phenomenological approach requires a metasurface performing identically from its both sides, e.g., being coupled with m + = 0 and |m -| 2 = 2γ d to the waves on one side and with m -= 0 and |m + | 2 = 2γ d on the other side. This can be automatically ensured by restricting to flipping symmetric designs. Achieving maximum optical chirality requires precise control of the coupling of eigenstates to the free-space continuum. In the following, we present a step-by-step design of such eigenstates starting from fully uncoupled BICs and carefully enabling their selective coupling by symmetry breaking perturbations. Consider a planar lattice of pairs of parallel dielectric bars shown in Fig. To estimate the coupling parameter of a dimer eigenstate to a vertically incident plane wave polarized along a unit vector e and having a wavevector k along the z-axis, one can integrate the incident wave field with the eigenstate field or, equivalently, with its current density where V 1,2 are the volumes of dielectric bars. For each volume, the integral yields the dipole moment of the corresponding bar, and the antiparallel dipole eigenstate is uncoupled of all incident polarizations as: This is a perfect BIC with respect to all normally incident waves. Introducing weak symmetry breaking transforms BIC into q-BIC. As has been studied in much detail are helicity independent, as the structure retains certain mirror symmetries. An out-of-plane symmetry breaking can be introduced by a small vertical offset d of bars within each dimer eliminating the mirror plane σ 1 together with the C 2 axis. The corresponding coupling parameters: are also achiral, as certain mirror symmetries remain. Combining the offset by d with the rotation by θ, as illustrated in Fig. which ensures m + = m -= 0. Under this condition, the remaining coupling parameters are controlled by θ and allow continuous tuning to match the dissipation in the critical coupling regime To validate the symmetry-based analysis, we numerically study a particular structure using Comsol Multiphysics. To keep relevance with available materials (silicon and germanium), we model bars consisting of dielectric having complex refractive index n = 4+iκ with small extinction coefficient κ. For simplicity, the background refractive index is set to unity. The dimensions of elliptical bars are l = 220 nm, w = 70 nm and h = 100 nm (see Fig. First, we simulate the transmission of normally incident light by achiral lattices of parallel bar dimers, dimers diverged by an in-plane rotation by θ = 3 • , and dimers with an out-of-plane offset d = 10 nm. In all three cases, the transmission is polarization insensitive. As seen in Fig. To determine the parameters necessary for a q-BIC uncoupled from RCP waves, we use Eq. ( Knowing the perfect combination of θ and d, we proceed to verify the main CMT conclusions. For a proper chiral q-BIC state isolated from RCP waves by m + = m -= 0, the minimum LCP transmittance at the resonance is given by Eq. ( If a certain value κ = κ opt corresponds to the critical coupling regime, Eq. ( Accordingly, we keep all other parameters fixed and simulate the transmission of structures with different κ, as illustrated in Fig. As the Si refractive index at λ = 595 nm is n Si = 3.948 + 0.021i In conclusion, we have developed the concept of chiral BIC metasurfaces transmitting one circular polarisation and resonantly blocking the opposite polarization. Our design strategy is applicable for maximizing the optical chirality of other types of metasurfaces operating in the visible and near IR spectral ranges. The work of MVG and AAA is supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation within the State assignment of FSRC "Crystallography and Photonics" RAS. YSK acknowledges the support from the Strategic Fund of the Australian National University. The authors are grateful to Alexey Kondratov for his assistance with Comsol Multiphysics modelling. Supplemental Material: Metasurfaces with maximum chirality empowered by bound states in the continuum Maxim V. Gorkunov 1 , Alexander A. Antonov 1 , and Yuri S. Kivshar 2 1 Shubnikov Institute of Crystallography of the Federal Scientific Research Centre "Crystallography and Photonics", Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 119333, Russia 2 Nonlinear Physics Centre, Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia In the Supplemental Material we (i) analyze the S-matrix symmetry and derive Eq. ( Consider a light transmitting metasurface possessing a rotational symmetry axis of the N -th order (C N -symmetry) with incoming transversal waves incident normally on its both sides. As we show, the main advantage of rotationally symmetric metasurfaces with N ≥ 3 is that they affect the light polarization only due to their intrinsic chirality. To reveal the most general features of light transmission and reflection following from the fundamental principles of symmetry and reciprocity, we start with the S-matrix in the basis of linear polarizations. For the transversal waves propagating along the z-axis, the S-matrix equation reads as b = Sa, or expressed by components : where a i and a i are the components of the amplitudes of waves incident on different sides, and b i and b i are those of the waves outgoing from different sides. The S-matrix is symmetric due to Lorentz reciprocity. N -th order rotational symmetry implies the S-matrix invariance with respect to a rotation about the z-axis by an angle φ = 2π/N . Using corresponding coordinate transform matrix Transformation from the Cartesian coordinate basis e x,y to the helical basis e ± = (e x ∓ ie y )/ √ 2 is performed by the matrix and the S-matrix in the "±" basis obtained as S = T c S (xy) T † c reads: The analogue of Eq. (S1) in the helical basis reads as: which is introduced as Eq. ( Metasurface optical response is dominated by its resonances. Coupled-mode theory (CMT) provides very convenient description of such systems and allows deriving a particular form of the S-matrix expressed by a few phenomenological parameters of clear meaning Metasurface eigenstates can be formally obtained as solutions of source-free Maxwell's equations: where the states are enumerated by the index j and outgoing wave conditions at z → ±∞ are imposed on E (j) . The metasurface structure is described by inhomogeneous permittivity ε(r) The inherent dissipation and radiative energy losses determine small negative imaginary part of the eigenfrequencies ω j . The metasurface rotational symmetry determines the eigenstate E (j) (r) symmetry. The connection is universally described by the group theory apparatus involving appropriate irreducible point group representations x (x, y, z) = exp(iπj/2) E (j) y (y, -x, z), (S8) x (y, -x, z), (S9) where only the numbers j = -1, 0, 1, 2 are meaningful and ensure that performing the rotation 4 times yields the initial state. As eigenstates of an open resonator, E (j) (r) posses the far field asymptotics of transversal plane waves outgoing in the ±z directions, i.e., having the nonzero components E (j) x (z) and E (j) y (z) depending only on the z-coordinate. Not all numbers j are compatible with this. For j = 0, one must simultaneously satisfy E x (z) = -E (2) y (z) and E (2) x (z) = E (2) y (z), must hold true. Therefore, the eigenmodes with j = 0, 2 are true BIC states topologically isolated from the continuum. The eigenmodes with j = ±1 asymptotically transform into plane waves obeying the relations E (±1) x (z) = ±iE (±1) y (z), i.e., polarized with a certain helicity. By the symmetry, each of the two eigenmodes is coupled to one of the two independent transmission-reflection problems described by Eq. (S6). As has been shown in Ref. To describe the interaction of metasurface with electromagnetic radiation oscillating with a real frequency ω, one characterizes the eigenstates by slow-varying amplitudes P ± , and their particular normalization in a phenomenological CMT is of minor importance where the matrix describes the coupling of the incident waves with the eigenmodes, and the vector of the incident wave amplitudes a is the same as in the r.h.s. of Eq. (S6). Similarly, the irradiation of the outgoing waves is described by another CMT equation: where the vector of outgoing wave amplitudes b is the same as in the l.h.s. of Eq. (S6), while the matrix 