Materials with no net magnetization are generally not magneto-optically active. While this is individually true for a collinear antiferromagnet (AFM) and a topological insulator (TI), it is shown here that the magnetooptic Kerr effect (MOKE) emerges when the TI and AFM films are proximity coupled. Because of the lack of macroscopic magnetization, the AFM only couples to the spin of one of the TI's surfaces breaking timereversal and inversion symmetry -which leads to a small μdeg MOKE signal. This small MOKE can be easily enhanced by 5 orders of magnitude, via cavity resonance, by optimizing the AFM and TI film thicknesses on the substrate. For slightly off-resonant structures, a 6 • Kerr rotation can be electrically switched on by varying the Fermi energy. This requires less than 20 meV, which is encouraging for low power spintronics and magnetooptic devices. We further show that this simple structure is easily resilient to 5 % material growth error. The Faraday effect and the magneto optic Kerr effect (MOKE) can be viewed as optical manifestations of the Berry curvature. The optical response functions in MOKE are analogous to those of the electrical Hall conductivity. However, there are subtle differences and additional probing capabilities due to the inter-and intra-band transitions, interface effects, and frequency-and directional dependencies. These properties lead to magneto-optic effects in quantum Hall devices MOKE requires broken time reversal symmetry (TRS), which is usually achieved by the presence of an external magnetic field or macroscopic magnetization. Strongly magnetized materials, such as ferromagnets (FMs) show large MOKE, but they also have large stray magnetic fields that are undesirable for devices. Antiferromagnets (AFMs) are more attractive since they have negligible stray fields and also electrically switch much faster that FMs In this paper we show that a MOKE signature arises at the interface of a TI and a collinear g-type AFM. This MOKE signature can be enhanced by 5 orders of magnitude, to 1-2 • , by using resonant enhancements from the structure and small electric fields. This strong anomalous MOKE occurs in the absence of external magnetic fields, stray magnetic moments, or magnetic dopants. The MOKE in this system is a result of the breaking of symmetries that allow MOKE and the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in non-collinear AFMs with no net magnetic moments In this paper, we specifically consider a heterostrcuture as illustrated in Fig. The Model: The low energy zone-center effective Hamiltonian for a thin-film TI (1) where h i = (m 0 + 4m1 a 2 )τ x ⊗σ 0 , the site indices i, j run over all nearest neighbor sites, and is the spinor annihilation operator for site i and layers 1 and 2. Here t ∈ {t x , t y } represents nearest neighbor hopping where t x(y) = ± ihv 2a τ z ⊗σ y(x) -m1 a 2 τ x ⊗I. It is implied that σ = I ⊗ σ, where I is the identity, σ = {σ x , σ y , σ z } is the Pauli spin vector for the TI's itinerant electron and S = {S x , S y , S z } is the spin-vector of the AFM. The TI's surface spins interact with the AFM's spins via the Hund's rule coupling term J H . The electronic bandstructure (shown in Fig. The proximity coupling of the G-type AFM to the TI has several effects. First, it increases the periodic unit cell from a single tight-binding site consisting of two surfaces and 4 spins to 4 tight-binding sites with two surfaces and 16 spins resulting in 16 bands. This doubling of the unit cell causes zone folding of the Brillouin zone resulting in crossing of bands at Γ at higher energies. The TI's proximity coupling to the AFM with J H = 40 meV does not affect the low energy levels near the Dirac point. However a Rashba type gap opens at the higher band crossing, as shown in Fig. Dielectric Tensor Components: Magneto optic effects are determined by the dielectric tensor which depends on the band-structure and its topology. In particular for the polar Kerr effect considered here, the Néel vector of the AFM is along z, which is perpendicular to the surface and parallel to the optical incidence. The x and y directions preserve in-plane symmetry. The complex 3 × 3 dielectric tensor has [ xx , yy , zz ] diagonal terms and off-diagonal xy terms which are topology dependent. The matrix elements of the optical conductivity tensor are obtained from the Kubo formula where is the matrix element of the velocity operator, v μ = ∂H h∂kμ , where {μ, ν} ∈ {x, y}. The energy broadening parameter γ = 17.5 meV for all calculations. is the energy difference of an optical transition between an unoccupied band n and an occupied band l. f nl (k) = f n (k) -f l (k) where f n (k) is the Fermi factor, however all calculations are performed at zero temperature. L is the thickness associated with the TI surface state taken to be 1 nm. The velocity operator is similar to the Berry connection. For a single surface this leads to a momentum space gauge potential or an equivalent magnetic field. For a TI, the gauge fields for each surface cancel each other unless the symmetry between the top and bottom surfaces is broken, such as by an AFM on one side. The resulting MO effects can therefore be viewed as an optical manifestation of the Berry curvature. Since an effective Hamiltonian has been used to obtain σ μν , the missing higher band contributions are compensated for by adding a κ/(ω + iγ) term to the optical dielectric tensor as follows: μν (ω) = ε o δ μν -4πi ω σ μν -κ ω+iγ , where ε o is the vacuum permittivity. κ is adjusted so that the relative zero frequency dielectric constant 0 (obtained from the optical sum rules) matches the known experimental value For calculating polar-MOKE, the required complex inplane refractive index is n ± = √ ± = xx ± i xy where, the +(-) signs represents right(left) circularly polarized (RCP(LCP)) light propagation. The complex MOKE is, Θ k = θ k + iξ k where the Kerr rotation and ellipticity respectively are, (3) Since the eigen-modes here are LCP and RCP, the Kerr rotation angle can be expressed as the phase difference between these two modes. The complex phase ∆ ± is in turn obtained from the Fresnel reflection coefficients The MOKE in a multilayer thin-film structure can be significantly altered by internal reflection at various interfaces. At normal incidence, r ± for N thin-films can be calculated using a 2 × 2 characteristic matrix method There is also a high energy MOKE resonance that occurs at 7.5 eV. Using the 1xx resonance condition and the Drude model it can be shown that this is near the plasma frequency ω p MOKE can be enhanced by the resonance effects that arise from optimizing the film thickness of different materials. In order to understand the effects of this for our system, we consider a thin-film structure as shown in Fig. For the TI:AFM device, the Kerr rotation angle's phase diagram is shown in Fig. Next, we analyze the Fermi level dependent MOKE spectra for the TI:AFM structure in Fig. The Kerr angle θ k can be sharply boosted by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude by applying a small bias to raise the Fermi energy in the TI:AFM, as shown in Fig. Finally, since thin-film growth can be prone to errors during the material deposition process, it is important to analyse how the TI;AFM device would behave with notable errors in the film thicknesses. In Fig. A notable feature is that ω(θ max k ) increases in a distinct step-like manner. The step size depends on the filmthicknesses and can be explained from Fig. ) at E f = 0). As the Fermi level sweeps the Diraccone conduction band, θ max k tends to shift to higher ω, due to steadily declining optical transitions. However, because of the thin-film structure, θ max k can only jump to a higher harmonic of ω r as shown in Fig. In summary, the MOKE arising from a thin film NiO / Bi 2 Se 3 heterolayer structure displays very interesting physical properties with potentially important device applications. Experimentally measurable Kerr rotations arise in the AFM-TI structure even though neither the AFM nor the TI have any net magnetization. The collinear AFM's proximity to one of the TI surfaces leads to the breaking of both time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry. This results in a small but observable MOKE signature. The polar-MOKE geometry is best suited for observing this effect, since the light is incident on the AFM-TI interface. This small MOKE can be enhanced 5 orders of magnitude by optimizing the AFM and TI film thicknesses, which leads to a cavity resonance condition where the AFM and the substrate form a natural cavity. For slightly off-resonant structures, a 6 deg Kerr rotation can be obtained by varying the Fermi energy. This is encouraging for practical low power devices as the Fermi energy has to be varied by less than 20 meV. We further show that this simple structure is resilient to 5 % material growth error. Overall this can lead to practical low-power spintronics, fast electro-optic switches, magneto-optic memory and gate controlled opticalisolators. This device is simple to grow, there is no magnetic doping required, it is planar, compact and free of stray magnetic magnetization and external magnets.