A method to analyze optical transitions is developed by combining the Kubo-Greenwood formula with the unfolding method to construct an unfolded electronic band structure with optical transition weights, which allows us to investigate how optical transitions are perturbed by imperfections such as impurity, vacancy, and structural distortions. Based on the Kubo-Greenwood formula, we first calculate frequency-dependent optical conductivity based on the first-principles electronic structure calculations using the linear combinations of atomic orbitals. Benefiting from the atomic orbital basis sets, the frequency-dependent optical conductivity can be traced back to their individual components before summations over all of k points and bands. As a result, optical transition weights of the material can be put on the unfolded electronic band structure to show contributions at different k points and bands. This method is especially useful to study the effects of broken symmetry in the optical transitions due to presence of impurities in the materials. As a demonstration, decomposed optical transition weights of a monolayer Si-doped graphene are shown in the electronic band structure. The optical properties contain fundamental features of materials, including optical conductivity, dielectric function, refractive index, reflectivity, and transmission that can be measured by experiments To analyze spectra of optical conductivity and dielectric function in a material, an electronic band structure is a useful analysis tool to examine whether transitions between occupied and unoccupied states occur The enhancement of optical conductivity of silicon doped graphene (SiG) with the tunable band gap in the visible region has been proposed to improve efficiency of photovoltaic cells This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the Kubo-Greenwood formula, partial optical transitions in an electronic band structure, and unfolding optical transition are shown. In Sec. III, an example of a monolayer Si-doped graphene is given for showing changes of unfolded partial optical conductivity between Si-doped graphenes. Finally, this research work is concluded in Sec. IV. In this Sec., based on the Kubo-Greenwood formula, we will discuss the formulation of (1) optical conductivity and momentum matrix element (MME), (2) partial optical conductivity, (3) unfolded partial optical conductivity, and (4) separation of unfolded partial optical conductivity. The computational order for the optical conductivity calculation is also discussed for the implementation with localized basis sets in the Sec. II A. Based on the Kubo-Greenwood formula where Pα is the momentum operator along α direction in the atomic unit, J and J ′ are indices of states, fKJ is the Fermi-Dirac distribution at a k-point K and a state J, |KJ is a Kohn-Sham eigenstate, ǫ is an eigenvalue, η is 0 + , N k is the total number of k points, and Ω is the volume of the unit cell. When the intraband transition or the degenerate state (ǫKJ = ǫ KJ ′ ) occurs, (fKJ -f KJ ′ )/(ǫKJ -ǫ KJ ′ ) is treated as the first derivative of the occupation number with respect to the energy where α is along x, y, or z direction, R is a lattice vector, a is an index of cells, m and n are atomic orbitals' indices, and C is LCAO coefficient. Here we estimate the computational order for the calculation of optical conductivity by Eq. ( Since frequency-dependent optical conductivity σ αβ (ω) is the summation over all of the k points, occupied states, and unoccupied states, Eq. ( where the partial optical conductivity σ αβ (K, J, ω) is given by In Eq. ( To analyze how the optical conductivity σ αβ (ω) is changed by perturbations such as impurities and structural disorders, we now combine the partial optical conductivity introduced by Eq. ( with the spectral function tensor for the supercell defined by On the other hand, the partial optical conductivity σ αβ (k, j, ω) of a perfect crystal as a reference system has the same expression as where Ωrc is the volume of the reference cell, |kj is a Kohn-Sham eigenstate at a k point and a state j in the reference cell, and A αβ kj,kj (ω) is the spectral function tensor in the reference cell. The upper-case letters in Eq. ( In order to relate partial optical conductivities between the supercell and the reference cell, the unfolding method By inserting closure relations kmn |km S -1 mn (k) kn| = Î into kj| Âαβ (ω) |kj , Eq. ( with the definition where m and n are indices of atomic basis functions in the reference cell, |Rn is an atomic basis function in the reference cell, L is the number of unit cells in the Bornvon Kármán boundary condition, and the closure relation After inserting closure relations KJ |KJ KJ | = Î for two adjacent positions of Âαβ (ω) on the right-hand side of Eq. ( where and For simplicity, the summations in Eq. ( with the unfolded spectral weight where L is the number of unit cells in a supercell, l is the number of unit cells in a reference cell, r ′ (M ) and m(M ) refer to lattice vectors and an orbital index in the representation of the reference cell, respectively. The eigenstate j in the reference cell corresponds to the unfolded eigenstate J in the supercell due to KG δ k-G,K . According to Eqs. ( After calculating A αβ KJ,KJ (ω) in Eq. ( where Ω/Ωrc = L/l. Finally, after summing over frequencies ω on the interval [a, b], the unfolded and integrated partial optical conductivity σ αβ (k, j, ω(a : b)) can be expressed as The integrated unfolded partial optical conductivity gathers contributions of optical transition weights over a selected frequency range and it can be put on the unfolded electronic band structure of a material to show optical transitions at states in a fat band representation. The numerical demonstration of unfolded and integrated partial optical conductivity is provided in the Appendix. The equation (2) for calculating MME includes two summations over individual atomic orbitals. After rearranging the order of the summation, Eq. ( where m and n are orbitals' indices and the partial MME is definded as By substituting Eq. ( where Therefore, orbital transitions of partial optical conductivity can be evaluated by assigning four individual atomic orbitals. Similarly, by using the same rearrangement for the order of the summation in MME, orbital transitions of an unfolded partial optical conductivity can be obtained by four individual atomic orbitals. The formula of the unfolded partial optical conductivity σ αβ (k, j, ω) in Eq. ( where According to Eq. ( To demonstrate this analysis method, we provide optical conductivity of a monolayer Si-doped graphene (SiG) as an example. A monolayer SiG with a band gap and without a degradation in carrier mobility at a low doping level had been synthesized for designing optoelectronic devices The geometry optimizations with a regular mesh of 300 Ry in real space are performed by the OpenMX code (v3.8) based on DFT The optimized lattice constants of graphenes with different Si-doping levels are listed in Table Si-doping percentage a(=b) C-C( Electron currents of the Si-doped graphene with a small band gap can be induced by applying a voltage to penetrate through its x-y plane from source to drain Using the Kubo-Greenwood formula in Eq. ( In addition, the optical conductivity of graphene with a Sidoping level about 3.13% (SiG-(4×4×1)) has a similar shape in comparison with that of graphene and its peak at around 4 eV is slightly weaker due to the substitution of a silicon atom for one of 32 carbon atoms in graphene in Fig. Since SiG-(4×4×1) has a similar optical conductivity with graphene, we analyze individual contributions of optical conductivity decomposed to C atoms, Si atom, and/or relevant orbitals. In Fig. FIG. Graphene Re Unfolded and integrated partial optical conductivity σ αβ (k, j, ω(a : b)) gives an alternative way to investigate the transition weights of optical conductivity in an impurity material at different k and states after summation over frequencies ω from a = 0 eV to b = 6 eV by Eq. We have developed an unfolding optical transition method by combining the Kubo-Greenwood formula with the unfolding method for the band structure. This unfolding optical transition method enables us to construct an unfolded electronic band structure of a supercell to a reference cell with optical transition weights, which provides an analysis tool to understand how the optical transition is perturbed by structural imperfections such as impurities and disorders. Although we developed the unfolding optical transition method for the LCAO method, it might be straightforward to apply the ideal for other methods with Wannier functions ). These optical transitions correspond to π-π * transitions. It shows that the orbitals with z components in C atoms provide main channels to make electrons flow from source to drain. Finally, in addition to the frequency-dependent optical conductivity σ(ω), the unfolding optical transition method provides an alternative method to present (k, state)-dependent optical conductivity of an impurity material in an unfolded electronic band structure for studying defects, disorders, and doping effects. To confirm that the unfolding optical transition method is valid, we take the unfolded and integrated partial optical conductivity Re[σxx+yy(k, j, ω(0 : 20 eV))] of Graphene-(2×2×1) as an example in comparison with that of Graphene-(1×1×1). The unfolded and integrated partial optical conductivity of graphene-(2×2×1) is plotted in the electronic band structure with open circles whose size is proportional to the magnitude of the Re[σxx+yy(k, j, ω(0 : 20 eV))] as shown in Fig. 