Recent progress in nanophotonics is driven by the desire to engineer light-matter interaction in two-dimensional (2D) materials using high-quality resonances in plasmonic and dielectric structures. Here, we demonstrate a link between the radiation control at critical coupling and the metasurfacebased bound states in the continuum (BIC) physics, and develop a generalized theory to engineer light absorption of 2D materials in coupling resonance metasurfaces. In a typical example of hybrid graphene-dielectric metasurfaces, we present the manipulation of absorption bandwidth by more than one order of magnitude by simultaneously adjusting the asymmetry parameter of silicon resonators governed by BIC and the graphene surface conductivity while the absorption efficiency maintains maximum. This work reveals the generalized role of BIC in the radiation control at critical coupling and provides promising strategies in engineering light absorption of 2D materials for high-efficiency optoelectronics device applications, e.g., light emission, detection and modulation. Over the past decade, two-dimensional (2D) materials have emerged as promising core elements in the next generation optoelectronic devices due to their exceptional optical and electric properties In above-mentioned critical coupling systems, several key figures of the absorption properties including the central location, efficiency and bandwidth can be tuned by adjusting the geometric parameters of photonic crystal slabs. The absorption engineering essentially originates from the control of the radiation rate of the guided resonance. In reality, such kind of radiation control based on the dependence of geometrical parameters is ubiquitous in the field of nanophotonics, which is definitely not limited to the guided resonance in photonic crystal slabs, but also universally applicable to resonance modes in a variety of seemingly different photonic structures such as trapped mode In this work, we demonstrate a link between the radiation control at critical coupling and the fascinating BIC physics, and develop a general theory to engineer light absorption of 2D materials in coupling resonance metasurfaces. As an example, we present to place a monolayer graphene on top of asymmetric pairs of silicon nanobars. The maximum absorption of graphene is attained under the critical coupling condition when the radiation rate of the trapped mode in the resonators is equal to the dissipative loss of graphene. By simultaneously adjusting the asymmetry parameter for the resonators and the graphene surface conductivity, the absorption bandwidth can be flexibly tuned in good agreement with the theoretical predictions while the absorption efficiency maintains maximum. This work reveals the generalized role of BIC in the radiation control at critical coupling, and delineates the in-depth conceptual framework and novel promising strategies in engineering light absorption of 2D materials for smart design of compact optoelectronic devices. The coupled mode theory (CMT) is utilized to provide insights into the input and output properties of a resonance system. We consider the behavior of a mirrorsymmetric resonator that possesses a single resonance mode coupling with outside circumstances via two identical ports. For a lossless system, the dynamic equations can be written as where a is the resonance amplitude, ω 0 and γ represent the resonance frequency and radiation rate, -] T and D represent the input waves, the output wave and the coupling matrix, respectively, and C is the scattering matrix of the direct coupling pathway. In such system, the resonance mode is excited by the input waves |s + from ports 1, 2 with the coupling matrix D T , and the excited resonance mode couples with the output waves |s -at the ports with the coupling matrix D. The dynamic equations are constrained by energy-conservation and time-reversal symmetry considerations. For the case where the input wave with unit amplitude is incident from only a single port, the stored energy in the resonator can be derived from the general formalism Eq. ( (3) Further, when the dissipative loss is inserted into the system and the underlying symmetry of the structure remains unchanged, the dynamic equation Eq. ( As can be seen in Eq. ( which will attain a theoretical maximum of 0.5 when γ = δ. This is the so-called critical coupling condition for a single resonance in a two-port system. Meanwhile, the absorption bandwidth is usually defined as the full width at half maximum (FWHM). Assuming the half maximum absorption In association with the general wave phenomenon of BIC, the radiaiton rate γ of a resonance mode is considered as mode inverse radiation lifetime. An ideal symmetry-protected BIC has no access to radiation channels and thus can be treated as a resonance with infinite lifetime and vanishing linewidth, i.e., γ = 0. Then the quasi-BICs concept is introduced in practice that couples to the extended waves and radiates as a leaky resonance with γ > 0 when the symmetry of a resonator is broken to generate radiation channels. Formulated from the analytical calculations, the radiation rate γ is calculated by the sum of radiation losses into all the radiation channels with the coupling amplitudes where k 0 is the incident wave vector in the free space, S 0 is the unit cell area, and p α , m α and Q αβ (α, β = x, y, z) are the components of electric dipole, magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole moments in the irreducible representations, respectively. Considering a situation where the in-plane symmetry along the x axis is broken, it follows that D y = 0 since the electric field components E x and E y are classified as even and odd functions with respect to this symmetry. Also, m y and Q xz are both equal to zero because of the symmetry E x (-z) = E x (z). Then a simplified analytical expression can be written as p x = ±αp 0 is defined as the net dipole moment in an asymmetric resonator, where p 0 is the electric dipole moment in an according symmetric case and α is the asymmetry parameter. Then for a general kind of metasurfaces with asymmetric unit cell, the radiation rate γ of the quasi-BIC can be found to be dependent on the asymmetry parameter Substituing the expression of γ in Eq. ( i.e., Γ FWHM ∝ α 2 , following the universal rules for the asymmetric metasurfaces with high-quality resonance driven by BIC. Based on the quadratic scalability of FWHM, a simple but rigorous way to engineer light absorption at critical coupling is suggested by adjusting the asymmetry parameter for the quasi-BIC resonators. Consequently, a general physical link between the radiation control at critical coupling and the BIC physics is theoretically established. We focus on one of the examples in which a common 2D material of monolayer graphene is deposited on top of a typical dielectric metasurfaces that supports magnetic dipole mode, as shown in FIG. To verify the physical picture of the radiation control at critical coupling via BIC, we first perform the resonance mode analysis without the presence of graphene. The lengths of the nanobars are set with L 1 = 600 nm and L 2 = 750 nm, respectively. Due to the in-plane symmetry breaking of the unit cell, BIC mode manifests itself in the transmission spectrum as a Fano resonance. As shown in FIG. We further provide the dependence of absorption bandwidth FWHM on the asymmetry parameter α with the different Fermi levels of graphene. Extracted from the critical coupling condition corresponding to the cases undoped graphene and doped graphene with 0.4 eV and 0.5 eV, the estimated FWHM is proportional to the square of α as can be seen from FIG. In conclusions, we bridge a direct link between the radiation control at critical coupling and the intriguing BIC physics, and develop a generalized theory to engineer light absorption of 2D materials in coupling resonance systems. The quadratic dependence of the absorption bandwidth on the asymmetry parameter is obtained. In the hybrid graphene-dielectric metasurfaces, the absorption bandwidth can be flexibly tuned by more than one order of magnitude by simultaneously adjusting the asymmetry parameter for the silicon nanobar resonators and the graphene surface conductivity while the absorption efficiency maintains maximum. Beyond this typical example, the proposed theoretical method should have wide applicability to diverse types of critical coupling systems, in principle, with various asymmetric metasurfaces designs and different atomically thin 2D materials throughout the spectrum. Therefore, this work not only gains a deeper physical insight into the enhanced lightmatter interaction in 2D materials, but also paves a way towards smart design of compact optoelectronic devices such as light emitters, detectors and modulators.