We present the earliest astronomical observation of a high energy neutrino error box in which its variability was discovered after high-energy neutrinos detection. The one robotic telescope of the MASTER global international network (Lipunov et al. 2010) automatically imaged the error box of the very high-energy neutrino event IceCube-170922A. Observations were carried out in minute after the IceCube-170922A neutrino event was detected by the IceCube observatory at the South Pole. MASTER found the blazar TXS 0506+056 to be in the off-state after one minute and then switched to the on-state no later than two hours after the event. The effect is observed at a 50-sigma significance level. Also we present own unique 16-years light curve of blazar TXS 0506+056 (518 data set). It is still not possible to understand where cosmic neutrinos of high energies come from and astronomical robots have joined in solving this problem. A few years ago, the MASTER 15 Global Network of Robot Telescopes Identification of the astrophysical sources of very high energy neutrinos still remains one of the most exiting enigmas of the Universe. It was with the aim of detecting sources of VHE neutrinos that unique observatories were built at the South Pole (IceCube et al. 2017, in the Mediterranean Sea (ANTARES, Ageron et al. Unlike very high energy cosmic rays, electrically neutral neutrinos freely propagate across the Universe undeflected by the intergalactic magnetic field and unattenuated by the interaction with cosmic background emission Unfortunately, scattering of light in ice or in water, the working media of sparsely instrumented neutrino detectors, blur the positional error regions, whose sizes are currently comparable to one square degree. Therefore finding a blazar within the error box of a VHE neutrino event cannot be considered sufficient to prove that blazars are actually progenitors of these particles. Detecting some non-standard event from the supposed source at a time close to the neutrino event is required. For example, a blazar emitting gamma and cosmic rays and showing a sharp flux variation near the neutrino detection time would provide compelling evidence of the association of the neutrino event with a known astrophysical object. The first candidate object for an astrophysical neutrino event was the blazar TXS 0506+056 Although the blazar was in the gamma-ray active state, this state started several months before the neutrino event. Detection of high-energy particles (175Gev) began one week after, and the optical, x-ray, and gamma-ray emission was observed with low temporal resolution and showed no appreciable variations near the detection time Therefore although when combining the available data suggested that TXS 0506+056 was a very promising high energy neutrino source optical candidate, the temporal resolution of multi-messenger data did not provide conclusive evidence at the time and the object remained just a likely, but still debatable, candidate As the leader of early gamma-ray burst observations, MASTER Global Robotic Net has an almost 20year long experience with real-time rapid pointings to gamma-ray burst alerts within the first minute of the alert It was the successful finding of the kilonova So on 22d of September, 2017, after receiving an alert from IceCube 40 seconds after the neutrino event, MASTER-Tavrida telescope acquired the first three images, starting from 2017-09-22 20:55:43 UT. The field of view of the MASTER telescope has a size of four square degrees After 2 hours, at 2017-09-22 23:11:36 UT, the flux from the blazar increased in brightness by a factor of two and reached 14.33 m +-0.01 m . We emphasize that here in the text we give the averaged values for the triples of frames in the first minutes and after two hours (compare Table There are 518 2x2 square-degrees images in the MASTER Global Robotic Net database, starting from 2005, when we had only one MASTER I telescope located near Moscow where SNR is the (F i -F i-1 )/s, F i and sis the optical flux and error of two adjacent measurements at the mid-exposure time t i . The event of September 22, 2017 has outstanding characteristics in terms of flux derivation and signalto-noise ratio. Recently, we conducted detailed blazar monitoring over several nights at the right end of Figure We find for the adopted set of cosmological parameters The generally accepted picture is that blazar radiation arises from a relativistic jet directed toward us. The boosted jet gamma factor is moderate Г ~ 10. In the shock wave at the front of the jet there is an acceleration of protons to ultrahigh energies, which in turn collide with target photons and generate pion production. The decay of pions, in turn, gives rise to a muon neutrino that registers an IceCube detection and high gamma photons detected by the Fermi gamma-ray observatory. During the period within ~2 weeks around the neutrino event detection time the 0.1 -100 Gev gammaray luminosity was 1.3⋅10 47 erg/s (IceCube et al 2018b). Note that the neutrino luminosity of the quasar was equal to about L ν ≈ 4 ⋅10 47 erg/s, which is appreciably higher and, evidently, closer to the gamma-ray luminosity. However, this is not surprising because neutrinos and gamma-ray emission have the same source of energy ---that of high-energy protons accelerated by the central supermassive black hole. Two branches of reactions pp + γγ tt → 〈 pp + ππ 0 → pp + 2γγ FFFFFFFFFF nn + ππ + → nn + μμ + + νν μμ produce neutral and charged pions, which then decay into and gamma-ray photons (γγ FFFFFFFFFF ) and muon neutrinos (νν μμ ). Both pion-birth reactions are of the threshold type Then it should be expected that with an increase in the neutrino flux, due to the disappearance of protons in proton-photon reactions, the optical synchrotron photons of the protons will drop. The maximal amplitude of the decrease in optical luminosity can be as much as 2 times, since the branches of the reaction proceed with approximately the same probability. This is what we are observing. How does so much variability arise at large distances? Where do we expect the process of acceleration of protons and nuclei to high energies? In the recent work We have yet to learn from where the target photons come The event that we discovered, namely the decrease of the brightness of the TXS 0506+056 blazar near the neutrino detection time, provides complementary and very compelling evidence for the link between the blazar and the IceCube-170922 neutrino event. We analyzed archival data (MASTER unique 518 photometry data for 16 years), which we found to be consistent with this fact. We also propose a hypothesis explaining the anticorrelation of the optical and neutrino flux. An increase in neutrino flux means that up to half of the protons disappear. If we assume that these protons produce synchrotron optical radiation, then any increase in neutrino luminosity will lead to a decrease in the optical brightness of the blazar. We http://observ.pereplet.ru