Integrating and manipulating the nano-optoelectronic properties of Van der Waals heterostructures can enable unprecedented platforms for photodetection and sensing. The main challenge of infrared photodetectors is to funnel the light into a small nanoscale active area and efficiently convert it into an electrical signal. Here, we overcome all of those challenges in one device, by efficient coupling of a plasmonic antenna to hyperbolic phonon-polaritons in hexagonal-BN to highly concentrate mid-infrared light into a graphene pn-junction. We balance the interplay of the absorption, electrical and thermal conductivity of graphene via the device geometry. This novel approach yields remarkable device performance featuring room temperature high sensitivity (NEP of 82 pW/ √ Hz) and fast rise time of 17 nanoseconds (setup-limited), among others, hence achieving a combination currently not present in the state-of-the-art graphene and commercial mid-infrared detectors. We also develop a multiphysics model that shows excellent quantitative agreement with our experimental results and reveals the different contributions to our photoresponse, thus paving the way for further improvement of these types of photodetectors even beyond mid-infrared range. Hyperbolic phonon-polaritons (HPPs) are hybridized modes of ionic oscillations and light present in polar dielectric materials, such as hexagonal-BN (hBN) To reveal the spatial intensity profile of the beam focus at λ = 6.6 μm, we scan the sample with xyz-motorized stages and measure the photocurrent (I PTE ) as shown in Fig. To determine the photodetector spectral response, we measure the TM-polarization (Fig. We first identify the behavior of the resonant mechanisms, in terms of field intensity enhancement and spatial localization by studying the absorption enhancement in graphene (G) across the channel in the x direction (averaging over 500 nm in y direction, see Fig. In the TM-polarization case shown in Fig. For TE-polarization (see Fig. To further elucidate the role of the antennas in G, we simulate the system without the contribution of the HPPs using wavelength-independent refractive index values for the hBN (Fig. when combining the gate LSPR with HPPs (Fig. To evaluate the coupling between the bow-tie antenna LSPR and the hBN HPPs, we study the responsivity as a function of the antenna length for TM-polarization as shown in Fig. The sensitivity of the detector is best expressed in terms of external responsivity, which the maximum measured value is 27 mA/W (92 V/W, see Fig. The novel device concept introduced in this work can be extended to detectors for other wavelengths or more specific functionalities such as hyperspectral imaging and spectroscopy. Our approach can also be combined with HPPs in other regions of the mid-IR and long-wave infrared range such as MoO 3 We use a pulsed QCL mid-IR laser (LaserScope from Block Engineering) that is linearly polarized and has a wavelength tuning range from λ = 6.1 to 10 μm. We scan the device position with motorized xyz-stage. We modulate the mid-IR laser employing an optical chopper at 422 Hz and we measure the photocurrent using a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research). We focus the mid-IR light with a reflective objective with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.5. We measure the mid-IR power using a thermopile detector from Thorlabs placed at the sample position. The external responsivity is given by: Responsivity = (I PTE /P in )×(A focus /A diff ) 