The localized f-electrons enrich the magnetic properties in rare-earth-based intermetallics. Among those, compounds with heavier 4d and 5d transition metals are even more fascinating because anomalous electronic properties may be induced by the hybridization of 4f and itinerant conduction electrons primarily from the d orbitals. Here, we describe the observation of trivalent Yb 3+ with S = 1⁄2 at low temperatures in YbxPt5P, the first of a new family of materials. YbxPt5P (0.20 ≤ x ≤ 1) phases were synthesized and structurally characterized. They exhibit a large homogeneity width with the Yb ratio exclusively occupying the 1a site in the anti-CeCoIn5 structure. Moreover, the resistivity measurement of a sample analyzed as Yb0.25Pt5P shows it to exist a complete zeroresistance transition with a critical transition temperature of 0.6 K, possible superconductivity. However, the zero-resistivity transition was not observed in YbPt5P with antiferromagnetic ordering existing solely. First-principles electronic structure calculations substantiate the antiferromagnetic ground state and indicate that 2D nesting around Fermi level may give rise to exotic physical properties, such as superconductivity. YbxPt5P appears to be a unique case among materials. Understanding the electronic interactions in intermetallic compounds and designing the functional materials with targeted physical properties accordingly have been long-standing challenges in the materials science. One side, the classical chemical concepts, such as charge balance arguments and electron-counting rules, do not work for the intermetallic compounds with strong electron correlation, partially the valence orbital manifold, and occasionally relativistic effects. One chemical perspective for discovering new functional materials especially superconductors is to posit that similar physical properties can be observed in structural families. A well-known example is the HoCoGa5-type structure motif type becoming intriguing after the discovery of heavy fermion superconductivity in CeCoIn5 Heavy fermion superconductors, most of which are 4f The ternary compound LaPt5As, synthesized in rhombohedral symmetry under high pressure, provides a new avenue for research because, although non-magnetic, it hosts superconductivity with Tc~2.6 K. Thus, here we report a new material YbxPt5P with a thorough crystallographic and physical properties characterization. YbxPt5P crystallizes in tetragonal TlPt5As-type structure with the space group P4/mmm. The structure can be considered as the anti-format of CeCoIn5. According to single crystal X-ray diffraction, the Yb content (x) in YbxPt5P varies significantly from x= 0.20~1.0. We studied the magnetic and electronic properties on two samples with x = 0.23 (1) and 0.96 (1). In both samples, we observed antiferromagnetic transitions of Yb 3+ around 0.3 K. Moreover, the zeroresistivity transition, highly possible a superconducting transition, was observed around ~0.6 K only in low ratio Yb sample, Yb0.20(1)Pt5P, but not in Yb0.96(1)Pt5P. Our new quantum material is a new ideal platform to study the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism. Our new quantum material appears to be a distinct platform for studying the interactions between superconductivity and magnetism, in a material where the strong spin-orbit coupling is present. Synthesis: YbxPt5P samples with several loading compositions (x= 0.4, 0.5, 0.8 and 1.1) were synthesized by a high-temperature solid-state method. Stoichiometric elemental Yb (<200 mesh, Alfa Aesar, ≥ 99.9%), Pt (~22 mesh, Beantown Chemical, ≥ 99.99%) and red P (~100 mesh, Beantown Chemical, ≥ 99%) were mixed well, and pressed into a pellet inside an argon-filled glovebox. The pellet was placed in an alumina crucible which was then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. Heat treatment to 950 o C was carried out with a rate of 30 o C per hour in a Thermo Scientific furnace. After holding at 950 o C for two days, the tubes were slowly cooled to room temperature in five days. Based on our experiments, heating at 950 o C longer than 10 days would lead to the decomposition of YbxPt5P and a low ratio of Yb less than x = 0.5 will less possibly yield the appropriate phases. Small single crystals (~0.4×0.2×0.02 mm 3 ) were attached to the bulk polycrystalline material, as shown in FIG. YbxPt5P is resistible to both air and moisture. The phase purity was determined by using a Rigaku MiniFlex 600 powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu K radiation (=1.5406 Å, Ge monochromator). A long scan with the Bragg angle ranged from 3° to 90° in a step of 0.005° at a rate of 0.35°/min was performed for each sample. Rietveld method was utilized to fit the powder XRD pattern in the Fullprof Suite according to the calculated pattern from single crystal data. Electrical resistivity measurements were performed in a four-wire configuration with platinum or gold wires and silver contacts for T = 0.1 -300 K using the Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigerator (ADR) option or using the combination of Dilution Refrigerator and Electrical Transport (ETO) options. The bulk electronic structures of YbPt5P were computed using the projector augmented wave method The oxidation states of Yb, Pt and P atoms for Yb0.67Pt5P and YbPt5P are determined by a Kratos AXIS 165 XPS/AES equipped with standard Mg/Al and high-performance Al monochromatic source in an evacuated (10 -9 torr) chamber at room temperature. Phase Information, Crystal Structure and Chemical Composition Determination: Single Crystal X-ray Diffraction (SXRD) analysis shows that YbxPt5P adopts the tetragonal structure illustrated in FIG. The refined crystallographic data including atomic positions, site occupancies, and isotropic thermal displacements for the different Yb concentrations studied in detail are summarized in Tables Table YbxPt5P (0.23 ≤ x ≤ 1) phases exhibit superconducting trace and magnetism with low Yb-ratio and sole magnetism with high Yb-ratio. The isostructural material can be synthesized with other rare earths, with a variety of strange results expected. The coexistence of such strongly competing electronic states in a single substance itself makes this material remarkable. Moreover, the fact that the strong spin-orbit coupling of the Pt electrons must have an influence in determining the properties makes it truly novel. The complexity of the interactions between magnetism and superconductivity in this new materials family will push the frontiers of our knowledge of electronic and magnetic properties of materials into new areas and provide fertile ground for developing our still-emergent understanding of quantum materials. The material can be synthesized with other rare earths, with a variety of strange results expected. The occupied orbitals on the Pt1 sites and Pt2 sites are mainly from dxy/dz 2 and dxy, respectively. In contrast, the Yb-4f states show the more isotropic distribution. Since the charge density lobe of Pt2-dxy is directly point to the Yb-4f states, the in-plane hopping strength is stronger than the out-of-plane one that manly form interlayer Pt1-dz 2 hopping. a 296 K; Numbers in ( )'s are standard uncertainties.