Full phase control of THz emitting quantum cascade laser (QCL) combs has recently been demonstrated, opening new perspectives for even the most demanding applications. In this framework, simplifying the set-ups for control of these devices will help to accelerate their spreading in many fields. We report a new way to control the emission frequencies of a THz QCL comb by small optical frequency tuning (SOFT), using a very simple experimental setup, exploiting the incoherent emission of an ordinary white light emitting diode. The slightly perturbative regime accessible in these condition allows tweaking the complex refractive index of the semiconductor without destabilizing the broadband laser gain. The SOFT actuator is characterized and compared to another actuator, the QCL driving current. The suitability of this additional degree of freedom for frequency and phase stabilization of a THz QCL comb is shown and perspectives are discussed. In the field of frequency metrology a paradigmatic shift has occurred with the invention of optical Frequency Combs Indeed, the development of active regions with engineered optical dispersion allows for the simultaneous emission on a large number of equally-spaced longitudinal modes emitted by this kind of devices. Moreover, high third-order nonlinearities in the QCLs active region enable very fast four-wave mixing (FWM) processes that induce mode locking of the emission modes, with a high level of coherence proving that this technology is suited for challenging metrological grade applications. In this latest report, the spacing among the modes and offset frequency of the QCL-comb are stabilized through only one actuator, the device driving current, by exploring two very different frequency ranges. Finally, free running THz QCL-combs have been used as laser sources for dual comb spectrometers THz QCLs frequency tuning is usually obtained by driving current or heat-sink temperature control, but, recently, a new approach has been followed for single-mode devices. Initially demonstrated for mid-infrared devices In this work, we aim to apply the advantages of tuning through electromagnetic radiation to a THz QCL-comb, showing how light influences the device multi-mode emission. In particular, we focus on QCLs based on double-metal waveguides. For these devices there is no optical mode extending in the semiconductor substrate, and we therefore directly excite the laser active region. This condition was discarded in previous works, due to instabilities induced in the QCL emission by the high intensity of the near-infrared laser used for tuning For this reason, we are able to operate in a slightly perturbative regime, affecting the laser gain, but not destabilizing it. This new control technique will be called small optical frequency tuning (SOFT), in order to differentiate it from the huge tuning ranges allowed by LIFT. Nevertheless, here attention is rather posed on the possibility of exploiting these small tunings for exact frequency and phase control. In fact, our data and analysis confirm the possibility of using SOFT as external actuator on the QCL-comb degrees of freedom (mode spacing and frequency offset), and we show that SOFT can actually induce full phase control of one of these parameters, phase-locking it to the primary frequency standard. Finally, we study the similarities of this new actuator with respect to driving current, in order to envision a full frequency comb phase locking. The experimental setup realized for this work is schematically sketched in fig. A detailed description of the QCL-comb device used in this work can be found in Moreover, the OBNs allow monitoring the QCL-comb modes frequencies, tracking their evolution in time. To this purpose, the acquisition of the OBN frequencies is performed by means of a real-time spectrum analyzer (Tektronix RSA5106A). In the operating conditions used for this work (QCL heat-sink temperature ~20 K and driving current in the range 305-335 mA), the spectrum of the QCL shows 11 intense modes, while the other emitting modes have an intensity more than 10 times lower The QCL-comb emitted modes have frequencies that can be parametrized as: where N is the order of the mode considered and foff is the QCL-comb frequency offset. By simply deriving this equation, it is possible to retrieve the contribution of IBN and offset tuning on the emitted comb frequencies. Moreover, by keeping the OR-comb modes' frequencies fixed, these variations are transferred to the acquired RF-comb modes: where k is one tuning parameter, i.e. driving current, heat-sink temperature or LED light intensity. The sign uncertainties are lifted once the directions of the IBN and offset tunings are retrieved, knowing that they can depend on the actuator used. In fact, thanks to the developed experimental setup, down-converting the IBN to RF frequencies by mixing it with a proper synthesized frequency, it is possible to acquire both the IBN and the OBNs simultaneously on the same spectrum analyzer, and trace their frequency shifts while tuning the device parameters. Therefore, using equation 2, it is possible to discriminate the spacing and offset tunings for all actuators. Table Driving current + -Heat-sink temperature -- Table driving current, heat-sink temperature and light emitting diode (LED) light intensity. SOFT and driving current actuator. The ratio between the two coefficients is a good parameter to compare the tuning characteristics of the two actuators on the device. All the previous results, related to SOFT and current tunings have been summarized in table 2. The driving current tuning coefficients are reported, while the moduli of the two SOFT tuning coefficients depend also on other non-device-related parameters, such as the LED optical power effectively impinging on the QCL (depending mainly on the distance between the LED and the QCL, and the cryostat window transmittivity). For this reason, in order to compare the actuators, we can calculate the ratio between the two coefficients, shown in the last column of table The LED illumination creates an electron-hole plasma in a thin slice (1-2 Dm) close to the laser cavity edges. Depending on the intensity, the amount of the photogenerated electrons will change more or less significantly the complex refractive index of the semiconductor. From the experimental geometry and the laser dimension we can estimate that the power illuminating the laser edge is 10 -4 of the LED power, that is around 13 mW overall. From the LED power coupled to the laser (about 1.5 DW) we would expect then a tuning of the laser lines 10 -5 times lower than what observed for the laser case of Ref. The broadband nature of the LED illumination leads to a non-selective injection of carriers in the active region populating also higher levels in the subbands. The photoexcited electrons will relax via intraband scattering in the lower subbands changing the effective temperature distribution of the electrons in the lasing levels (see also Ref. In order to confirm and quantify this difference, two tests have been performed. First, we can measure the two different fixed points for the two actuators. A frequency comb fixed point is the only frequency that remains stationary while the comb expands or contracts around it, due to a frequency tuning. Therefore the fixed points can be extracted from eq. 2 and eq. 1, by simply considering: Where the sign ambiguity of eq. 2 has been lifted by the measurements. Finally: Dialing in the numbers we calculate ffix = 2.922 THz for the SOFT actuator, and ffix = 3.060 THz for the driving current. The two fixed points are outside the detected emission bandwidth of the comb, and despite being close (138 GHz), they are clearly distinguished thus allowing, in principle, an independent control of the comb degrees of freedom. The second test that proves the difference between the two actuators is to stabilize the frequency of one comb degree of freedom by simultaneously applying modulations through the driving current and the LED light, with ad-hoc amplitudes and a fixed phase difference. In fact, if the two actuators were the same, there would be no linear combination of the two modulations minimizing only one degree of freedom. Fig. One intriguing possibility is to use the SOFT actuator to obtain full phase control on the QCL-comb emission, by controlling one comb degree of freedom with SOFT and the other with the driving current. With respect to the driving current, the LED actuator is expected to be a smaller bandwidth control, and, as a consequence, it has been chosen to phase lock the comb mode spacing, showing a characteristic width in the order of few tens of kHz. To this purpose, the IBN signal is isolated, down converted to RF frequencies, and compared to a local oscillator on a standard phase detector unit. The phase detector output signal is properly elaborated by a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller, and fed back to the LED driving unit, closing a simple feedback loop acting on the SOFT actuator. Once all the parameters are optimized, we achieve a stable phase-locking loop (PLL) on the IBN signal. Fig. In order to attempt complete phase control of the comb emission, we activate the PLL on the comb mode spacing through SOFT and simultaneously stabilize the comb offset. Following the work done in Fig. In this work we have demonstrated how LED illumination can be used to tune the emission of a THz QCL-comb, entering a new regime of control with small optical frequency tuning (SOFT). We have reported on how the SOFT actuator compares with the device driving current, showing that the two actuators are similar but distinguishable. Finally, tight phase locking of the QCL IBN to a primary frequency standard is demonstrated, thus enabling phase control on the free spectral range of the THz QCL-comb emitter. It has to be noted that ambient laboratory light can have an impact on the laser emission frequencies and also on their stability. For this reason all the measurements reported in this paper were performed in the dark. In cases where light perturbation can affect the device performances particular filters in the cryostat window can be adopted, in order to filter out the ambiet light. The additional SOFT actuator, with respect to current, temperature and RF injection locking, significantly widens perspectives of full control of THz comb emission in an increasing number of scenarios. In particular, for future wireless communication networks, such LED control of QCLs can enable practical Optical-to-THz multichannel encoding of information, recently demonstrated for single THz frequencies by photomixing telecom frequencies 2.206(6) MHz/mA. Figure