The static and time-dependent behaviours of adhesively bonded polyethylene Double-Strap (DS) joints were investigated to assess the viability of this joint configuration relative to the Single-Lap (SL) joints. Both experiments and finite element simulations are conducted. First, we individually characterise the tensile and creep behaviour of the adhesive and adherent materials; an epoxy-based adhesive and polyethylene, respectively. This information is used to develop suitable constitutive models that are then implemented in the commercial finite element package ABAQUS by means of user material subroutines, UMATs. The numerical models are used to design the creep tests on the adhesive joints. Afterwards, an extensive experimental campaign is conducted where we characterise the static and creep behaviour of two joint configurations, SL and DS joints, and three selected values of the overlap length. In regard to the static case, results reveal an increase in the failure load with increasing overlap length, of up to 10% for an overlap length of 39 mm. Also, slightly better performance is observed for the SL joint configuration. For the creep experiments, we show that the DS adhesive joint configuration leads to much shorter elongations, relative to the SL joints. These differences diminish with increasing overlap length but remain substantial in all cases. In both joint configurations, the elongation increases with decreasing overlap length. For instance, increasing the overlap length to 39 mm led to a 50% and a 30% reduction in elongation for SL and DS joints, respectively. Moreover, the numerical predictions show a good agreement with the experiments. The stress redistribution is investigated and it is found that the shear stress is highly sensitive to the testing time, with differences being more noticeable for the DS joint system. The findings bring insight into the creep behaviour of polyethylene-based adhesive joints, a configuration of notable industrial interest. Adhesive joints are widely used across many sectors due to their advantages relative to other competing joining technologies. Well-known advantages include weight reduction, fewer sources of stress concentration and reduced through-life maintenance A promising material for joints adherents is polyethylene (PE), widely used in a variety of sectors. Polyethylene can favourably compete with metals due to its higher strength-to-weight ratio, bonding performance and resistance against corrosion Studies have been conducted regarding the use of polyethylene adherents in lapshear joints. Pinto et al. The response of adhesive joints under creep is of interest to many applications across the aerospace, transport, energy, and marine sectors In this work, we investigate for the first time the creep behaviour of adhesively bonded polyethylene strap joints. Both experiments and finite element simulations are conducted. First, the tensile and creep behaviours of the adherent and adhesive materials are characterised, experimentally and numerically. This information is then used to assess the performance of SL and DS joint configurations. Comparisons are drawn between the behaviour exhibited by SL and DS joints. However, the aim is not to compare performances but to characterise, numerically and experimentally, the behaviour of various classes of adhesive joints based on polyethylene. The different conditions present in SL and DS joint configurations enable assessing the generality of the constitutive models developed. Tensile tests are first conducted to characterise the mechanical response of the adhesive joints under monotonic loading. Creep tests are then performed to gain insight into the time-dependent response. In all cases, the role of the adherent length is explored by testing three different cases per adhesive joint configuration. In addition, finite element analysis is also conducted to gain further insight and assist in the interpretation of the results. The validation of the numerical model gives confidence in the use of parametric finite element analysis studies for joint design across many applications. The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the details of the experimental campaign. In Section 3, we describe the constitutive material models employed and the finite element framework developed. The numerical and experimental results are presented and discussed in Section 4. Finally, the manuscript conclusions are presented in Section 5. We proceed to describe the testing procedures under tensile and uniaxial creep loading conditions. Tests were carried out on the adherent and adhesive materials, individually, and on both Single-Lap (SL) and Double-Strap (DS) joints, see Fig. The outcome of the experimental campaign was used to validate the finite element model. The adherents of both the SL and DL joints were made of 5 mm thick highdensity polyethylene (HDPE) sheets with dimensions 25x120 mm. These are bonded through a thin layer (0.2 mm) of epoxy-based structural adhesive, Araldite 2011 (Huntsman Advanced Materials, India). The mechanical properties of HDPE and the adhesive, as well as their time-dependent behaviour, are characterised by testing dog-bone samples manufactured following ASTM D638 standard, as shown in Fig. Two batches of SL and DS joints are manufactured with geometries and dimensions as given in Fig. We examined first the tensile and creep behaviours of the adherent and adhesive materials. The uniaxial tension tests were conducted with a crosshead speed of 1.3 mm/min. While for the creep testing, we used constant loads at 65%, 75% and 85% of the joint strength (at room temperature). For this purpose, an automatic creep In the following, we proceed to describe the constitutive models employed and the numerical framework that has been developed. The behaviour of the adherent and the adhesive is assumed to be elastic-plastic, in agreement with the tensile tests. J2 plasticity theory is used to model the adherent, as in Specifically, we adopt the general exponent form by which the yield function F is written in the meridional plane (p -q plane) as: Where p t is the hardening parameter that represents the hydrostatic tension strength of the material, p is the hydrostatic stress, q is the effective stress, and a and b are material parameters. For a given material yield stress in tension σ Y and a hydrostaticstress-sensitivity parameter λ, the values of a and p t can be given as: Plastic flow is defined by the parameter ψ and is obtained from the following expression: where v p is the plastic component of Poisson's ratio On the other hand, capturing the time-dependent behaviour of the adhesive joints requires modelling the creep behaviour of the adhesive, Araldite 2011, and the adherent, polyethylene. The experiments are conducted at a load level well below yielding, and accordingly the evolution of the creep strain as a function of time, ε c (t), is defined by subtracting the elastic strains ε elastic to the total strains ε total : The non-linear creep behaviour of polymers can be appropriately captured using a sufficient number of elastic and damping elements. Here, a model is used that combines spring and damper elements to derive the compliance equation of the material, as sketched in Fig. The material parameters (E ∞ , E 1 , E 2 , η 1 , η 2 and η 3 ) can be obtained through nonlinear regression of the experimental results of creep tests. On the other hand, the parameters E 0 , θ 1 and θ 2 are defined as: Equation ( Where ε e denotes the elastic strain and α and β are respectively referred to as the first and second-order functions of stress. The parameters α, β and t ̂ can be defined as follows: On the other hand, the parameters a i are material constants that can be calculated from the experimental data by means of nonlinear regression techniques. In the present work, the mathematical software MATLAB is used to exact these coefficientssee Section 4. The commercial finite element package ABAQUS is used to reproduce the experimental campaign described in Section 2. Two-dimensional, plane stress models are developed to reproduce the SL and DS adhesive joint configurations shown in Figs. In this section, we describe the experimental and numerical results obtained, as well as their implications on adhesive joint behaviour and design. Tensile testing on the adherent and adhesive materials is described first, Section 4. The goal is to ensure that the applied load is sufficiently low such that no yielding occurs in the adhesive and, to a certain extent, in the adherent. First, the von Mises equivalent stress is plotted along the centre line of the adhesive, path A-B in Figs. 1c and 1d. The results are shown in Fig. The contours of equivalent von Mises stress are plotted in Fig. We proceed to gain further insight into the creep response by making use of the numerical model. Specifically, we aim at quantifying the stress redistribution that occurs during the testing. First, we compute the peel and shear stresses along the centre line of the adhesive, referred to as path A-B in Figs. We investigated, numerically and experimentally, the static and creep behaviour of polyethylene-based Single-Lap (SL) and Double-Strap (DS) adhesive joints. First, insight is gained into the behaviour of the adherent and adhesive bulk materials, and a suitable rheological model is developed to capture their time-dependent response. The model is implemented in the finite element package ABAQUS by programming a user material subroutine. A large experimental campaign is conducted to evaluate the behaviour of SL and DS joints under static and time-dependent conditions for different load levels and overlap lengths. By combining experiments and numerical simulations we reveal the following findings: • SL joints slightly outperform DS joints under uniaxial tension. In both systems, the failure load increases with increasing overlap length. • Under creep conditions and for a given remote load, SL joints reveal much larger elongations than DS joints. Differences decrease with increasing overlap length but remain substantial in all cases. • Little redistribution of the peel stress is observed in the adhesive. However, the shear stress shows a notable sensitivity to the testing time, and this effect is more pronounced for the DS joint configuration. The numerical model shows a very good agreement with the experiments, strengthening the constitutive choices and enabling the assessment of multiple configurations for optimising adhesive joint design. The qualitative and quantitative insight gained into the mechanical and creep behaviours of polyethylene-based joints should facilitate design and industrial uptake. 4.1 Tensile tests of the adherent and adhesive materials Uniaxial tensile tests are conducted to characterise the mechanical response of the adherent, polyethylene. The mechanical properties of the polyethylene obtained from experiments are listed in Table