Intercalation of alkali atoms within the lamellar transition metal dichalcogenides is a possible route toward a new generation of batteries. It is also a way to induce structural phase transitions authorizing the realization of optical and electrical switches in this class of materials. The process of intercalation has been mostly studied in three-dimensional dichalcogenide films. Here, we address the case of a single-layer of molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ), deposited on a gold substrate, and intercalated with cesium (Cs) in ultra-clean conditions (ultrahigh vacuum). We show that intercalation decouples MoS 2 from its substrate. We reveal electron transfer from Cs to MoS 2 , relative changes in the energy of the valence band maxima, and electronic disorder induced by structural disorder in the intercalated Cs layer. Besides, we find an abnormal lattice expansion of MoS 2 , which we relate to immediate vicinity of Cs. Intercalation is thermally activated, and so is the reverse process of de-intercalation. Our work opens the route to a microscopic understanding of a process of relevance in several possible future technologies, and shows a way to manipulate the properties of two-dimensional dichalcogenides by "under-cover" functionalization. The interest for transition metal dichalcogenide single-layers, initially spurred by the bright light emission found in molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) 1,2 and the achievement of electrostatic switching of electrical conduction in MoS 2 , 3 has revived activities devoted to the synthesis of these materials. Efforts to elaborate them with a structural quality similar to the one obtained in mechanically exfoliated samples with bottom-up approaches -chemical vapour deposition, On the contrary, intercalation of thicker transition metal dichalcogenides has been thoroughly investigated. Much like with graphite, a rich variety of systems with modulated structure in the direction perpendicular to the basal plane can be formed this way. Here, we report on the intercalation and de-intercalation of the alkali cesium (Cs) atoms. Unlike all works addressing in-solution intercalation of bulk-like transition metal dichalcogenide layers, the focus of our work is on single-layer MoS 2 flakes, prepared on Au(111), and (de)intercalated under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. We find that the process of intercala-tion is thermally activated, being completed after few tens of minutes at a temperature of 550 K. Above 850 K, deintercalation is efficient and completed within a few tens of minutes. Intercalated cesium forms a a Cs monolayer with an ill-ordered structure compatible with a ( √ 3 × √ 3)R30 • reconstruction with respect to Au(111). We reveal electron transfer from Cs to MoS 2 , modifications of the relative positions of the valence band maxima in MoS 2 , and electronic disorder induced by structural disorder in the intercalated layer. Upon intercalation, MoS 2 is lifted, and adopts an unusually large lattice parameter. Our analysis combines scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED), grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), reflectivity (XRR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) all performed under ultrahigh vacuum, in some cases in operando during intercalation. Further insights are brought by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Three ultrahigh vacuum systems were used for our experiments. A first one is coupled to the X-ray synchrotron beam delivered at the BM32 beamline of the ESRF. It has a base pressure of 3×10 -10 mbar and is equipped with a quartz micro-balance and a RHEED apparatus. The second one, at Institut Néel (Grenoble), with a base pressure of 2×10 -10 mbar, is part of a larger ultrahigh vacuum system comprising a STM, a RHEED apparatus, and a quartz microbalance. The samples were prepared in each system before being investigated by RHEED, STM, GIXRD, and XRR. Temperatures were measured with a pyrometer in both systems. Note that the pyrometers and the chamber configurations are different in the two systems, which implies a plausible variability (∼50 K) in the measurements, and suggests caution when comparing these measurements. The third ultrahigh vacuum system is installed at the SGM-3 endstation 36 of the ASTRID2 synchrotron radiation source (Aarhus); it includes one chamber (base pressure 10 -10 mbar) devoted to ARPES and XPS measurements, and two other chambers (base pressures, 4×10 -10 mbar) comprising a STM. All three ultrahigh vacuum systems are equipped with a Cs evaporator. MoS 2 /Au(111) was prepared in Grenoble and transported in atmospheric conditions to Aarhus where it was degassed in ultrahigh vacuum at 500 K. There, temperatures were measured using a K type thermocouple fixed on the rear side of the Au (111) crystal. The cleanliness of the surface was confirmed with STM and photoelectron spectroscopy. Single-crystals bought from Surface Preparation Laboratory and Mateck were prepared under ultrahigh vacuum by repeated cycles of room temperature sputtering with 0.8-1 keV Ar + ions and annealing to 900 K. Surface cleanliness was checked with STM imaging and RHEED, both revealing a well-developped herringbone reconstruction. Molybdenum was evaporated using a high-purity rod heated by electron-beam bombardment, at a rate of 0.02 monolayer/min in the ultrahigh vacuum chamber coupled to the X-ray beam and in the ultrahigh vacuum chamber coupled to the STM, respectively (one monolayer referring to the surface coverage of a single-layer MoS 2 on Au(111)). This rate was determined with both a quartz microbalance and STM. For introduction of H 2 S in the ultrahigh vacuum chambers, we used an automatic injection system by VEGATEC that supplies H 2 S via pneumatic valves (chamber coupled to the X-ray beam), and a leak-valve (chamber coupled to the STM). The latter system comprises large copper parts. Their surface was saturated by maintaining a pressure of 10 -6 mbar of H 2 S for 30 min. Without this treatment, residual gas analysis revealed that H 2 S was prominently decomposed before even reaching the sample surface, which prevented MoS 2 growth. Cesium was deposited under ultrahigh vacuum by resistive heating of a high purity Cs dispenser (SAES Getter). Assessing the deposited Cs dose is not a straightforward task. Cesium dose measurements, using a quartz microbalance for instance, are seldom reported. Exceptions include low temperature measurements; 37 in contrast, our room temperature measurements were inconclusive. Alternative calibration methods were hence needed. In the ultrahigh vacuum system where STM imaging was performed, graphene growth on Ir(111) is operative. Cesium deposition in this system leads to its intercalation between graphene and Ir(111) in a sequence of well-crystallized phases readily detected with electron diffraction. Cesium was deposited (5.7 A current) for a given time at room temperature onto Au(111), and the Cs density was assessed by comparing the area under the Cs peaks and Au surface 4f components in XPS, assuming that Cs is in the form of a flat sub-monolayer deposit. With this calibration at hand, we then deposited Cs in two steps, each at room temperature followed by 550 K annealing, corresponding nominally to 0.3 and 0.6 Cs atoms per Au atom on the surface. In the third ultrahigh vacuum system, installed at the BM32 beamline, we could not use any of these two methods. We hence decided to deposit a large excess of Cs, using a high current flowing the Cs dispenser (7.2 A) and large deposition times, each of 30 min. There also we deposited Cs sequentially, in three steps, each at room temperature followed by a 500 K annealing. Diffraction measurements were performed at European Synchrotron Radiation Facility using a z-axis diffractometer installed at the BM32 CRG/IF beamline and optimized for grazing incidence surface X-ray diffraction. The experimental energy was set at 11.8 keV, below the Au L III absorption edge. The incident angle was set to 0.24 • , slightly below the critical angle for total external reflection, to enhance the signal from MoS 2 while minimizing the background. The diffraction signal was acquired with a Maxipix two-dimensional detector (256×1288 pixels, each of size 55 μm). The XRR spectra were processed with PyRod (home-made software for surface diffraction 2D data treatment). Data were integrated in reciprocal space and the profiles were extracted as a function of the modulus of the scattering vector perpendicular to the surface (Q ⊥ ). Corrections to this integrated intensity were applied for beam polarization, surface active area and gaussian beam profile. Correction for beam refraction at interfaces were used to calculate Q ⊥ inside the sample. The ANA-ROD software The STM data we show were acquired in Grenoble with an Omicron STM-1 apparatus, at room temperature under ultrahigh vacuum, in a dedicated chamber with a base pressure of 5×10 -11 mbar. At the SGM-3 endstation, an Aarhus STM was used to check the sample quality after Cs deposition, which gave consistent results with those obtained in Grenoble. ARPES and XPS measurements were performed at the SGM-3 end station of the ASTRID2 synchrotron radiation source. Structural relaxations as well as electronic structure determination have been performed using DFT. The DFT localized-orbital molecular-dynamics code as implemented in Fireball Single-layer MoS 2 flakes were grown following the procedure described by Grønborg et al. For the example shown in Figure The full-width at half maximum of the MoS 2 peaks in a radial direction (Figure To model the structure of MoS 2 and learn more about the out-of-plane structure of the material, we use DFT calculations taking van der Waals interactions into account. For that purpose, we choose an unsheared moiré unit cell with 6 MoS 2 units matching 7 Au(111) surface units. This (6×7) coincidence lattice is not the (10×11) observed experimentally. Our choice is however legitimate since in our DFT calculations, the lattice structure optimization are performed at 0 K (while the measurements are performed at 300 K), a temperature and of the Mo layer are better visualised in Figure They range from typically 1 to 8 pm (Au), and 1 to 4 pm (Mo). In another epitaxial two-dimensional material, graphene, smaller (∼1 pm) and larger (∼20 pm) distorsions have been reported on Ir(111) (Ref. 48) and Ru(0001) (Ref. 49) substrates. In the former system no or very weak moiré peaks were observed while they were clearly observed in the latter. Regarding the out-of-plane structure (Figure We now confront the DFT analysis to the experimental analysis of the out-of-plane structure via XRR. The modulus of the Fourier transform of the total electronic density of the system along the out-of-plane direction (Figure (modulus of the out-of-plane scattering vector Q ⊥ , 0 nm -1 and 26.68 nm -1 ), we observe a bump in the reflectivity. Qualitatively, the local reflectivity minima correspond to destructive interferences between the X-ray waves scattered by the Au(111) lattice and by the MoS 2 layer, perpendicular to the surface. The distance between the minima is related to the distances between the layers (it decreases when the interlayer distance increases, and vice versa). We performed a more quantitative analysis by calculating the structure factor of an atomic model of MoS 2 /Au(111), and refining the values of the free structural parameters to fit the calculation to the experimental data, using the ANA-ROD code. The disappearance of the moiré pattern observed in STM is corroborated by GIXRD measurements. After three cycles of deposition of a large Cs excess followed by 550 K annealing, the reciprocal space lattice of the sample shows no discernable moiré signals (compare Figures Concomitantly to the vanishing of the moiré signal, the GIXRD data reveal that the diffraction signal associated to MoS 2 progressively shows two components, the one at lower scattering vector modulus corresponding to an expansion of the lattice (Figure The GIXRD data show a decrease in intensity and an angular broadening of the diffraction peaks as the Cs dose increases (compare Figures Strain induced by intercalation. In the absence of a significant hybridization between MoS 2 and Au orbitals, the MoS 2 is no more strongly pinned on the substrate lattice. Consistent with this view, the in-plane lattice parameter of MoS 2 is found to change (the MoS 2 diffraction peak is shifted to lower momentum transfer values, Figure What is the origin of the remaining ∼0.7% expansion? A structural phase transition (1H to 1T or 1T') is expected upon electron doping, There, the role of the increased charge density within the Mo-S bonds was invoked. We again examine the structure of the sample perpendicular to the surface. While for pristine MoS 2 /Au(111), the XRR spectrum exhibited essentially one intensity rebound (Fig- Given the large atomic radius of Cs, we expect a low-density Cs phase. Our STM analysis directly confirms that on MoS 2 -free regions (Figure The best match of our model to the experimental data is obtained for d Au-S = 0.551 nm and d Au-Cs = 0.389 nm (see Table the moiré signal re-appears in GIXRD, the MoS 2 peak shifts back to its initial position (Fig- Electronic effects of Cs intercalation. We expect that intercalation of Cs has strong influence on the electronic properties of MoS 2 . We start with experimental measurements, with ARPES, of energy-momentum cuts in the electronic band structure along KΓKM in reciprocal space, first with the case of as-grown MoS 2 /Au(111). The valence band of MoS 2 (whose maxima are highlighted with horizontal lines in Figure The origin of the shifts can be qualitatively rationalised by inspecting the projection of the electronic states on the different orbitals in the system, which has been calculated by DFT for a (1×1) approximate model for MoS 2 on Au(111). In the energy range explored in Figure The broadening of the valence band at K point after Cs intercalation points to a significant disorder in the system. This is consistent with our STM observations of a disordered nanoscaled pattern for Cs in this case (Figure Our ARPES observation can be rationalised in the framework of a simplified DFT cal- Except for one marked peak (-330 meV) that we ascribe to an interfacial Au/Cs state, within about 600 meV below the bottom of the conduction band, the DFT calculations predict few in-gap states than for MoS 2 /Au(111). Below this energy range more in-gap states are predicted, at least for d Au-Cs = 0.389 nm and d Au-S = 0.551 nm. Their occurrence is however highly dependent on the distance between the bottom S layer and the Cs layer, as shown for a calculation performed with another set of d Au-Cs and d Au-S values (Figure We showed that starting from MoS 2 flakes strongly coupled to the Au(111) substrate, with a short spacing and a substantial nanorippling, Cs intercalation lifts the flakes and flatens them. The process is thermally activated. De-intercalation is also thermally activated, but at higher temperatures. We found that Cs, which is intercalated in the form of a atomic layer whose density is consistent with a ( √ 3 × √ 3)R30 • reconstruction on Au(111), substantially dopes MoS 2 with electrons, and that this doping is a possible origin for a ∼1% expansion of the atomic lattice of MoS 2 parallel to the surface. The interaction with the Cs layer is associated with relative changes in the energy of the valence band maxima and to electronic disorder presumably related to the structural disorder in Cs. Our work opens new perspectives towards the manipulation of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Similarly to in-solution strategies, 