Time-reversal-invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS) wires host Majorana Kramers pairs that have been predicted to mediate a fractional Josephson effect with 4π periodicity in the superconducting phase difference. We explore the TRITOPS fractional Josephson effect in the presence of time-dependent 'local mixing' perturbations that instantaneously preserve time-reversal symmetry. Specifically, we show that just as such couplings render braiding of Majorana Kramers pairs non-universal, the Josephson current becomes either aperiodic or 2π-periodic (depending on conditions that we quantify) unless the phase difference is swept sufficiently quickly. We further analyze topological superconductors with T 2 = +1 time-reversal symmetry and reveal a rich interplay between interactions and local mixing that can be experimentally probed in nanowire arrays. Introduction. Topological superconducting wires hosting unpaired end Majorana zero modes (MZMs) An elegant method of probing topological superconductivity and performing readout utilizes the so-called fractional Josephson effect When some time-reversal symmetry T is present, topological superconducting wires can host multiple MZMs at each boundary. In particular, a time reversal invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS) for which T 2 = -1 hosts a Kramers pair of end MZMs that cannot hybridize provided T is preserved. MZM Kramers pairs in a TRITOPS wire accordingly generate a symmetry-protected ground state degeneracy consisting of locally distinguishable states-and thus furnish a qubit subspace with limited fault-tolerance. Indeed, even time-dependent local perturbations that instantaneously preserve T can rotate the Majorana Kramers pair wavefunctions, generating a non-universal non-Abelian Berry phase Given these non-universalities, to what extent does a fractional Josephson effect survive in TRITOPS wires? This question turns out to be exceedingly subtle. On one hand, in a TRITOPS Josephson junction that preserves T at phase differences 0 and π, each subgap level is certainly 4π-periodic (Fig. Here we show that, when the superconducting phase winds adiabatically, local mixing indeed spoils the fractional Josephson effect and yields either an aperiodic or 2π-periodic current-phase relation depending on local-mixing time scales. This result holds even in an otherwise ideal situation for which effects known previously to destroy 4π-periodicity Local mixing. Let γ 1(2) , γ1(2) denote the MZM Kramers pair at the left (right) end of a TRITOPS wire. Time reversal sends for convention-dependent signs s j = ±1; note consistency with T 2 = -1. Bilinears hybridizing a given MZM Kramers pair are odd under T and thus forbidden. Local, adiabatic time-dependent perturbations that instantaneously preserve T endow the MZM operators at each end with nontrivial time dependence. Such perturbations can result, e.g., from external manipulation or stochastic noise that couples the initial MZMs and bulk energy modes, as reviewed in the Supplemental Material. Reference 47 showed that after the Hamiltonian completes a closed cycle in time T , the final state generically differs in a non-universal way from the initial state. The ground-state rotation resulting from this "local mixing" is implemented by the unitary matrix U = exp j=1,2 θ j γ j (0)γ j (0)/2 , with θ j a local-mixing angle determined by evolution details. Local mixing accordingly spoils the topological protection of braiding MZM Kramers pairs TRITOPS Josephson junction. Consider a TRITOPS Josephson junction (Fig. where λ e,o are real-valued tunneling amplitudes (see Supplemental Material for a derivation). In the even-parity sector (iγ L γ R )(iγ L γR ) = +1 only the first line survives, whereas in the odd-parity sector (iγ L γ R )(iγ L γR ) = -1 only the second line survives Crucially, however, the TRITOPS fractional Josephson effect hinted at here does not constitute a robust adiabatic cycle. As proof of concept, suppose that we begin in the ground state of the even-parity sector (solid lines in Fig. Repeated implementations of the closed adiabatic cycle above generically result in aperiodic unitary state evolution, signaling a breakdown of the TRITOPS fractional Josephson effect. A more physically relevant scenario arises when local mixing and phase winding occur simultaneously. For an illustrative toy model, we incorporate a Kramers pair of Andreev bound states described by f = (γ ε +iγ ε )/2, f = (γ ε +iγ ε )/2 and supplement Eq. ( The Andreev bound states exhibit an energy gap ε encoded by the first line and couple to the Majorana Kramers pair on the left side of the junction via the second line; all terms instantaneously preserve T . We take ε to be the largest energy scale and, for simplicity, project onto the even-parity subspace γ L γ R γL γR γ ε γ ε γε γ ε = +1. In this formulation, the Hamiltonian H(t) = H JJ + δH(t) supports two 'low-energy' instantaneous eigenstates-denoted |ψ 1 (t) and |ψ 2 (t)separated from the next lowest instantaneous eigenstates FIG. Transition probability after evolution by The choice of α(t) yields step-like jumps in θ(t) over a time scale τ , as shown in the inset. In the main plot's horizontal axis, Ω(t1) denotes the magnitude of the instantaneous energy at the time of the jumps. 'Slow' jumps [τ Ω(t1) 1] yield nearly zero transition probability, signifying a 2π-periodic Josephson effect. 'Fast' jumps [τ Ω(t1) 1], however, generate aperiodicity-even for arbitrarily slow φ(t). Inset: Off-diagonal element of H eff (t)/λ e near φ = π for τ Ω(t1) ≈ 1.257 (red) and τ Ω(t1) ≈ 0.00629 (blue), along with diagonal elements (grey). by an excess energy ∼ ε. We further assume that α(t) varies slowly in time, i.e., β α(t) ε 2 , so that transitions between the low-and high-energy states are negligible. Solutions to Schrödinger's equation then approximately take the form with H inst a diagonal matrix populated by the instantaneous energies and H B,ij =ψ i (t)|i∂ t |ψ j (t) a Berry-phase term. Retaining terms up to O ε -2 (except an unimportant term proportional to identity), we explicitly find where , and the Pauli matrices now refer to the basis of instantaneous eigenstates |ψ j (t) . When λ e = 0, the time-evolution operator U = e -i T 0 H eff (t) ≡ e i θ 2 σy implements local mixing among the degenerate junction states with mixing angle θ = T 0 dt θ(t), in agreement with Ref. 47 To analyze the Josephson effect described by Eq. ( Next we examine a 'quench' that more closely resembles the proof-of-concept picture considered earlier: As sketched in the inset of Fig. Thus far we have focused on unitary time evolution. We now note that continuously measuring the current can stabilize 4π periodicity through the quantum Zeno effect. Although current eigenstates correspond to energy eigenstates, the current is most distinguishable when the energies are degenerate; hence measurement backaction competes against local mixing. If the measurement projects onto a current eigenstate faster than the time scale of local mixing, the fractional Josephson effect survives (up to processes not considered here). T 2 = +1 Josephson junction. Topological superconductors with T 2 = +1 time-reversal symmetry can support an arbitrary number m of MZMs at each end in the non-interacting limit, but only m mod 8 with interactions Physics at Caltech; and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundations EPiQS Initiative, Grant GBMF8682. Reference 47 derived that when the operators describing a Majorana Kramers pair depend on some parameters η, the local mixing angle is given by We review a simple example of how a non-zero mixing angle can arise microscopically. Consider a TRITOPS wire modeled by two Kitaev chains. In the dimerized limit, the Hamiltonian is given by where σ ∈ {↑, ↓} labels the two time-reversed copies, a and b the two Majorana flavors that form the spinful fermion, and j the site. The two Majorana operators corresponding to the same j and σ transform oppositely under T : here we take the signs in Eq. ( where α parametrizes the ratio of the two terms and is timedependent. Both Eq. ( where tan ζ = β/ε. Solving Eq. ( where α(T ) = α(0) + 2πn, with n ∈ Z. Therefore, provided α has non-trivial winding, θ 1 = 0 and γ 1 , γ1 undergo local mixing. A TRITOPS wire can be thought of as two topological superconductors related by time reversal symmetry. Labeling the two copies with a spin degree of freedom σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, time reversal acts on the fermionic operators of the Jth wire as c J = (c J,↑ , c J,↓ ) T as The sign s J (φ) = ±1 represents a Z 2 gauge-freedom when defining symmetry transformations of superconductors. When multiple TRITOPS are present but disconnected, each satisfies its own time reversal symmetry according to Eq. ( A simple model of a TRITOPS Josephson junction is where L/R denote whether the fermion belongs to the wire on the left/right end of the junction and we can generically allow for different tunneling amplitudes between wires with the same and different σ labels. Each fermionic operator can be written as where φ J is the superconducting phase of the wire on the Jth side of the junction (J ∈ {L, R}), and the operators γ cσ , c ∈ {a, b} satisfy the Majorana anticommutation relation Equations ( Fixing φ L = 0 and φ R = φ and dropping the a/b label of the Majorana operators, Eq. ( In the above, we have written σ to indicate the opposite choice of σ for the subscripts, and σ as a coefficient to correspond to ± for ↑ / ↓. We recover Eq. ( We now derive Eq. ( Then, defining even-parity basis states so that |0 corresponds to the vacuum state annihilated by c, c, f, f and and similarly for the time-reversed partners. In this basis, the full Hamiltonian can be written in first-quantized form as where we have adopted the shorthand λ e = 2λ e cos φ 2 and λ o = 2λ o sin φ 2 and suppressed the time-dependence of φ and α. Working to order ε -2 , the two lowest energies are with corresponding instantaneous eigenstates We have defined ν p,p = 1 + (-pλ e (t) + p λ o (t)) /ε with p, p = ±1. As described in the main text, when β α(t) ε 2 , transitions between the low and high-energy states are negligible. Solutions to the Schrödinger equation for a state initialized in the low-energy subspace take the form The coefficients satisfy the equation of motion where recovering Eq. ( Note that all λ o dependence drops out at order ε -2 . Time evolution according to H eff (t) Equation ( where |0 , |1 are the eigenstates of σ z corresponding to eigenvalues ±1, respectively, and we have defined β ± (t) = Ω(t)±a(t) 2Ω(t) . Consider the parameter The adiabatic theorem asserts that when A 1, the system initialized in an energy eigenstate remains in that eigenstate throughout the time evolution For H eff (t), A and Ω(t) evaluate to where t is the time that maximizes the numerator and t the time that minimizes the denominator. When θ(t) = 0, A reduces to the inverse of the Landau-Zener parameter x: Alternatively, for the quench considered in Fig. where t 1 is the location of the quench. If θmax 2λ e cos[φ(t 1 )/2], then the denominator reduces to θ2 max and Thus the transition probability approaches zero for τ θmax 1/2. If instead θmax /2 and 2λ e cos[φ(t 1 )/2] are comparable (as is the case in Fig. where When |v(t)| Ω(t), the coefficients evolve according to a diagonal Hamiltonian and the system initialized in the instantaneous ground state will remain in the instantaneous ground state at later times, resulting in the conventional 2π-periodic Josephson effect. (Note that max t |v(t)|/Ω(t) corresponds to A when t = t.) When |v(t)| Ω(t), the instantaneous energy states undergo Rabi oscillations, and the current-phase relation will generally be aperiodic. Consider a junction described by Eq. ( so that for a = λ e / λ 2 e + λ2 e , b = λe / λ 2 e + λ2 e . When φ is not equal to an odd multiple of π, the junction eigenstates are Note that |I -is the instantaneous ground state of the junction for φ < π, while |I + is the instantaneous ground state for φ > π. Consider a thought experiment of a phase-biased TRITOPS Josephson junction, undergoing the following protocol. Initialize the system at φ = 0 in the state |I + , then evolve the phase φ such that at the kth time invariant point one of the Majorana Kramers pairs accrues a local mixing angle θ k . In the absence of any other noise sources, between the k -1th and kth time-reversal invariant points, the system is in a superposition of junction eigenstates with current expectation value When thus the current expectation value is not 4π periodic. More generally, I(φ) is aperiodic except for fine-tuned choices of the θ j . The phase-biased system is not necessarily the most experimentally accessible, as usually phase would be tuned by a magnetic field, whose presence would break the time reversal symmetry of the junction. A more physically relevant setup is for the junction to be voltage-biased, so that the DC Josephson equation implies a constant phase sweep speed φ = 2eV / = ω J . When the system undergoes a 4π periodic fractional Josephson effect, the power spectrum of the current exhibits a peak at ω = ±ω J /2. An aperiodic current-phase relation manifests as no peak in the power spectrum. If the only source of noise is local mixing, then the probability q ± of occupying junction eigenstates |I ± only changes after passing through a time reversal invariant point. If s k = 1p k is the probability of transitioning between junction eigenstates (i.e. p k is the probability of transitioning between instantaneous energy eigenstates) at the kth such point, and q ± (t k ) is the occupation probability of |I ± preceding that point, then Approximating s k = sin 2 (θ k /2) by its average value, s The matrix in Eq. ( Note that in the large k limit the system approaches the maximally mixed state at a rate ω J ln[1 -2s]/2π. The current is corresponding to correlator for t > t [59] for I 0 = e λ 2 e + λ2 e . Therefore, the power spectrum is As s → 0 (p → 1, r 1), the power spectrum has two peaks at ω = ±ω J /2, corresponding to a fractional Josephson effect. When s → 1 (p → 0, r 1), the power spectrum peaks at ω = 0, ω J , corresponding to the standard 2πperiodic Josephson effect. As s → 1/2 from either side, P (ω) flattens-signaling an aperiodic current-phase relation. where spin indices have been suppressed, h is a Zeeman term, α is the spin-orbit coupling, and ∆ is the superconduting gap. This Hamiltonian is symmetric under T = K time-reversalsymmetry where all tunneling amplitudes are real: Λ Jjk , λ jk ∈ R. Time reversal symmetry acts on the complex fermionic operators c Jj = e -iφ J /2 2 (γ Jaj + iγ Jbj ) as c Jj → s J (φ J )e iφ J c Jj . Thus, we once again see that φ = φ Rφ L = nπ are the time-reversal invariant points. Fixing φ L = 0 and φ R = φ, the transformation on the Majorana operators is with signs s L = 1, s R = (-1) n for φ = nπ. Projection to the low-energy subspace takes the same form as Eq. ( From here on, we drop the a/b labels and write the zero mode operators as γ Jj . Under T , Equation ( The model given in Eq. ( We investigate the effect of local mixing on a Josephson junction between two sets of m Majorana wires. Above we argued that m = 2 reproduces the aperiodic behavior of a TRITOPS junction. We now demonstrate that interactions restore 4π periodicity for m = 3, and 2π periodicity for m = 4. Such Josephson junctions offer a testbed for probing the Z 8 classification of Majorana nanowires theorized by Ref. We consider the low-energy Hamiltonian where j runs over each of the m wires and L and R signify the wires to the left and right of the junction. After one evolution γ Rj → -γ Rj . We can combine Majorana fermions into Dirac fermions as c j = γ Lj + iγ Rj . After one evolution the occupation of this bound state switches. Notice that for m wires we track 2 m bound states, which for free fermions all intersect at φ = π (where all energies are 0). • m = 1. The standard fractional Josephson is immune to local mixing, as the two bound states differ by local fermion parity. No local mixing terms are allowed that mix the states at φ = π. • m = 2. The model posited in previous Appendices still respects T 2 = +1 symmetry. The four states in question split into even and odd parity states. Unlike the m = 1 wire, however, fermion parity in the junction remains the same after a 2π evolution (as both bound states switch occupation) and so we can restrict ourselves to the even parity sector. The crossing at φ = π is protected by our symmetry, but that does not prevent local mixing. Interactions do not play an important role for m = 2. The only acceptable interaction at φ = π reads which only splits the even and odd parity sectors and does not affect the Josephson periodicity. We recover local mixing, implying (for certain parameter regimes) the loss of 4π periodicity. • m = 3. While it may seem that m = 3 wires will suffer from local mixing as well, interactions conspire to restore 4π periodicity (in much the same way that interactions stabilize an 8π-periodic fractional Josephson effect in the absence of local mixing for a junction of proximitized quantum spin Hall edges However, adding interactions will shift the different bands up or down. Instead of crossing at π, many crossings are now shifted away, and so symmetry-breaking perturbations may be added that open up avoided crossings. Not all crossings are avoided; recall that even parity states get mapped to odd parity states and vice versa. Crossings between these states are protected by fermion parity; we recover the 4π periodic Josephson effect. • m = 4. As predicted by Ref. completely removes any degeneracy at the crossing while respecting time reversal. The Josephson effect is 2π periodic.