Photodetectors based on nano-structured superconducting thin films are currently some of the most sensitive quantum sensors and are key enabling technologies in such broad areas as quantum information, quantum computation and radio-astronomy. However, their broader use is held back by the low operation temperatures which require expensive cryostats. Here, we demonstrate a nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sensor, which shows orders of magnitude improved performance characteristics of any superconducting detector operated above 77K, with a responsivity of 9.61•10 4 V/W, noise equivalent power of 15.9 fW/Hz -1/2 and operation speeds up to GHz frequencies. It is based on van der Waals heterostructures of the high temperature superconductor Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, which are shaped into nano-wires with ultra-small form factor. To highlight the versatility of the detector we demonstrate its fabrication and operation on a telecom grade SiN waveguide chip. Our detector significantly relaxes the demands of practical applications of superconducting detectors and displays its huge potential for photonics based quantum applications. Because of their high detection efficiencies, low dark count rates and small noise equivalent powers (NEP), photo-detectors based on thin film superconductors (SCs) are crucial components in the development of revolutionary quantum communication protocols, such as quantum key distribution and the Bell inequality test [1][2][3][4][5] . Such outstanding performance is made possible by engineering superconducting nanostructures with ultra-low heat capacity, which use the steep SC transition edge to induce large resistance jumps by the heat generated from absorbed photons 1,2,6 . However, a broader use of SC detectors is held back by the low operation temperatures, which require expensive cryostats, and the highly disordered growth methods, which set an upper limit to the SC film thickness and impose strict restrictions to the employed SC materials and substrates. A breakthrough in this field would lie in the creation of ever thinner materials with ever higher superconducting transition temperatures (Tc), which would ultimately reach values beyond the boiling point of liquid nitrogen T > 77K. On this path, cuprate high temperature superconductors (high-Tc), with their recordhigh Tc > 100K Here we demonstrate a telecom wavelength high-Tc superconducting transition edge sensor (TES) that can be operated above liquid nitrogen temperatures, with record responsivity and operation speeds, which are comparable to state-of-the-art commercial detectors, such as InGaAs photodiodes The devices are prepared in inert argon atmosphere to avoid instantaneous oxidation of the BSCCO surface in air (SI Fig. We probe the photo response of the Ibias ~ 0.1mA biased device with a telecom laser with wavelength λ = 1550nm. Fig. We highlight the strong dependence of Vphoto on the superconducting transition edge, which shows a pronounced maximum at Ic. Fig. Our study presents a breakthrough in the development of high-performance superconducting detectors and paves the way towards cheap, liquid nitrogen cooled quantum sensors. The presented unoptimized detector concept already shows record high performance characteristics, but it is feasible to push it to the ultimate limit of half a unit cell thickness. Alongside with the creation of more homogeneous nano-wire edges, this advancement will allow ever sharper SC transitions, and lead to the creation of liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPD) -a long standing goal in the field. The ease of integration into photonic circuits, will make such detectors a promising building block for the development of photonic quantum circuits. For comparison the gray columns depict the performance of selected previous thermal detectors made from high-Tc materials, including micro-bridges Materials and fabrication. The hBN/BSCCO devices are assembled from micro-mechanically exfoliated crystals using a van der Waals assembly technique. BSCCO and flakes are exfoliated onto a PDMS film on a glass substrate. We transfer the BSCCO onto pre-patterned Ti/Au electrodes on the SiN/SiO2 chip to make electrical contact. We subsequently cover the BSCCO flake with a suitable hBN crystal in order to avoid device degradation. The whole device fabrication is performed inside a glovebox under inert argon atmosphere. For the fabrication of nano-wires, we locally irradiate the device with a 30keV helium-ion beam in a Zeiss Orion NanoFab. For patterning the structures we irradiate the BSCCO/hBN structure with ion doses between 10 and 100 pC/m 2 following the dose testing procedure as specified in supporting information note 3. Transport and photovoltage experiments. The measurements of temperature-and bias dependent resistivity are carried out in an AttoDry closed-cycle cryostat. Standard low-frequency lock-in techniques (Stanford Research Systems 860) and DC biasing (Yokogawa GS200 and Keithley 2400 SourceMeter) were used to measure the resistance and to bias the device. For the photovoltage experiments, a fixed frequency 1550nm laser was used to locally excite the device with a spatial resolution of ~2m. Scanning mirrors and xyz-Piezo scanners were used to position the device and to scan the laser-spot across the device. The laser was modulated with an optical chopper and the photovoltage was measured with a lock-in detection on the chopper frequency. The incident laser power was adjusted using a variable optical attenuator (JGR OA5 l). A fixed-frequency laser at 1550nm (193THz) and a tunable laser with 1528nm-1566nm (193THz+f) (ThorLabs C-band) are modulated at different chopping frequencies with a twinslot chopper wheel (supporting information 8). The beams overlap in a beam splitter, which creates a sinusoidal optical beating at the difference frequency f. The sinusoidal detector response is detected with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems 860) as a function of the difference frequency f while demodulating at the difference frequency of the chopping frequencies. Supporting Information: A liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sensor with ultra-high responsivity and GHz operation speeds Paul Seifert 1 † , José Ramón Durán Retamal 1 † , Rafael Luque Merino , Hanan Herzig Sheinfux 1 , John N. Moore 1 , Mohammed Ali Aamir 1 , Takashi Taniguchi 2 , Kenji Wantanabe 3 , Kazuo Kadowaki 4 , Massimo Artiglia 5 , Marco Romagnoli 5 and Dmitri K. Efetov c, In order to avoid degradation of the BSCCO, the flake is fully encapsulated with a thin crystal of h-BN, using the same process as for the BSCCO in (b). All exfoliation and van der Waals assembly steps are performed under inert Argon atmosphere inside a glovebox. d, A nanowire channel is patterned into the BSCCO on top of the SiN waveguide using focused helium ion beam irradiation. In order to make a reliable electrical contact to the superconducting layers in BSCCO one has to achieve a conducting path through the insulating BiO layer. This has been achieved in the past e.g. via in-situ selective ion etching through the top layer before metal evaporation 2 or via cold welding with diffusive metals e.g. indium Dose testing for Helium ion nanofabrication: In order to obtain the optimum helium ion dose for patterning nano-structures into BSCCO without a physical milling we utilize the following procedure: We irradiate an array of triangular shapes as indicated in Figure Figure For the patterning of the BSCCO nano-wires, we try to account for the indirect irradiation damage and choose a width that leaves us with a channel of pristine BSCCO without radiation damage in the center, e.g. by choosing a channel width of 300nm to obtain a nominal ~100 nm wide channel of pristine BSCCO. We will later show, that this strategy works for short channels on the order of ~1m, whereas the statistical occurrence of disorder/defects/bubbles imposes additional limitations on long nanowires. We note, that in future experiments, the damage from backscattered ions as well as the topography change can be addressed by the use of free-standing devices. Simulation of helium ion interaction: Figure In previous work, the chemical instability of BSCCO, attributed to surface degradation and oxygen outdiffusion in ambient conditions and during thermocycling, was considered a bottleneck for the applicability of thin nanoscale high-Tc compounds in applications 