Semiconductor core-shell nanowires based on the GaAs substrate are building blocks of many photonic, photovoltaic and electronic devices, thanks to the associated direct band-gap and the highly tunable optoelectronic properties. The selection of a suitable material system is crucial for custom designed nanowires tailored for optimised device performance. The bismuth containing GaAs materials are an imminent class of semiconductors which not only enable an exquisite control over the alloy strain and electronic structure but also offer the possibility to suppress internal loss mechanisms in photonic devices. Whilst the experimental efforts to incorporate GaBixAs1-x alloys in the nanowire active region are still in primitive stage, the theoretical understanding of the optoelectronic properties of such nanowires is only rudimentary. This work elucidates and quantifies the role of nanowire physical attributes such as its geometry parameters and bismuth incorporation in designing light absorption wavelength and polarisation response. Based on multi-million atom tight-binding simulations of the GaBixAs1-x/GaAs core-shell and GaAs/GaBixAs1-x/GaAs multi-shell nanowires, our results predict a large tuning of the absorption wavelength, ranging from 0.9 μm to 1.6 μm, which can be controlled by engineering either Bi composition or nanowire diameter. The analysis of the strain profiles indicates a tensile character leading to significant light-hole mixing in the valence band states. This offers a possibility to achieve polarisation-insensitive light interaction, which is desirable for several photonic devices involving amplification and modulation of light. Furthermore, at low Bi compositions, the carrier confinement is quasi type-II, which further broadens the suitability of these nanowires for myriad applications demanding large carrier separations. The presented results provide a systematic and comprehensive understanding of the GaBixAs1-x nanowire properties and highlight new possibilities for future technologies in photonics, quantum optics and solar energy harvesting. Semiconductor nanowires are versatile nanostructures which provide access to a unique set of electronic and optical characteristics suitable for many photonic applications. For nanowire growth and design, a large number of material systems have been investigated in the literature including III-Vs (such as GaAs, GaNAs, InGaP, GaPAs), The nanowires formed by the conventional GaAs alloy materials such as InGaAs, InGaP, and AlGaAs have been around for many years and their optoelectronic properties are well studied in the literature. The interest in the GaBixAs1-x nanowires is at its primitive stage and the first few experimental studies have been reported in the literature during the last three to four years. This work is based on the state-of-the-art atomistic tightbinding simulations, which have been carried out on 4 to 8 million atoms to understand the optoelectronic properties of GaBixAs1-x nanowires with realistic geometry parameters. The accuracy of the tight-binding model was verified against the available experimental data sets in a number published studies including on band-gap variation of the GaBixAs1-x bulk material as a function of Bi composition with The reported results have uncovered novel properties of the GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires which further motivates interest in this material system and highlight opportunities for a wide range of applications. We show that the inter-band absorption wavelength is highly sensitive to the nanowire diameter and Bi fraction of the shell region, and can be tuned from 0.9 μm to 1.6 μm. This provides a two-way knob to control light absorption/emission energies. Another interesting property of the GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires reported in this work is the transition from quasi type-II carrier confinement to type-I carrier confinement, which occurs at low Bi fractions (≈3%). This property is useful for designing a variety of devices where large carrier separation or strong light absorption is the parameter of interest. Finally, our results demonstrate that the GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires provide a strong light-hole absorption, which couples to TM polarisation mode. This is in contrast to usual III-V nanostructures where typically TE mode absorption is dominant. We also show the possibility of isotropic light polarisation at 1.55 μm wavelength which is important for many optical devices such as semiconductor optical amplifiers and modulators. Overall, our results indicate that GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires can be custom designed to target desired properties and hence are expected to find myriad applications in nanophotonic and nanoelectronic technologies. In this work, we have investigated two types of core-shell nanowires as shown by the schematic diagrams in Figure In experimental studies, often multi-shell nanowires, also known as quantum well nanowires, are investigated where the nanowires are made up of two or more shell regions. In such nanowires, for example the outer shell and core regions can be made up of the same material composition whereas the inner shell designed with an alloy forming the active region of the nanowire for charge carrier confinements and/or transport. In this work, we also investigate the effect of GaAs outer shell forming GaAs/GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires as shown in Figure Figure We want to conclude this section by summarising that a large tunable band-gap energy (optical transition wavelength) is accessible from the investiagted GaBixAs1-x/GaAs and GaAs/GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires, which can be controlled by engineering geometry parameters (i.e. nanowire diameters and/or Bi fractions). Importantly, we find that for Bi fractions around 15%, the optical transition wavelength is in the spectral range of interest for telecommunication devices (1550 nm) which will be desirable for a variety of photonic devices. In order to understand the band-gap energy shifts discussed in the previous section, it is imperative to analyse strain profiles which directly affect the electron and hole energies and wave functions. Generally, the strain character at the interface of a small and large lattice constant materials is such that the larger lattice constant material is heavily compressed whereas the smaller lattice constant material is stretched. This results in compressive (negative) H and B within the larger lattice constant material and tensile (positive) H and B inside the smaller lattice constant material. This has been reported in many previous studies on quantum wells and quantum dots, for example GaAs/InAs quantum dots The impact of strain on the nanowire electronic structure is schematically shown in Figure Another important effect of strain is related to light polarisation. Inside the GaBixAs1-x shell region where the carriers are confined, we compute that the presence of the tensile biaxial strain will enhance the mixing of LH character in the topmost valence band states. This is similar to large stacks of the quantum dots, where a very strong interdot coupling leads to a tensile strain which increases LH contribution of valence band states. In what follows, we investigate the impact of the GaAs outer shell by plotting H and B strain profiles for GaAs/GaBixAs1-x/GaAs nanowires in Figures The inter-band optical absorption strength depends on the spatial profiles of the confined electron and hole charge carriers in the nanowire region. Figure In comparison to the electron wave functions, the hole wave functions are impacted by both strain and alloy composition (pairs and clusters of Bi atoms). The polarisation sensitivity of the inter-band optical transitions is an important parameter of interest for many photonic devices. In the past studies, this parameter has been investigated for many nanostructures, including quantum dots, Generally, for a lattice mismatched nanostructure where a large lattice constant material such as InAs is surrounded by a small lattice constant material such as GaAs, the strong compressive biaxial strain leads to high sensitivity of the light absorption towards TE mode polarisation, Figure In summary, this work has investigated the optoelectronic properties of GaBixAs1-x/GaAs and GaAs/GaBixAs1-x/GaAs core-shell nanowires by carrying out a systematic set of multi-million atom tight-binding calculations. The results show a highly tunable band-gap energy which can be engineered by either controlling the nanowire diameter or by adjusting the Bi composition in the shell region. Due to highly mismatched lattice parameters of GaAs and GaBixAs1-x materials, the strain is expected to have an impact comparable to quantum confinement, provided the interface remains relatively defect free and coherent. Remarkably, the detailed analysis of the internal strain profiles reveals a peculiar character which is found to profoundly impact the charge carrier confinements and sensitivity to light polarisation. The controllability of strain magnitude by Bi fractions and nanowire diameters allows modification of carrier confinements from a quasi type II to highly confined type I character, which broadens the scope of the investigated nanowires for myriad applications involving large carrier separations or strong inter-band optical transition strengths. A polarisation-dependent optical spectrum is computed which exhibits high TM mode coupling due to highly tensile strain character inside the GaBixAs1-x shell region. We also report the possibility of realising isotropic polarisation response at 1550 nm wavelength, which is highly desirable for many photonics devices such as optical amplifiers. Overall, our analysis uncovers important physical factors which impact the optoelectronic character of core-shell nanowires for investigated constituent materials and geometries, which can aid in the advancement of ongoing experimental efforts to incorporate GaBixAs1-x materials in the active region of nanowires. The idea of including GaBixAs1-x material in nanowires is relatively new, with the first experimental study published only recently. The electronic structure atomistic simulations performed in this work are based on a well-benchmarked tight-binding model, where H is the single particle tight binding Hamiltonian in the sp 3 s * basis, Ei and Hi are the electron and hole energy states respectively, and -→ n is a vector along the polarization direction. The polarization dependent polar plots are computed by rotating the polarization vector -→ n = ( -→ x + -→ y ) cos φ sin θ + -→ z cos θ to the appropriate direction in the polar coordinates: φ = 135 o and θ is varied from 0 to 360 o .