Light interference in strongly disordered photonic media can generate lasers where random modes are amplified in unpredictable way. The ease of fabrication, along with their low coherence caused by multiple small-linewidth peaks, made random lasers (RL) emerging, efficient, speckle-free light sources and a means to achieve spectral super-resolution. With potential to become a mature and accessible technology, their complex system's nature furnishes endless opportunities to unveil fundamental physics, since they can act as elements of optical network architectures. To date no experimental studies have analyzed the optical interaction between independent resonators in networks of RLs. Realizing RLs with a pumped strip joining two rough mirrors, we experimentally investigate and numerically simulate the emergence of networks when, by sharing scattering centers, RLs become coupled. We prove that the emission of a single RL can be manipulated by the action of others in the network, giving rise to substantial peak rearrangements and energy redistribution, fingerprint of mode coupling. Our findings, involving a few coupled RLs, firmly set the basis for the study of full-grown photonic networks. Oddly, both their deep understanding and their deployment as hardware clearly point in the direction of a novel disruptive technology: artificial intelligence on photonic random neural networks. Artificial intelligence, the kind of activity certain machines do to react to and thrive in their environment, is very often embodied by machine learning where computing machines run algorithms that improve through experience Artificial neural networks can be realized as dedicated implementations where the computing process is performed by the collective interactions between the physical elements of the network. Among many optical implementations However, hardware based on lasers almost solely contemplates Fabry-Perot types of lasers, where the emission spectrum comprises a single emission line At variance with conventional lasers, RLs do not require the engineering of a high-quality cavity, since they are based on disordered media in which the feedback necessary to trigger the laser amplification is provided by strong elastic light scattering The most widespread RL implementation is based on distributed feedback, where the scattering centers are randomly placed inside the optically active medium. We previously introduced an alternative configuration in which amplification and feedback are separated and performed by a narrow strip pumped region and two rough mirrors respectively. The later provide feedback in a way similar to a Fabry-Perot cavity but by virtue of the disorder embedded in the mirrors, the emission exhibits RL behavior Coupling between modes has been studied in a single RL Numerical calculations based on coupled mode theory were carried out and predictions on the spectral redistribution induced by the interacting RL network were found in agreement with the observed synchronization behaviors. Finally, since a single network node can be used as scattering and coupling element between many resonators, more complex network architectures can be envisioned as "join-the-dots" graphs in order to extend the proposed approach to simulate neural networks even with the ability to use any node as output. For the sake of simplicity, before extending the study to more complex geometries, we demonstrate the functionality by focusing on the basic building block of a network: two equivalent RLs connected through a node, consisting of a scattering center that furnishes feedback for both random resonators to lase. In this configuration, we prove that one RL emission can be affected by the action of the second RL with which it has a scattering center in common. Then we realized different network archetypes involving more than two mutually linked RLs with increasing complexity and proved that every investigated arrangement can sustain RL interactions. At variance with ordinary cavity lasers, RLs exhibit a multitude of modes engaged in a complex interaction of gain and loss, virtually impossible to foresee for the intrinsic difficulty in obtaining useful prior knowledge of the actual cavity and by the complex nature of the mode competition. The typical single RL we used, representing the buildingblock of RL networks, is composed of two distant (≈ 2 mm) scattering centers acting as rough mirrors and connected by a laser pumped stripe Each scattering center consists of a single (Fig. The scattering centers act as disordered mirrors and, at the same time, as out-of-plane couplers, which allow to probe the lasing modes by recording the scattered emission orthogonally to the sample surface (see Methods). It is worth mentioning that random modes in this kind of RL emerge as stable sharp random spectral peaks and the same resonances are recorded in both ends (see Fig. When considering RL networks, one must establish a protocol to determine the existence of coupling on the basis of the spectra acquired from each or the compound RL. Two different RLs provide spectra that can be taken as standard for independence (fully uncorrelated) whereas two spectra taken successively from a single RL (only subject to stochastic fluctuations) can be used as standard for strong dependence and similarity, since high correlation is assured. We started by addressing the simplest case consisting of two RLs having one scattering node in common. In this configuration, two resonators activated one at a time show distinct, uncorrelated spectra that we take as benchmark of spectral independence. When both RLs are pumped simultaneously, if they do interact (coupling through the common disordered mirror) the emerging spectral features must depend on the lasing state of both resonators. Several circumstances can be expected to occur such as frequencies common to both uncoupled resonators not belonging to the compound one, modes from some resonator becoming available to the compound one, modes not lasing in any resonator showing as a consequence of the coupling and, generally, changes in mode gain. This provides an alternative method to detect coupling between resonators: searching for dissimilarity between the spectrum of one when pumped alone and when in conjunction with the other. The fingerprint of an effective interaction would thus be a spectral modification, i.e. peak wavelength-shifts and/or an intensity redistribution, that may be detected at every network node. Therefore, the modus operandi we followed to test mode coupling occurrence was acquiring spectra of each single RL and compared them to the spectrum emerging from the simultaneous activation of both RLs in the network. To set a standard for uncoupled RLs we first studied the device reported in the inset of Fig. In order to visually highlight the low correlation and spectral difference between the two RLs, in Fig. An additional measure to assess the degree of similarity between spectra, can be provided by the surface area (S) enclosed by the lines that connect the parametric plot data. The surface area measure increases with shifted, overlapping peaks but, at variance with Pearson's correlation it attains very small values both for high correlation (e.g. between nearly proportional spectra, see Fig. When two resonators do couple, this interaction must appear as a difference between the sum of their independent spectra and the compound spectrum obtained with simultaneous pumping. We used the dissimilarity between these spectra as a smoking gun of coupling. When both RLs are simultaneously active, the compound spectrum (1&2), reported in Fig. Investigation of 20 network devices with the same design revealed that the spectral rearrangement occurs with large variations, as depicted in Fig. strength, which depends on the specific features of the resonators and on spectral and spatial overlap of RL modes, that cannot be engineered a priori. The analysis presented in this work aims to prove that individual RLs composing a network can exhibit mode coupling between them. Apart from investigating the sum vs compound spectral similarity at the common node, another experimental approach worth studying to prove mode coupling is evaluating how one RL emission from nodes that are not shared is influenced by the network interaction. Moreover, to prove the universality of the coupling occurrence, we varied the geometry of the scattering centers by fabricating networks with three nodes, positioned at the corners of an equilateral triangle, each consisting of four holes arranged in a square pattern, as reported in the inset of Fig. In order to close down the definition of end-coupled RL network we study the impact of a strip with only one disordered mirror (not a resonator) as line 3 in Fig. A ring RL network, still simple yet more complex than the one investigated in Fig. The analysis based on the conjunction of the Pearson's correlation and the enclosed area allowed to quantify the coupling in a network of RLs, since the interaction induces a spectral redistribution of the amplified modes. With respect to other method that evaluate the similarity between different spectra, such as the autocorrelation function In order to substantiate the experimental findings we simulated the RLs network in the framework of time coupled mode theory where a k (t) is the complex amplitude of the k-th mode as a function of time, ω k the frequency, α k the losses, c j,k ∝ |ω k -ω j | the coupling coefficient with all other j-th modes that fade with detuning, g(t, ω k ) the time dependent mode gain (pump pulse) and γ k the gain saturation coefficient. Eq. ( In modelling the case of two coupled RLs, Eq. ( We realized multiple RLs in a planar morphology by inscribing scattering centers in a film of gain material made of dye-doped biopolymer and selectively pumping the strip joining them. RL resonators can be realized by using ablated holes in the active medium that act as rough mirrors by back scattering radiation into the pumped stripe and facilitating amplification. At the same time these scattering centers forward scatter so that they establish the coupling with any resonators sharing the center. Additionally, out of plane scattering helps monitor their lasing action by spectroscopic means. By designing networks in which RLs (each consisting of a strip between two rough mirrors) share mirrors, we proved that it is possible to induce an effective coupling between them. Spatially resolved probing and spectral correlation analysis allowed to detect their synchronous ensemble interaction. Tests of different configurations consistently show the network coupling effects when RL resonators are fully formed (pumped strip and two end rough mirrors) and the linking includes them in the network (at least one of the mirrors is shared). Our findings are supported by coupled mode theory calculations that predicted the observed spectral correlations. The modelling, based on time coupled mode theory, gives a full qualitative account of the behavior despite dispensing with the full details of the actual cavities. The presented architecture has a small footprint, low fabrication complexity and cost, making it a good candidate to study highly nonlinear interactions in networks. Spatially modulated pumping, where different RLs in the network can be selectively pumped (digital) or different pulse power sent to each of them (analog), enables a versatile random neural network platform. We believe that the ample potential for large connectivity and dynamic character of the pulsed action offered by this platform will trigger the study of more complex networks based on RLs aiming to realize photonic neural network architectures. Spec-tral synthesis achieved by training the network to produce desired peaks; reservoir computing configuration, to save testing large numbers of weights in training or spiked implementation, where the pulsed character of the RLs is exploited, are potential direct applications of this kind of platforms. Finally, this can be an initial step in developing statistical methods based on machine learning in order to address and evaluate the RL interaction even in more complex network geometries. The dye-doped biopolymer films were produced by introducing 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(4-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM) molecules, with a 0.35% mass concentration in a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-cetyltrimethyl ammonium (CTMA) polymer matrix. The cationic surfactant CTMA (Sigma-Aldrich 292737) was used to make the DNA (Sigma-Aldrich D1626) soluble in organic solvents and then easily mixable with the DCM dye-molecules solution. The DNA-CTMA complex is dissolved (4 vol.%) in ethanol and mixed with the DCM solution (0.5 vol.% in equal parts of ethanol and chloroform). The resulting blend was magnetically stirred for 5 hours. Then it was spread by dropcasting onto a glass substrate, and solid films with a thickness of about 20 μm were obtained after drying the sample at room temperature and pressure. The scattering centers that serve as disordered mirrors and provide feedback for RL were fabricated by using a direct laserwriting technique. The polymer was locally ablated by means of a short-pulsed (100 fs), high-energy (~250 J/pulse) Ti:Sapphire laser emitting at 800 nm peak wavelength. The laser power, the number of shots delivered and the focusing position were controlled by using a half-wave plate in conjunction with a linear polarizer, a software controlling the laser output and motorized translational stages, respectively. A single laser shot focused by a lens of 5 cm focal length drilled a hole in the polymer matrix. In order to create a reproducible hole size, we overcame the shot-to-shot laser power fluctuations by lowering power and increasing the number of pulses (50 single shots) delivered to obtain each hole. This assures that, in the energy range between 200-300 J/pulse, the local ablation removed completely the polymer and reached the underlying glass substrate, thus leaving a cylindrical-like air-defect in the polymer matrix. By varying the laser fluence we achieved reproducible holes with diameter size in the range 30-150 μm. The excitation setup involves a 10 ns pulsed, frequency doubled 532 nm Nd:YAG laser with a 10 Hz repetition rate, whose beam was shaped by an amplitude spatial light modulator working in reflection. By means of this scheme we imaged on the sample surface the intensity distribution required to produce the desired optical pumping geometry. We drew a set of stripes of same length and width (50-100 μm) connecting scattering centers, as reported in Fig. The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. The MATLAB codes developed to execute the calculations presented in this paper are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Then, by acquiring spectra as a function of the exciting laser energy, the RL threshold can be estimated. In Fig. In fact, the investigated devices are too long (L=2 mm, resulting in a free spectral range Δλ = λ 2 2nL = 0.07 nm) to sustain longitudinal modes with a spectral separation larger than the available resolution For every couple of spectra, we constructed the so called "parametric plot" by reporting the intensity of the first spectrum as a function of the intensity of the second one, for each acquired wavelength. The line that connects the scatter points are drawn following the wavelength order. It visually highlights the correlation between the two spectra considered. In order to estimate the degree of similarity between spectra we evaluated the linear coefficient of correlation (Pearson coefficient, P, that is proportional to the variance of the angular distribution of the parametric plot data), and, in addition, the area (S) that lies in between the parametric plot lines. To calculate this parameter, each parametric plot was converted in a figure and the percentage of internal area was then counted by image processing. The conjunction of the two parameters P and S allowed us to estimate a degree of similarity exploited in finding RLs interaction in a network. In the case of almost identical spectra, the parametric plot presents a distribution of points squeezed to the diagonal, resulting in P~1 and S~0, see Fig. To answer these questions, we calculated P and S for spectra consisting of a given number of Lorentzian peaks with the addition of a certain level of noise. The analysis of the corresponding parametric plots allowed us to benchmark the proposed correlation parameters on test-bed cases. For instance, in Fig. Further notable examples of parametric plot calculations for spectra involving a larger number of Lorentzian peaks are reported in Fig. In this section we discuss further data concerning RL networks presented in the main manuscript, but also samples with different scattering centers in order to corroborate our findings. When investigating a network of two RLs, due to the output coupler difference, we chose a given scattering center position and then we acquired the spectra by pumping alternatively the first RL device, the second one and finally both of them at the same time, while keeping the detecting optical fiber in the same position. In Fig. 