We have performed magnetotransport measurements in CeTe 3 thin films down to 0.2 K. It is known that CeTe 3 has two magnetic transitions at T N1 ≈ 3 K and T N2 ≈ 1 K. A clear Shubnikov-de-Haas (SdH) oscillation was observed at 4 K, demonstrating the strong two-dimensional nature in this material. Below T N2 , the SdH oscillation has two frequencies, indicating that the Fermi surface could be slightly modulated due to the second magnetic transition. We also observed a magnetic hysteresis in the SdH oscillation below T N1 . Especially, there is a unique spike in the magnetoresistance at B ≈ 0.6 T only when the magnetic field is swept from a high enough field (more than 2 T) to zero field. Researches on layered materials have attracted much attention over the last decade CeTe 3 is a layered material in the family of rare earth (R) tritellurides, i.e., RTe 3 . It is known as a heavy fermion system with a localized 4f 1 orbital at the Ce 3+ site. Its crystal structure consists of a NaCl-type CeTe layer which is responsible for its magnetic properties, separated by two Te sheets which are responsible for the highly two-dimensional (2D) electric transport In the present work, we have performed magnetotransport measurements with 30-40 nm thick CeTe 3 devices. We have observed the coexisitance of quantum oscillation with unique magnetotransport phenomena. Specifically, a clear Shubnikov-de-Haas (SdH) oscillation was observed in the magnetic field B range from 3 to 8 T even above T N1 , demonstrating the existence of a small Fermi surface pocket. Since such a SdH oscillation has never been reported in bulk CeTe 3 , the result reveals its strong 2D nature which is possibly enhanced by the thin film fabrication. Furthermore, the SdH oscillation has two frequencies below T N2 . This could originate from the modification of the Fermi surface due to the second magnetic transition at T N2 . We also observed a magnetic hysteresis in the SdH oscillation below T N1 . In particular, a sharp resistance peak appears at B ≈ 0.6 T only when the magnetic field is swept from a high enough magnetic field (more than 2 T) to zero field (see Fig. Single crystals of CeTe 3 were synthesized in an evacuated quartz tube. The tube was heated up to 900 • C and slowly cooled to 550 • C over a period of 7 days. To fabricate thin film devices from the bulk CeTe 3 , we used the mechanical exfoliation technique using scotch tapes Electrical transport measurements were performed by the conventional four-probe method using a lock-in amplifier. The device was cooled with a 3 He/ The resistivity ρ(T ) measured with the CeTe 3 thin film device in Fig. Hysteresis in magnetoresistance measured at T = 2 and 0.4 K. There is a clear hysteresis between the blue and red curves where the magnetic field is swept from 0 to 8 T and from 8 to 0 T, respectively. A clear jump in resistance was observed only for the red curve at B ≈ 0.6 T. Such a hysteresis was not observed at T = 4 K above TN1. 140, indicating that the device is a high quality single crystal CeTe 3 thin film. We next performed magnetoresistance measurements up to B = 8 T for the temperature range from 0.4 to 4 K, as shown in Fig. In order to extract the oscillatory part of the magnetoresistance, the derivative of ρ xx (B) with respect to 1/B was obtained numerically. Fast Fourier transform (FFT) was then performed in order to obtain the frequency f of the quantum oscillation. The results are presented in Fig. Although the angular dependence of the SdH oscillation has not been measured in the present study, it was already demonstrated in a similar tritelluride thin film device, i.e., GdTe 3 In a typical SdH oscillation, the FFT amplitude for a given frequency decreases with increasing temperature. However, FFT amplitudes of the main oscillation remained mostly constant, with the exception at T = 2 K. A similar result has been reported in GdTe 3 , where the FFT amplitude plateaus below its antiferromagnetic transition temperature, while showing a typical temperature dependence well above the transition temperature In addition to the SdH oscillations discussed above, we observed a magnetic hysteresis behavior, superimposed onto the SdH oscillations, below the first antiferromagnetic ordering temperature T N1 . This is highlighted in Fig. In conclusion, we have performed magnetotransport measurements of 30-40 nm thick CeTe 3 thin film devices. A clear SdH oscillation was observed from T = 4 K, indicating a highly two-dimentional character of the conduction electrons, possibly enhanced due to thin film fabrication. Below the second magnetic transition temperature T N2 = 1.3 K, on the other hand, SdH oscillations with two different frequencies were obtained. The FFT analysis revealed the existence of two small Fermi pockets whose sizes are 3.09 × 10 13 cm -2 and 1.05 × 10 13 cm -2 . In addition, a magnetic hysteresis superimposed to the SdH oscillation was detected below the first antiferromagnetic temperature T N1 = 2.7 K. Especially, a sharp peak at B ≈ 0.6 T was clearly observed when the magnetic field was swept from the high enough field to zero field. Materials where quantum oscillations and magnetic hysteresis coexist are extremely scarce. Along with the ease of thin film fabrication through mechanical exfoliation, further researches on CeTe 3 could pave the way for forbital spintronics and could provide an ideal stage for understanding the interplay between electronic quantum conduction and localized heavy fermion spins.