We study the role of electronegativity in sliding friction for five different two dimensional (2D) monolayer systems using density functional theory (DFT) with van der Waals (vdW) corrections. We show that the friction between the commensurate 2D layered systems depends strongly on the electronegativity difference of the involved atoms. All the 2D layered structures exhibit almost the same magnitude of friction force when sliding along the nonpolar path, independent of the material and the surface structures. In contrast, for sliding friction along the polar path, the friction force obeys a universal linear scaling law as a function of the electronegativity difference of its constituent atoms. Further analyses demonstrate that atomic dipoles in the 2D monolayers induced by the electronegativity difference enhance the corrugation of charge distribution and increase sliding barrier accordingly. Our studies reveal that electronegativity plays an important role in friction of low dimensional systems, and will provide a strategy for designing nanoscale devices further. Understanding the origin of atom-scale friction processes and controlling them for designing nanotechnological devices pose a major challenge to physicists and nanotribologists alike due to the complex energy dissipation mechanisms and intricate interfacial interaction Friction is ultimately governed by the atomistic interactions dominated by quantum mechanics Electronegativity plays a significant role in the electronic structure, and electronegativity difference among constituent atoms has an important influence on the physical and chemical properties of materials Ab initio molecular dynamics calculation showed that the coefficient of friction (COF) of liquid water sliding on h-BN is about three times larger than that of on graphene, which was ascribed to the greater corrugation of the energy landscape of h-BN arising from specific electronic structure effect In this research work, we systematically investigate the role of electronegativity on friction in 2D layered systems. We show that when two monolayers slide relative to each another, the atom electronegativity difference along the sliding path strongly influence the interfacial friction properties. We show that the friction scales linearly with electronegativity difference in the polar sliding path. Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) code based on the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method was employed in the calculations Based on the Prandtl-Tomlinson model and its extensions, several researchers have developed methods to compute friction using DFT calculations. In these methods, typical friction parameters, such as shear force, COF and potential energy surface (PES), can be obtained by calculating the energy barrier or sliding energy corrugation along the sliding path In order to study the influence of polarity on friction, we first discuss the polarity character in the sliding path. Fig . The atoms A, B form the upper layers, and C, D form the bottom layers arrange alternatively along the sliding direction. The total polarity of the sliding system along the sliding direction is then the sum of the polarity of each single layer in that direction, which is decided by the electronegativity differences between A and B atoms, and C and D atoms. Here, bilayer h-BN is chosen as an example to illustrate the polarity differences in different paths, as shown in Fig. We next investigated the friction between polar and nonpolar sheets by using the isoelectronic interface of graphene on h-BN (graphene/h-BN). The computational model was simplified by enlarging the lattice constant of graphene to be equal to that of h-BN so that the influence of incommensuration and Moiré patterns on friction can be cancelled. It should be noticed that although the upper layer is nonpolar, path II is still polar due to dipoles that exist in the bottom layer along the sliding path (Fig. Based on the graphene/h-BN system, we further consider the friction modulation through tuning polarity of graphene. For this purpose, we induced polarity into graphene lattice by single side half hydrogenation (H-graphene). The covalent C-C bond in graphene turns into a partially ionic bond in the single side half hydrogenated graphene (H-graphene), with the charge transfer of 0.35 e (0.21 e for Bader analysis). The COF between H-graphene and h-BN (H-graphene/h-BN) was calculated and is shown in Fig. The calculations provide new insight for understanding and tuning friction by surface modification of monolayers. The variation of the interaction energy as a function of the relative lateral position of the two surfaces in contact can be represented by PES, which is relevant for the friction in the case when no external load is applied On the contrary, the h-BN system exhibits larger friction force along path II than that of path I. These results further demonstrate the anisotropic friction behavior of the h-BN system, which corroborate results of COF in Fig. To understand the origin of the anisotropic friction behavior of the h-BN polar system, we calculated the charge density difference of h-BN system by the formula ρ and N ρ are the charge densities of h-BN, free B and N atoms, respectively. Fig. shows that charge accumulates around N atoms from neighbor B atoms. The Mulliken population analysis estimates the transferred charge to be 0.84 e (2.18 e for Bader analysis). We further calculated the interlayer charge density difference of the stable bilayer h-BN. From the Fig. we can see that when two sheets of h-BN approach each other, the intralayer charge transfer from B to N atoms is further enhanced. However, this effect is noticeably different in the two paths as seen in cross-sectional views of the charge density difference. Along the nonpolar path I, the net positive charge on the upper layer and the negative charge in the bottom layer separately distribute along the sliding direction, which corresponds to a small charge corrugation and smooth sliding barrier. However, along the polar path II (Fig. To better understand the different COF along the polar direction II, we further extracted the functional relation between charge transfers and friction, as shown in Fig. Using the DFT including dispersion correction, the role of electronegativity in interfacial friction has been investigated. Five systems with different polarities (Graphene/Graphene, Graphene/h-BN, h-BN/h-BN, H-Graphite/h-BN and MoS 2 /MoS 2 ) were chosen in the study. Our results show that all of the systems exhibit almost same friction along nonpolar sliding path I, which is consistent with the similar values of vdW interactions. In contrast, the interfacial friction force along polar path obeys a linear scaling law with the electronegativity difference among its constituent atoms. This linear scaling relationship between friction and electronegativity difference can be extended to other low-dimensional materials such as multiwall nanotubes and nanosheets, which have important applications in nanotechnology. The results of this paper provide new ideas for the design of nanoscale devices. For example, one can provide specific sliding channels through the design of polar or nonpolar paths in low-dimensional materials. Therefore, the research has important scientific significance and application value. 