The performance of ultra-wide band gap materials like β-Ga2O3 is critically dependent on achieving high average electric fields within the active region of the device. In this report, we show that high-k gate dielectrics like BaTiO3 can provide an efficient field management strategy by improving the uniformity of electric field profile in the gate-drain region of lateral field effect transistors. Using this strategy, we were able to achieve high average breakdown fields of 1.5 MV/cm and 4 MV/cm at gate-drain spacing (L gd ) of 6 μm and 0.6 μm respectively in β-Ga2O3, at a high channel sheet charge density of 1.8 × 10 13 cm -2 . The high sheet charge density together with high breakdown field enabled a record power figure of merit (V br 2 /R on ) of 376 MW/cm 2 at a gate-drain spacing of 3 μm. Low loss power switching devices were mostly based on Si until the introduction of wide band gap semiconductors like SiC (3.2 eV, Fbr=2.5 MV/cm) and GaN (3.4 eV, Fbr=3 MV/cm). The much larger breakdown field strength in these semiconductors offered the possibility of shrinking the active drift region thickness for the same breakdown voltage resulting in much lower on resistance (R on ). This improvement in the performance of power switching devices on breakdown field is well described by the power figure of merit 1 (BFOM-εμF br 3 ), where ε, μ and F br represent dielectric permittivity, carrier mobility and breakdown field strength respectively. With a theoretical breakdown field strength (8 MV/cm) 2,3 much higher than GaN and SiC, β-Ga2O3 offers a new material platform for improving the performance metrics of such devices. In addition to the large breakdown field strength, the availability of bulk substrates grown from melt 4-7 makes β-Ga2O3 highly attractive since this allows high quality epitaxial growth with low defect density. High quality epilayers have already been demonstrated using a variety of growth techniques like molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) showing the quality of β-Ga2O3 epilayers that can be achieved High voltage β-Ga2O3 devices with excellent performance have already been demonstrated both in the vertical and lateral geometry The low room temperature mobility is another significant issue hampering the performance of β-Ga2O3 based devices (2) Where V BR is the breakdown voltage, L gd is the gate-drain spacing, n s is the channel charge density and ε ch is the dielectric permittivity. Where E br is the breakdown field strength of β-Ga2O3. The power figure of merit discussed above (BFOM) is therefore given by Where V br 2 (n s ) represents the solution to (3) as a function of n s and μ is the channel mobility. In equation ( This section covers the investigation of the off-state gate-drain electric field profiles in the presence of high-k dielectrics. The effect of using a high-k gate dielectric has previously been studied using 2D device simulations by Xia et al Consider the lateral transistor structure shown in Figure showing the reverse trend. As n s is increased in the channel, the slope in the x electric field increases, increasing the peak electric field. Additionally, the peak value of y electric field also increases with increasing n s . Therefore, in addition to the dielectric constant of the high-k material, its thickness and the channel sheet charge density also have an effect on the electric field profile. The presence of these charges leads to the formation of polarization charges on both interfaces of the high-k dielectric. The negative line of charge induces a positive sheet of polarization charge (σ 1 (x)) at the A'-B' interface (Figure Where δ(x) is the Dirac delta function with peak at x = 0, and Therefore, the polarization charge density at the A'-B' interface is zero except at the gate corner. Therefore, the slope of the y electric field is a constant and can most generally be written as Since the high-k dielectric is assumed to be a linear, E y (C) and E y (D) are proportional to the polarization charge density at C and D respectively. and Therefore, the slope of y electric field in the high-k dielectric at any position x along the A-B interface is given by Since the high-k dielectric contains zero free charge, we can apply Laplace equation giving Since the tangential component of electric field stays the same across the dielectric interface where where δ x=0 is the Kronecker delta function given by The depletion length at any given reverse bias V dg can be calculated by satisfying Figure To demonstrate the field management strategy using high-k dielectrics we fabricated lateral metal insulator field effect transistors (MISFETs) on β-Ga2O3 with BaTiO3 as the high-k gate dielectric. Metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) carried out in an Agnitron Agilis R&D Oxide Growth System was used to grow the epilayer as shown in Figure Source and drain regions were defined using optical lithography followed by ion implantation of Si atoms (shallow donor) to form heavily doped (n ++ ) regions as shown in Figure Capacitance-voltage (C-V) and transfer length measurements (TLM) were performed to estimate the effect of sputtering the high-k gate dielectric at high temperature (670 °C) on the channel charge density, mobility and contact resistance by comparing these measurements pre and post deposition. Sputtering involves deposition using high energy atomic species and can cause significant damage to the semiconductor surface The TLM measurements performed pre deposition of the high-k dielectric showed a sheet resistance of 3.35 KΩ/sq and a contact resistance of 1.4 Ω.mm as shown in Figure Transistor characteristics including three terminal breakdown performance was measured to study the effect of high-k gate dielectric. The measured devices span a gate drain spacing from 0.5 um to 6 um. In conclusion, we have shown that high-k insulators like BaTiO3 can provide efficient field management in lateral field effect transistors when used as gate dielectrics. 2D device simulations and analytical modelling considering polarization charges formed at the dielectric interfaces were done to theoretically understand the effect of introducing the high-k gate dielectric. The field management strategy was further experimentally investigated by fabricating BaTiO3/β-Ga2O3 MISFETs with high channel charge density of 1.8 × 10 13 cm -2 . The fabricated devices showed excellent breakdown performance without any additional field termination structures like field plates, giving an average breakdown field of 1.5 MV/cm at L gd = 6 um and 4 MV/cm at L gd = 6 um. The high average breakdown fields coupled with the high channel charge density enabled a record power figure of merit of 376 MW/cm 2 at a gate-drain spacing of 3 um. The performance of these transistors in future may be further improved by integrating additional field termination structures like field plates along with high-k gate dielectrics. The ideas developed here are relevant not just for β-Ga2O3, but also provide a framework for designing the next generation of semiconductor devices in RF and power electronics where higher electric fields enable better efficiency, power density, and faster speed. The integration of high permittivity dielectrics based on perovskite oxides into conventional and wide bandgap semiconductors such as Si, GaAs, GaN and SiC could enable unprecedented performance improvements in RF and power electronics devices. This work was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-18-1-0479 (Program Manager: Ali Sayir. MOCVD growth: Prior to the growth, the substrates were rinsed using acetone, IPA and DI water followed by 5 min dip in 10% HF solution to remove possible Si contamination from the substrate growth surface. The epitaxial growth using MOCVD was performed at a substrate temperature of 880 °C using the precursors, trimethyl gallium (TEGa), trimethyl aluminium (TMAl) and oxygen for supplying Ga, Al and O adatoms respectively. Ar was used as the carrier gas for supplying the precursors into the growth chamber. Si doping was carried out using silane (SiH4) as the gas source balanced with Ar to achieve the required doping level. Further information on MOCVD growth of β-Ga2O3 and β-(AlxGa1-x)2O3 can be found in The Si ion implantation was done at ion energies ranging from 10 KeV to 115 KeV, so as to obtain a 100 nm box profile with Si ion concentration of 5×10 19 cm -3 as shown in Figure RF sputtering of BaTiO3: Sintered BaTiO3 (99.9 % purity) procured from Kurt J. Lesker was used as target for the deposition process with an applied RF power of 140 W. Ar and O2 were used to form the sputtering plasma with corresponding flow rates set to 20 sccm and 2 sccm respectively and the chamber pressure maintained at 10 mTorr resulting in a deposition rate of 0.5 nm/min. A substrate temperature of 670 °C was also used for the deposition. The thickness of the high-k dielectric layer was measured using ellipsometry (woolam alpha-SE spectroscopic ellipsometer) giving a thickness of 73 nm and a high frequency refractive index of 2.25. Dry etching: Dry etching for both the source-drain contacts and mesa isolation was carried out in a Plasma Therm The total charge density induced on the high-k interface can be calculated as which is independent of d. Therefore, in the limit of d → 0, (4) becomes where δ(x) is the dirac delta function with peak at x = 0. The constants k 1 and k 2 represent the efficacy of field management in the device, where values greater than one indicate a device without perfect field management, and k 1 = k 2 ~1 is a device with perfect field management. In general,