We report guiding and manipulation of charged particle beams by means of electrostatic optics based on a principle similar to the electrodynamic Paul trap. We use hundreds of electrodes fabricated on planar substrates and supplied with static voltages to create a ponderomotive potential for charged particles in motion. Shape and strength of the potential can be locally tailored by the electrodes' layout and the applied voltages, enabling the control of charged particle beams within precisely engineered effective potentials. We demonstrate guiding of electrons and ions for a large range of energies (from 20 to 5000 eV) and masses (5 ⋅ 10 -4 to 131 atomic mass units) as well as electron beam splitting as a proof-ofconcept for more complex beam manipulation. Simultaneous confinement of charged particles with different masses is possible, as well as guiding of electrons with energies in the keV regime, and the creation of highly customizable potential landscapes, which is all hard to impossible with conventional electrodynamic Paul traps. (a) When a beam of charged particles with velocity v z (green arrow) is injected into a structure consisting of electrostatic electrodes with spatially periodic voltages, the charged particle beam will be subjected to the equivalent transverse restoring force as charged particles in a linear electrodynamic trap with the same geometry but with unsegmented electrodes as shown in (b). This is because the spatially periodic electrostatic quadrupole field with period length L P leads to an alternating field with the periodicity T P = L P /v z in the rest frame of the moving particles (c). Like in a linear Paul trap, the charged particles experience a time-averaged harmonic pseudopotential, the ponderomotive potential, resulting in a restoring force towards the centerline. (d) The pseudopotential Ψ of both linear trap realizations shown in (a) and (b) can be made identical. R represents the electrodes' minimal distance from the guide's center. The invention of radio frequency ion traps -Paul traps -70 years ago set the foundation for precision mass spectrometry, ion trapping and cooling, and ion-based quantum computing Since the driving frequency generating this ponderomotive force originates from the particles' forward velocity, we call the resulting effective potential "auto-ponderomotive". The resulting transverse forces are identical to those in a linear Paul trap. Hence, the stability of the trajectories of the charged particles is described by the two well-known dimensionless stability parameters a and q (the derivation is shown in the Supplementary Material on page 5). The geometric factor η = 0.61 accounts for deviations from the ideal hyperbolic electrode geometry and from the perfectly sinusoidal form of the electric field The charged particle beams are unguided when the electrodes are grounded, as shown in the detector images for electrons in Fig. Next to this most versatile guiding demonstration, we now show that more complex potential landscapes can be realized based on the auto-ponderomotive principle. As an example, we show the design of an auto-ponderomotive beam splitter in Fig. The S-curved guide and the beam splitter presented here represent examples of what we call auto-ponderomotive engineering: A powerful method to create a custom-made ponderomotive potential landscape controlled by the geometry and arrangement of lithographically produced electrodes on a chip. It is noteworthy that the measured energy range for guided electrons from 20 to 4000 eV was limited by magnetic stray fields in the source for small beam energies and by sparking between the electrodes for large energies; we expect to expand the range from ~1 to at least 10 000 eV by shielding environmental magnetic fields and by using an optimized electrode layout for higher breakdown voltage. Because these structures work independently of the specific charge and mass of ions, any ion may be guided, hence simultaneous transport and trapping of various species of charged particles at welldefined velocities is possible, which might open up new possibilities to cold and collision chemistry A compact system consisting of a tungsten needle tip, extractor, four deflectors and two grounded apertures serves as a source of charged particles. The final aperture with a diameter of 400 μm limits the size and the divergence of the beam. The strong fields between the tungsten needle tip and the extractor allow electron field emission The S-curved guide consists of two planar chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 84 electrodes. The electrodes define an S-curve with a radius of curvature of R K = 0.535 m, such that the output of the guide is laterally displaced by 5.8 mm with respect to its input. The electrodes have a length of 1.3 mm and are 1.4 mm wide. The gap between the electrodes is 100 μm wide. The electrode layout of one of the two chips is displayed in Fig. The beam splitter consists of two planar chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 270 electrodes arranged in three rows. The electrodes have a length of 0.55 mm and the gap between the electrodes is 50 μm wide. . Because we use planar electrodes, a geometric factor η needs to be included to describe the effective quadrupole strength of the used geometry Thus, the stability parameter is corrected to q = η⋅ L P 2 ⋅U DC 2π 2 ⋅R 2 ⋅U A and is valid for non-relativistic particles (v z ≪ speed of light c). The sign of q has no effect on the stability, therefore we only calculate the absolute value. An extension for relativistic velocities can be derived by including length contraction of L P and the Lorentz transformation of the electric field, but resulting expression is only independent of the particle's charge Q and rest mass M 0 in the limiting cases of relativistically slow and fast particles. The ponderomotive potential is calculated as with 〈E 2 〉 the time-averaged squared electric field. For autoponderomotive structures, 〈E 2 〉 is calculated by the average of the electric field squared along the guide over the period length L P . Compared to the ideal case of hyperbolic electrodes, the field strength of the quadrupole component is reduced by a geometric factor η and is attained by a best fit from simulation. We obtain η ≈ 0.61 for the guiding structure presented in Fig. The harmonic force of the ponderomotive potential F H must compensate the centrifugal force F Z to guide the particles in a curve with curvature R K . Stable trajectories are limited to the harmonic region of the guide, where the restoring force F H = -∇Ψ = -∇( 1/e the maximum intensity) for electrons and all used noble gas ions calculated from the detector intensity of the guided charged particles obtained by voltage scans (as discussed in the main text around Figure Fig. 