Under standard conditions, the electrostatic field-effect is negligible in conventional metals and was expected to be completely ineffective also in superconducting metals. This common believe was recently put under question by a family of experiments, which displayed full gate-voltage-induced suppression of critical current in superconducting all-metallic gated nanotransistors. To date, the microscopic origin of this phenomenon is under debate and trivial explanations based on heating effects given by the negligible electron leakage from the gates should be excluded. Here, we demonstrate the control of the supercurrent in fully suspended superconducting nanobridges. Our advanced nanofabrication methods allows to build suspended superconducting Ti-based supercurrent transistors which show ambipolar and monotonic full suppression of the critical current for gate voltages of V C G 18 V and for temperatures up to ∼80% of the critical temperature. The suspended device architecture minimizes the electron-phonon interaction between the superconducting nanobridge and the substrate, and therefore it 1 ing effect, which cannot be explained by the usual voltage-driven charge density modulation. These include the full ambipolar suppression of the critical supercurrent, The geometry of a typical suspended Ti-based gated superconductor transistor (GST) is depicted in Fig. The latter was achieved via an undoped crystalline InAs nanowire The width of the GSTs is not lithographically determined, but depends on the diameter of the InAs nanowire, usually between 80 and 130 nm. A detailed description of the device fabrication procedure is reported in the Methods section. At 20 mK, the current-voltage (I -V ) characteristic of the GST exhibits dissipation-less Cooper pair transport, with a critical supercurrent I C1 25 nA (see Fig. To quantify the small leakage current flowing between the gates and the bridge (I L ) a high-gain room-temperature current pre-amplifier was connected to the bridge referred to ground. The I L -V G characteristic is linear (see Fig. We stress that such a value is comparable with those obtained in previous experiments performed on non-suspended devices set on sapphire substrates, Differing from previous works, the peculiar suspended architecture of our devices allows to make some precise assessments about the spatial distribution of I L : in the first place, I L can propagate through the substrate only from the gate to the side leads. This consideration allows to exclude any local Joule overheating transferred to the bridge via phonon coupling caused by a leakage current injected through the substrate. In the second place, a direct flow of current from the gate to the bridge (and vice versa) would be possible only via coldelectron field-emission (CFE) through vacuum. The latter might be expected to occur due to the application of an intense electric field between the gate electrodes and the bridge. To shed light on the role played by an eventual field-emitted electronic current in the I C quenching, we numerically quantified the CFE current (I F E ) by means of 3-dimensional finite-element method simulations performed on a geometry equivalent to our real device, and compared it with the measured I L . A detailed description of the whole simulation procedure is reported in the Methods section. I F E was calculated by integrating on the cathode surface, i. e., the gate(wire) for negative(positive) V G , the Fowler-Nordheim tunnel current density that at the cathode reads 29,30 where E(x,y,z) is the amplitude of the electric field on the cathode surface, m e is the electron mass, e is the electron charge, h is the Plank's constant, and φ 0 = 4.33 eV is the work function of Ti. where Ω the volume of the bridge, γ the Sommerfeld's constant of Ti, and T f and T i are the final and initial electronic temperatures, respectively. For the absorption of a single electron emitted at V G = 5 V, (i. e., a value for which no I C suppression was ever observed) a sudden increase of T f ∼ 600 mK is expected for T i = 20 mK, which is ∼ 20% higher than T cL . It therefore follows that a single highlyenergetic electron absorption would result in a sudden destruction of the superconducting state, which is incompatible with the smooth damping of I C -V G . In conclusion, our cutting-edge suspended device architecture allowed us to take a different perspective compared to previous studies, and to investigate the effect of applied electrostatic fields on the superconducting properties of a nano-GST. Our experiments allow to unequivocally exclude any current injected through the insulating substrate as a possible trigger of the GST. Moreover, our analysis demonstrated that cold-electron field-emission between the gates and the bridge is very unlikely to occur, and does not play any obvious role in the physical description of the supercurrent suppression process. These evidences remark that the still elusive fundamental microscopic mechanisms at the basis of the phenomenon have to be addressed. Yet, the generality of our fabrication protocol provides a technological platform enabling the investigation of a variety of groundbreaking suspended all-metallic-based GSTs with applications in superconducting nanoelectronics and spintronics. Josephson junctions based on EuS/Al and NbN/GdN multilayered heterostructures, The Ti GST fabrication involved the use of undoped InAs self-assembled crystalline nanowires (NWs) grown by chemical beam epitaxy (CBE). The cross-linking process of the polymer chains makes the over-exposed PMMA insoluble to any conventional PMMA remover (i.e., acetone). The InAs NW suspension was then accomplished by immersing the sample in acetone for 10 min and rinsing it in IPA. This step allows us to remove the unexposed PMMA, keeping intact the cross-linked one (see Fig. Our sample was then subjected to a second re-aligned EBL exposure, followed by a thermal evaporation of a Ti/Au (5/15 nm) bi-layer. The resulting drain and gate areas are visible in Fig. The computational results are obtained via a four-step finite-element model (FEM) simulation, where the geometrical parameters were set up consistently with the typical suspended Ti-based nanodevice dimensions (see Fig. In the first simulation step the potential V (x, y, z; v G ) was obtained numerically integrating the Poisson equation ∇ 2 V (x, y, z; V G ) = 0 over the entire simulation domain for selected values of the gate voltage parameter V G , with the potential boundary condition of V = V G and V = 0 on the side gates and bridge surfaces, respectively. The electric field distribution E(x, y, z; V G ) was then calculated (second step) through the Maxwell equation E = -∇V (x, y, z; V G ). The electric field on the gates or the bridge surface, depending on the sign of V G , was substituted into the Fowler-Nordheim equation to calculate the CFE current density, and its integration over the cathode surface leads to the total emitted current. Finally (fourth step), the surface current density was exploited to solve the equation of motion of the electrons traveling between the gates and the nanobridge. In order to ensure the reliability of the results, a mesh convergence study was performed, using the maximum value of the electric field modulus on the electrodes surfaces and the total emitted current as checkpoints. 