Sodium-titanate Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 (NTO) is regarded as a highly promising anode material with a very low voltage for Na-ion batteries and capacitors, but suffered from relatively low specific capacity and poor electron conductivity. Here we report a first-principles study of electrochemical properties of NTO and its vanadium-modified compounds, Na 2 Ti 2 VO 7 and Na 2 TiV 2 O 7 (NTVO), offering an insight into their detailed working mechanism and an evidence of enhancing anode performance by Ti/V cation exchange. Our calculations reveal that the specific capacity can increase from 177 mAh g -1 in NTO to over 280 mAh g -1 in NTVO when using NaTi 3-x V x O 7 (x = 1, 2) as a starting material for Na insertion due to higher oxidation state of V +5 , together with lower voltages and small volume expansion rates below 3%. With Ti/V exchange, we obtain slightly higher activation energies for Na ion migrations along the two different pathways, but find an obvious improvement of electronic transport in NTVO. Ever increasing demand for a better welfare in daily life has drawn an explosive production of portable electronic devices and electric vehicles. Together with the urgent need for exploiting renewable and clean energy sources, which are often intermittent, this requires to develop advanced electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems with high efficiency, stability and reliability. Primarily two types of devices exist for reversible EES; secondary batteries, and electrochemical supercapacitors. The former delivers a high energy density, while the latter provides a high power density with a longer life time. Up till now, Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have been dominating EES markets, but recently, a great deal of renewed research attention has been paid to Na-ion based technology, such as Na-ion batteries (NIBs) The key issue in realizing commercially viable NIBs and NICs is to search their proper electrode materials, especially anodic materials. Although graphite is a common anode material in LIBs, it does not properly intercalate Na + ion due to its larger ionic radius (1.02 Å) compared to Li + ion (0.76 Å). In this status, ternary graphite intercalation compounds with organic molecules have been devised for using graphite in NIBs Thereafter, NTO-based compounds have been extensively studied, aiming at improving the performance. The synthesis was evolved from the simple solid-state reaction way In comparison with such extensive experimental studies, only a few number of theoretical works to reveal the sodiation/desodiation mechanism has been reported so far Herein we presented the electrochemical properties of NTO and its two different Ti/V exchange compounds, Na 2 Ti 2 VO 7 (NTV 1 O) and Na 2 TiV 2 O 7 (NTV 2 O), obtained by performing DFT simulations. We identified the possible sites for Na insertion into NTO and pathways for Na ion migrations based on the bond valence sum (BVS) analysis. As increasing the Na content, we calculated the formation energies of compounds and derived the convex hull plots, which were used to plot the electrode voltage profiles. The activation energies for Na migrations along the paths identified through the BVS analysis were calculated to reveal the ionic conductivity and Na storage mechanism. We calculated the electronic density of states in these compounds, providing an insight into their electronic transport. Systematic comparison between NTO and NTVO compounds was given, emphasizing the positive role of Ti/V exchange in improving the electrode performance. The sodium titanate Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 is known to crystallize in steplayered structure with a monoclinic space group P2 1 /m, in which each step consists of three edge-sharing TiO 6 octahedra connected with the others by vertex-sharing In the present form of NTO, Ti is in +4 oxidation state, and upon insertion of additional Na + ions, its oxidation state can change to +3, allowing NTO to act as electrode active material with Ti 4+ /Ti 3+ redox couple. Therefore, it is necessary to identify probable positions for the additional Na + ions, which can be carried out by plotting the BVS isosurface of NTO is the position vector of the i-th atom), and plotted the BVS isosurface at the value of 3, as shown in Fig. In the supercell containing 4 formula units, the eight host Na ions are shown to occupy the most probable sites, and another 8 equivalent positions are found to be unoccupied in the interlayer space. Accordingly, 8 Na ions in total can be inserted one by one into the interlayer space of supercell, forming Na 2+x Ti 3 O 7 (x = 0 -2), while some Ti ions are reduced from +4 to +3 oxidation state. To reduce all the Ti 4+ ions to Ti 3+ , 4 Na ions should be more inserted into the supercell, resulting in the formation of Na 5 Ti 3 O 7 . To search these positions, we again drew the BVS isosurface plot at higher value of 14, identifying three sites more in the gap spaces between the neighboring up and down steps of layer (see Fig. To investigate the influence of Ti exchange with V on sodium storage performance, we considered two different exchange models, Na x Ti 2 VO 7 and Na x TiV 2 O 7 . Since vanadium has higher oxidation state of +5 than Ti, the Na content x can be below 2, indicating that the host Na ions can be removed from Na 2 Ti 3-x V x O 7 (x = 1 and 2). In these Ti/V exchange compounds, the lowest values of Na content reduce to 1 and 0 for NTV 1 O and NTV 2 O, while the highest values are equal to 5. With these considerations, we can write the reduction processes occurred on NTO, NTV 1 O and NTV 2 O upon insertion of Na ions into their lowest Na content compounds as follows, Then, we can expect an enhancement of electrode specific capacity by Ti/V exchange in NTO, as discussed below. It is important to provide concrete evidence of formability as experimental work on synthesis of the NTVO compounds could not yet found. As a first check for formability, we calculate cohesive energy E c using the following equation, where E Na 2 Ti a V b O 7 is the total energy per formula unit of Na 2 Ti a V b O 7 bulk and E i X is the total energy of isolate atom X. We also calculate the formation enthalpy of the compounds from binary metal oxides including Na 2 O in cubic phase (space group F M 3M), anatase-type TiO 2 and V 2 O 5 in orthorhombic phase (PMMN). For the following chemical reactions for synthesis, the formation enthalpy E b f can be calculated as follows, ) where E O 2 is the total energy of isolated O 2 molecule that can be simulated by supercell with lattice constant of 15 Å. On the other hand, the synthesis was suggested to be performed by using ternary sodium carbonate Na 2 CO 3 instead of binary sodium oxide Na 2 O (5) for which the formation enthalpy E t f can be calculated as follows, For the cases of bulk, we can assume that the enthalpic difference term P∆V and the entropic term T ∆S at room temperature are negligible due to being 3 or 4 order smaller than the internal energy difference. Meanwhile, for the cases of O 2 and CO 2 gas we should consider both terms which can be taken from experimental data All the DFT calculations have been carried out by applying the pseudopotential plane wave method as implemented in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package The activation energies for Na ion diffusion according to the paths predicted by BVS in the supercells were calculated by applying the climbing image nudged elastic band (NEB) method Firstly, we determined the lattice parameters of NTO unit cell with 2 formula units in monoclinic phase by using different XC functionals. With the PBE + DFT-D2 functional, they were calculated to be a = 9.092 Å, b = 3.786 Å, c = 8.510 Å, β = 101.88 • , which were slightly underestimated compared with the experimental values within a relative error of -0.5%. Such underestimation is due to the inclusion of vdW dispersion energy, since the pure PBE functional gave the slight overestimation within the well-known trend of the GGA functional. Then, the supercell with 4 formula units was constructed by doubling the optimized unit cell in the (010) direction, which was again optimized. The polyhedral view of its crystal structure is shown in Fig. During the charge/discharge process in NIBs, Na ions should be inserted/deserted into/from the intercalation-type anode material, causing a volume change or even multi-step phase transition. To simulate the charge process, we constructed the supercells for NTO, NTV 1 O and NTV 2 O with increasing number of Na ions from 1 to 8, which were placed on the sites identified by BVS analysis as discussed above. It should be emphasized that the final productions are Na 4 M 3 O 7 based on the BVS analysis in this work, although Na 5 M 3 O 7 is theoretically possible as proved in Eqs. 1a-1c. Meanwhile, we considered the supercells with remove of host Na ions up to 4 and 8 for the cases of NTV 1 O and NTV 2 O respectively. There were many configurations for Na insertion and remove, which could be reduced by considering the crystalline symmetry. After picking out the lowest energy configuration of each intermediate phase with structural optimization, we measured the lattice parameters and volume as increasing the number of Na ions. In Fig. We estimated the relative stability of NTO-based compounds upon insertion and extraction of Na ions by calculating the for- mation energy of intermediate Na n+x M 3 O 7 compound with respect to the two end compounds. As mentioned above, the starting compounds in this work were arranged to be Na 2 M 3 O 7 for all the cases and NaM 3 O 7 only for NTVO cases, correspondingly indicating n to be 2 and 1, while the final compounds were consistently Na 4 M 3 O 7 . Then, the formation energies can be written in two ways, as follows, where E comp is the DFT total energy of the compound. Figure On the other hand, the formation energies, calculated by applying Eq. 7b and using the two end compounds of NaM 3 O 7 and Na 4 M 3 O 7 for NTVO models, were found to be negative for the whole range of inserted Na content x ∈ (0, 3), as shown in Fig. In order to shed light on the enhancement of electrode performance by Ti/V exchange, we estimated the electrode potential V as a function of specific capacity. The step discharge voltage between the adjacent Na contents, identified as placed on the convex hull curves in Fig. where e is the elementary charge. Due to the two different working ways of electrodes distinguished by selecting the base compound, which is Na 2 M 3 O 7 or NaM 3 O 7 , we plotted also two different step voltage curves, as shown in Fig. Ionic conductivity plays a decisive role in electrochemical performance of rechargeable batteries and capacitors. To get an insight into ionic conductance, we determined the activation energies for vacancy-mediated Na ion migrations along the most plausible pathways, which were preliminary predicted by the BVS analysis. As shown in Fig. To increase the reliability of ionic conductivity test, we considered two different Na concentrations, one Na atom inserted into Na 2 M 3 O 7 supercells (Na 2.25 M 3 O 7 , denoted as Na1) and three inserted Na atoms (Na 2.75 M 3 O 7 ; Na3). Figure Figure It was known that NTO is electrically insulating material with a direct bandgap of 3.73 eV When inserting a Na atom into these base compounds, the Fermi level was found to move upward and be placed on the CBs consistently in the three kinds of models, resulting in change of electric state of material from insulating to metallic. As already revealed in our previous work To clarify the electron transfer upon insertion of Na atom, we investigated the electronic charge density difference defined as, where n comp is the electron density of the compound. Here, all the atomic positions were fixed in the same supercell dimension for the three compounds. As shown in Fig. Using first-principles calculations, we have investigated the electrochemical properties of Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 and its two different Ti/V exchange compounds Na 2 Ti 2 VO 7 and Na 2 TiV 2 O 7 , which are thought to be promising anodic materials for Na-ion batteries and capacitors. The lowest energy configurations for the two different exchange models have been determined with the structural optimizations combined with the crystalline symmetry consideration. Through the bond valence sum analysis, we have identified the plausible positions for Na atoms inserting into Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 , from which the final sodiation compounds have been fixed to be Na 4 M 3 O 7 . We have found that as increasing the Na content x in Na x M 3 O 7 , the supercell volumes increase first and decrease after x = 3.25 with the maximum relative volume expansion rates below 3%, revealing the shrinkage of cell volume by Ti/V exchange because of their enhanced M-O interaction. Based on the convex hull plot of formation energies of Na 2+x M 3 O 7 , lower electrode voltages have been obtained in Ti/V exchange models with the maximal specific capacity of about 175 mAh g -1 , and by considering the higher oxidation state of V +5 , the specific capacity could increase over 280 mAh g -1 . We have computed the activation energies for Na ion migrations along the (010) direction wavy pathway in sequential move and (100) direction step-line-step pathway in concurrent move, finding that Ti/V exchange leads to slightly higher activation barriers. Through the analysis of electronic density of states, we have found an improvement of electronic transport properties by Ti/V exchange in Na 2 Ti 3 O 7 . 