We performed angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of bulk 2H-WSe2 for different crystal orientations linked to each other by time-reversal symmetry. We introduce a new observable called time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TRDAD), which quantifies the modulation of the photoemission intensity upon effective time-reversal operation. We demonstrate that the hidden orbital pseudospin texture leaves its imprint onto TRDAD, due to multiple orbitals interference effects in photoemission. Our experimental results are in quantitative agreement with both tight-binding model and state-of-the-art fully relativistic calculations performed using the onestep model of photoemission. While spin-resolved ARPES probes the spin component of entangled spin-orbital texture in multiorbital systems, we unambiguously demonstrate that TRDAD reveals its orbital pseudospin texture counterpart. Locking between spin and valley degrees of freedom emerges in solids possessing a combined broken inversion symmetry and strong spin-orbit coupling, leading to peculiar valley dependent spin texture in momentum-space. This spin-valley locking leads to optical selection rules allowing for the generation of spin-and valley-polarized excited carriers TMDC monolayers are emblematic materials with entangled spin, orbital and valley degrees of freedom. In a minimal electronic structure model of TMDC monolayers , where the label VB1 and VB2 represented the two first spin-orbit split valence bands and where |d ±2 = [|d x 2 -y 2 ± i|d xy ]/ √ 2. While the spin texture is determined by the momentum-dependent spin state, the orbital texture is set by the momentum-dependent orbital pseudospin, defined as σ , where σi (i = x, y, z) is the Pauli operator K and K' valleys are related to each other via the timereversal operator, i.e T |ψ K k = |ψ K k . In TMDC monolayers, swapping valley indexes (time-reversal) thus reverses both the spin and orbital textures. In bulk-TMDC of 2H polytype, the adjacent layers are rotated by 180 • with respect to each other, leading to opposite and alternating local spin polarization and orbital texture between neighboring layers. This peculiar layered structure naturally introduces the concept of "hidden" spin and orbital texture, which exists within each layer, but vanishes in the bulk, i.e. when the inversion-symmetry of the crystal is restored In this Letter, we perform extreme ultraviolet (XUV) angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) of bulk 2H-WSe 2 for crystal orientations rotated by α = 60 • with respect to each others (R 60 • ) effectively acting as the time-reversal operator ( T ): R 60 We introduce a novel observable, time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TR-DAD), which probes the modulation of the photoemission intensity upon time-reversal, and which is shown to be sensitive to the orbital pseudospin texture, due to multiple orbitals interference effects in photoemission. We show that TRDAD is free of any spurious contribution from experimental geometry, which typically complicates the interpretation of the (linear or circular) dichroism in ARPES. Our experimental results are in quantitative agreement with state-of-the-art fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) ab initio calculations performed using the one-step model of photoemission The experimental apparatus features a table-top femtosecond (fs) XUV (21.7 eV, 110 meV FWHM bandwidth) beamline Dichroism in the angular distribution (both linear, LDAD, and circular, CDAD) are powerful quantities relying on the modulation of the photoemission transition dipole matrix element upon the change of the ionizing radiation polarization state. CDAD has been used to probe electronic chirality in graphene Using our multidimensional detection scheme with the p-polarized fs-XUV pulses incident in the k x -k z plane (and along Γ-M/M'), the normalized intensity differences between the forward (I α (k x , k y , E B )) and back- LDAD and A 60 • LDAD , the "left-right asymmetries", reflect the photoemission intensity asymmetry between the kx <0 and kx >0 hemispheres, for two crystal orientations, respectively, and are calculated using Eq. 1. (f ) TRDAD (calculated using Eq. 2) represents the component of A 0 • /60 • LDAD which is antisymmetric upon timereversal (i.e. upon 60 • azimuthal rotation of the crystal). ward (I α (-k x , k y , E B )) hemisphere, i.e. the linear dichroism asymmetry in the photoelectron angular distribution (A α LDAD (k x , k y , E B )), can be extracted (see Eq. 1), without the need to rearrange the sample geometry or the light-polarization state Looking at A 0 • LDAD and A 60 • LDAD (Fig. where crystal rotation by an angle α-α (R α-α ) is equivalent to time-reversal, i.e. R α-α ≡ T . The resulting TRDAD is shown in Fig. To investigate the microscopic origin of TRDAD, we perform state-of-the-art quantitative one-step photoemission calculations based on fully relativistic density functional theory (DFT). The one-step model of photoemission is implemented in the fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method. The calculated photoemission signal is layer-resolved and includes all matrix element effects such as experimental geometry, photon energy, polarization state, and final state effects (see SM and refs. The striking similarity between experimental and theoretical results (Fig. Next, we want to fully disentangle the signatures of spin and orbital textures in TRDAD. To do so, we have investigated the photoemission intensity and associated TRDAD in both the fully relativistic and non-relativistic limit (vanishing spin-orbit coupling (SOC)). Indeed, SOC is at the origin of the hidden spin-polarization of the two topmost valence bands at K/K', and thus of the emergence of the peculiar spin texture in 2H-TMDCs. In the limit where SOC vanishes (non-relativistic limit), the two oppositely spin-polarized topmost valence bands at K/K' are merging together, leading to the annihilation of the spin-polarization, but to a conservation of the orbital texture. Because the dominant relativistic corrections scale with 1/c 2 , where c is the speed of light, a straightforward theoretical approach to go from the fully relativistic to the non-relativistic limit, and thus to modify the strength of SOC, is to modulate the speed of light. In Fig. Last, to get a more intuitive and comprehensive picture of the origin of TRDAD, we employ a third-nearest neighbor tight-binding (TB) model In conclusion, we have introduced a novel and fully general robust observable in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy called time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TRDAD), which probes the modulation of the photoemission intensity upon crystal rotation mimicking time-reversal. We have demonstrated that the hidden orbital pseudospin texture of pro-FIG. totypical bulk 2H-WSe 2 leaves its imprint onto TRDAD through the multiorbital interference process in photoemission. This robust observable is free of contributions from experimental geometry, and is extremely stable against variation of the photon energy, on the contrary to most conventional dichroic ARPES signals, e.g. CDAD (see SM). Similar to the role of spin-resolved ARPES to experimentally elucidate complex momentum-space spin texture, we envision that TRDAD could emerge as the new standard observable to probe peculiar momentumspace orbital texture in complex multiorbital materials. Moreover, the extension of the approach to time-resolved TRDAD experiments is conceptually straightforward and will give access to the orbital texture of excited states and changes of topological properties of out-of-equilibrium states of matter, on ultrafast timescales The experimental apparatus features a table-top femtosecond XUV beamline coupled to a photoemission endstation. Briefly, a home-built optical parametric chirped-pulse amplifier (OPCPA) delivering 15 W (800 nm, 30 fs) at 500 kHz repetition rate As mentioned in the manuscript, our photoemission calculations are based on fully relativistic density functional theory (DFT). The one-step model of photoemission is implemented in the fully relativistic Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method of the Munich band structure software package, based on Green's function and multiple scattering spindensity matrix formalism As explained in the previous subsection, after the optimization of the Wigner-Seitz radius of individual atomic types, we reached a very good agreement with the experimentally measured electronic band structure of bulk 2H-WSe 2 . To qualitatively show the agreement between experimentally measured band structure, we have plotted the experimentally measured photoemission intensity along Γ-K and Γ-M high symmetry directions, as well as the corresponding calculated photoemission intensity using the one-step model of photoemission (SPR-KKR). The data are shown in Fig. As described in detail in the manuscript, in TMDCs, the combined broken inversion symmetry within each layer and the large spin-orbit coupling lead to peculiar momentum-space spin-orbital textures. To disentangle the effect of spin from orbital degrees of freedom, it would be particularly interesting to have a theoretical way to manipulate the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), and investigate the sensitivity of the time-reversal dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (TRDAD) to its strength. For vanishing spin-orbit coupling, the two top-most valence bands, which typically exhibit strong and opposite spin-polarized character around the K/K' points, are expected to merge. This new degeneracy at the Brillouin zone boundary is thus expected to annihilate the spin-polarized character of these bands. However, these two normally spin-split bands have the same orbital texture within each given valley. Thus, the orbital texture is expected to be invariant upon modification of the SOC strength, so is expected to be TRDAD. Within the KKR framework, there are several ways to manipulate the SOC One other knob that is available within our KKR framework is to turn-off some initial-and final-state channels. We will use this knob to strengthen our conclusions about the microscopic origin of TRDAD. We first investigated the role of initial-state channels in the emergence of TRDAD. In Fig. The emergence of circular dichroism in photoelectron angular distributions (CDAD), which is a well-established observable in ARPES, can be of multiple origins. For example, photoemission from the helical Dirac fermions at the surface of the topological insulator Bi 2 Te 3 leads to strong CDAD, which has been initially interpreted as originating from either the handedness of the experimental setup, the initial-state spin angular momentum, and the initial-state orbital angular momentum. However, a joint experimental and theoretical (KKR calculations, as used in our study) paper demonstrated strong modulation (even sign reversal) of the CDAD signal when scanning the photon energy of the ionizing radiation, and conclude that, in this material, circular dichroism was originating from so-called 'final-state effects' That being said, one important question is the following: How stable is the TRDAD signal against variation of the photon energy? In order to investigate this, we have computed (using the KKR framework described in the manuscript and the SM) TRDAD and CDAD for three different photon energies, i.e. the same photon energy as in the experiments (harmonic 7 of the 3.1 eV driver, i.e. 21.7 eV), as well as the photon energies of the two upper neighboring harmonics (i.e. 24.8 eV and 27.9 eV). The results are shown in Fig. While TRDAD features are extremely stable against variation of the photon energy, CDAD exhibits strong modulations including even sign reversal upon modification of the photon energy (given our experimental geometry). This unambiguously demonstrated that CDAD is sensitive to details of the experimental parameters/geometry. In particular, the intrinsic dichroism related to the Berry curvature is overshadowed by photon-and geometry-dependent final state effects (using this experimental geometry). On the contrary, our analysis reveals that TRDAD allows extracting the hidden orbital pseudospin texture in an extremely robust fashion. This rules out the predominance of final-state effects in the emergence of TRDAD. To get a more intuitive and comprehensive picture of the origin of TRDAD, we employ the third-nearest neighbor tight-binding (TB) model from ref. where the index m of orbital d m corresponds to the angular momentum state | = 2, m . We neglect the SOC here, as TRDAD is a predominantly nonrelativistic effect. This is consistent with the TB picture close to K, K , where the SOC gives rise to a spin-dependent shift of the valence band The photoemission matrix elements with respect to the valence band can be expressed as where C m (k) denote the expansion coefficients with respect to the d m orbital, while M m (k, k ⊥ ) stands for the corresponding atomic matrix element. For calculating the latter we assume the final states to be plane waves. The dipole operator is expressed in the length gauge, which has been shown to yield qualitatively accurate results Here, u is the polarization vector, while w m (r) is the Wannier function (WF) corresponding to the d m orbital. We assume the WFs to be well approximated by atomic orbitals: w m (r) ≈ f (r)Y =2,m (r). By using the expansion of plane waves in terms of spherical harmonics, Eq. ( To obtain an estimate of the radial dependence f (r), we performed DFT calculations using the Quantum Espresso code The TB model allows to qualitatively reproduce the measured TRDAD (see Fig. To understand the origin of this intensity variation, we consider the orbital contribution to the photoemission signal. The orbital character close to K (K ) is dominated by d ) is an eigenstate), with a contribution of d z 2 increasing further away from K, K , as inferred by inspecting the projected density of states (Fig. As a test, we exclude the contribution of the d z 2 orbital in Eq. ( This picture is further confirmed by comparing the TRDAD signal including (Fig. where E k = (k 2 + k 2 ⊥ ) 2 /2, while ω denotes the photon energy. Rearranging the matrix element into To understand the symmetry of the interference effects, we computed the orbital pseudospin where σ = [σ x , σy , σz ] is the vector of Pauli matrices. The in-plane pseudospin texture is shown in Fig. with Inspecting the vector field R(k, k ⊥ ) close to the K/K' points (Fig. As the analysis reveals, the dark corridor in the photoemission intensity is governed by the in-plane pseudospin projection. This is a genuine interference effect. Since the time-reversal signal is dominated by the observed rotation of the dark corridor upon crystal rotation, the sign structure and the symmetries of the interference term is inherited by TRDAD, thus providing direct insight into the pseudospin texture. To illustrate this point, the direction of R(K, k ⊥ ) and R(K , k ⊥ ) at the corresponding K, K points are shown in Fig. 