The miniaturization of diagnostic devices that exploit optical detection schemes requires the design of light-sources combining small size, high performance for effective excitation of chromophores, and mechanical flexibility for easy coupling to components with complex and non-planar shapes. Here, ZnO nanowire-in-fiber hybrids with internal architectural order are introduced, exhibiting a combination of polarized stimulated emission, low propagation losses of light modes, and structural flexibility. Ultrafast transient absorption experiments on the electrospun material show optical gain which gives rise to amplified spontaneous emission, with threshold lower than the value found in films. These systems are highly flexible and can conveniently conform to curved surfaces, which makes them appealing active elements for various device platforms, such as bendable lasers, optical networks and sensors, as well as for application in bioimaging, photo-crosslinking, and optogenetics. Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). The development of miniaturized and effective light sources with emission in the near ultraviolet (UV) is highly important for all those fields, including microanalysis through fluorescence spectroscopy, chemical sensing, and healthcare diagnostics, where molecular photoexcitation is involved. Polymeric light-emitting materials and films, Hybrid approaches, inserting highly-efficient and stable oxide nanosystems in flexible polymer nanostructures and enabling high throughput processing, would combine advantages of UV lightemitting inorganics and plastic matrices, and potentially lead to materials with enhanced properties. For instance, in these systems light from UV nanoscale emitters could be efficiently coupled to polymer waveguides and transported along macroscale distances, Here, the incorporation of ZnO NWs in transparent 3 poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) electrospun filaments leads to a NW-in-fiber hybrid material with internal architectural order, combining optical gain, polarized stimulated emission, and waveguiding properties in an efficient system for flexible UV lasers operating at room temperature. The internal alignment of NWs promoted by electrospinning is found to be critically relevant in making ZnO NW-in-fiber hybrids capable to outperform counterparts doped by non-elongated ZnO nanocrystals, in terms of reduced optical losses as well as low amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) threshold. The relevance of here reported results is twofold, i.e. at both fundamental and practical level. Ultrafast transient absorption measurements with high temporal resolution (20 fs) are presented for the ZnO NW-in-fiber hybrids. These measurements provide insight into the ultrafast non-Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). 5 equilibrium physics of ZnO NWs in the hybrid material, enabling the observation of carrier scattering with optical phonons and of a shift in absorption due to photogenerated charges (Burstein-Moss effect), thus providing insight into the ultrafast non-equilibrium physics of ZnO NWs in the hybrid material. In addition, these hybrids can lead to the definition of design rules for miniaturized lasers, bio-and chemical sensors, and optical networks embedding UV-emitting materials and nano-components. Indeed, the optical gain in the hybrid system incorporating elongated nanoparticles can benefit from having them aligned in electrospun polymers, The used ZnO nanomaterials, including non-elongated nanoparticles (NPs) and NWs, are initially inspected by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Figure In addition, the SEM analysis strongly suggests a largely uniaxial alignment of NWs along the fiber length, which is also supported by optical transmission micrographs (Figure Reference absorption measurements performed on the hybrid materials highlight the typical features of ZnO, 40 with a single narrow peak at 374 nm due to the excitonic transition superimposed to a light-scattering background (Figure 12 shows the T/T map, as a function of probe wavelength and pump-probe delay, for hybrid fibers embedding NWs. Figure To demonstrate the use of these systems in mirrorless laser sources, ASE measurements are carried out by optically-pumping uniaxially aligned arrays of fibers with long-pulse (ns) excitation at  = 355 nm. The pump light is polarized parallel to the fiber length and shaped as a stripe with size 10×0.2 mm 2 , which is aligned parallel to fibers. ASE is generated by the amplification of spontaneously emitted photons by stimulated emission under intense optical excitation, In Eq. ( Figure 16 fluences up to 1.6 mJ cm -2 . Correspondingly, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the PL spectrum decreases from 25 nm to about 4 nm (triangles in Figure Here we measure a threshold of 650 J cm -2 for ZnO NW-in-fibers, that is significantly lower than values reported for other hybrid systems based on ZnO nanomaterials such as polydimethylsiloxane nanocomposite films and zinc oxide-silica systems (generally in the range 2-4 mJ cm -2 ). experienced by light with polarization component perpendicular to the sample surface ('90°' curve in Figure Finally, the NW-in-fiber hybrids are conformable enough to be wrapped around curved surfaces with mm-scale curvature radius such as capillary glass tubes (Figure A summary of the emissive properties for ZnO NW-in-fibers is reported in Table 19 hybrid material, make NW-in-fibers excellent and versatile active media for flexible UV lasers that can be coupled with curved optical components or integrated in miniaturized diagnostics and microfluidic devices. In summary, we have introduced light-emitting NW-in-fiber hybrid materials with optical gain in the UV and highly favourable combination of properties. We performed an extensive optical characterization of the electrospun fibers. High time-resolution pump-probe spectroscopy in the UV detected stimulated emission in the 380-400 nm wavelength range, while line narrowing in this spectral range provided a signature of ASE, with onset for excitation fluence of 650 J cm -2 . ASE in the fibers with internal order of ZnO NWs, leading to more effective optical behaviour, features a lower excitation threshold compared to other nano-hybrid materials and components based on ZnO nanocrystals. These properties, obtained in flexible and conformable fiber mats, make these materials highly interesting for various applications in sensing and light-emitting devices, bioimaging and photo-crosslinking, as well as in network and bendable microlasers. Upon engineering the strength of the ZnO/polymer interface through proper surface modifiers or cross-linking of the organic matrix, one could also aim to obtain effective strain and load transfer to the inorganic component, Hybrid NW-in-fibers. ZnO NWs (manufacture code 773999) and ZnO NPs (manufacture code 544906) with high purity PMMA (average molecular weight~120,000 Da), and chloroform are purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Ethanol is purchased from Fluka and DMF is purchased from Carlo Erba. Solutions for electrospinning are prepared by 250 mg mL -1 of PMMA dissolved in a mix of chloroform, ethanol and DMF with volume ratio 4:4:1 and ZnO NPs or NWs added at a relative weight ratio () between 10% and 50% with respect to the polymer. The solution is loaded in a syringe with a 27 gauge needle and injected through the needle at constant flow rate of 1 mL h -1 by a microprocessor dual-drive syringe pump (33 Dual Syringe Pump, Harvard Apparatus Inc., Holliston, MA). A voltage of 12 kV (XRM30P, Gamma High Voltage Research Inc., Ormond Beach, FL) is applied to the spinneret, and fibers are collected at distance of 10 cm from the needle on a metallic collector biased at -6 kV. Either a plate or a rotating collector (disk with 0.8 cm width, 8 cm diameter, 4000 rpm) are used to obtain randomly-oriented or aligned fibers, respectively. Morphological and optical characterization. The morphology of the hybrid fibers is investigated by SEM, TEM and AFM. For SEM analysis, fibers are collected on Si substrates and images acquired by a FEI Helios 600i system, operating at acceleration voltages of 3-5 kV. TEM images are acquired with a JEOL JEM 1011 microscope operating at accelerating voltage of 100 kV. For particle inspection, few drops of dispersions are drop-casted onto 300 mesh carbon-coated grids, and the residual solvent is allowed to evaporate at room temperature. For fibrous samples, 400 mesh copper grids are temporarily fixed on the electrospinning collector by carbon tape, and few fibers deposited onto them in a short time lapse ( 10 s) for subsequent imaging. All images are acquired and processed by Gatan Digital Micrograph 2.3 native software. AFM measurements are carried out by a Multimode system equipped with a Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). Nanoscope IIIa electronic controller (Veeco Instruments). The fiber topography is analyzed in tapping mode, utilizing Si cantilevers with 190 kHz resonance frequency and with tips featuring a nominal radius of 8 nm, length in the range 10-15 μm and apex angle of 22.5°. The width and height of the cross-sectional profile of the NW-in-fiber (Figure NW-in-fibers, deposited on quartz substrates, by the 3 rd harmonic of a ns Nd:YAG laser (Quanta-Ray INDI Spectra-Physics), with emission wavelength at λ = 355 nm and a repetition rate of 10 Hz. The propagation direction of the incident pumping beam is set perpendicular to the sample surface, and the emission is collected from the sample edge, namely at 90° with respect to the excitation beam, through a fiber-coupled imaging spectrometer (iHR320, Jobin Yvon) equipped with a charge coupled device (Simphony, Jobin Yvon). Beam divergence measurements are performed on aligned fibers excited above threshold. A Si CCD is used to measure the spatial profile of the emitted beam, and the divergence is estimated plotting the measured beam Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). diameter vs. the detector position, and evaluating the half angle corresponding to the asymptotic variation of the beam radius along the propagation direction. Femtosecond pump-probe experiments are performed starting from an amplified Ti:sapphire system (Libra, Coherent) generating 4-mJ, 100-fs pulses at 800 nm central wavelength and 1 kHz repetition rate. A fraction of the laser output is used to pump a non-collinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA), which generates sub-20-fs visible pulses at 540 nm. Sum-frequency generation of the NOPA output with the 800-nm pulse in a 50-m-thick type II -barium borate crystal produces the sub-20-fs pump pulses with spectrum centred at 335 nm. Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). Additional details and calculations on ZnO NPs solubility, diameter distribution of hybrid fibers, TEM analysis and estimation of the ZnO/PMMA volumetric ratio, calculated waveguiding and scattering properties, PL and ASE emission, estimation method for the photoexcited carrier density, femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy of fibers with ZnO NPs, decay associated spectra, and ASE spectra of NW-doped films. The Supporting Information file (PDF) is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/journal/ancac3. To identify a good solvent, able to disperse the nanomaterials and to avoid aggregation and precipitation during the solution preparation and the electrospinning process, extensive solubility tests have been performed by mixing ZnO nanoparticles with common solvents and mixtures of them. To this aim, 50 mg mL -1 of NPs have been dispersed in (1) acetone, (2) chloroform, (3) a mixture of chloroform and dimethylformamide (ratio 1:1 volume/volume -v/v), (4) ethanol, ( Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020). TEM imaging was exploited to give an estimation of the ZnO/PMMA volumetric ratio in the hybrid fibers. An example of a TEM micrograph of a single hybrid fiber is shown in Figure NWs are visible as darker areas with different signal intensities that can be attributed to two or more overlapping NWs along the path of the electron beam. Brightness and contrast of the image were set to highlight as much as possible the presence of NWs in the polymer matrix. The volume occupied by the NWs can be estimated by considering the area, A1, of the darker regions as due to packed and uniaxially aligned NWs, with length 1 μm and diameter 40 nm. The ratio between A1 and the cross-sectional area of a single NW (ANW  2LNW×rNW, where LNW and rNW are the length and radius of the ZnO NW) gives the number of NWs in the area A1 (N1 = A1/ANW) and allows their total volume (V1 = N1×VNW = N1×LNW×πrNW 2 ) to be calculated. The extension of A1 is shown in Figure Published in ACS Nano, doi: 10.1021/acsnano.0c00870 (2020).