The presence of a non-optically active polymorph (yellow-phase) competing with the optically active polymorph (black γ-phase) at room temperature in CsSnI3 and the susceptibility of Sn to oxidation, represent two of the biggest obstacles for the exploitation of CsSnI3 in optoelectronic devices. Here room-temperature single-source in vacuum deposition of smooth black γ-CsSnI3 thin films is reported. This has been done by fabricating a solid target by completely solvent-free mixing of CsI and SnI2 powders and isostatic pressing. By controlled laser ablation of the solid target on an arbitrary substrate at room temperature, the formation of CsSnI3 thin films with optimal optical properties is demonstrated. The films present a band gap of 1.32 eV, a sharp absorption edge and near-infrared photoluminescence emission. These properties and X-ray diffraction of the thin films confirmed the formation of the orthorhombic (B-γ) perovskite phase. The thermal stability of the phase was ensured by applying in situ an Al2O3 capping layer. This work demonstrates the potential of pulsed laser deposition as a volatility-insensitive single-source growth technique of halide perovskites and represents a critical step forward in the development and future scalability of inorganic lead-free halide perovskites. Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) has offered unique options for the development of complex materials thin film growth, allowing stoichiometric transfer and multi-compound deposition independent of the relative volatility of the elements and ultimate control of interfaces. In the field of complex oxides, PLD opened the way to high-Tc superconducting films requiring stoichiometric transfer of multiple (4-5) cations. CsSnI3 has been widely proposed in literature as a Pb-free and all-inorganic alternative to the archetypical hybrid halide solar cell absorber, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3). The replacement of toxic Pb with Sn is a natural choice due to their similar ionic radius and lower toxicity of Sn. In terms of synthesis, solution-based processes are the most widely used techniques to fabricate these materials. Here we present single-source room temperature PLD of CsSnI3 thin films with excellent optical properties achieved by the formation of the orthorhombic black (B-γ) perovskite phase. This work introduces PLD as an enabling technology to achieve near-stoichiometric transfer of all-inorganic halide perovskites in vacuum, opening the path for controlled and reproducible growth as well as ease of integration in devices from PV to more complex architectures such as integrated photonics. Figure The target was loaded into the PLD chamber, which was then evacuated to a base pressure of ~1 × 10 -7 mbar. CsSnI3 thin films were deposited onto Si (with native SiOx), fused silica and glass substrates at room temperature using a KrF (248 nm) laser and a fluence of 0.2 J cm -2 . The growth rate was 0.05 nm/pulse such that for a laser repetition frequency of 5 Hz, the total duration to grow 100 (200) nm CsSnI3 was only 400 (800) seconds. An Ar working pressure of 1.3 × 10 -3 mbar was kept constant during deposition and no additional reactive gasses were introduced. Following CsSnI3 deposition, an amorphous Al2O3 capping layer was applied in situ by PLD. Steady-state photoluminescense (PL) spectra and absorption coefficient measurements were performed on 100 nm thick PLD-grown CsSnI3 films on fused silica substrates (Figure Target source materials: CsI and SnI2 source powders were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (99.9% purity) and TCI (> 97.0% purity). For the Al2O3 deposition, an Al2O3 single crystal with rough surfaces to enhance laser absorption was used as source target. PLD: The vacuum chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of ~1 × 10 -7 mbar. A KrF (248 nm) laser was used to ablate the fabricated CsSnI3 target. Thin films were deposited onto Si (with native SiOx), fused silica and glass substrates at room temperature. An Ar working pressure of 1.3 × 10 -3 mbar was kept constant during deposition and no additional reactive gasses were introduced. The laser frequency was kept at 5 Hz, target-to-substrate distance at 50 mm, and a fluence of 0.2 J cm -2 was used. The deposition of the Al2O3 capping layer was performed under Ar atmosphere and room temperature as the CsSnI3 film. Al2O3 is a large band gap material (~7 eV) with insignificant absorption in the measured spectral region, therefore, the measured optical properties are unaffected by the Al2O3 thin film. PDS: Photothermal deflection spectroscopy directly measures the optical absorption of thin films with sensitivity of up to four orders of magnitude. The light absorption is determined via a sample heating effect, by measuring the deflection of a probe laser beam with a position-sensitive detector. The PDS spectrophotometer uses a 150 W Xe lamp as a light source and a monochromator equipped with grating blazed at 750 nm operating in a broad spectral range from ultraviolet to infrared region 400-1200 nm. PL: Photoluminescence spectra are measured using an excitation laser at 442 nm in a Renishaw in-Via REFLEX spectroscope. The intensity of the excitation light is reduced in order to prevent any structural degradation during measurements. XRD: The films were analyzed by X-ray diffraction, using a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer with a high brilliance microfocus Cu rotating anode generator, Montel optics, a 1 mm pinhole beam collimator and an EIGER2 R 500K area detector. TEM: Cross-sectional specimen were prepared with a FEI Helios G4 CX FIB, using gradually decreasing acceleration voltages of 30 kV, 5 kV and 2 kV. TEM analyses were performed with a double aberration corrected FEI Themis Z, operated at 300 kV. HAADF-STEM images were recorded with a probe currents between 50 and 200 pA, convergence semi-angle 21 mrad and HAADF collection angles 61-200 mrad. EDX spectrum imaging was performed with a probe current of 1 nA, where the spectra were recorded with a Dual-X system, providing in total 1.76 sr EDX detectors. * On the target tmix=3h (low mixing time target), some highly Cs depleted areas were found. This indicates that also Sn depleted areas must be present but were not measured by EDX. X-ray diffraction patterns and photoluminescence spectra of films deposited from the three different solid targets Optical band gap determination Optical bandgap (Eg) of halide absorbers was estimated from the Tauc relation: α = (hν -Eg) x with α being the absorption coefficient obtained from photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) measurement and hν being the photon energy. The power factor of the exponent x depends on the nature of absorption transitions. Since CsSnI3 is reported to be a p-type direct band gap semiconductor, we used the exponent x = 1/2 corresponding to allowed direct optical transitions. Eg value of CsSnI3 film determined from the intercept of α 2 = 0 is 1.32 eV while for the most common hybrid halide perovskite absorber MAPbI3 it is found to be 1.6 eV (Figure Vivien M. Kiyek, Yorick A. Birkhölzer, Yury Smirnov, Martin Ledinsky, Zdenek Remes, Jamo Momand, Bart J. Kooi, Gertjan Koster, Guus Rijnders, Monica Morales-Masis*