By utilizing Floquet driving protocols and interlacing them with a judicious reservoir emission engineering we achieve extreme non-reciprocal thermal radiation. We show that the latter is rooted in an interplay between a direct radiation process occurring due to temperature bias between two thermal baths and the modulation process which is responsible for pumped radiation heat. Our theoretical results are confirmed via time-domain simulations with RF circuits. Introduction -Thermal radiation is associated with the conversion of the thermal motion of (quasi-)particles, in matter with some finite temperature, into electromagnetic emission. Its management constitutes a major challenge with both fundamental and technological ramifications A long-standing problem in thermal radiation management is the quest for novel non-reciprocal devices, like thermal diodes and circulators, that control the directionality of photon emissivity. Along these lines, researchers have proposed a variety of schemes ranging from magneto-optical effects Here we unveil an interplay between three elements that control the efficiency of thermal rectification in Floquet-driven circuits: (a) a judiciously engineered bath emissivity (via photonic filters) of the thermal reservoirs; (b) an appropriately designed Floquet protocol that enforces a time modulation of the constituent parameters of a photonic circuit; and (c) the temperature gradient between two thermal reservoirs which are coupled resonantly with the circuit. The latter is responsible for a biased current while the second element is generating pumped thermal radiation which can balance the biased thermal current in one specific direction. We utilize these elements for the design of optimal reconfigurable Floquet- based thermal diodes and validate the theoretical predictions via time-domain simulations. Statistical Coupled-Mode-Theory Modeling -We consider a photonic network of N coupled modes. The field dynamics in such a network is described by a timedependent effective coupled-mode-theory (CMT) Hamiltonian H 0 (t) = H 0 (t + 2π Ω ). We assume that two of these modes are connected directly to two reservoirs characterized by temperatures T α=1 = T α=2 , see Fig. We study the radiative energy transfer between these reservoirs for a forward (Fig. where the amplitudes |ψ = (ψ 1 , • • • , ψ N ) T are normalized such that |ψ n | 2 represents the energy in the n = 1, • • • , N -th mode. The matrix Γ nm = γ α δ n,α δ nm + Σ nm (t) represents the dissipation of the n-th mode, where Σ nm (t) describes driving-induced losses and/or gain and γ α is the dissipation due to coupling of the n-th mode with the reservoir α. From the fluctuationdissipation relation, we also have that dω indicate the incoming (+) and outgoing (-) thermal excitations from and towards the α-th reservoir. The amplitudes S + α (ω) satisfy the relation where φ α (ω) describes spectral filtering of the α-th thermal reservoir. Existing proposals for the control of spectral emissivity of the thermal reservoirs include the deposition of photonic crystals that support band-gaps, or their coupling to the photonic circuit via a waveguide or a cavity with cut-off frequencies, etc. Floquet Scattering for Thermal Radiation-In Floquet scattering, an incident excitation S + α (ω) at frequency ω can change its frequency by ±lΩ and scatter out of the modulated target at a Floquet channel ω l = ω + lΩ where l ∈ (-∞, • • • , ∞). The Floquet scattering matrix S F , connecting the outgoing to the incoming field amplitudes where [D] represents a block diagonal matrix with blocks D, and G F is the Green's function associated with the Floquet Hamiltonian ĤQ . The latter takes the form where is the total transmittance of all incoming waves at frequency ω from the β-th reservoir, which are emitted at frequencies ω l at reservoir α. A positive value of Īα indicates that current flows toward the α-th heat bath. Equations Rectification Efficiency -We consider three singlemode resonators n = 1, 2, 3, equally coupled with one another, see Figs. The non-reciprocal efficiency of the circuit is described by the rectification parameter R R ≡ where R = ±1 indicates perfect diode action, while R = 0 corresponds to completely reciprocal radiation. A rectification parameter |R| > 1 indicates that the photonic circuit operates as a "refrigerator". We will assume that T C is fixed. A qualitative understanding of the effects of a temperature gradient ∆T ≡ T H -T C , modulation frequency Ω, and spectral filtering φ(ω) on R, is achieved by analyzing the slow driving limit Ω → 0. In the forward configuration, the current Eq. ( where Ī(f) 2,b is the current due to temperature bias and Ī(f) is a pumped current associated with the time modulation of the circuit , FIG. Following the same analysis, we evaluate ). In other words, for a specific set of parameters (∆T * , Ω * ) the photonic circuit operates as a perfect diode for thermal radiation i.e. |R(∆T * , Ω * )| ≈ 1. Substituting in Eq. ( , we find that for Ω, ∆T /T 0 → 0 the rectification parameter is indicating that thermal rectification increases proportionally to the modulation frequency Ω and inversely proportional to the temperature gradient. The former is responsible for inducing non-reciprocal transport T F α,β (ω) = T F β,α (ω) and a pumped current, while the latter controls the bias current. From Eq. ( CMT modeling-We consider the photonic circuit of Figs. 1a,b described by the effective Hamiltonian H 0 where k nm = k mn = k is the evanescent coupling between the resonators. In the absence of any modulation ω n = ω 0 , and due to rotational symmetry, the system has two degenerate right/left-handed modes (1, e ±2iπ/3 , e ±4iπ/3 ) T / √ 3 with frequency ω L(R) = ω 0 -k and a mode (1, 1, 1) T / √ 3 with frequency ω C = ω 0 + 2k. The situation is different in the presence of periodic modulations that is maximized by an appropriate choice of the phasors φ 0 = 0, φ 2 = +π/2, and φ 3 = -π/2 (see Fig. In Fig. The associated rectification parameter R is shown in Fig. For the temperature gradient ∆T * = 10K, one can achieve perfect isolation in the forward configuration i.e. I for which the bias current in the forward configuration balances the pumped current is The latter corresponds to a resonant driving that promotes transitions between the frequency domain around ω ≈ ω C , where transport is reciprocal T F 12 = T F 21 , and the domain ω ≈ ω L/R where T F 12 = T F 21 . For smaller ∆T = 2K, the biased current in the forward configuration Ī(f) 2,b ∼ ∆T is smaller (in magnitude) than the pumped current Ī(f) 2,p ∼ Ω, thus leading to a total emitted radiation from the cold reservoir i.e. the circuit operates as a "refrigerator" with |R| > 1, see Fig. Next, we engineered the emission spectrum in a way that it excludes the reciprocal frequency range around ω ≈ ω C and enforces emission in the range where nonreciprocity is maximum. To this end, we have incorporated in Eq. ( where ω * /ω C ≈ 0.88 is the frequency around which the transmittance is nonreciprocal and b = 0.05 is the spectral width of the filtering function. In Figs. where Θ α (ω) = k B T α is evaluated at its classical limit and φ α (ω) = φ(ω) describes a filtering function. The net energy current flowing to a transmission line α is evaluated from the time-dependent voltages v α (t) and currents i α (t) at the respective nodes, Īα = dω Īα (ω); Īα (ω) = Ω 2π where an average over one modulation cycle is assumed. Moreover, an initial transient t 0 has been discarded to ensure steady state conditions. The transmittances T 1,2 , T 2,1 are obtained from Īα (ω) in Eq. ( In Fig. In this section, our goal is to provide a derivation for the net average energy current Īα directed toward a heat bath α, Eq. ( The field amplitude |ψ(t) is a result of the excitations |S + (t) coming from the heat baths connected to the system through the (frequency-independent) coupling matrix D. The time dependent Hamiltonian H(t) and the losses Γ = DD + /2 not only determine the dynamics of the wave function, but also shape the outgoing scattered waves H eff (t)e -imΩt dt is a N S × N S matrix, being N S the number of modes. In what follows, we assume that Eq. (S1) is valid around a resonant frequency ω 0 , and |ψ(ω) → 0 when ω ω 0 or ω ω 0 and that Ω ω 0 . In addition, the thermal excitations coming from bath β, S + β (ω) = β|S + (ω) , satisfy the correlation relation where Θβ (ω) = ω[exp( ω/(k B T β )) -1] -1 being k B and T β the Boltzmann constant and temperature of reservoir β, respectively. Therefore, from Eq. (S1) we have (S5) We can turn Eq. (S5) into a matrix equation in an extended space with the definition of the following quantities. The block matrix ĤQ = H 0 Q -[nΩ], where H 0 Q and [nΩ] are block matrices, whose blocks are (H Here, I N S is the N S × N S identity matrix and the notation [A] represents a block diagonal matrix whose blocks are AI N S . We denote the frequency as ω when its range is restricted to ω ∈ [ω 0 -Ω/2, ω 0 + Ω/2). Finally, we define the vectors with f being, as before, S ± or ψ, and where ω n = ω +nΩ. Interestingly, Eq. (S6) allow us to express the wave function vector in a physically meaningful form, which evidences that the excitations introduced by the thermal baths, S + (ω), are propagated through the system in the extended dimension, and hence scattered to other frequencies. The propagator, is nothing else than the Green's function of the extended space, or also called Floquet Green's function, which allow us to find the outgoing scattered fields for given incident waves S + (ω). The above mentioned outgoing scattered field can be readily found by using the Fourier transform of Eq. (S2) in the extended space and Eq. (S7), where I = and this allow us to find the scattered field going out of the system toward lead α where S ± β (ω m ) = S ± βm (ω) = β|S ± (ω+mΩ) . Notice that the element S F αn,βm (ω) indicates that radiation coming from lead β at frequency ω m = ω + mΩ leaves the system toward lead α with frequency ω n = ω + nΩ. Then, in order to highlight the incident and outgoing frequencies, we will also use the notation S F α,β (ω n , ω m ) ≡ S F αn,βm (ω). The net average energy current going out of the system toward the reservoir α is where the outgoing field in the frequency domain can be written as Introducing Eq. (S13) into Eq. (S12) leads us to evaluate the correlation for the outgoing scattered fields, which read Here we have used Eqs. (S11), (S13), and the correlation relations for the incident radiation (S15) which follow from the properties of the thermal reservoirs, Eq. (S4). Therefore, we obtain where we have used Ω 2π 2π/Ω 0 dte i(n -n)Ωt = δ n ,n . Notice that in Eq. (S16) we have restored the integration over the whole frequency range by using the incident-outgoing frequency notation for S F . Finally, we can evaluate the net average energy current going toward reservoir α where the incident energy current Īin . Finally, using Eq. (S16) and shifting ω m → ω, we obtain (S18) which demonstrates Eq. ( Here, we provide expressions for the average energy current in the adiabatic limit, Ω → 0, without involving the classical limit and small temperature gradient approximation. Further details will be given in a future publication[S37]. The average current at a lead 2 can be separate in two contributions, as in Eq. ( (S19) Here, the bias current reads where the transmittance T (ω) = Ω 2π dt|S t 21 (ω)| 2 is averaged over one cycle, being S t the instantaneous scattering matrix, and we consider instantaneous reciprocal transport, i.e. S t 21 (ω) = S t 12 (ω). The current associated with the modulation of the scatterer is the pumped current, which evaluated at lead 2 reads dt (S t α,β ) * , and = A 22 + A 21 . In the classical limit, where Θ α (ω) ≈ k B T α /( ω), integration of the first term of Eq. (S21) results proportional to [P ∞ 0 ≈ 0, while the third term is of order O(Ω∆T /T 0 ). Green's Functions The main difficulty in the computation of S F in Eq. (3) of the main text is associated with the evaluation of the Floquet Green's function G F = ([ω] -ĤQ ) -1 which requires the inversion of the matrix ([ω] -ĤQ ), whose rank is in principle infinite involving all Floquet channels n ∈ (-∞, +∞). Approximate results can be obtained through truncations of the Floquet space to n ∈ [-N F , N F ], where reliable results require N F to be large, slowing down the calculation. Of course, there are cases, like for adiabatic [S45] and for high modulation frequencies [S53, S54] or for a simple two level Rabi driving schemes [S46], where G F and subsequently Īα are easily calculated. In most general scenarios, however, one needs to consider many Floquet channels in order to obtain an accurate description of the scattering process. We have tackled this difficulty by employing a decimation technique borrowed from the field of molecular electronics [S59-S61]. By utilizing the block diagonal structure of the Hamiltonian in the Floquet -Hilbert space, a matrix continued fraction expansion [S61] allows the calculation of G F via an iteration relation connecting blocks n and m. Floquet Hamiltonians ĤQ have typically a block structure. In particular, for simple driving schemes (few harmonics in the Fourier expansion of the effective Hamiltonian) ĤQ is block tridiagonal and thus several nondiagonal blocks are zeros. Here, we take advantage of this structure and we perform efficient calculation of G F by means of the decimation procedures, inspired in the renormalization group techniques of statistical mechanics [S59], and widely utilized in Condensed Matter [S61] and Molecular Electronics [S60]. Here we will show the basics of this technique, and we parallel the approach given in Refs. [S60, S61]. The decimation procedures recursively reduce a general N × N Hamiltonian into another of lower rank by decreasing the number of degrees of freedom, without altering its physical properties. As a result, the method utilizes O(N ) operations instead of O(N 2 ) required by the matrix inversion [S61] and allow us to deal with complex driving schemes which are intractable by any other method. For instructive purposes, let us consider a block tridiagonal Hamiltonian H such that it satisfies the equation where the corresponding identity matrices multiplying ω are implicit. From the middle (block) equation, we can isolate u 2 and decimate it, leading to the equations Here, the blocks have been renormalized hiding the nonlinear dependence on ω: The terms Σ j (ω), known as self-energies, account for the frequency (energy) shifts due to the coupling with the decimated state. Notice that now, there are effective coupling elements V Here, we have introduced the notation Σ to indicate the correction to block n due to the decimation of all blocks between n and m, with m included. We highlight that the order of the decimation protocol does not affect Σ (m) n , which is obtained as "matrix continued fractions" [S61]. The recursive structure of the self-energy Σ n , e.g. as shown in Eq. (S25), can be used to efficiently reduce Hamiltonians of arbitrary dimensions. In particular, the Floquet Hamiltonian can be decimated into two blocks, with labels n and m, resulting in Ẽn = E n + Σ (1) n + Σ (m) where for m > n. We have assumed block tridiagonal matrices, but the procedure can be straightforwardly generalized. Now, utilizing this procedure, we can address our initial question by obtaining the block element of the total Green's function connecting blocks n and m from The inversion of the matrix can be performed resorting to the block-inversion matrix which requires the existence of the inverses of matrices D, A, (D -CA -1 B), and (A -BD -1 C). In our case, all of them exist. Therefore we have, , , These equations allow the calculation of the Green's functions avoiding the inversion of the full Floquet Hamiltonian matrix. In Eq. (S30) the recursive nature of the decimation procedure requires O(N ) self energies Σ (1) n and Σ (N ) n for the diagonal elements of G F . For the non diagonal elements, it is possible to use the self energies already calculated for the diagonal ones, highly improving the performance of the method.[S61] Coupled mode theory description of the electrical circuits We construct a CMT description for the electrical circuit as shown in Fig. , equivalently as the first-order differential equation d dt ψ (t) = jω 0 ψ (t) or its complex conjugate. At the same time, the mode amplitude ψ is normalized such that |ψ| 2 represents the energy stored in the resonator. Notice that the full degree of freedom i.e., v (t) and v (t), required to specify the circuits completely at each time, is maintained in the complexmode description, since they can be expressed, using the definition of the amplitude ψ (t) and its complex conjugate ψ * (t), as v Nevertheless, when describing the dynamics of circuits, the amplitude ψ (t) and its complex conjugate ψ * (t) are generally not decoupled with each other as seen below. We proceed to describe the coupling between two (identical) LC resonators under the complex-mode description. As considered in Fig. where v n , n = 1, 2 are the node voltages of each resonator. Using the complex-mode representation ψ n for each resonator n, we can rewrite the circuit equations Eq. ( when assuming κ → 0. Furthermore, under the rotatingwave approximation enabled by the weak coupling κ → 0, we can simplify the Eqs. (S33) and (S34) further by decoupling ψ n with their complex conjugates ψ * n to get a coupled mode form Clearly, the capacitive coupling C c = κC shifts the resonant frequency of each resonators in addition to coupling the two resonators. The effects of the external capacitive coupling C e = C between a transmission line (TL) and a LC resonator can be examined similarly. Before that, we need to define the complex wave amplitude S ± for the incoming/outgoing wave flowing through the TL. Along the TL, the voltage v (z, t) and current i (z, t) can be written in terms of the superposition of incoming and outgoing voltage waves where Z 0 is the characteristic impedance of TL. In turn, the real voltage waves v ± (z, t) can be separated into the complex wave amplitude S ± (z, t) and its complex conjugate as v ± (z, t) = Z0 2 S ± (z, t) + S ± (z, t) * . We assume that S ± (z, t) = S± (z, t) e jω0t with a slow envelope S± (z, t) such that ∂S ± ∂t ≈ jω 0 S ± . Correspondingly, the time-averaged incoming and outgoing power with respect to the period 2π/ω 0 , i.e., P ± = v ± i ± , are simply ± |S ± | 2 , benefiting from the proper normalization factor in the definition of wave amplitudes. From now on, we will use S ± (t) to represent the incoming and outgoing wave amplitude at the ending position z = 0 of the TL, where the external coupling capacitor C e is attached. The set of circuit equations accounting for the coupling between the TL and the LC resonator are where v is the node voltage of the LC resonator. Assuming that Z 0 ∼ O (z 0 ) with z 0 ≡ L/C and → 0 for the weak coupling, we can use the complex mode amplitude ψ of the resonator and the input/output wave amplitude S ± to reformulate Eqs. (S37) and (S38) as where r = Z 0 /z 0 ∼ O (1), and the rotating-wave approximation enabled by the weak-coupling assumption is employed in the derivation. Finally, we study the effect of a small driving on the dynamics of the LC resonators for two relevant cases. We start by considering a LC resonator with time-dependent capacitance C (t) = C [1 + δ (t)] with δ (t + 2π/Ω) = δ (t). Under the weak and slow driving assumptions such that δ (t) → 0 and Ω/ω 0 → 0, we can rewrite the circuit equation v/L + d dt [C (t) v] = 0 using the complex mode amplitude ψ (t) as Therefore, the driving could introduce effective gain/loss to the system in addition to modifying the resonant frequency. Next, we consider the case of two identical LC resonators coupled through a time-modulated capacitance C k (t) = C [h 0 + h 1 (t)], with h 1 (t + 2π/Ω) = h 1 (t). Like in the previous case, we resort to the approximations h 1 (t) → 0 and Ω/ω 0 → 0, and weak coupling limit h 0 → 0, which allow us to write the Kirchoff equations as described by Eqs. (S31) and (S32) but replacing κ → h(t) = h 0 + h 1 (t). Introducing the complex mode amplitudes ψ 1 and ψ 2 , dψ 1 dt ≈ jω 0 1 -h(t) ψ 1 + jω 0 h(t)ψ 2 , (S42) where h(t) = h(t) 2 -j ḣ(t) ω0 . Like in the previous case of the driven LC resonator, the driving of the capacitance introduces effective gain/loss due to the non-zero imaginary part of h(t). But in contrast, the driving of the coupling capacitance not only modulates the coupling but also the resonant frequencies of the resonators. In the weak coupling limit, above mechanisms can be superimposed on top of each other independently ignoring higher-order effects. For example, using this rule we can write down directly the CME for the circuits as shown in Fig. 