Generally, it is supposed that the Fermi level in epitaxial graphene is controlled by two effects: p-type polarization doping induced by the bulk of the hexagonal SiC(0001) substrate and overcompensation by donor-like states related to the buffer layer. In this work, we evidence that this effect is also related to the specific underlying SiC terrace. We fabricated a periodic sequence of non-identical SiC terraces, which are unambiguously attributed to specific SiC surface terminations. A clear correlation between the SiC termination and the electronic graphene properties is experimentally observed and confirmed by various complementary surface-sensitive methods. We attribute this correlation to a proximity effect of the SiC termination-dependent polarization doping on the overlying graphene layer. Our findings open a new approach for a nano-scale doping-engineering by self-patterning of epitaxial graphene and other 2D layers on dielectric polar substrates. The growth of epitaxial graphene on large-scale silicon carbide (SiC) substrates enables the fabrication of electronic devices for a wide range of technological applications in an industrial fabrication environment. The epitaxial buffer and graphene layers in this work were grown on semi-insulating 6H-SiC samples with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° toward [1100] (from II-VI Inc.). Epitaxial growth was carried out in a horizontal inductively heated furnace. Only step edges appear as narrow regions with increased phase. On the other hand, ~0.25/~0.5 nm stepped surface clearly shows an alternating phase (Figure Again, the regular ~0.75 nm stepped SiC terraces (see Figure The formation of the SiC terraces during graphene growth can be understood in the framework of the SiC step retraction model applied to the 6H polytype SiC(0001) substrate. Figure The schematic representation of the terrace structure with single Si-C steps (1L) of ~0.25 nm, in Figure . From this model, we can clearly assign the S3 terrace being above a 1L step and an S2 terrace above a 2L step. It is further assumed that S2 is the most stable surface because < 5 > of its least hexagonality (kk on-bond and kk off-bond) and, therefore, the width of the S3 terrace (kk on-bond but hk off-bond) is decreasing faster than S2, which agrees with the model in ref. The preparation of a ~0.25/~0.5 nm stepped surface with alternating S2 and S3 terraces of nearly 100% efficiency is a specific advantage of the PASG method. As will be discussed further below, the different brightness in the BF-LEEM images can be related to a variation of the surface potential, which is induced by the stacking of the SiC crystal underneath. Next to the very regular S2/S3 terrace pattern in the upper part of this BF-LEEM image, there also irregular terrace configurations are observed in the lower part of Figure A confirmation of the presented surface terrace model and a visualization of the SiC surface crystal orientation is provided by a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) investigation of the graphene sample. Figure So far, AFM phase images reveal that the surface properties of graphene monolayers are different depending on the stacking termination of the underlying SiC terrace, which is in good agreement with the observed reflectivity contrast in the BF-LEEM images. In this section, we use additional methods to quantify the energy difference between the terraces and we discuss possible origins. ). As a second approach, low-energy electron reflectivity (LEEM-IV) measurements are used to deduce the graphene specific energy from the energy dispersion of the reflected electron beam in BF μ-LEED geometry. For the neighboring terraces S2 and S3, an energy difference of (ES3 -ES2) of (60 ±10) meV is estimated from the minimum energy histogram in the inset of Figure As the third complementary method, X-ray photoemission electron microscopy (XPEEM) was applied, which directly visualizes the work function variation on the surface. Up to now, other experimental results are lacking. The local measurements of the sheet resistivity by high-resolution scanning-tunneling potentiometry (STP) on similar 1L/2L stepped samples (thermally cleaned) have indicated a difference of the average graphene sheet resistance by ~14% at room temperature and ~270% at low temperature (8 K) on both terraces S2 and S3. [23] The analogy to the results presented here supports the idea of a strong impact of the SiC terrace termination on the graphene properties. The presented measurements convincingly show a correlation of the SiC substrate termination with the electronic properties and the work function of epitaxial monolayer graphene. The graphene's n-type doping level is mainly determined by two effects, namely, an overcompensation of the SiC bulk polarization doping by donor-like buffer layer and interface states. [4] A specific terrace related polarization effect can be deduced from ab-initio pseudo charge calculations, which show a different valence band charge density for cubic and hexagonal SiC layers in the 6H polytype and a different charge density depending on the distance to the next underlying hexagonal layer. This discussion shows that the assumption of a SiC stacking termination dependent polarization doping can explain the presented experimental results. Other effects, e.g., an influence of terrace dependent stress is less probable by the observation of strong contrast patterns also in more relaxed free-standing mono and bilayer graphene. In summary, by using a variety of measurement techniques (AFM, STM, μ-LEED, LEEM, LEEM-IV, KPFM, XPEEM) we have for the first time evidenced a direct dependence of electronic properties of epitaxial graphene on the underlying SiC stacking termination. This was realized by employing advanced epitaxial growth techniques including the PASG method. We gratefully acknowledge M. Wenderoth and A. Sinterhauf for valuable discussions. This work was supported in part by the Joint Research Project "GIQS" (18SIB07). This project received funding from the European Metrology Programme for Innovation and Research (EMPIR) co-financed by the Participating States and from the European Unions' Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme. A. A. Z. acknowledges the support from Stiftelsen för Strategisk Forskning (project RMA15-0024). We thank the support DFG Project Te386/12-1. We also acknowledge funding from the European Commission Graphene Flagship Core2 (grant agreement 785219). Sample preparation. Samples in this study were grown on semi-insulating 6H-SiC(0001) specimens (5 × 10 mm 2 ) with a nominal miscut of about -0.06° toward [1100]. The SiC samples were first cleaned with acetone/ isopropanol in an ultrasonic-bath (USB) (15 min, 40 °C). The PASG method was applied using a so-called liquid-phase deposition (LPD) in a way that the samples were immersed into a mixture of AZ5214E polymer with isopropanol (25ml/ 5ml) and introduced to the USB (15 min, 40 °C). The specimens were subsequently rinsed with isopropanol (30 sec) before being spin-dried. Atomic force microscopy/ kelvin probe force microscopy. The AFM investigations were performed using two AFM setups: (i) the NANOStation AFM equipped with the SSS-NCLR silicon tips fabricated by "Nanosensors TM ," and (ii) the NanoWizard AFM system made by JPK instruments AG. The latter also enables KPFM (AM-mode) investigations. For this, conductive coated (Cr/Pt, 5 nm/25 nm) micromachined monolithic silicon tips (Tap300E-G, r=25nm) from < 13 > "budget sensors" was supplied. In the AM-KPFM, the mapping of the topography and surface potential of the sample was performed in two-pass mode, in which first in tracing-pass the AFM in tapping mode collects the topographical data over the measuring profile line and this data is then used in retracing-pass at a set ascended height above the surface (<5 nm) to map the surface potential. Scanning tunneling microscopy. The atomic structures were investigated using an Omicron low-temperature STM system at 77 K with a tungsten tip. Before characterization, the sample was degassed in situ at 500 °C for two hours. There two sets of LEEM measurements were presented. The first (Figure 