We demonstrate that the recently discovered triple-Q (3Q) magnetic structure, when embedded in a magnet-superconductor hybrid (MSH) system, gives rise to the emergence of topological superconductivity. We investigate the structure of chiral Majorana edge modes at domain walls, and show that they can be distinguished from trivial in-gap modes through the spatial distribution of the induced supercurrents. Finally, we show that topological superconductivity in 3Q MSH systems is a robust phenomenon that does not depend on the relative alignment of the magnetic and superconducting layers, or on the presence of electronic degrees of freedom in the magnetic layer. Introduction The non-Abelian braiding statistics of Majorana zero modes (MZMs) represent a new paradigm for the realization of topological quantum computing and topology-based devices In this Letter, we address these open questions and demonstrate that MSH systems containing a 3Q magnetic layer do not only realize topological superconductivity, but also exhibit a rich topological phase diagram. Underlying the emergence of topological superconductiv-ity is a uniform Rashba spin-orbit interaction that is induced by the 3Q magnetic structure. We show that ribbons of the 3Q magnetic structure exhibit Majorana edge modes, that despite the complex 3Q structure, still exhibit a well-defined chirality. Moreover, we demonstrate that domain walls at which the magnetic 3Q structure is inverted (spin-domain wall) give rise to Majorana modes that traverse the superconducting gap. In contrast, domain walls at which the superconducting order parameter undergoes a π-phase shift (π-phase domain wall) induce only trivial in-gap modes. However, while the local density of states (LDOS) at these two types of domain walls shows only some quantitative differences, we demonstrate that the induced supercurrents at the domain walls, which can be imaged using a scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) Theoretical Model To study the topological phase diagram of an MSH system containing a 3Q magnetic layer, we begin by considering a model, in which the magnetic moments are located above the sites of the underlying s-wave superconductor, and couple to the surface electrons via an exchange field only [see Fig. where -t rr is the hopping amplitude between nearest neighbor sites on a triangular lattice, μ is the chemical potential, and ∆ 0 is the superconducting s-wave order parameter. J is the magnetic exchange coupling, and c † rσ creates an electron with spin σ at site r. S r represents the magnetic moment's spin S at site r, encoding the spatial form of the 3Q magnetic structure. It possesses a 2 × 2unit cell with the four spins pointing from the center of a tetrahedron to its corners [see Fig. To characterize the topological superconducting phases of the system, we compute the topological invariant -the Chern number C -given by where E n (k) and |Ψ n (k) are the eigenenergies and the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian in Eq.( The topological phase diagram in the (μ, JS)-plane, resulting from the Hamiltonian in Eq.( with μ 0 = 2t for the Γ point, and μ 0 = -t at the (K, K ) points, and at the M point. While the gap closing at the Γ and (K, K ) points yields phase transition lines that are symmetric around μ = 0.5t, those at the M point are symmetric around μ = 0. As a result, the topological phase with C = 2 (for μ > 0) is fully surrounded by one with C = -4, while their counterparts (for μ < 0) only partly overlap, giving rise not only to C = -2 and C = 4 phases, but also to a C = -6 phase. We note that the gap closing at the (K, K ) and M points occur via a Dirac cone, Ribbon geometry In order to investigate the emergence of Majorana edge modes in 3Q MSH systems, we next consider a ribbon of the 3Q magnetic layer placed on the surface of an s-wave superconductor, as shown in the upper panel of Fig. The recent observation of a dispersing Majorana mode at a domain wall However, a significant and qualitative difference between spin and π-phase domain walls emerges when considering the supercurrents induced by the domain walls. For a spin domain wall, the opposite Chern numbers imply that the chirality of the supercurrents associated with the two domains is reversed. As a result, the supercurrents posses an even symmetry across the domain wall, leading to a non-vanishing net supercurrent flowing along the domain wall [see Fig. Experimentally motivated model While the above model has demonstrated the general existence of topological superconductivity in 3Q MSH systems, the question naturally arises of how this result depends on material specifics. In particular, recent realizations of MSH systems have shown H hyb = -t hyb r,r ,σ c † rσ d r σ + H.c. and H 0 given in Eq.( Conclusions We have shown that a non-collinear 3Q magnetic layer in a MSH system induce a spatially uniform Rashba spin-orbit interaction that gives rise to a rich topological phase diagram. We demonstrated that a spin domain leads to topological Majorana modes, while a π-phase domain wall induces trivial in-gap states only. Both types of domain walls possess a qualitatively similar LDOS, making it difficult to distinguish between them experimentally solely based on STS measurements. In contrast, the spatial distribution of the induced supercurrents differs qualitatively, allowing one to distinguish topological domain walls giving rise to Majorana modes from trivial ones. Finally, we show that the emergence of topological phases in the 3Q MSH system is a robust phenomenon that does not depend on the relative alignment of the magnetic and superconducting layers, or the presence of electronic degrees of freedom in the magnetic layer. Our results open new possibilities for the creation of topological superconductivity and the manipulation of the concomitant edge modes in MSH systems containing complex magnetic structures. The long-term vision is to control and to modify electronic circuits of edge modes by manipulating domain walls as proposed for magnonic edge modes The Hamiltonian of Eq.( The effective hopping is given by with α rr being the induced Rashba spin-orbit interaction. To derive the explicit form of the effective hopping -trr , we note that for the four different spins in the 3Q structure, the local gauge transformations are given through There exist six unique bonds that connect the four spins in the unit cell [see Fig. with tij = t † ji = U † ri U rj . Here, tij denotes the hopping matrix between sites r i and r j . The above results show that while the phase of α rr varies spatially, its magnitude is constant, |α| = 2/3t. At the same time, the magnitude of the nearest-neighbor hopping term is reduced to | trr | = 1/3t. Section 2: Symmetries of the magnetic 3Q structure and doubly degenerate electronic band structure The real space structure of the 3Q magnetic layer is shown in Fig. Here, both T and R are 16 × 16 matrices that acts on a spinor representing the four sites in a unit cell, defined by where c kr i is given by We note that a translation of the magnetic structure by a 1 is equivalent to exchanging the sites at which spins S r0 and S r1 are located, as well as those with S r2 and S r3 . This exchange is achieved by applying T . The application of the matrix Ŝ = T • R leaves the spatial spin structure of the system unchanged. Given the definition of the Hamiltonian matrix in momentum space We note that the eigenvalues of Ŝ are ±i. In order to block-diagonalize Ĥ(k), we need to find the unitary transformation that diagonalizes Ŝ. This can be achieved by first finding the unitary transformations Û T , R that diagonalizing T and R separately. These are given by then does not only diagonalize Ŝ, but also sorts its eigenvalues ±i into block-diagonal form such that the first 8 states belong to the eigenvalue i and the last 8 states to -i. The Hamiltonian matrix Ĥ(k) is now block-diagonalized (because the two eigenspaces of Ŝ cannot be mixed) through the transformation where + 2t cos(k x )μ ∆