Todays great challenges of energy and informational technologies are addressed with a singular compound, the Li and Na doped few layer graphene. All what is impossible for graphite (homogeneous and high level Na doping), and unstable for single layer graphene, works very well for this structure. The transformation of the Raman G line to a Fano lineshape and the emergence of strong, metalliclike electron spin resonance (ESR) modes, attest the high level of graphene doping in liquid ammonia for both kinds of alkali atoms. The spin-relaxation time in our materials, deduced from the ESR line-width, is 6-8 ns, which is comparable to the longest values found in spin-transport experiments on ultrahigh mobility graphene flakes. This could qualify our material as promising candidate in spintronics devices. On the other hand, the successful sodium doping, this being a highly abundant metal, could be an encouraging alternative to lithium batteries. Charge state in various forms of carbon can be conveniently controlled using alkali atom doping methods. It led to applications in e.g. energy storage Conventional alkali doping of carbon proceeds in the so-called vapor phase which works well for heavier alkali atoms with a lower melting point (K, Rb, and Cs): Alkali atom doping of graphene is also intensively studied. As mentioned, doping with light alkali atoms cannot be performed with the vapor phase method. An alternative doping route uses solvents, such as liquid ammonia and organic solvents (e.g. tetrahydrofuran (THF) Few-layer graphene (FLG) samples were doped with lithium and sodium in liquid ammonia with the setup shown in Fig. Given the surprising result of a successful and relatively high level of Na doping of the few layer graphene sample, we performed Raman spectroscopy on the synthesized materials as it is a sensitive probe of the charge transfer toward the carbonaceous material. Raman spectra recorded at 514.5 nm wavelength of the materials are presented in Fig. We also present Raman data for two Na doped samples, one denoted as heavily, the other as moderately doped. The heavy doping notation refers to the highest achievable doping level whereas the moderate doping is representative for a sample prepared with a smaller amount of alkali dopants. Both types of sodium doped samples present a Fano line at around 1572 cm -1 and a symmetric Lorentzian peak at 1600 -1602 cm -1 . The Fano peak at the lower Raman shift confirms the presence of highly intercalated flakes in agreement with the above mentioned surprising microscopic observation, i.e. that significant charge transfer is observed in the Na doped samples. The Fano lineshape in alkali-metal intercalation compounds with graphite only occurs when a stage-I compound is reached, that means when each graphene layer is surrounded from both sides by an alkali atom layer. where q is the Fano asymmetry lineshape parameter, and A is an offset parameter. Herein ω 0 is the vibrational energy of the unper- turbed phonon, ∆ is the interaction induced shift of the phonon energy and Γ is the broadening parameter due to the interaction. In general Γ and ∆ increases with the strength of the electron-phonon coupling however q is inversely proportional to it, q = ±∞ represents the non-interacting limit and q → 0 is the limit of strong electron-phonon interaction. We found q = -1.03 for the Li doped FLG and q = -2.64 and q = -3.17 for the heavily and moderately Na doped FLG samples, respec-tively (details of the lineshape analysis are provided in the Supplementary Information). These figures have to be compared with q = -1.09 found for the graphite intercalation compounds The significant charge transfer and the sizable electron-phonon coupling in the Li doped FLG motivated us to search for traces of superconductivity for both the Li and Na doped materials. However, SQUID magnetometry in a zero field cooled condition and using a 10 Oe of sensing field, while warming up the samples from 2 K, did not reveal any traces of superconductivity. Electron spin resonance spectroscopy To gain a deeper insight to the electronic properties of the doped materials, the temperature dependence of the ESR signal was studied in the 5 to 250 K temperature range. The ESR intensity is directly proportional to the spin susceptibility, which allows to identify the nature of spins (localized or delocalized) which give rise to the ESR signal. In addition, the ESR linewidth is related to T 2 , which is called the spin-spin relaxation time (due to historical reasons). The spectroscopic properties, including line intensity, position, and linewidth were determined by fitting the Dysonian lines with a mixture of absorption and dispersion Lorentzian lines, In contrast, a Pauli-like spin susceptibility, i.e. with little temperature dependence, dominates the signal for both the lithium and sodium doped samples above 20 K, although the sodium doped material also contains a Curie-like contribution with a much smaller intensity. An ESR signal with a spin-susceptibility with little or no temperature dependence is characteristic for conduction electrons. The fact, that the Li doped material contains two such signals, hints that the doping is inhomogeneous. We note that the presence of unreacted metallic particles can be excluded as the origin of the observed metallic signals, since metallic Li and Na have a characteristic lineshapes (typical for strongly diffusing electrons) which is not observed herein. We identify the Pauli-like signal in the Na doped FLG sample as coming from Na doped graphene monolayers. It is based on the observation that Na cannot dope graphite, thus it is very probable that multilayer graphene is also inaccessible for it. This observation is in a full agreement with the Raman result, as it evidenced that Na doping of an FLG sample leaves a part of the sample undoped. The ESR linewidth, ∆B, data in Fig. In principle, the temperature dependent character of the spin relaxation time also contains information about the relaxation mechanism, 8,80 whether it can be described by the Elliott-Yafet Nevertheless, the striking observation is that the ESR linewidth at 230 K, when translated to spinrelaxation times, gives ∼ 6.1 ns and ∼ 7.9 ns for lithium and sodium doped monolayer graphene, respectively. These values are even more surprising in view of the well-known heterogeneity of chemically exfoliated graphene and the synthesis method we employed. In fact, our figures are only surpassed by recent spin-transport experiments on carefully manufactured microscopic graphene samples, with ultrahigh mobility. Early spin-transport experiments reported sub-nanosecond spin-relaxation times in graphene, In conclusion, we successfully synthesized lithium and sodium doped few-layer graphene in liquid ammonia solution. We found that Na dopes exclusively monolayer graphene which is present in the FLG sample. This is deduced from an overally weaker Na doping of the FLG samples, which is argued to be associated with the well-known inability of Na to intercalate graphite, thus multilayer graphene is also inaccessible for it. The obtained materials exhibit a clear change of color, a dominant Fano mode in the Raman spectrum, and ESR signals due to conduction electrons. These observations prove a successful intercalation and charge transfer from the alkali atoms toward graphene. Electron spin resonance spectroscopy indicates a spin-relaxation time of 6-8 ns, which is comparable to the longest values found on ultrahigh mobility graphene flakes using spintransport methods. Given that we studied a relatively impure and bulk graphene material, these figures are encouraging for the spintronics applications of alkali atom doped graphene. Preparation of the few layer graphene starting material. Few-layer graphene was prepared from saturation potassium doped spherical graphite powder (SGN18, Future Carbon) using DMSO solvent for the wet chemical exfoliation as described previously. Doping of graphene with lithium and sodium Lithium and sodium with a purity of 99.9 + % and 99.8% (from Sigma-Aldrich), respectively, were handled in an Ar glove box (O 2 , H 2 O < 0.1 ppm). The lithium granules had metallic color and were cut into smaller pieces to increase the surface. The sodium chunks were first thoroughly cleaned and then cut up. About 1 milligram of FLG and excess alkali metal of 1.1 or 2.2 milligrams for lithium and sodium, respectively, were placed in a bulb shaped quartz container (reaction chamber in the following) inside the glove box. The bulb of the re-action chamber (hand-blown by a technician) had a diameter of 10 mm and it was connected to the vacuum line with a 5 mm diameter quartz tube. A (Li,Na)C 6 stoichiometry (which is probably the upper limit of doping) would require 0.09 mg and 0.24 mg for the Li and Na, respectively, for the 1 mg FLG. The unreacted mixture was then connected to a vacuum line with the help of a wellsealing valve and pumped to a vacuum better than 10 -6 mbar. The reaction chamber was placed in liquid nitrogen and gaseous ammonia, that was connected to the vacuum line, was rapidly (within a few seconds) condensed to the starting mixture of FLG and alkali metal. The rapid condensing is required to prevent the formation of side products. Following this, the reaction chamber is surrounded by an ethanol bath which is kept at -40 • C (below the -33 • C boiling point of ammonia at ambient pressure). Ethanol has a freezing point of -114 • C thus it is well suited for this purpose. The reaction chamber, surrounded by the ethanol bath was immersed in a bath sonicator where it was intensively sonicated for 30 minutes to obtain a homogeneous doping of the few-layer graphene. The pressure of the chamber is monitored to avoid evaporation of the ammonia during the process. The dissolution of alkali metals in liquid ammonia can be followed by characteristic color changes: the solution changes its color to dark blue initially, immediately followed by a change to yellow-brownish. This marks the dissolution of the alkali metals: dark blue color indicates a low concentration of the dissolved alkali and yellow-brownish color is characteristic for a high concentration of dissolved alkali metals. At the end of the intercalation, the solution is slowly heated to room temperature, when ammonia is evacuated. Subsequently, a heating of 200 • C is applied for 30 minutes to remove any absorbed ammonia and the unreacted alkali metal. The choice of 200 • C is delicate: on one hand it is above the melting temperature of the alkali metals (181 • C for Li and 98 • C for Na) which allows for an efficient removal of the unreacted, excess alkali atoms but on the other hand, it is below the onset of the formation temperature of alkali carbides (this occurs above ∼ 400 • C, Ref. Ammonia is known to react with alkali metal elements and forms amides. Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy was performed on the as prepared samples inside the same reaction chambers where the doping proceeds. A 514.5 nm wavelength laser excitation with 0.5 mW power was used to avoid laser-induced deintercalation Electron spin resonance The reaction chambers were opened up inside an Ar glove box and placed into quartz tubes with a 4 mm outer diameter. These tubes were then evacuated on the vacuum line to better than 2 × 10 -6 mbar, then filled with 20 mbar He exchange gas for the cryogenic measurements and sealed permanently with a torch. Raman spectrum of the materials were checked before and after this procedure to ensure that no changes occur during this operation. ESR measurements were performed on a Bruker Elexsys E500 X-band spectrometer equipped with an Oxford He flow cryostat. The temperature could be varied between 4 and 300 K. Care was taken to avoid saturation and overmodulation of the observed signals, similarly to our previous works. where the ESR lineshape, I(B) is given as a function of the B magnetic field, A is proportional to the static spin susceptibility, B 0 is the line position, ∆B is the ESR linewidth, φ is the mixing angle between the two types of curves (absorption and dispersion). The ESR linewidth is related to the T 2 spin-spin relaxation time as ∆B = 1/γT 2 where γ = 2π • 28.0 GHz/T is the so-called electron gyromagnetic ratio. Magnetometry with a superconducting quantum interference device Samples inside the same, He exchange gas filled quartz tubes were used for the SQUID measurement that were used in the ESR studies. We searched for traces of superconductivity in a standard MPMS SQUID magnetometer down to 2 K with a zero magnetic field cooling protocol, in small applied fields of 5 -50 Oe, and also at 2 K in magnetic hysteresis loops. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/.............. Details of the Raman spectra deconvolution, spectroscopic parameters of the Breit-Wigner-Fano lineshapes, a discussion of the electronphonon coupling and the temperature dependent g-factor as detected by electron spin resonance (PDF). Deconvolution of the observed Raman spectra is depicted in Fig. We note that in LiC 6 (Ref. To obtain further valuable information of the nature lithium intercalation, the electron-phonon coupling parameter (EPC), which is directly related to the charge transfer can be calculated from the the fitted parameters, whose are summarized in Table Here, ω Fano is the measured position of the G-line peak, ω A and ω NA are the calculated adiabatic and non-adiabatic phonon frequencies. ESR g-factors of the investigated materials are shown in Fig. 