Integration of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) into functional optoelectronic circuitries requires an understanding of the charge transfer across the interface between the TMD and the contacting material. Here, we use spatially resolved photocurrent microscopy to demonstrate electronic uniformity at the epitaxial graphene/molybdenum disulfide (EG/MoS2) interface. A 10 larger photocurrent is extracted at the EG/MoS2 interface when compared to metal (Ti/Au) /MoS2 interface. This is supported by semi-local density-functional theory (DFT), which predicts the Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface to be ~2 lower than Ti/MoS2. We provide a direct visualization of a 2D material Schottky barrier through combination of angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy with spatial resolution selected to be ~300 nm (nano-ARPES) and DFT calculations. A bending of ~500 meV over a length scale of ~2-3 μm in the valence band maximum of MoS2 is observed via nano-ARPES. We explicate a correlation between experimental demonstration and theoretical predictions of barriers at graphene/TMD interfaces. Spatially resolved photocurrent mapping allows for directly visualizing the uniformity of built-in electric fields at heterostructure interfaces, providing a guide for microscopic engineering of charge transport across heterointerfaces. This simple probe-based technique also speaks directly to the 2D synthesis community to elucidate electronic uniformity at domain boundaries alongside morphological uniformity over large areas. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals semiconducting materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are of interest due to their strong light-matter interaction dominated by exciton phenomena. Efficient electron-hole pair (e --h + ) generation in MoS2-based devices upon photoexcitation is responsible for a single-layer MoS2-based photodetector exhibiting a photoresponsivity reaching 880 A/W. Photocurrent is observed at the heterostructure interfaces as shown in Figure The time-integrated photocurrent at heterostructure interfaces is primarily attributed to photovoltaic effect. where φ is the electric potential of the equilibrium interface along the z-axis perpendicular to the plane of the interface, e 0 is the electron charge, N d is the three-dimensional defect density in the semiconductor, ε and ε 0 are the dielectric constant of MoS2 (ε = 4.3) 62 and the vacuum permittivity, respectively. z c is the location along the transverse axis marking the transition between the quantum mechanical region of the interface model and the one-dimensional continuum (Mott-Schottky) description of the bulk semiconductor; z c is located two layers within the semiconductor to fully capture the effects of the interface before transitioning to a bulk model. The only unknown in equation 1 is N d . Following the method of Kim et al., The Schottky barrier of the EG/MoS2 interface is predicted to be 0.44 eV. This compares favorably with the previous predictions (0.4 eV) for undoped graphene/MoS2 junction, Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy with selected spatial resolution of ~300 nm (nano-ARPES) visualizes spatial variation in electronic band structures at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface to understand the photo-generated charge transfer. A lower Schottky barrier at the photo-active EG/MoS2 interface is coupled with a uniform built-in electric field aiding efficient charge separation. The spatial variations in the electronic band structure across the lateral EG/MoS2/EG interface (as shown in Figure Step edges on the SiC substrate are readily observed as lines with lighter contrast in Figure Density functional theory calculations can help interpret the spatial distribution of the potential at the EG/MoS2 heterostructure interface. Following the Schottky barrier calculations (Figure where x is the distance from the EG/MoS2 interface, and φ 0 is a constant to fulfill the boundary condition at the midpoint of the leftmost edge of the band region in Figure EG/MoS2/EG symmetric heterostructure has >10× larger photocurrent at the EG/MoS2 interfaces, as compared to metal/MoS2/EG asymmetric heterostructure, with a uniform built-in field through the length of the symmetric heterostructure device. The electronic Schottky barrier at the EG/MoS2 interface is predicted to be ~2 lower than Ti/MoS2 using DFT, corroborated by experimental I-V-T measurements. To further understand the transfer of photo-generated charge at the EG/MoS2 interface, spatial variations of electronic bands are investigated using nano-ARPES. The valence band maximum in MoS2 bends ~500 meV over a length scale of 2-3 μm, matching theoretical calculations. This comprehensive understanding of the photo-physics and optoelectronic properties of the EG/MoS2 lateral heterostructure system can be extrapolated to other systems in order to build a library of photo-active heterostructure interfaces with properties tailored for specific optoelectronic applications. We have highlighted the utility of first-principles calculations to interpret the electrical response at heterostructure interfaces. The photocurrent measurements presented here are demonstrated to be a simple probe to measure the electronic uniformity of the synthesized lateral heterostructure interfaces. This simple probe-based technique can be adopted easily by the 2D materials' growth community in order to check for electronic uniformity at domain boundaries of synthesized 2D materials and heterostructures over large areas alongside morphological uniformity. The method of sample preparation is the same as in our previous publications. We measure the photocurrent by scanning a tunable Ar/Kr laser at 488 nm (2.54 eV) across the area of the investigated lateral heterojunctions with piezo stages. The laser is focused on the heterojunctions by a 100× Mitutoyo Plan Apo objective (f = 200 mm) to a diffraction limited spot size of ~ 0.8 μm (FWHM). The resulting photocurrent at each point is measured by a succession of a current preamplifier (Ithaco 1211) at a sensitivity of 10 -7 A/V and a digital multimeter (Agilent 34401A). All measurements are performed in vacuum (10 -6 mbar) at room temperature. The SiC substrate does not contribute to the photocurrent at the wavelength of the laser utilized. Computational Details: We utilize the plane-wave Density Functional Theory code QUANTUM-ESPRESSO. Nano-ARPES: Angle-resolved photoemission intensity maps were recorded using a focused synchrotron beam and a Scienta R4000 analyzer at the MAESTRO beamline of the Advanced Light Source. A Fresnel zone plate was used to focus the beam. The zone plate used in the experiments allows a minimum spot size of 120 nm. For ARPES, the photon energy was set to Eph = 98 eV, the detector resolution was 125 meV, the entrance slit width and height were 50 μm and the sample was held at room temperature. From the nano-ARPES maps, we determined a spatial resolution of ~300 nm for the measurements presented. The base pressure during the measurements was below 10 -11 mbar. ARPES was conducted on the same samples as discussed in Ref 69. Introducing several Δφ values generates a wide range of Schottky barriers, but the interface will only be at equilibrium with the doped EG or the Ti for one value of Δφ. The equilibrium Schottky barrier is determined by testing a wide range of Δφ values across the interface until we find the Δφ that leads to the work function of the interface and the work function of doped EG being equal. The cutoff plane is placed two layers within the semiconductor, allowing the interface potential to be measured while avoiding spurious surface effects from the other end of the semiconductor slab. Following the determination of the equilibrium Δφ, we measure the slope of the potential at the cutoff plane and extrapolate the Schottky barrier using Equation Finally, our DFT calculations support the hypothesis that the EG/MoS2 interface bond is van der Waals in character and the Ti/MoS2 interface bond is more covalent/ionic. We perform Bader charge analysis 4 on both neutral interfaces to recover the amount of electrons that can be attributed to each atom. In the EG/MoS2 interface, sulfur atoms have an average of 6.6 e per atom, which remains constant both at the interface and in the bulk MoS2 section. In contrast, at the Ti/MoS2 interface, sulfur atoms have an average of 7.4 e at the interface, and a more typical average of 6.8 e in the bulk MoS2 section. This indicates that there is a significant amount of charge trapping at the Ti/MoS2 interface that does not take place at the EG/MoS2 interface, suggesting a more covalent or ionic character to the bonds at the Ti/MoS2 interface, while the EG/MoS2 bonds do not involve charge trapping and are more likely to be van der Waals in character. In the nano-ARPES experiment, the entrance slit of the electron analyzer is aligned perpendicular to the channel, but not perfectly aligned with respect to particular high symmetry directions of graphene or MoS2. As a careful band mapping could not be done, we cannot annotate the photoelectron emission angles precisely to their corresponding momenta. From their band dispersions, however, we can correlatively associate regions as "close to the Γ point" and "close to the K" point for the MoS2 and graphene respectively. A precise annotation would be misleading, however. ARPES is not a suitable probe to precisely determine the electronic work function. ARPES primarily measures the kinetic energy spectrum, i.e. E kin = hν -E b -φ , where the work function φ corresponds to the work function of the photoelectron analyzer, and is not influenced by the work function of the sample (which is a result of the contact potential between sample and analyzer that "automatically compensates" for any change of the substrate work function). In principle, the work function of the sample can be determined from the cutoff energy of secondary electrons. But as this determination of the cutoff is not precise and the corresponding experiment is very time consuming in the limited amount of available machine time, it was omitted. Further details from the nano-ARPES measurements as seen in Figure 