A solid with larger sound speeds exhibits higher lattice thermal conductivity (lat) Thermal conduction is one of the most fundamental physical properties of materials Recently, we have found that CuP2 exhibits a very low thermal conductivity at room temperature. The temperature dependencies of the lattice thermal conductivity (lat) of the single crystals along bc plane and out of bc plane are shown in Fig. Our neutron powder diffraction results confirm the crystal structure as previously reported Reduced PDF, G X (r), is subsequently obtained via Fourier transform of S X (Q). The inset of Fig. The temperature dependent lattice dynamics are considered first on the phonon density of state (PDOS) measurements on a powder sample in a wide temperature region. Shown in Fig. As temperature rises, it is clear that the whole profile is significantly broadened and several peaks are remarkably softened as an indication of strong anharmonicity. Compared with the DFT calculated PDOS, as plotted in Fig. The strong anharmonicity of this rattling mode is evidenced by the large softening from 11.40 meV at 200 K to 10.67 meV at 600 K. Since the acoustic phonons and the nearby low frequency optical phonons are the main contributors to the thermal conductivity, we further investigate the anharmonic property of this Cu rattling mode in the following sections. Focusing on the significantly softened mode at about 11 meV, detailed constant-Q scans were performed at 100, 300 and 450 K, respectively. Fig. Thirdly, the anti-crossing or avoided-crossing of the acoustic mode with the rattling mode is also theoretically predicted in the compound, though not experimentally observed due to experiment limitations, as highlighted in Supplementary Fig. (00 ) , q = 0.13 of G = 1 1 2 2 ( 0) and q = 0.32 of G = This behavior also gives rise to the decrease of the group velocity of the acoustic mode around the zone boundaries. This rattling mode differs from the previous ones reported in skutterudites and clathrates systems. These compounds have typical cage-like frames with the heavy atoms filled into the lattice void, whereas CuP2 crystallizes in a layered structure with Cu dimer as the rattler This rattling mode must play a dominating role in the thermal transport. We have systematically determined the sound speeds both experimentally and theoretically, as summarized in Supplementary Table summary, we have discovered the low thermal conducting property of CuP2 and established a profound understanding on the fundamental physical mechanism by a comprehensive study on the atomic structures and lattice dynamics through neutron, Xray scattering techniques and complementary DFT calculations. This system is manifested to be very anharmonic. The Cu atoms participate in a dimer rattling mode, which strongly scatters the LA phonons and leads to anti-crossing phenomena in the dispersion relationships. It is this mode that dominates the low thermal transport, counteracting the contribution of large mean sound speeds. The observed dimer rattling behavior in the open layered structures might represent emerging opportunity to rationally tailor thermal transport property of solids. The combined excellent acoustic and thermal insulation properties may find CuP2 a promising material in some novel applications requiring both excellent mechanical sound transmission and heat insulation. X-ray powder diffraction as well as for thermal conductivity measurement where a carbon-coated pellet ( = 10 mm) was used. Thermal conductivity measurement. The total thermal conductivity (tot) of the polycrystalline sample was obtained using the formula tot = DCpd, where D is the thermal diffusion coefficient measured using the laser flash method (LFA457, NETZSCH, Germany), Cp is the Dulong-Petit specific heat capacity and d is the density calculated from the geometrical dimensions and mass. Thermal conductivity of the single crystals was measured in the temperature range from about 50 K to 300 K by a steady-state comparative method The electronic part el  is proportional to the electrical conductivity  through the Wiedemann-Franz relation: Where L is Lorenz number Neutron powder diffraction. The neutron powder diffraction was performed at the measurements, a powder sample was mounted in an annular aluminum sample cans with 1 mm gap. The sample can was attached to the cold head of a closed-cycle refrigerator which is capable of achieving sample temperature from 1.5 K to 800 K. The instrument was aligned for 4.69 Å (3.7 meV) incident neutrons. The resolution at the elastic line was 135 μeV. An empty can was subtracted to determine the background contribution and the data was normalized to a vanadium standard that had the same geometry as the sample can. All data manipulations were performed using Large Array Manipulation Program (LAMP) For phonon dispersion measurements, a single crystal weighted 0.7 gram was used and pre-orientated such that the scattering plane was defined by [H,0,0] and [0,L,L]. A large reciprocal space was covered by rotating the sample over 100 degrees in a step of 1 degree around the axis perpendicular to the scattering plane. The incident neutron wavelength is 2.345 Å (14.8 meV), corresponding to the second order reflection of the Pelican HOPG monochromators configured at 4.69 Å. The sample temperature was set at 300 K. The data were reduced by LAMP and the whole S(Q,ω) was generated using HORACE Brillouin light scattering. Brillouin light scattering measurements were performed at room temperature using a Sandercock-type six-pass tandem Fabre-Perot (TFP-2) as a spectrometer and a 532 nm laser as a light source. It is a well-established technique for measuring sound velocities From the measured Brillouin frequency shift fB, using this equation, the refractive index n = 4.04 and the laser wavelength λ0 = 532 nm, the longitudinal acoustic-wave velocity was determined to be vL = 6275 m s -1 . DFT calculations. All the calculations in this work were performed using the ab initio density functional theory as implemented in the VASP code supercell with 96 atoms. The Γ-centered 2×2×2 q-point mesh was used.