We study equilibrium shapes and shape transformations of a confined semiflexible chain inside a soft lipid tubule using simulations and continuum theories. The deformed tubular shapes and chain conformations depend on the relative magnitude of their bending moduli. We characterise the collapsed macromolecular shapes by computing statistical quantities that probe the polymer properties at small length scales and report a prolate to toroidal coil transition for stiff chains. Deformed tubular shapes, calculated using elastic theories, agree with simulations. In conjunction with scattering studies, our work may provide a mechanistic understanding of gene encapsulation in soft structures. Motivation: When a polymer is confined in a cavity, the number of configurations it can explore (in comparison to a free chain) is reduced resulting in a lower entropy state. This reduction in the chain conformational entropy manifests as a pressure exerted by the chain on the walls of the container Most studies so far have focused on macromolecular confinement in rigid tubes Background: The conformational properties of flexible and stiff polymer chain inside rigid channels having different cross-sections (e.g. rectangular/cylindrical etc.) is now well understood. Scaling and mean field theories have been extensively used to probe the static and dynamic properties of such confined polymer chains The statistical properties of macromolecules under soft confinement however, are relatively unexplored. Long semiflexible polymers confined in soft tubes the chain adopts a globular configuration if the radius of gyration of the chain in free space is greater than the diameter of the confining tube, i.e. R g > D In this paper we investigate the equilibrium shape of a lipid tubule with a confined semiflexible polymer using coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations and continuum elastic theories. We characterise the confined macromolecular shapes of the chain as a function of the (i) length of the polymer chain N σ, (ii) its persistence length l p , (iii) equilibrium radius R 0 , and (iv) the bending modulus κ of the confining tubule. For soft tubules i.e. κ ≤ 15k B T , the entropic pressure from the polymer chain is enough to deform the tubule resulting in a globular chain conformation. In this regime, the maximum radial extent R ⊥ scales with the polymer size N σ as R ⊥ ∼ N 2/5 σ Tubule properties: We consider a bilayer membrane tubule of radius R 0 , and length L having a constant area A 0 = 2πR 0 L with R 0 << L. The elastic energy of defor-mation of the tubule is described by the Helfrich-Canham Hamiltonian where κ and Σ correspond to the bending modulus and the surface tension of the membrane respectively, and ∆p denotes the pressure difference acting across the membrane. The energy is expressed in terms of the two principal curvatures c 1 , and c 2 while c 0 is the spontaneous curvature of the membrane. For a bilayer membrane as in our case c 0 ≈ 0. Further, since we consider a closed tubule (see SI) the Gaussian curvature term in Eq.( We perform coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) simulations of bilayer tubules using the LAMMPS package (SI) following the Cooke-Kremer-Deserno model A semi-flexible polymer is placed inside the tubule and the coupled polymer-tubule system evolved in time for t = 5τ eq , where τ eq = 1 × 10 6 ∆t, is the equilibration time of the system. The equilibration time τ eq is determined by monitoring the radius of gyration R G (t) of the system undergoing a swollen to globule transition as a function of time and noting the time at which the R G (t) saturates to a steady value (SI) starting from different initial configurations. The total energy of the system fluctuates around a mean value beyond τ eq . Fig. (1 a & d) shows the axial and radial equilibrium conformation of a confined polymer in a stiff tubule with κ = 24k B T . In this regime, i.e. κ 20k B T , the entropic pressure due to the polymer is not enough to deform the tube, resulting in a swollen phase. For softer tubes however, i.e. κ 12k B T the polymer adopts a globular conformation. Fig. The variation of the maximum radial bulge D m /2 of the deformed tubule as a function of the chain size N (600 ≤ N ≤ 7000), for a semiflexible polymer having a persistence length l p = 13.1σ is shown in Fig. The entropic pressure arising from chain confinement ∆p/κ acting across the lipid bilayer is calculated as a function of the chain length N using the deformed tubular shapes (SI). This is shown in the inset of Fig. Polymer properties: A structural characterisation of the confined chain as a function of its length N allows us to estimate the chain free energy and in turn the pressure exerted by the chain on the tubule. Thus F = -k B T ln P (R ⊥ , R || ), where P (R ⊥ , R || ) is the probability distribution of the deformed chain in the radial and axial direction respectively. Since R || is independent of the chain size N , the probability distribution is a function of R ⊥ alone. The volume occupied by the chain V can then be obtained as a function of N assuming an ellipsoidal shape. Thus taking derivative of the free energy of the chain with respect to the volume V , i.e. p = -∂F ∂V , one can compute the pressure exerted by the chain on the tubule. For equilibrium to be established this pressure must balance the mechanical pressure difference acting across the leaflet ∆p/κ. , shows the variation of the maximum extension of a chain both perpendicular R ⊥ and parallel R || to the tube axis as a function of the confined chain length N . A distorted prolate globular conformation is observed for all values of persistence length l p , and initial confining radius R 0 . The radial extension scales with the chain length R ⊥ ∼ N 0.38±0.03 in agreement with mean field theories While the large scale properties of confined polymer chains can be investigated using statistical signatures e.g. R ⊥ and R || , it does not provide information about shape transformations on length scales smaller than the bulge deformation scale ξ. In this regime, we probe the short distance properties of the chain conformations by computing (a) tangent-tangent correlation function t i • t j , (b) the asphericity parameters ∆, and Ξ, (c) the radial distribution function g(r) (SI), and (d) the mass distribution ρ r of the confined polymer. Persistence length of semiflexible chains under confinement has been measured in experiments The tangent-tangent correlations of a semiflexible under hard spherical confinement is approximately (2) The characteristic oscillatory behaviour of the correlation function observed in experiments is captured in this model. The leading order contribution to the correlation function in the limit le R0 >> 1 is of the form e -s le cos s R , where R 0 is the radius of the hard spherical confinement, and can be used to compare against simulation results of chains under soft tubular confinement. Stiff chains having persistence length larger than the tubule length l p >> L, undergoes a conformational transition where the chain wraps the inner leaflet of confining bilayer tubule to minimize the bending energy cost. Thus, the polymer density is high near the wall and nearly zero density at the central region of the confining tubule. We characterise this shape transition by calculating the asphericity parameter ∆ = 3 2 , expressed in terms of the variance of the eigenvalues of the traceless gyration tensor about the centre of mass, Qαβ = Q αβ - 1 3 Tr(S)E, with E unit tensor , where α and β indicate components of the position vector of the i-th monomer The asphericity parameter ∆ lies in the range 0 ≤ ∆ ≤ 1, with ∆ = 0 for spheres, and ∆ = 1 for rigid rods. The difference between oblate and prolate shape is given by the parameter where λ = 1 3 3 i=1 λ i represents the average chain size. The shape characterisation of confined compact structures is shown in Fig. The shape transition can be quantified further using the asphericity ∆ and nature of asphericity Ξ. As shown in panels (c), (g), (k), and (o) respectively, the heat map obtained for different configurations in the ∆-Ξ phase plane We have developed a multi-scale model to compute statistical properties of polymer chains under soft confinement and characterise the confined macromolecular phases as a function of the polymer chain length N , stiffness l p , radius of the confining tube R 0 and its bending modulus κ and report a swollen to globular conformational transition as the chain size N and stiffness l p is increased. The maximum radial bulge of the polymer R ⊥ scales with the chain size as R ⊥ ∼ N 0.38±0.03 in agreement with scaling theories Biological function crucially relies on a tight regulation between confinement and deconfinement of biomacromolecules in soft structures and their transport through them for suitable function, e.g. chromatin compaction inside the cell nucleus Author Contributions: BC designed the research and obtained funding. SB carried out the research and analysed the data. BC supervised the research. SB and BC wrote the paper. To probe the conformational properties of a homopolymer chain confined in a soft tube, we perform Langevin dynamics simulation to verify theoretical results obtained from continuum theories. For mesoscopic simulation of the membrane tubule, we adopt coarse-grained Cooke-Kremer-Deserno lipid bilayer model where is the potential well depth and r c = 2 b is the location of the minima. The geometric parameters of the three bead lipid model with b head,head = b head,tail = 0.95σ and b tail,tail = σ is such that the tail beads are slightly bigger than the head bead. To mimic fluidic behaviour of the membrane non-bonded interactions between coarse-grained (CG) tail beads is incorporated. Thus, the effective hydrophobic interactions between tail beads mimicking the implicit solvent is given by an attractive potential of depth with the potential decaying to zero smoothly in the interval between r C and r c + w c . The width of the attractive region is w c . The bonded interaction between tail beads and head bead is modeled by the finite extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) potential, Here r 0 is the maximum extension of the spring. A bond bending potential, that generates a straight conformation of lipid molecules is given by where equilibrium angle θ 0 between three beads is θ 0 = 180 • and k θ is the spring constant corresponding to the bond-bending potential. For lipid interactions k θ = 10 /σ 2 , while for the polymer k θ ranges between 10 /σ 2 and 100 /σ 2 depending on the semiflexibility of the chain. A Kremer-Grest bead-spring model has been used to simulate CG polymer of N monomers connected by FENE springs as shown in Eq. ( We perform molecular dynamics simulations of polymer-membrane system using LAMMPS The radius of gyration R G and the radial R ⊥ and axial extension R || of the polymer is monitored as a function of time. For chains undergoing a conformational collapse the R G decreases as a function of time. Equilibration time τ eq is obtained by noting the time scale at which R G saturates to a steady value. The total energy of the system of the system in this phase fluctuates around a fixed value. For polymers that remain in the swollen phase, we collect data for t >> τ eq obtained from the collapse runs. Random initial polymer conformations are generated using a MATLAB script. With this model canonical selfassembly of the flat membrane is observed in simulations, however, spontaneous self-assembly of bilayers to form a tubule is not possible A. Quantifying conformational transitions A semiflexible polymer chain inside a tube whose bending modulus κ >> k B T , is rigid, in which the polymer adopts an elongated conformation. On the contrary, if κ ∼ k B T , polymer can deform the tube and adopt a globular structure. Depending upon the bending rigidity of the polymer chain, its size, bending modulus of the tubule, membrane tension etc., the confined polymer and the tubule can have different shapes. For a semiflexible chain with, l p >> R 0 (R 0 is the radius of the confining tube), the chain adopts a toroidal shape, in order to minimize its bending energy. The resulting shapes are qualitatively different than those obtained for softer chains, i.e. l p ∼ D. In the case, l p ∼ D, polymer elongated along the tube axis and eigenvalues of other two orthogonal principal axes are similar. Prolate shapes obtained in this regime is shown in the main text Fig. As shown in the Fig. The bilayer tubule used in our simulations has a finite thickness, with the outer and inner diameters being D out and D in respectively. In order to determine the radial bulge of the tubule we divide the cylindrical tubule in slices of width σ, i.e. size of a head bead. Therefore the tubule can be visualised of as a series of adjacent rings of width σ. The instantaneous tube diameter at position x is calculated by taking the mean of the inner and outer D(x) = (D in (x) + D out (x)) /2 diameters. For a fluctuating tubule the D out and D in are the distance of the head beads from the centre of mass of each ring. We compute D(x) by performing a time average of the instantaneous tube diameter measured every τ m = 10 3 ∆t time steps after equilibration τ eq . For axisymmetric tubular shapes D in (x)/2 and D out (x)/2 is independent of the azimuthal angle of a head bead on the ring. This is seen for the tubule without a confined polymer and for ellipsoidal tubular shapes. However for toroidal coils l p >> R 0 the azimuthal symmetry is lost. In this case we average over the azimuthal angle for all head beads in a given ring along the tubule, to obtain instantaneous values of the tubule diameter D ( x) and in turn its thermal average D(x) . at different positions x. A simple averaging of the deformed configurations over time to yield D m /2 would therefore be erroneous. Therefore in order to obtain the accurate measure of the radial bulge (and since we have periodic boundary conditions imposed along the direction of the tube) we have shifted the deformed tubular profile, along the tube axis such that the maximum deformation occurs at x = L/2. The statistical properties of the polymer chain in the long wavelength limit l ∼ ξ e.g. R ⊥ , the maximum extent of the polymer along radial direction and R || the maximum extent of the polymer along axial direction, are calculated by noting the position of the terminal monomers of the deformed chain. In order to compute R ⊥ we have averaged over the radial coordiantes i.e. x-y plane. Monomer position snapshots are collected every 10 3 ∆t time steps once equilibrium t = τ eq is reached. Polymer shapes are quantified by two parameters, asphericity (∆) and the nature of asphericity (Ξ) The pair correlation function or radial distribution function g(r) describes how density of the monomers varies as a function of distance from a reference particle. We compute the number of particles in the interval between r and r + dr from a reference particle. Averaging over all monomers present in the system gives g(r). In other words g(r) is the ratio between the average number density at a distance r from any given monomer as shown in the Fig. Density distribution of a polymer chain in different environments averaged over τ m = 5000∆t timesteps is shown in Fig A histogram obtained by binning the monomers as a function of r gives density distribution ρ(r). In case of strong confinement, the monomer density is high near the boundary, while for a weak confinement the monomers distribution is peaked about the centre of the channel. The monomer density is used to distinguish between ellipsoidal and toroidal coils (main text). We develop a variational formulation to predict axisymmetric deformed tubule shapes (altered via membrane insertion) by minimising the membrane free energy where c 1 and c 2 are the the two principal curvatures of the axisymmetric tubule of length L and c 0 is the spontaneous curvature. For a bilayer membrane c 0 = 0. An energetic cost of pulling out a tether of length L, from a GUV, relevant in micropipette aspiration experiments is also included. For a cylindrical shape c 1 = 1 R and c 2 = 0, thus equilibrium free energy of the cylindrical membrane tube can be written as, F eq = πκL R + 2πRLΣ -πR 2 L∆P -f L. For an unperturbed tube ∆P = 0, ∂Feq ∂R = 0 and ∂Feq ∂L = 0 gives equilibrium radius R 0 = κ 2Σ and tube axis directional pulling force f 0 = 2π √ 2κ Σ Solutions to variational shape equations for axisymmetric tubules with open boundaries have not been explored in detail. These stem from a lack of understanding of the proper boundary conditions that need to be enforced to solve the first variation of the Helfrich-Canham free energy The curvature of 2D surface embedded in 3D space can be expressed in terms of two principal curvatures c 1 and c 2 . Fig. The first variation of the free energy in Eq. 5 yields one second-order (expressed in terms of two nested firstorder differential equations) and two first-order differential equations in terms of the variables Ψ(S), U (S), γ(S), and Z(s) We solve the coupled differential equations Eq. 7 with initial conditions ψ = π 2 , and ψ = 0. In our numerical scheme we integrate Eq. 7 starting from S = 0 corresponding to Ψ(s) = 0, till S ∼ 1, at which Ψ = π/2. This corresponds to a point X = X m along the tube axis. The profile is then reflected about a line perpendicular to the X-axis to generate the membrane configuration along the arclength Z(s) above the midplane of the tube axes as shown in Fig. We present a variational solution of the shape equation using two types of ansatz (a) a spherical bulge as shown in Fig. A. Spherical bulge model Fig. Expressing h in terms of R and D, h = R -R 2 -D 2 /4, and noting that the area of the cylindrical tubular segment is 2πRh as shown in Fig. Next, we compute the energetic cost of deforming a cylindrical tubule to form a spherical bulge. Elastic energy of the tubule is given by, where c 1 and c 2 are the principal curvatures and κ is the bending modulus. For sphere of radius R, principal curvatures are c 1 = c 2 = 1 R , while for a cylinder of radius D/2, the principal curvatures are c 1 = 1 R and c 2 = 0. Thus bending energy of the deformed tube is thus The elastic energy of the undeformed cylindrical tube computed from the Helfrich-Canham free energy Eq. 5 is given by The elastic free energy of the deformed cylinder Eq. 10 approaches that of the undeformed cylinder in the limit, D/2 → R 0 and R → R 0 . This can be seen in Fig. For the spherical bulge geometry shown in the Fig. where p = ∆p/κ. Thus total energy of the deformed tube is sum of bending energy and the work done by the excess pressure, F tot = F b + F p . We plot F tot as a function of the dimensionless parameters D/R 0 , and R/R 0 . As seen in The intersection between the two planes traces out a curve yielding a family of shapes that minimise the Helfrich-Canham free energy. However, not all solutions satisfy the area constraint. The area of a deformed tubule can also be plotted in the D/R 0 -R/R 0 parametric space following Eq. ( Fig. where z(x) is the displacement of the membrane from its symmetry axis. The deformed axisymmetric shape smoothly connects with the undeformed segment, i.e. a cylinder of length L -ξ having a diameter D. In order to ensure the continuity of the membrane, we match the value of the function z(x) and the derivative z (x) at the intersection point between the deformed and undeformed segments. Further, we ensure that z (x = ξ) = 0. We compute the area of the deformed tube using the functional form of Eq. ( Similarly the volume of the deformed tube using the functional form in Eq. ( The work done by the pressure in deforming the cylindrical tubule to bring about a shape change is given by Eq. 12 where p = ∆p/κ. Fig. We note that the three parameter variational minimisation of the elastic free energy is non-unique, as the number of variables ξ, R/R 0 , and D/R 0 is more than the number of constraints. It is thus possible to find more than one solution with a different combination of D/R 0 , R/R 0 , and ξ that simultaneously minimise the free energy and satisfy the constant area constraint. We therefore need an additional input to uniquely determine the shape and hence the pressure exerted by an encapsulated polymer chain. This can be carried out in imaging studies by measuring the axial deformation length ξ. One can than use the "drop on a fibre" shape ansatz and the calculational scheme outlined here to uniquely determine the pressure exerted by a semiflexible chain on the walls of a soft tubule. Along with the calculation of pressure based on free energy of the confined polymer this forms a self-consistent scheme to connect the conformational states of confined chains with their thermodynamic behavior. SI movie shows the time evolution of a polymer encapsulated in a tubule starting from a random initial polymer conformation to the equilibrium sate obtained using CGMD simulations. The first and second columns show the axial and radial cross sections of lipid tubule. The encapsulated semiflexible polymer (green beads) of size N = 2000σ, is confined in the bilayer lipid tubule having hydrophilic head groups (red beads) and hydrophobic tails (blue beads). For rigid tubules having κ = 24k B T (a) swollen chain is seen (first row), while for softer κ = 12k B T tubules (second row) (b) a prolate ellipsoidal conformation is observed. The persistence length of the polymer in this case is l p = 13σ. The third row (c) shows a toroidal coil for a polymer with l p 200σ, (such that l p ξ).