PrMnO 3 (PMO) based RRAM shows selector-less behavior due to high-non-linearity. Recently, the non-linearity, along with volatile hysteresis, is demonstrated and utilized as a compact oscillator to enable highly scaled oscillatory neurons, which enable oscillatory neuromorphic systems found in the human cortex. Hence, it is vital to understand the physical mechanisms behind such a volatile hysteretic behavior to provide useful insights in developing a device for various neuromorphic applications. In this paper, we present a comprehensive investigation of the transient characteristics and propose a physical mechanism to replicate the observations by simulations. First, we investigate the complex dynamics of the hysteresis with the voltage ramp rate. We observe that the voltage window initially increases and later decreases as the ramp rate is increased -while the current window reduces monotonically. Second, an analytical electrothermal model based on space charge limited current (SCLC) and Fourier Heat equation is proposed to model the co-dependent heat and current flow. Finally, we show that the interplay between the self-heating due to the current and the current dependence on the temperature is accurately modeled to reproduce the hysteresis dependence on the various voltage ramp rate. Such a detailed understanding of the device PMO RRAM volatile hysteresis may enable efficient device design required in neuromorphic computing applications. Brain-inspired neural architectures have been the subject of extensive research for alternate computing paradigms. Previous studies have shown that the human brain seamlessly processes data parallelly and in an energy-efficient manner The work is partially funded by Department of Science and Technology (DST), Nano Mission and Ministry of Electronics and IT (MeitY), India. It was performed at IIT Bombay Nanofabrication Facility. All authors are with Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India-400076. S. Lashkare is physics like VO2 Recently PrMnO3 (PMO) based RRAM device has demonstrated highly non-linear I-V characteristics with threshold switching and a volatile hysteresis loop in Low Resistance State (LRS), enabling a compact oscillator In this work, we present the hysteresis experimentally by varying the voltage ramp rate to observe complex behavior. To understand the observations quantitatively, an analytical electro-thermal model is proposed to simulate the currenttemperature transient. The model effectively captures the interplay between current, temperature, and voltage ramp rate. The stack of PMO based RRAM is as shown in Fig. PMO is a p-type semiconductor material, sandwiched between two metal electrodes (Pt -bottom and W -top). The voltage (V) is given as the input to the top electrode while the bottom electrode is grounded, and current (I) is measured as the output. When a DC voltage sweep from 0 to -1.5 V is applied to the device, at a certain high threshold voltage (V H ) the device switches its current resistance state (R H ) abruptly to a low resistance state (R L ) (Fig. As stated earlier, a strong correlation exists between current conduction and heat dissipation within the devices. Since temperature changes have an associated timescale, the nature of hysteresis is expected to change with the voltage (V) ramp rate. While DC behavior is well-known, oscillations utilize the hysteresis in a transient mode The voltage ramp rate is described as the rate of change in the voltage (ΔV) with respect to change in time (Δt). For the following experiments, ΔV is kept constant, and Δt is varied to obtain different ramp rates. A transient voltage sweep of varying ramp rates was applied, and current through the device is measured. The step voltage (ΔV) of 20 mV was used for different voltage ramp rates, as shown in the inset of Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Given the complex ramp dependence of hysteresis observed, a qualitative explanation is of significant interest. For a slow voltage ramp rate, i.e., with sufficiently long Δt time step, current at that voltage will tend to its steady-state value. If there is self-heating within the device, the temperature will also attain a steady-state value. However, for shorter Δt, the voltage is changed before the current or temperature could attain its steady-state value. The effect will propagate with every time step. Thus, current and temperature will lag the steady-state value as ramp rate increases, i.e., Δt decreases. For a fast ramp rate, i.e., Δt is small (10 ns), the current curve traces the instantaneous voltage with the peak of current and voltage occurring coincidentally in time. The current levels are adequately low at that point (Fig. In this section, we demonstrate an electrothermal model to quantitatively show the V-ramp dependence of the hysteresis to further substantiate our qualitative model. We have earlier demonstrated Space Charge Limited Current (SCLC) conduction mechanism in PMO based RRAM devices where μ(Mobility)=3cm 2 Vs ⁄ where k is Thermal conductivity, c v is Specific heat capacity, volume = A. L = 10 × 10μm 2 × 60nm The simulated results for current transient with voltage for different ramp rates are shown in Fig 7 . As seen in Fig. J. Sakhuja, S. Lashkare, K. Jana, U. Ganguly