Interatomic-force measurements are regularly performed using frequency-modulation atomic force microscopy. This requires conversion of the observed shift in the resonant frequency of a force-sensing cantilever, to the actual force experienced by its tip. Recently, Sader et al. Nature Nanotechnology 13, 1088 (2018) showed that this force conversion can be unreliable and proposed the inflection point test to identify valid and robust force data. Efficient and user-friendly algorithms are required for its routine practical implementation, which currently do not exist. Here, we (1) advance the theoretical framework of the inflection point test, (2) develop the required efficient algorithms for its complete automation, and (3) demonstrate the utility of this automation by studying two experimental datasets. The principal outcome of this report is the development of user-friendly software that integrates this automation with a standard force conversion methodology. This software provides the enabling technology for practitioners to now seamlessly perform robust nanoscale and interatomic-force measurements. Frequency modulation atomic force microscopy (FM-AFM) is used widely to image surfaces with atomic resolution and perform atomically-resolved force measurements. The frequency shift, ∆f (z), of the cantilever obeys, where F (z) is the interaction force that the tip experiences, z is the tip-sample distance of closest approach, f res is the resonant frequency of the cantilever in the absence of this force, k is the cantilever's dynamic spring constant and a is its (fixed) tip oscillation amplitude. Equation (1) must be inverted to recover the force, F (z), from the measurement of ∆f as a function of z. This inversion has been studied by many authors with a range of techniques being developed. These include explicit formulas in the small 1 and large amplitude 10 limits, and methods that are formulated for arbitrary amplitude. We eliminate this restriction by expanding the inflection point test's framework which is combined with new and efficient algorithms for its rapid and complete automation. In so doing, we detail how to acquire valid and robust force-distance datasets in practice and demonstrate this protocol using two discrete experimental measurements. In an FM-AFM force measurement, the measured ∆f (z) curve is first converted into force using a method formulated for arbitrary amplitude, e.g., Sader-Jarvis or matrix methods, discussed above. This gives a force-distance curve whose validity is yet to be established. The inflection point test assumes the tip-sample distance of closest approach is z = 0; this reference can always be set. We now summarize the inflection point test and provide a new advance that is required for its general implementation. The test states that presence of an inflection point, z = z inf , in the true force, F (z), does not produce a spurious recovered force provided the S-factor satisfies, 14 where the prime symbol denotes the spatial derivative with respect to z. Violation of Eq. ( where L inf = -F (z inf )/F (z inf ) is the length scale for the jump in F (z) at the inflection point, z inf . This provides a means for adjusting the oscillation amplitude, if required, to enable recovery of a valid force-distance curve. Importantly, valid force recovery under S(F ) < ∼ -1 occurs for all amplitudes if the force jump through the inflection point is insignificant, i.e., because ill-posedness induced at z inf exerts a negligible effect overall in this case. The necessary and sufficient condition in Eq. ( When the recovered force-distance curve contains more than one inflection point, the inflection point test must be applied to each inflection point and their forbidden zones determined. In principle, this is to be implemented sequentially as in Ref. 15, by (i) first applying the inflection point test at z = z max inf , (ii) adjusting the amplitude according to Eq. ( A more efficient algorithm is to (i) apply the inflection point test simultaneously to all inflection points of a recovered force-distance curve, i.e., at z = z a min a a max 2. Schematic of the infection point test algorithm. The inflection point test is applied to all inflection points of a recovered force-distance curve, from which a maximal forbidden zone is determined. This maximal forbidden zone is used to select a new measurement amplitude and the FM-AFM measurement taken again to obtain a new recovered force-distance curve. The procedure is repeated until the chosen amplitude lies outside of the maximal forbidden zone. This produces a valid force curve from which the final forbidden zone is determined. Coincidence of several valid force curves using different amplitudes identifies a robust force curve. Dashed box : Inflection point test algorithm-software is provided in the Supplementary Material, incorporating force recovery using the Sader-Jarvis method. S n (F ), and thus (iii) compute their individual forbidden zones, where a The required maximal amplitude range, i.e., the 'maximal forbidden zone', for which artefacts in the recovered force can occur is then given by that spanned by all individual zones in Eq. ( with a lower = min{a min } and a upper = max{a (n) max }. If the measurement amplitude satisfies Eq. ( While the maximal forbidden zone, Eq. ( A central requirement of the inflection point test is numerical evaluation of F (z inf ) and F (z inf ). Since F (z) arises from experiment, and is inherently discrete/noisy in nature, care must be taken to properly evaluate these derivatives (and estimate their uncertainties). This was performed in Ref. 15 using splines that require user input/judgement and no error estimate was provided. Here, we use the property that these derivatives occur at the inflection points, z = z inf , and employ a local Taylor series representation for F (z), where F 0 , F 1 , F 3 , and z 0 are variables to be determined; each variable specifies a unique feature of the force-distance curve (see Eq. ( is fit directly to the discrete (and noisy) force-distance curve in the neighborhood of each individual inflection point, using a nonlinear least squares procedure. This regularizes the derivative calculation and yields the following estimates, This fit procedure is most readily implemented in standard software packages, which automatically provide associated uncertainties for the estimates in Eq. ( A Mathematica notebook that completely automates implementation of the abovedescribed inflection point test algorithms, together with the Sader-Jarvis method for force recovery, is provided in the Supplementary Material. Users simply input their measured frequency-distance data, cantilever tip amplitude, stiffness and resonant frequency, from which a recovered force and its validity are reported (figure and CSV file) along with guidance on the appropriate choice of amplitude for any additional measurement. No other user input is required. We now demonstrate this inflection point test algorithm and its automation on the two experimental (discrete) data sets reported in Ref. 15: ∆f (z) spectra over the center of (i) a carbon monoxide (CO) molecule and (ii) a single Fe trimer on Cu(111), measured using a metal tip. Experiments in Ref. 15 were performed using a custom-built, combined scanning tunneling and atomic force microscope operating at a temperature of 5.9 K. trimer, functionalized tips both over a Cu adatom on a Cu(111) surface. The primary observable in the measurement is the frequency shift, which is inverted to give the force using the Sader-Jarvis and matrix methods, as indicated. First consider the measurement over the center of a CO molecule adsorbed on Cu(111). To demonstrate utility of the automated inflection point test, we use the measured shortrange 17 ∆f (z) curves in Fig. The recovered force using the matrix method gives similar results; see Table The chosen measurement amplitude, a = 50 pm, lies within this maximal forbidden zone, indicating ill-posed behavior may be present. A notable difference is observed between recovered force curves from the Sader-Jarvis and matrix methods that exceeds known inversion errors. It is well known that direct discretization, such as used in the matrix method, generally produces spurious solutions in the ill-posed case. In summary, the inflection point test's framework has been further developed and new efficient algorithms formulated that together enable its complete automation. Software implementing this automation, combined with the Sader-Jarvis method for force recovery, is provided in the Supplementary Material. This gives all AFM users the ability to easily perform valid and robust force measurements, which was demonstrated on two discrete experimental datasets. While users typically choose a single amplitude for their force measurements, the present study highlights the importance of selecting a range of amplitudes and testing for consistency amongst valid force measurements. Only through this procedure can a robust force measurement be established. Our study suggests that this constitutes good practice for all future measurements. We conclude by noting that other dynamic AFM modes, e.g., amplitude modulation AFM, are expected to exhibit similar ill-posed behavior. This is because they also blur the underlying force during measurement-due to their inherent use of nonzero oscillation amplitude-and their force recovery involves a deblurring process. 