Fe5-xGeTe2 is a van der Waals material with one of the highest reported bulk Curie temperatures, TC ≈310 K. In this study, theoretical calculations and experiments are utilized to demonstrate that the magnetic ground state is highly sensitive to local atomic arrangements and the interlayer stacking. Cobalt substitution is found to be an effective way to manipulate the magnetic properties while also increasing the ordering temperature. In particular, cobalt substitution up to ≈ 30% enhances TC and changes the magnetic anisotropy, while ≈50% cobalt substitution yields an antiferromagnetic state. Single crystal x-ray diffraction evidences a structural change upon increasing the cobalt concentration, with a rhombohedral cell observed in the parent material and a primitive cell observed for ≈46% cobalt content relative to iron. First principles calculations demonstrate that it is a combination of high cobalt content and the concomitant change to primitive layer stacking that produces antiferromagnetic order. These results illustrate the sensitivity of magnetism in Fe5-xGeTe2 to composition and structure, and emphasize the important role of local structural order/disorder and layer stacking in cleavable magnetic materials. The disparity between interlayer and intralayer bonding forces in exfoliable materials typically results in weak interplane magnetic interactions. This can lead to low magnetic ordering temperatures, particularly in insulators with long direct or multi-atom exchange paths between layers. The case is more complicated in cleavable metals, where delocalization makes bonding and magnetic interactions more difficult to understand. One of the highest reported Curie temperatures (T C ) in a cleavable bulk material is found in metallic Fe 5-x GeTe 2 with bulk T C as high as 310 K; 1-3 magnetic order was demonstrated to exist at similarly high temperature in exfoliated flakes with thicknesses approaching 10 nm. Cobalt-containing crystals were grown using the same iodine-assisted approach as utilized for Fe 4.87(2) GeTe 2 , 2,3 using initial compositions of Fe 5-y Co y GeTe 2 . The raw elements were sealed in evacuated silica ampoules and heated to 750 • C at 120 • /h, followed by an isothermal step for 1-2 weeks at 750 • C. The ampoules were quenched into ice-water and iodine was washed from the surfaces of In real crystals, the Fe4CoGeTe2 composition is expected to possess stacking disorder associated with the competition between these two stacking sequences. crystals with solvents (ethanol and/or isopropanol with an acetone rinse). An attempt to form Co 5 GeTe 2 in the presence of iodine yielded only binary compounds. Single-crystal x-ray diffraction data were collected using a Bruker D8 Quest with a nitrogen cold stream at 220 K by mounting the crystals in paratone oil. Structural solution and refinement were performed using ShelX after data reduction via SMART-Plus. The structural unit of Fe 5 GeTe 2 is shown in Fig. We employed first principles calculations based on density functional theory to investigate the preferential occupation on the Fe1 sublattice and the substitution of cobalt into the lattice. The lattice parameters were fixed and all atomic positions were relaxed locally in response to the different atomic orderings imposed for the Fe1 sublattice. The calculations revealed a significantly lower energy when the Fe1 atoms are distributed on both Fe1a and Fe1b positions as opposed to occupation on only Fe1a. The results are summarized in Table We grew single crystals using an iodine assisted reaction, and the crystals obtained from a given growth were found to have similar compositions and magnetic properties. Individual crystals were selected and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was performed prior to characterization by diffraction off as-grown or cleaved facets, magnetization, specific heat or electrical resistivity measurements. The electrical resistivity data demonstrate that all compositions are metallic with a large residual resistivity, and the specific heat data suggest a decreasing electronic contribution with increasing cobalt content (see Supplemental Materials). The relationship between nominal cobalt concentration and the experimentally determined concentration is shown in Fig. X-ray diffraction off the facets of as-grown crystals was utilized to assess the interlayer spacing at a few cobalt concentrations, with data shown in Fig. X-ray single-crystal diffraction data were collected to assess how cobalt substitution impacts the average symmetry. Crystals were selected from growths that pro-Table The change from a rhombohedral to a primitive unit cell is not especially surprising because stacking faults associated with the primitive stacking are observed in parent Fe 5-x GeTe 2 crystals. 1 Indeed, these have been associated with a structural transition at ≈570 K. The preferred site occupancy for cobalt was investigated with DFT calculations. Substitution of cobalt on the Fe1 sublattice is 175 meV/Co more favorable than occupation on the Fe2 site, which is still 140 meV/Co more favorable than occupation on the Fe3 sublattice (for the distribution of atoms on both Fe1a,b in a checkerboard arrangement with 10% cobalt substitution). We therefore anticipate that cobalt first substitutes (primarily) for Fe1 and then for Fe2, and have illustrated this calculation scheme in Fig. The anisotropic magnetization data are shown in Fig. The isothermal magnetization data at T =2 K in Fig M ( e m u / g ) anisotropy of about 2 T, which is roughly double that of the easy-axis anisotropy for the parent Fe 4.87(2) GeTe 2 crystals. This evolution of the magnetic anisotropy is illustrated in Fig. In addition to changing the anisotropy and enhancing T C , the incorporation of cobalt leads to a more monotonic behavior in M (T ). In Fe 4.87(2) GeTe 2 crystals, the Fe1 sublattice is magnetically dynamic above 120 K, and this characteristic of the magnetism dominates the low-field magnetic response as well as the transport properties. In crystals with the highest cobalt concentrations (46- M ( e m u / g ) M ( e m u / g ) 54%), antiferromagnetic character was observed in the magnetization data. Magnetization data for a crystal with 46% cobalt content are shown in Fig. The M (T ) data indicate that the orientation of the moments changes as a function of temperature. At 200 K and above, there is little anisotropy in the magnetic response (see Fig. The impact of cobalt substitution on the magnetic response is summarized in Fig. The numerical results of first principles calculations are summarized in Table The DFT calculations demonstrate that structural disorder and short-range atomic order will be significant in determining the magnetic properties of Fe 5 GeTe 2 . In materials with regions of short-range atomic order that have different magnetic ground states, the neighboring domains can interact and cause a strong competition between magnetic states in a way that leads to complex magnetic behavior. The effect of cobalt substitution on the magnetism was investigated theoretically using the energeticallyfavorable atomic configurations (Fe1a,b site preference followed by Fe2 occupation). At 20% cobalt in the parent R 3m structure, FM ordering remains as the ground state, albeit with a slightly reduced moment. For DFT calculations of 60% Co substitution (Fe 2 Co 3 GeTe 2 ) we first utilized the primitive unit cell obtained experimentally for a crystal with approximately 46% cobalt content. In this configuration, AFM coupling along [001] is more stable than the FM order by 5 meV/f.u., in agreement with the experimental result that shows AFM ordering for 45-54% cobalt content. Within the parent rhombohedral structure, however, FM ordering is calculated to be slightly more stable than the AFM order for 60% cobalt (by only 1 meV/f.u.). It was also verified that the small increase in layer spacing that occurs with cobalt doping does not impact these qualitative results. These results demonstrate that the transformation from FM to AFM order is correlated with the change of layer stacking and the net cobalt content. This investigation has shown that the magnetism in Fe 5 GeTe 2 is highly sensitive to the local atomic arrangements in a given Fe 5 GeTe 2 layer as well as the interlayer stacking configuration. Cobalt substitution allows one to control the magnetic response in Fe 5 GeTe 2 at a surprising level by impacting the nature of the magnetic interactions and the atomic configurations. Cobalt substitutions up to ≈30% enhance the ferromagnetic character by substituting primarily on the Fe1 sublattice. The result is a unified response of the different magnetic sublattices, an enhancement in T C and an inversion of the magnetic anisotropy. Cobalt concentrations of 45-55% induce an antiferromagnetic ground state with relatively little magnetic anisotropy. A transition to a primitive unit cell is also observed at similar compositions. DFT calculations reveal that both the primitive unit cell and a high cobalt content are required to induced the AFM ground state. In general, the calculations reveal that local atomic configurations and layer stacking strongly impact the predicted magnetic ground state, while the intralayer coupling is dominantly ferromagnetic. As such, these results highlight how metallic, cleavable materials can be tuned to access different states, in large part because of their weak interlayer interactions. From a chemical perspective, controlling the composition and identifying alternative synthesis strategies that can promote particular types of local order are promising avenues to further tune the magnetism in Fe 5 GeTe 2 and similar itinerant materials containing structural disorder. After the initial submission of this manuscript, an article reporting similar changes in the magnetization of Fe 5-x GeTe 2 upon cobalt substitution was published. The introduction of magnetic materials into the catalogue of exfoliable vdW crystals has allowed for fundamental investigations of magnetism in the 2D limit as well as the development of devices with advanced functionality. We are pleased to thank J. Yan, B. Sales, S. Okamoto and D. Parker for useful discussions and R. Custelcean for assistance with x-ray single-crystal diffraction measurements. This work was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. ORNL is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 for the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for U. S. Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan. Single crystal x-ray diffraction data for the crystal selected from the growth that produced 46% cobalt crystals were found to contain sharp spots without notable streaking along l (negligible stacking disorder). A structural model was successfully generated for this sample. The model is in space group P 3m1 and contains a split site 'Fe1' and Ge positions in analogy to the structural model we have previously utilized for Fe 5-x GeTe 2 . The primitive structure can also be described in space group P 3 with essentially identical atomic positions and slightly better refinement indicators. We note that a twin law was necessary and several different twin laws were sufficient, including a two-fold rotation about [001] or a mirror plane perpendicular to the c-axis. Refinement using all iron in the unit cell or a mixture of iron/cobalt at 50/50 yielded similar refinement indicators. Results for the 50/50 mixture of Fe/Co across all sites are shown to emphasize the importance of the substitution. Based on DFT calculations, site preferences are expected. The data were collected at 220 K for the 46% cobalt sample and are compared to data collected at 220 K for the quenched Fe 5-x GeTe 2 sample. The data suggest a 0.2% increase in van der Waals gap relative to parent Fe 5-x GeTe 2 while the majority of the interlayer spacing increase comes from an increase in the slab thickness (0.7% expansion). The basal plane lattice parameter a decreases by 0.6% in the cobalt doped sample. The single crystal x-ray diffraction data obtained from a crystal in the batch that yielded large crystals with 28% cobalt by EDS were found to contain evidence for a large degree of stacking disorder. This is similar to Fe 5-x GeTe 2 crystals that are allowed to cool naturally in the furnace but with more stacking disorder for these 28% cobalt containing samples. Structural files (.cif formats) wih relaxed atomic positions have been uploaded as additional supporting information. These files contain the atomic positions for the supercells utilized to investigate the distribution of atoms on the Fe1 sublattice. Files are included for the atomic positions after relaxing in the ferromagnetic configuration for Fe 5 GeTe 2 . The energetically preferred distribution on both Fe1a and Fe1b (a checkerboard pattern) is provided. Another distribution on Fe1a and Fe1b (stripe pattern, not included) was only 3 meV/f.u. higher in energy and thus we expect significant disorder in real crystals with both Fe1a and Fe1b occupied. The configuration involving only Fe1a (all-up) is significantly higher in energy (file included). A structural file for Fe 2 Co 3 GeTe 2 is included as well, and this contains atomic positions after relaxation in the AFM ground state; two layers are necessarily included in the atomic list but the underlying symmetry is a primitive cell. For 20% cobalt substitution (complete substitution for Fe1 atoms), the atomic configurations with checkerboard and stripe occupations of the Fe1a,b sublattice were equal in energy. These configurations were 63 meV/f.u. more energetically favorable than the occupation of only Fe1a positions. This value is for a FM state using a primitive cell to reduce computation time. As discussed in the main text, the magnetic coupling within each layer or slab of Fe 5 GeTe 2 appears to be dominantly ferromagnetic based on the calculations performed. We also investigated a magnetic configuration with intralayer AFM coupling. This simulation started with an AFM configuration where each crystallographic position at a given z-coordinate was coupled FM to itself and AFM to the neighboring sites (which are at different z-coordinates as moving upward through the layer). Upon relaxation, the following intra-layer AFM configuration was realized with an energy that is 438 meV/f.u. above the calculated FM ground state. Each atomic site listed on a separate line is at a slightly different z-coordinate within a given Fe 5 GeTe 2 layer. The Fe1a,b entries have fewer spins because these atoms are distributed across Fe1 in a checkerboard pattern. Configuration stabilized after relaxation with AFM coupling within a given structural layer (slab) of Fe 5 GeTe 2 : The projected density of states (DOS) are shown for several atomic and magnetic configurations in Fig. Magnetization data for a crystal with a measured cobalt concentration of 54(2)% cobalt are shown in Fig. The effect of demagnetization fields is expected to be strong for these plate-like ferromagnetic crystals. Indeed, the M (T ) data would suggest that the moments are more readily aligned perpendicular to [001], yet the material appears as an easy-axis [001] ferromagnet for low T according to neutron diffraction data as well as investigation of exfoliated flakes. Four-probe electrical resistivity and specific heat capacity measurements were completed in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System to verify the metallic nature for both FM and AFM compositions. The resistances relative to the values obtained at 300 K are shown in Fig. 