The scientific community has witnessed tremendous expansion of research on layered (i.e. two-dimensional, 2D) materials, with increasing recent focus on applications to photonics. Layered materials are particularly exciting for manipulating light in the confined geometry of photonic integrated circuits, where key material properties include strong and controllable lightmatter interaction, and limited optical loss. Layered materials feature tunable optical properties, phases that are promising for electro-optics, and a panoply of polymorphs that suggest a rich design space for highly-nonperturbative photonic integrated devices based on phase-change functionality. All of these features are manifest in materials with band gap above the photonics-relevant nearinfrared (NIR) spectral band (~ 0.5 -1 eV), meaning that they can be harnessed in refractive (i.e. non-absorptive) applications. (c) Integrated photonic switch enabled by phase-change materials; reprinted from ACS Photonics. The requirements of strong optical phase modulation, fast and low-power switching, low material fatigue and long device lifetime, low insertion loss, and process compatibility result in a daunting set of technical specifications for integrated photonics active materials. Present-day solutions often satisfy some of these requirements, but not all. Silicon-based electro-optic phase shifters can be fast and highly-reliable, but are also power-hungry and the underlying effects are weak. 3) -motivate continued research on refractive applications of TMDs for photonic integrated devices, and the focus on phase-change functionality. k is a critical parameter for refractive materials for integrated photonics, but is difficult to measure in the below-band gap spectral range. Experimental measurements usually depend on discerning a small signal from a large background. Furthermore, k below-band gap is highlydependent on materials processing (much more so than n), and therefore may have a large range of reported values for a given material. This is appreciated in traditional photonics, for which materials processing for low loss is essential; examples include MultiSpectral (TM) ZnS ceramics, processed for low-loss by reducing sulfur vacancy concentration, and chalcogenide glass fibers processed for low-loss by reducing oxygen contamination. We also devote attention to materials processing, with an emphasis on large-area coating methods appropriate for planar device fabrication, because even a spectacular material isn't viable for commercialization without process-compatibility. This review primarily covers monochalcogenides and dichalcogenides, with chemical formulae MX and MX2, respectively (M-metal, X-chalcogen); we also discuss black phosphorus (bP), due to structural and functional similarities with some monochalcogenides. We close this introduction with a brief discussion of the word "phase". In optics, the phase of light describes a relative position in a cyclic waveform. In materials science, the phase of a material is defined by its composition and structure, and determines its properties. Optical phase modulators change the phase of light relative to a reference beam. However, "phase change" may also imply functionality deriving from a materials phase transformation, such as crystalline-amorphous transformations in GST, or martensitic transformations in TMDs. In an attempt to reduce confusion, throughout this review, we use the term"optical phase" to refer to the phase of light, and "phase-change" everywhere we refer to a materials phase transformation. LMs are studied widely due to their diverse physical properties, which become particularly rich in the two-dimensional (2D) limit of individual monolayers. LMs typically have weak van der Waals (vdW) bonding between layers, and strong bonding within layers, resulting in highlyanisotropic optical and electronic properties. In Fig. The complex refractive index (n -ik) is related to the dielectric permittivity ε by n = Re(√ε) and k = -Im(√ε), and k is related to absorption coefficient α by α = 4πk/λ. For integrated photonics, materials with large n are preferred to improve optical confinement and reduce mode leakage. There exists an extensive body of work measuring n for LMs, dating back decades, focused mainly on spectral reflectivity and transmission in the visible range from basal faces of bulk LM crystals. Excitons are correlated electron-hole pairs bound by the Coulomb interaction. The electronhole Coulomb interaction is screened by the dielectric constant of the material, and in most semiconductors the exciton binding energy is less than 0.1% of a Rydberg. The layered structure and vdW bonding of LMs decreases the screening effect and confines the electron and hole wavefunctions (see Fig. Modulating exciton resonances can have a strong effect on the refractive index. Yu et al. reported that the refractive index of monolayer TMDs MoS2, WS2 and WSe2 can be strongly modulated by electrostatic gating, with ∆n ∼ ∆k ∼ 1 in the vicinity of exciton absorption resonances (Fig. The layered crystal structure of LMs leads to large birefringence. In Fig. So far we have discussed the linear optical properties of LMs. The linear electro-optic (EO, or Pockels) effect is a non-linear property that can be exploited for electrically-driven optical phase modulators. The change in refractive index due to applied electric field is ∆n = -n EO coefficients follow from crystal symmetry, and may be zero for some light propagation directions. For a large number of centro-symmetric LMs (for example, 2H-WS2), the EO effect is not present for even layer numbers, and is small for odd layer numbers greater than unity. For monolayers, the modulation depth (for below-band gap light) is very small due to low light-matter interaction (owing to ultra-small thickness), but can be enhanced by device design such as in the travelling-wave Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) geometry described in section concerning experimental techniques. The linear EO effect is present in certain LMs with reduced symmetry. PCMs are based on order-disorder transformations (Fig. The energy required for martensitic transformations varies with material composition; understanding these thermodynamic trends guides materials selection for strong optical phase modulation. (a) Calculated energy differences between polymorphs for Mo-and W-based TMD monolayer TMDs; reprinted with permission from Springer Nature. Figure In this section we review techniques available to measure the optical properties of LMs. Optical property measurements of LMs are frequently complicated by the large out-of-plane birefringence, and the difficulty in preparing crystals with optically-smooth faces with orientation other than the basal plane. Measurements of materials for integrated photonics are also complicated by the differences between reference samples (e.g. bulk single crystals), and the active material in photonic integrated circuits (e.g. thin films, often with spatially-inhomogeneous grain structure). We summarize the techniques discussed in Table In ellipsometry we measure the ratio ρ = r P /r S of the amplitude reflection Fresnel coefficients. Both ellipsometry and reflectivity can be adapted to measure optical anisotropy. For normalincidence reflectivity, in-plane optical anisotropy can be estimated from polar reflectivity plots using linearly-polarized light. Spectroscopic ellipsometry can in principle measure the full optical response tensor of a material, using an approach called generalized ellipsometry. Transmission-geometry measurements are well-suited for measuring the optical properties of materials in the low-loss spectral region, such as accurate measurement of k below-band gap, and quantification of defect-assisted absorption. Transmission-geometry measurements of LMs can be found in the older literature, but seem to have gone out of favor. The reflection and transmission methods described above are typically intended to measure the "bulk" optical properties of a material; even for thin films, these experiments and their interpretation report thickness-averaged properties. However, optical fields in photonic integrated circuits are highly non-uniform, and the optical properties -and particularly the loss -of a given material in a photonic integrated device may depend strongly on the exact geometry of the device, the material microstructure, and the presence of interface regions. These are processing-and geometry-dependent details that can-not be anticipated by bulk optical property measurements. We therefore emphasize the role of using integrated photonic devices for material characterization. For measuring the EO coefficients, a crystal can be processed in a Pockels cell geometry. By modifying the positioning of the crystal with respect to the optical field and applied electric field in the Pockels cell, the EO tensor can be measured. For on-chip integrated photonic-device measurements, the traveling wave MZI geometry may be used, where the electric modulation field co-propagates with the signal light field in two separate arms (Fig. Using LMs in photonic integrated circuits will require reliable methods to make and pattern uniform, wafer-scale thin films. Wafer-scale photonic integrated circuitry will be built on established material platforms, including Si, Si3N4, and InP, using planar processing methods, and it is important to be able to insert LMs into these process flows. In this section we review synthesis methods for LMs, with emphasis on wafer-scale processing. Processing temperature is an important consideration for integration. Si photonic integrated circuit wafers with passive waveguides patterned from SiO2 or Si3N4 can withstand at least 800 °C without degradation, which is sufficient for most LM film processing methods. If CMOS devices (such as doped modulators or detectors) are present on the wafer, then the processing temperature should be lower than 600 °C; this may be a challenge for many LMs. Layer transfer methods can decouple the LM film processing temperature from the photonic integrated circuit wafer thermal history. Thin-film synthesis methods can be grouped according to the phase relation at the surface of the forming film. Here we focus on vapor-phase methods, for which the desired film grows at a vapor-solid interface. Upon close inspection, some vapor-phase methods may be related to liquidor solid-phase growth, such as the case of conversion of a metal film to a chalcogenide LM. Such distinctions hold interest for materials science, but are not discussed here. Liquid-phase methods capable of coating large areas at relatively low cost are intriguing, but also are not discussed here. Solid-source chemical vapor deposition (ssCVD): In this process, solid precursors vaporize and react on a substrate to grow a film. This is the most common method for making LM films -the archetypical process is growth of MoS2 films from powder MoO3 and S sources -and is usually referred to simply as CVD. LM monolayer or few-layer sheets can be mechanically exfoliated, from thicker crystals or growth substrates, and transferred to different substrates. Layer transfer can be used to make heterostructures, and allows LM synthesis to be decoupled from device integration: LMs can be synthesized at high temperature and in chemically-aggressive conditions, before being transferred to a wafer in mild conditions. Air stability is a key consideration for any material to be deployed widely in technology. Uncontrolled oxidation can ruin a device, while controlled and self-limited oxidation can imbue functional properties such as surface passivation. The anisotropic crystal structures of LMs lead to opto-electronic properties that may be especially useful for photonic integrated circuits. Here we have highlighted refractive properties of LMs, and proposed uses of LMs as optical phase modulators and switches. Developing these applications requires a fresh emphasis on knowing and controlling the complex optical properties of LMs, particularly in the below-band gap, low-loss spectral regions. This will require focused efforts in materials characterization and processing, building on but somewhat distinct from the tremendous recent advances in LM research. The processing-properties relationships relevant to refractive uses of LMs in photonic integrated devices remain largely unknown, and are likely to be distinct from those most relevant to uses in other domains such as microelectronics. For instance, how do grain boundaries contribute to optical loss, and how do they affect the performance of strong optical phase modulators based on material phase transformations? Such questions frame an exciting future for research on LMs for integrated photonics. We've reviewed techniques for measuring the optical properties of LMs, and highlighted the challenges of measuring the complex refractive index below-band gap in highly-anisotropic semiconductors. Certain methods developed decades ago may be primed for revival, motivated by new applications, and enabled by advances in film processing; examples include transmission ellipsometry and photo-thermal deflection spectroscopy, useful to quantify optical loss due to ingap defects. We encourage the measurement of in-and out-of-plane optical anisotropy (i.e. biaxial, triaxial), and the development of new device concepts taking advantage of these sizable effects in LMs. We also encourage increased research on electro-optic properties of LMs and ensuing applications. Using LMs in photonic integrated circuits will be enabled by advances in materials processing. Looking ahead to photonic circuit integration, we've reviewed processing methods with emphasis on wafer-scale film synthesis. Recent developments in CVD methods, including MOCVD, are promising for future device integration. Two topics particularly relevant to LMs are layer transfer and air stability. Layer transfer may greatly expand the set of materials available for photonic integrated circuits by decoupling materials synthesis and integration, but will require concerted development for each LM, film synthesis method, and integration process flow. Air stability remains a critical issue for many LMs: few LMs are air-insensitive, some form self-limiting native oxides in air, and some suffer from unimpeded oxidation. The field would benefit from continued, focused study of oxidation processes, and on the functional properties of native oxides (or even chemisorbed oxygen molecules). The diversity of LM polymorphs with distinct opto-electronic properties motivates research on functional material phase transformations. LMs present opportunities to surpass the performance of established phase-change materials, by using order-order transformations that can be switched by non-thermal stimuli, rather than those based on thermal switching between ordered and disordered phases. Here we've emphasized order-order (i.e. martensitic) transformations for strong optical phase modulation. The requirements of strong optical phase modulation, fast and lowpower switching, low material fatigue and long device lifetime, low insertion loss, and process compatibility add up to a daunting set of material specifications; we suggest that alloy design may be an effective strategy to balance these demands. The use of LMs for refractive applications in photonic integrated circuits is at a crossroads. The material properties are certainly intriguing, and key device concepts have been demonstrated. However, it's still far from clear that LMs will be better than established options for strong optical phase modulation, all things considered. The opportunities for collaborations between the materials science and photonics engineering communities are focused and exciting.