High-entropy oxides (HEOs) are a new class of materials that are promising for a wide range of applications. Designing HEOs needs to consider both geometric compatibility and electrical equilibrium. However, there is currently no available method to systematically consider these two factors when selecting constituent materials for making HEOs. Here we propose a two-step strategy, where a HEO system to be explored is first partitioned into multiple subsystems based on the valence combinations of substituted cations; the geometric compatibility is then considered in selecting suitable substituted cations. We demonstrate this strategy by using A(5B0.2)O3 perovskite as a model system. We show that the system can be partitioned into 12 subsystems. Ten of the subsystems have formed a single-phase cubic perovskite, while two have partially ordering structure. The formation of single phases is correlated to Goldschmidt's tolerance factor, while the formation of the ordering structure is mainly correlated to cation-valence difference. We anticipate that this strategy is applicable to exploring HEOs in other systems. The rapid evolution in modern technology has put forward a pressing demand for developing new materials with advanced properties. Recently, this demand has led to the discovery of a new family of materials named high-entropy alloys (HEAs), where five or more elemental species are deliberately incorporated into a single lattice with random occupancy These multicomponent materials exhibited many extremely attractive properties, surpassing those of the constituent materials Selecting substituted cations for HEOs requires two factors to be considered. The first factor is geometric compatibility, which requires that the size of each substituted cation should be appropriate for the corresponding oxygen polyhedron and the average size of these cations should accord to structural tolerance factors (e.g. Goldschmid structural tolerance factor) The second factor is electrical equilibrium, which requires that substituted cations must have a special combination of valences so that their average valence is equal to the value required to maintain stoichiometry (although slight non-stoichiometry is allowed). So far, this last requirement has received little attention since previously reported HEOs were primarily made from substituted cations with the same valence (or were non-stoichiometry) Such negligence is surprising because the use of substituted cations with different valences can greatly expand the range of cation choices, and thus the HEO family. In addition, since the electrostatic bond strength to oxygen for a given polyhedron is determined by the valence of the cation, the valence mismatch between the cations in the two polyhedra sharing the oxygen will cause distortion of the electron cloud distribution (referred to herein as charge distortion). Consequently, the use of cations with different valences to make HEOs gives an additional dimension to distort the materials, which is unique to HEOs. A strategy is highly desired when exploring systems with more than one variable and the number of samples in the system is extremely large, such as HEOs. A good strategy should ensure that the entire system to be explored will be covered and repeat exploration will be avoided. Here, we propose the following two-step strategy for better exploring HEOs. First, we determine the possible independent valance combinations of substituted cation by considering electrical equilibrium and partition the system into multiple subsystems according to these combinations. That is, materials with the same combination of substituted cation valence will be grouped into one subsystem. Second, we select suitable cations for each subsystem by considering geometric compatibility. The use of valence combination to partition HEOs is due to the fact that the valence of the substituted cations is an integer within a certain range, so that for a given system, the number of independent valence combinations (or subsystems) is finite, and the demarcation between these combinations (subsystems) is unambiguous. In this study, we use ABO3 type high-entropy perovskite as a model system to demonstrate the proposed strategy. Specifically, we focus on the system where the A-site was occupied by Ba 2+ and the B-site was occupied by five substituted cations with different valences in equiatomic amount (referred to as Ba(5B0.2)O3). Perovskite oxides are one of the most important functional materials with a multiscale controllable structure and diverse properties. The widespread applications of the materials include dielectrics, ferroelectric and multiferroic devices, cathode for solid oxide fuel cells, piezoelectric devices, superconductors, and photovoltaic modules. A unique feature of perovskite oxides is that both their A-site and B-site can be substituted with a wide range of cations to selectively tailor the multiple physical properties of the materials. This ability can be greatly expanded by forming high-entropy compounds. High-entropy perovskite oxides (HEPOs) with either A-site, B-site or both being substituted with 5 different cations in equiatomic amounts have been reported recently First, we partition Ba(5B0.2)O3 system into subsystems based on the valence combination of substituted cations. After considering various factors (such as the availability and stability of raw materials), we limit the valences of the substituted cations to +2 to +6. If there is no other restriction, the number of possible valence combinations of the five substituted cations is 5 5 = 3125. Electrical equilibrium requires that in order to form stoichiometric ABO3 compounds, the average valence of the five B-site substituted cations must be +4. This restriction reduces the number of independent valence combinations to 12. That is to say, the Ba(5B0.2)O3 system has 12 subsystems. These 12 subsystems (independent valence combinations) are summarized in Table Next, we select cations suitable for synthesizing high-entropy Ba(5B0.2)O3 in each subsystem by considering geometric compatibility. Note that although each subsystem may contain multiple materials, the purpose of this study is by no means to explore all possible materials, but to use one material in each subsystem to demonstrate the proposed strategy. Two geometric restrictions need to be considered when selecting cations to form a B-site substituted perovskite. First, the size of the cations should be suitable for the oxygen polyhedron, which is an octahedron for the B-site of perovskite. According to Pauling's first rule where A r , B r , and O r are the ionic radii of the cation at A-site, the cation at B-site and oxygen ion, respectively. A recent study has revealed that in order to form stable cubic perovskite, the value of t should be around 1 We then evaluate whether these compositions can form single-phase high-entropy perovskite. To do so, pellets made of these compositions were sintered at various temperatures. The resultant samples were characterized by using XRD and SEM-EDXS (Figs. Interestingly, the XRD patterns suggest that the samples made from 2 compositions (C2 and C3) contain the (111) chemical ordering of the B-site. Fig. where i r and i c are the radius and the mole fraction of the i th cation, respectively. The result (Table where Vi is the valence of the i th cation. δ(V B ) is calculated for the 12 compositions and listed in Table Finally, the room temperature dielectric constant and dielectric loss were measured for the samples made from the 10 compositions that can form single phases (Table This provides an opportunity to choose materials for afferent applications. For example, the sample made from composition C10 having a dielectric constant of 46.5 and dielectric loss of 0.26% could be useful as microwave dielectric materials like Ba(Mg1/3Nb1/2)O3. The sample made from C6 exhibits a dielectric constant of 526 and a dielectric loss of 2.63, which could be useful in microwave absorption. The temperature-dependent alternating current (AC) conductivity of the 10 samples listed in Table Where σ 0 is a constant, E a is the activation energy for conduction, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. As shown in Fig. samples have the activation energy in the range of 0.98eV ~ 1.21eV. These values are very close to half of the intrinsic band gap width (2.5 ~ 3.2eV) of BaTiO3 In summary, we have proposed a systematic strategy for designing high-entropy oxides, in which a system to be explored is first divided into multiple subsystems by considering electrical balance. The substituted cations are then selected by considering geometrical compatibility. We applied the strategy to the Ba(5B0.2)O3 perovskite system, and identified 12 subsystems. Suitable substituted cations were then determined for each subsystem by considering both Pauling's first rule and Goldschmidt's tolerance factor. We found that 10 out of the 12 compositions formed single phase cubic perovskite in the corresponding temperature range, and 2 have (111) chemical ordering structure. The formation of single phase is influenced by the tolerance factor, while the formation of partial ordering structure is mainly influenced by cation-valence difference. The current results demonstrated that the strategy is effective in designing high-entropy oxides, which can be expanded to other oxide systems. The starting materials used in this study are BaCO3 (99%) powder purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., and MgO (99.99%), ZnO (99%), Y2O3 (99.5%), Yb2O3 (99.99%), CeO2 (99.5%), HfO2 (98%), ZrO2 (99.99%, 50nm), SnO2 (99.5%), GeO2 (99.99%), TiO2 (99.99%, anatase), Sb2O5 (99%), Ta2O5 (99.99%), Nb2O5 (99.9%), Ga2O3 (99.99%), WO3 (99.99%) and MoO3 (99.99%) powders purchased from Aladdin Reagent (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.. The as-received powders were first baked at 120 o C for 24 hr to remove moisture. The dried powders, in an atomic ratio required to form the stoichiometric compounds listed in Table The phase composition of the resultant ceramics was characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα (λ=1.54Å) as the radiation. The microstructure and element distribution were analyzed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS, FESEM, Quanta FEG 650, FEI). For electric property measurement, silver paste was painted on the surfaces of the discs as the electrodes. The spectra were acquired using a precision LCR meter (E4980AL, Table 