In field electron emission (FE) studies, it is important to check and analyse the quality and validity of results experimentally obtained from samples, using suitably plotted current-voltage [I m (V m )] measurements. For the traditional plotting method, the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot, there exists a so-called "orthodoxy test" that can be applied to the FN plot, in order to check whether the FE device/system generating the results is "ideal". If it is not ideal, then emitter characterization parameters deduced from the FN plot are likely to be spurious. A new form of FE I m (V m ) data plot, the so-called "Murphy-Good (MG) plot" has recently been introduced (R.G. Forbes, Roy. Soc. open sci. 6 (2019) 190912. This aims to improve the precision with which characterization-parameter values (particularly values of formal emission area) can be extracted from FE I m (V m ) data. The present paper compares this new plotting form with the older FN and Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) forms, and makes an independent assessment of the consistency with which slope (and hence scaled-field) estimates can be extracted from a MG plot. It is shown that, by using a revised formula for the extraction of scaled-field values, the existing orthodoxy test can be applied to Murphy-Good plots. The development is reported of a prototype web tool that can apply the orthodoxy test to all three forms of FE data plot (ML, MG and FN). The process of field electron emission (FE) occurs in very many technological contexts. This paper is about the analysis of measured current-voltage [I m (V m )] data that relate to FE processes, devices, and systems. The conventional methods of analysing this data are to make either a Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plot, i.e., a plot of the form log !,!" I ! V ! ! vs 1 V ! , or (in older work) a Millikan-Lauritsen plot, i.e., a plot of the form log !,!" I ! vs 1 V ! . Such plots are often approximately straight. Emitter characterization parameters are then extracted from the slope of the plot, and from the intercept that a fitted straight line makes with the 1 V ! = 0 axis. With logarithmic expressions, such as log{x}or ln{x}, an international convention [1] is used in this paper that the symbol {x} means "the numerical value of x, when is x is measured in the stated units". In this paper, in all equations, all figures and all tables, voltages are always measured in volts and currents are always measured in amperes. Brackets not part of logarithmic expressions are used normally. A so-called ideal FE device/system is one where the measured I m (V m ) characteristics are determined only by unchanging system geometry and surface properties, and by the electron emission process. An ideal system is termed orthodox if, in addition, it is an adequate approximation to assume that emission takes place through a Schottky-Nordeim (SN) ("planar image rounded") potential-energy barrier, and hence that Murphy-Good FE theory applies. For an orthodox device/system, FN plot (or ML plot) analysis leads to correct values for emitter characterization parameters. However, for a variety of reasons (for example, series resistance in the measurement circuit) many real FE devices/systems are not ideal (and hence cannot be orthodox). When conventional FN plot (or ML plot) analysis techniques are applied to I m (V m ) data taken from non-ideal devices/systems, then spurious values can be (and often are) derived for emitter characterization parameters. The so-called Orthodoxy Test For a field emitter with local work function φ, subject to a local electrostatic field of magnitude F L , a corresponding scaled field f L can be defined by where c S is the Schottky constant, e is the elementary positive charge, ε 0 is the vacuum electric permittivity, and φ 2 is the reference field needed to pull the top of a SN barrier of zero-field height φ down to the Fermi level. Emitter behaviour can be described in terms of characteristic field (F C ) and scaled-field (f C ) values, usually taken as the values at the emitter apex (for a pointed emitter), or at the apex of a prominent individual emitter (for large-area field electron emitters). The range of f C -values in which emitters normally operate is well established (see spreadsheet associated with Ref. Fowler-Nordheim plots came into use because the FE equation derived by FN in 1928 Murphy-Good plots are a new form of FE I m (V m ) data plot that has recently been developed The parameter η depends only on the assumed work-function φ and is given by More generally, in the expression ln{Im /Vm k } , the value to be allocated to the general voltage exponent k depends on the plot type, as shown in Table We also develop a form of orthodoxy test that applies to Murphy-Good plots, and report on the development of a software tool that implements this test for any of the three plot forms shown in Table The so-called Extended Murphy Good (EMG) equation Here: λ is an "uncertainty factor", of unknown functional dependence or value, called the local pre-exponential correction factor; JkL SN is called the kernel LECD for the SN barrier; and a and b are the first and second FN constants as usually defined ( where f is to be interpreted as the local scaled field f L as defined above, or as its characteristic value f C . Integrating Eq. ( where An EMG is the related notional emission area. On defining the formal emission area (for the SN barrier) by A f SN by and on assuming that the measured current I m is equal to Ie EMG , we obtain the I m (F C ) form of the EMG equation, as The characteristic barrier field F C can be related to the measured voltage V m by the formula where ζ C is a system-geometry parameter called the characteristic voltage conversion length (VCL). This parameter ζ C is constant for ideal FE devices and systems, because their I m (V m ) characteristics are determined only by the emission process and unchanging system geometry and surface properties. Additional background theory is given in This Section reviews the theory We can define two scaling parameters η(φ) and θ(φ) by Inserting these three relationships into Eq. ( where, for simplicity, we do not explicitly show that η and θ depend on φ . Making use of approximation Equation ( Combining this with Eq. ( In Eq. ( Dividing both sides by V m κ , and taking the natural logarithms of both sides, gives us the equation for the theoretical MG plot: MG plots have the form log e,10 {I m /V m κ } vs 1/V m , but we discuss only the natural logarithmic form here. We can define the following expressions: β ≡ -ηVmR . For a given work-function value, β, α and ln{α} are constants. On substituting Eqs. (19) to (22) into Eq. ( Thus, ln{α} is the theoretical intercept of the MG plot and β is its theoretical slope. It can also be seen that From eqs (11) and ( Let SMG fit denote the slope of a straight line fitted to an experimental MG plot (made using natural logarithms), and let ln{R MG fit } denote the intercept that this line makes with the (1/V m )=0 axis. It follows from the equations above that an extracted value of formal emission area A ! !" can be obtained from the extraction formula where the extraction parameter for the MG plot, Λ MG (φ), is given by Examples of the numerical dependence of Λ MG (φ) on φ are given in It also follows that extracted values of V mR and ζ C can be obtained from For large area field electron emitters (LAFEs), an extracted value of a characteristic (dimensionless) field enhancement factor (FEF) γ !" , can then be obtained from where d M is the macroscopic distance used to defined the FEF (often, but not necessarily, the separation between two parallel planar plates). Once a value has been extracted for V mR , Eq. ( This can be contrasted with the formula for extracting f C -values from an FN plot made Clearly, the MG-plot formula does not contain the slope correction factor s t . Since the orthodoxy test is based on comparing extracted ranges of f C with acceptable and unacceptable ranges of f C , as defined in Ref. (1) Fit a straight line to the experimental (or simulated) plot. Regression techniques can be used, but usually defining a straight line with a ruler is good enough. (2) Identify the position on the line that has the same X-coordinate (X up ) as the lowest-X data-point you wish to use, and determine the Y-coordinate (Y up ) of this position on the line. These coordinates (X up , Y up ) define the upper point shown in Fig. (3) Carry out a similar procedure for the lower point shown in Fig. (4) Evaluate the (negative) slope S MG fit of the fitted line, using the formula (5) Extract the range-defining scaled-field values, by applying Eq. (31) to the (1/V m )-values that define the ends of the range, as follows: (6) Apply the test condition, as derived from Tables In Table Inconclusive More investigation is needed The physical meanings of the two "fail" ranges are easy to state. The "low-f C " one corresponds to the situation where the extracted f C -value is thought too low for a measurable current to be detected in normal experiments; the "upper-f C " one corresponds to the situation where the extracted f C -value is higher than f C -values at which the emitter is known to electroform (i.e., change shape due to atomic migration) or self-destruct. In both cases, it has to be concluded that the FE device/system is not ideal, and that any characterization parameters extracted from the plot are likely to be spurious. At a recent conference For an MG plot, the physical consistency of the extraction process can be checked in the following simple way. Highly precise simulated ideal I m (V m ) data-sets can be generated by using: (a) Eqs (13) and 14); (b) chosen values for system input parameters φ, V mR and A ! !" ; (c) a high-precision (HP) formula for v(f), given in Values of parameters used in (or related to) this simulation are shown in Table The chosen values of f C (as shown in Table For simplicity, the "lower" and "upper" data points on the MG plot are assumed to have the horizontal ("Z") and vertical ("Y") coordinates given by the values in columns 4 and 5 of Table A data-set was created by using the same basic input data as above, but using f Cvalues at intervals of 0.01 in the range 0.15 ≤ fC ≤ 0.35. This f C -range was then divided into four different smaller ranges, in order to check how much the extracted slope S !" !"# varied, depending on the particular range chosen. As shown in the first five columns of Table It is known that a Fowler-Nordheim plot is not expected to be an exactly straight line, and that this gives rise to difficulties when interpreting a straight line fitted to an experimental FN plot. Within the framework of the prevailing "smooth planar metal emitter (SPME)" methodology almost-universally used for interpreting FE currentvoltage data (see Section 6), the Murphy-Good plot was designed The superior quality of the MG plot is illustrated in Fig. To illustrate this quantitatively, we carried out for a FN plot a simulation exercise analogous to that described in Section 4.2 for an MG plot, using the same set of values of f C , V m and I m . The results for the FN-plot fitted slope S !" !"# are listed in the last column of Table Obviously, this difference between MG plots and FN plots aligns with the fact that Eq. (30) contains the slope correction factor s t but Eq. (29) does not. It is known (e.g. (One of the problems with precise FN-plot analysis is determining the precise value of s t ). Note that the numerics presented here have been generated specifically for the purpose of confirming the theoretical performance of a MG plot, and comparing this with that of a FN plot. These numerics should not be interpreted as likely errors when MG plots are used to interpret real experimental data. In the application of FN plots and MG plots to real experimental data, other factors come into play, including noise in the data, non-ideality, and weaknesses in SPME methodology. Obviously, the whole discussion here has been within the framework of the nearuniversal experimentalists' assumption (whatever the material they are working with) that, theoretically, emitters can be treated as if: (a) the existence of atomic structure can be disregarded; (b) emission is coming from a limited area of a smooth planar surface of very large extent; and (c) Sommerfeld free electron-metal theory applies. This has been called elsewhere The above set of assumptions is obviously wildly unrealistic for some modern field electron emitters (in particular, for low-apex-radius carbon nanotubes). Clearly, for such emitters important questions are: "how should FE I m (V m ) data-analysis techniques be modified?" and (in the context of the present paper) "do new test(s) of FE 'ideality' need to be developed to replace the orthodoxy test?" To a large extent, these questions are outside the scope of the present paper. The MG plot is a method for improving the precision of data analysis within the framework of SPME methodology, and the focus of this paper has been on developing and testing a form of orthodoxy test applicable to a MG plot. These things have merit in themselves. Nevertheless, the following points deserve making. In reality, the situation is more favourable than it might seem at first sight. (1) (Except perhaps for very sharp emitters) most of the causes of non-orthodoxy in FE devices/systems are associated with breakdown of the assumption that V mR is constant, rather than with breakdown of the assumption that the emission is adequately described by Murphy-Good theory. But the causes of breakdown in the constant-V mR assumption are much the same, whatever the emitter material. (2) In breakdown of the assumption that the EMG FE equation applies, the biggest factor will probably be that the true barrier is not a SN barrier. But, except possibly for very sharply curved emitters, the effect on FN-plot analysis is known to be a change in the value of s t by a relatively small amount (typically of the order of a few percent); equivalently, one would expect (qualitatively) that the numerical validity of MG-plot analysis would be affected only in a small way. (3) Differences in the electron supply function would be expected to have only a very small effect on the FN plot or MG plot slope, since they primarily affect the plot intercept. ( Although more-exact tests for "ideality/non-ideality" may be developed in due course, this seems unlikely to happen soon. For the time being, we consider that the orthodoxy test, whether applied to FN or MG plots, is a technological test of "ideality or otherwise" that is sufficient for purpose. A final point is that development of data-analysis theory for non-metal emitters and for very sharp emitters is inhibited by lack of sufficiently good understanding of emission theory for such emitters. Probably a higher strategic priority is to first develop a form of data-analysis theory that deals with metal emitters that have the shape of pointed needles or of rounded posts, or are otherwise sharp (but not "very sharp"). This topic is beginning to be an active area of research, and some of the issues involved have recently been discussed (see doi: This paper has reviewed the theory of Murphy-Good (MG) plots, and has made some comparisons with the theories of Fowler-Nordheim (FN) plots and Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) plots. If experimental current-voltage characteristics conform to the socalled "Extended MG equation", then an experimental MG plot is expected to be "very nearly" a straight line, and "much more nearly straight" than either an FN plot or a ML plot. We have confirmed this to be the case. Also, by extracting (from a simulated MG plot) slope values that correspond to different voltage ranges, we have shown that (for an MG plot taken from a orthodoxly behaving FE device/system) the process of slope extraction generates very consistent slope values, irrespective of voltage range Because values of characteristic scaled field f C can be extracted from a MG plot by using Eq. ( A particular application that we have in mind is to use the new data-analysis techniques discussed here, namely Murphy-Good plots and the related orthodoxy test, Parameters used for preparing simulation data for MG plot, and extracted outputs related to its slope. Universal constants are shown to seven significant figures. Other parameters are shown to four or five figure precision. Asterisks indicate the chosen input-parameter values.