In this study, we propose a carrier time-of-flight technique to evaluate the carrier transport time across a quantum structure in an active region of solar cells. By observing the time-resolved photoluminescence signal with a quantum-well probe inserted under the quantum structure at forward bias, the carrier transport time can be efficiently determined at room temperature. The averaged drift velocity shows linear dependence on the internal field, allowing us to estimate the quantum structure as a quasi-bulk material with low effective mobility containing the information of carrier dynamics. We show that this direct and real-time observation is more sensitive to carrier transport than other conventional techniques, providing better insights into microscopic carrier transport dynamics to overcome a device design difficulty. Quantum structures have been extensively studied as candidate materials for next-generation solar cells So far, open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor have been mainly used to evaluate the influence of potential barriers on carrier collection In this paper, we propose a carrier time-of-flight (TOF) technique to evaluate the carrier transport time across a given quantum structure by placing a single-quantum-well probe under the target quantum structure. The schematic is shown in Fig. The optical TOF techniques proposed in earlier works have tried to measure carrier mobility The ineffective recombination is solved by applying forward bias during the measurement. Under forward bias, both the charge carriers, electrons and holes, are steadily supplied to the probe well in the form of injection current. This was tested on an InGaAs/GaAsP multiple-quantum-well (MQW) p-i-n cell grown by metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy 32 as shown in Fig. Fig. In the time-resolved PL measurement, the excitation wavelength of 405 nm was used similarly to the continuous-wave PL measurement. The streak camera images of time-resolved PL spectra from the reference [Fig. In the discussions so far, an assumption was made that the holes that are photoexcited at the p-doped surface are blocked and only the electron transport was observed by the TOF technique. The assumption was verified examining TOF at various bias voltages because electrons and holes have the opposite behavior. At higher forward bias, the effective potential barrier for electrons and holes in the probe direction became higher and lower, respectively, resulting in slower electron and faster hole transport (see supplementary Fig. By defining averaged electron drift velocity drift v as drift , TOF the dependence of field E on drift v in the MQW region can be investigated using the results from Fig. Based on the slope, the effective electron drift mobility in the MQW is estimated as eff μ = 0.28±0.04 cm 2 /Vs. This method of estimating the effective drift mobility is a significant step forward in modeling and analysis of carrier dynamics in quantum structure devices. By contrast, the measurement results using the conventional time-resolved PL technique, which focuses on the PL emitted from the MQW itself and has sometimes been used to evaluate carrier transport in quantum structures To study the influence of carrier obstruction on device performance, carrier collection efficiencies (CCE) of a GaAs reference and an MQW solar cell were calculated. CCE is a measure of the percentage of carriers collected as photocurrent and is expressed as where V reverse is the sufficient reverse bias at which almost all of the photoexcited carriers are collected In summary, we have proposed a carrier TOF technique using a quantum-well probe to observe carrier transport inside quantum-structure solar cells in the microscopic scale. The simplicity for analysis and evaluation accuracy in comparison to the conventional techniques will make the optimization of structure design more straightforward for carrier transport enhancement. Furthermore, this measurement technique and the effective mobility evaluation will help better understanding of carrier dynamics, such as cascade dynamics in superlattice structures, and their effects on the macroscopic current-voltage property, allowing us to maximize the potential of quantum-structure solar cells as well as other quantum-structure device applications. It should be pointed out that even though we have conducted the experiment on MQW, this method can also be applied to quantum dots or other nanostructures. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4927612 Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 043901 (2015)