The present work reports the role of different atomic mobility induced localized pore evolution on densification during spark plasma sintering of nanocrystalline W-Mo alloy powder. The shrinkage (or expansion) behavior of cold compacted milled powders was studied using dilatometry during non-isothermal sintering up to 1600 °C. Subsequently, the milled powders were densified to ~95% relative density using spark plasma sintering up to 1600 °C. The enhanced localized Joule heating due to dynamically evolved porous structure could be attributed for the densification during spark plasma sintering. Spark plasma sintering (SPS) has shown a great promise over the last few decades due to several advantages than the conventional sintering processes, such as densifying variety of materials to fully dense structure at a lower temperature in a short duration of time with a possibility of retaining the fine grain structure The present paper reports the role of Kirkendall porosity on densification process during both non-isothermal sintering and the SPS of nanocrystalline W-5wt.%Mo alloy. The study shows that such systems could be densified using SPS which is otherwise difficult to sinter by conventional processes. Mechanical milling/alloying (MM/MA) of W and W-5wt.%Mo were performed using high-energy planetary ball mill (Fritsch Pulversitte-5, Germany). WC balls of 10 mm diameter in tungsten carbide vials were used as grinding medium. Toluene was used as a process control agent. Milling was performed at 300 rpm for 6 h with a ball to powder weight ratio of 5:1. The X-ray diffraction measurements were carried out using X'Pert Pro (PANalytical, The Netherlands) X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation in a range of 10-140 degree using 0.02° step size with a 30 s time per step. Double-Voigt analysis Non-isothermal sintering was performed on cold compacted 8 mm diameter cylindrical pellet of W and W-5wt.%Mo alloy using Dilatometer (Setaram, Setsys Evolution) in Argon atmosphere with a constant heating rate of 20 K min -1 and up to 1600 °C under ~0.6 N load. The shrinkage data was used to understand the effect of Mo alloying on densification behavior of nanocrystalline W during the non-isothermal sintering. The consolidation of milled/alloyed powders was performed using SPS (Dr Sinter SPS-650 machine, Sumitomo Metals, Japan). The densification of milled/alloyed powders was performed in a cylindrical graphite die of 10 mm diameter up to 1600 °C by heating at 100 °C min -1 with a dwell time period of 5 min and 50 MPa uniaxial pressure applied throughout the process. The density of sintered samples was measured using Archimedes' principle using water as a medium. The non-isothermally sintered samples were investigated using a scanning electron microscope (FEI QUANTA 400 manufactured by FEI, USA). Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) was carried out on the electropolished samples in a FEG SEM (Inspect F, FEI, USA) equipped with TSL-OIM software using a step size of 300 nm. Nanoindentation study of SPS samples following the Oliver and Pharr method The XRD patterns of milled W and W-5wt.%Mo powders in comparison to unmilled W powder are illustrated in Fig. The starting W and Mo powder particle sizes lies in the range of 3-5 μm with nearly spherical in shape as shown in Fig. This could be ascribed to the competition between dynamically evolved Kirkendall porosity and the thermally induced diffusion driven densification process. It should be noted here that the densification starts during the non-isothermal sintering and the faster densification kinetics during SPS of W-5wt.%Mo sample was observed at almost the similar temperatures (~1450 °C). The densification behavior and its competition with dynamic pore evolution due to Kirkendall effect during SPS of W-5wt.%Mo alloy are discussed later. The EBSD characterization was carried out for spark plasma sintered samples. The inverse pole figure maps and the analyzed average grain size and grain size distributions are shown in Fig. The elemental distribution as shown in the supplementary materials (Fig. The nanoindentation study was performed to evaluate the mechanical properties of the SPS W and W-5wt.%Mo samples. The representative load and penetration depth curves are illustrated as Fig. In general, the densification (pore closure) is massive atomic movement caused by temperature, deformation or both. Therefore, a high temperature or high pressure or both are required for the densification to occur. The electric current, temperature and stress contributed multi-faceted densification mechanisms operating during SPS are different and difficult to understand than those during conventional sintering The above discussion has direct implications for understanding the densification behavior of W and W-5wt.%Mo powders. In the present study, it has been established through non-isothermal sintering using dilatometry (Fig. where, σ0-electrical conductivity, T0-initial temperature, E0-intensity of an electric field, ∆τtime of an electric field, Cm-the specific heat of the material, η-number of electric impulses. The ∇T estimated for a micron size Kirkendall pore formed in W for 12:3 ms electric pulse at 1400 °C with E0 ≈ 5 V/5 mm (obtained from the SPS experiment) is approximately 1064 K/μm i.e. ≈ 800 °C/μm. The temperature gradient around the pores generates the vacancy gradient (∇Cv) and the vacancy flux (J) is given by the following equation where, kT-thermal diffusivity and Dv-diffusion coefficient of vacancies. From Equation (2), it can be concluded that the vacancy diffusion will occur from the large to small pores leading to shrinkage of large pores as illustrated in Fig. Additionally, the vacancy mediated massive unequal atomic mobility of both W and Mo during SPS leads to the annihilation of excess vacancies at sinks such as dislocations and grain boundaries. Such events could be enhanced for the starting milled powders having nanocrystalline structure and rich in defect density, in particular, the dislocation density. The annihilation of excess vacancies becomes the reason for dislocation sources and their mobility and thereby contributing towards material flow Thus, the scenario during sintering of W-5wt.%Mo system is more complex. There are two competing phenomena occurring, first one is the formation of Kirkendall pores increasing localized electric resistance and generate large thermal gradient (∇T ≈ 800 °C/μm). This leads to the second phenomenon that is the shrinkage of large pores (Equation Intriguingly, the formation of Kirkendall pores will increase the resistance offered to the electric current and thus to support this discussion, the resistance is calculated from densification data (Current and Voltage) obtained during SPS for W-5wt.%Mo and W powders First and second parts are typically common for both W and W-5wt.%Mo. The W-5wt.%Mo resistance trajectory saturates almost to the same value but at a temperature nearly 200 °C higher as compared to W. This could be well understood from the Fig. The above observation has its significance for systems which show Kirkendall porosity during sintering. The Kirkendall porosity is the hindrance for achieving full density during conventional sintering. However, the localized heating mechanisms in SPS can be advantageous to achieve higher density by turning these pores as potential heating sites. In addition, the plastic flow of the material is believed to be enhanced due to the annihilation of vacancies so created which aids up with other material flow mechanisms such as electromigration during SPS In conclusion, the role of Kirkendall porosity during the sintering processes of nanocrystalline W-5wt.%Mo alloy was studied. The Kirkendall porosity induced expansion was observed during the non-isothermal sintering of W-5wt.%Mo alloy. However, the typical S-curve densification behavior with ~95% relative density was evidenced during the SPS. This could be explained with enhanced localized heating due to dynamic pore evolution induced increased point contacts. The study clearly shows that the systems showing the Kirkendall porosity could be consolidated using SPS. 