We characterize single nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers created by 10-keV N + ion implantation into diamond via thin SiO 2 layers working as screening masks. Despite the relatively high acceleration energy compared with standard ones (< 5 keV) used to create near-surface NV centers, the screening masks modify the distribution of N + ions to be peaked at the diamond surface [Ito et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 213105 (2017)]. We examine the relation between coherence times of the NV electronic spins and their depths, demonstrating that a large portion of NV centers are located within 10 nm from the surface, consistent with Monte Carlo simulations. The effect of the surface on the NV spin coherence time is evaluated through noise spectroscopy, surface topography, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV -or just NV) center in diamond has opened up a unique opportunity for nanoscale nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and imaging. In Ref. 27, some of the present authors reported that near-surface NV centers can also be created by comparatively high energy (10 keV) N + ion implantation, when combined with a SiO 2 screening mask deposited on the diamond surface. The defining feature of this method is that the region of the highest N + density is located at the surface. We showed this by Monte Carlo simulations, and experimentally confirmed the creation of NV centers a) Electronic mail: kitoh@appi.keio.ac.jp b) Electronic mail: eisuke.abe@riken.jp (see Sec. A for a more detailed description of our method and the result of Monte Carlo simulations). The resulting N + distribution in our method is in contrast with the case for the standard (maskless) low-energy ion implantation, in which the implanted N + ions are approximately Gaussian-distributed inside of the diamond. An experimental confirmation of the distribution of the NV centers along the depth direction (depth profile), as well as the relation between T 2 and d NV , are highly desired but have not yet been reported so far. The present work addresses these issues. Specifically, we focus on single NV centers and determine d NV from NMR of proton ensembles on the surface, with direct application to nanoNMR in mind. Figures We also calculate the yield (efficiency of conversion from N + ions into NV -centers) as shown in Fig. The form of C depends on a type of measurements, t tot is the total time of the pulse sequence applied. Fitting parameters are T 2 and p (stretched exponent). In the case of Hahn echo, C echo = 1 and t tot = 2τ . The solid line in Fig. Here, γ e /2π = 28 MHz/mT is the gyromagnetic ratio of the NV spin, and ω n /2π = γ h B 0 /2π is the proton NMR frequency with γ h /2π = 42.577 kHz/mT the gyromagnetic ratio of the 1 H nuclear spin. B rms is the root-meansquare nuclear dipolar magnetic field integrated over the semi-infinite volume (i.e., outside of the diamond), and can be calculated analytically as Figure We repeat the measurements on different NV centers, and the relation between T 2,echo and d NV , obtained from 43 NV centers in total, is plotted in Fig. The condition is simply that the signal S be larger than the noise N . The NMR signal arises from the component of P 0 after subtracting the coherence decay, therefore S = 1 2 (1 -C NMR )e -(N τ /T2) p . We set p = 1 for simplicity (also consistent with experimental observation) and τ = π/ω n = 506.2 ns, corresponding to the resonance condition. Experimentally, the number of π pulses N is determined from the balance between the signal strength and the coherence time, and we usually found N τ /T 2,echo ≈ 2 to be an appropriate operating condition. For instance, the condition for Fig. The measurement noise N arises from the Poisson distribution of the photon counts n, the variance of which is given by √ n. The signal photon count n s is defined as n s = n 1 + (n 0n 1 )P 0 , where n 0 and n 1 are the photon counts from the m S = 0 and -1 states, respectively, and are mutually related by n 1 = (1c)n 0 , with c the contrast. We obtain P 0 = (n sn 1 )/(cn 0 ) and the fluctuation of n s , given by √ n s , leads to Combining these, we write the condition S/N = 1 as Typical values for c and n 0 in the present experimental condition are c ≈ 0.2 and n 0 ≈ 5 × 10 5 counts. Substituting these values, we draw the dashed line in Fig. In addition to this constraint, short T 2,echo limits the number of pulses we can apply. For instance, to satisfy N τ /T 2,echo ≈ 2 with N = 8, T 2,echo needs to be longer than 2 μs. In fact, from NV centers with T 2,echo shorter than 3 μs we were not able to observe clear NMR signals (and the extension of T 2 by dynamical decoupling is often not effective), even though they are likely to be located close to the surface. This motivates us to draw another bound T 2,echo = 3 μs in Fig. From the dataset in Fig. To include the former group in the histograms, we assume, judging from the trend observed in Fig. In our sample, it is observed that the NV centers with short T 2,echo also tend to be short-lived, degrading T 2,echo during the experiments. In one case, initially T 2,echo was 6 μs, but it reduced continuously to 2 μs in 5 hours, then fluctuates between 1 and 2 μs. Another case shows that initial T 2,echo of 18 μs slowly degrades to 12 μs in the time scale of 80 hours. These are likely to arise from the coupling with the surface, and we next examine the origin of the noise that affects the NV spin. For this purpose, we would ideally hope to use shallower NV centers, but as mentioned above, they suffer degradation of T 2,echo , making a clean set of experiments difficult. Nonetheless, the trend in Fig. We first perform dynamical decoupling by increasing N up to 512. The decay curves are shown in Fig. , T 2 by N -pulse dynamical decoupling, shows a scaling and saturating behavior described by corresponds to T 2,echo , but is treated as a parameter here. The scaling exponent s of 2/3 is expected for an environment that fluctuates slowly compared with T 2 . This observation is reinforced by spectral decomposition. Under a few simplifying assumptions, the spectral component at ω = π/τ is given by One can compute the noise spectrum directly from the dynamical decoupling data. or a sum of multiple Lorentzians, where E 2 ⊥ is the average coupling strength of the environment to the NV center, and τ c is the correlation time of the environment. In the present case, the spectrum is almost flat (typically 1-2×10 10 V 2 /m 2 Hz) up to ω/2π ≈ 10 7 Hz in the double logarithmic plot, suggesting that the noise is white in the probed frequency range (ωτ c ≪ 1). This makes fitting to a Lorentzian curve arbitrary, and we can only infer τ c to be shorter than 100 ns. Still, the short τ c ≪ T 2 is consistent with the small s. We also probe the noise by relaxation measurements through single quantum (SQ) and double quantum (DQ) channels as shown in Fig. We have found that our method of creating nearsurface NV centers provides the T 2 -d NV relation comparable to other existing methods. Yet, the SiO 2 deposition, in which an amorphous SiO 2 source (melting point ≈ 1700 • C) is heated by an electron beam and sublimated SiO 2 is directed to the diamond substrate in vacuum, is the process unique to ours, and it is of interest to examine an effect it might have on the diamond surface. Here, we perform AFM and XPS on two areas, one in which SiO 2 was not deposited and ion implantation was blocked (denoted as t = 0), and the other in which ion implantation was performed through SiO 2 layers (denoted as t = 0). These measurements were performed after all the ODMR-based experiments were done (including DEER presented in Sec. C), and therefore the t = 0 area was subject to the same chemical and annealing processes (described in Sec. A) as the t = 0 area. Figure Figure To conclude, we created single nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers by 10-keV N + ion implantation into diamond via SiO 2 layers of t = 52.3, 57.6, 64.1, and 69.1 nm, and examined the relation between T 2,echo and d NV . The depth profiles incorporating the NV centers with T 2 < 3 μs were found to be consistent with Monte Carlo simulations. The effect of the surface on T 2 was examined by a combination of noise spectroscopy, surface topography, and XPS. Although our method is found to give the T 2 -d NV relation comparable to other existing methods, we also conceive that the surface undergoes a slight change in morphology due to SiO 2 deposition and T 2 becomes unstable and/or is shortened over time. Recently, these aspects have been investigated in great detail by Sangtawesin et al., Figure The basic procedures for sample preparation are as described in Ref. 27, except for two points. The first is the growth of isotopically pure 12 C diamond layer, and the second is the use of The experimental setup used in the present work, including our method to generate microwave pulses, is described in detail in Ref. 30. It is a homebuilt tabletop scanning confocal microscope combined with highfrequency electronics, enabling time-domain and multifrequency ODMR of single NV centers. All the sequences start and end by green (532 nm) laser illumination for initialization (Init.) and readout (RO). The photons in the range between 650 and 800 nm are detected by a singlephoton counting module. To deliver microwave to the sample, broadband large-area microwave antennas were used in standard ODMR and proton NMR. Microwave pulse sequences used in the present work are summarized in Fig. For dynamical decoupling, we use a family of XY sequences given by XY4 = τ /2-X-τ -Y-τ -X-τ -Y-τ /2, XY8 = XY4-YX4, XY16 = XY8-X Ȳ8, where X, Y, X, and Ȳ denote the π pulses around x, y, -x, and -y axes of the rotating frame, respectively. the positions of X's and Y's swapped (X ↔ Y), and X Ȳ8 is XY8 with the rotation axes inverted (X → X, Y → Ȳ) The XYk (k = 4, 8, 16) sequence repeated N/k times is denoted as XYk-N , forming the N block in Fig. The ground state of the NV center is spin-triplet, forming a qutrit system. Although we usually pick up two states out of the three, treating it as a projected qubit system, the qutrit nature of the NV ground state can have profound consequences on the relaxation processes. The qubit spanned by the m S = 0 and 1 states or the m S = 0 and -1 states are magnetically allowed (SQ transition), and therefore the dominant relaxation source is also magnetic in origin. The qubit spanned by the m S = -1 and 1 states on the other hand are magnetically forbidden (DQ transition), but the Hamiltonian of the NV spin system has terms such as d Π S 2 z and d ⊥ Π ⊥ (S 2 + + S 2 -)/2, making the m S = -1 ↔ 1 transition susceptible to electric field noise. Therefore, a comparison of the SQ and DQ relaxation channels allows us to distinguish the prevailing noise source in the system. Using the sequences in Fig. T 1,SQ is what we usually call the spin relaxation time T 1 , but in practice includes contributions from both the SQ and DQ channels. This is also the case for T 1,DQ . The relaxation times and the SQ and DQ relaxation rates (Ω and γ, respectively) are related by T 1,SQ = (3Ω) -1 and T 1,DQ = (Ω + 2γ) -1 . 40 Appendix C: Double electron-electron resonance DEER is a technique that employs multifrequency to simultaneously drive two paramagnetic species. Applied to the NV spin system, DEER provides a means to optically detect dark paramagnetic spins using NV centers as a probe spin. Typically, the dark spins to be detected are P1 centers (substitutional N donors) or g-factor of g e = 2 spins due to divacancies (V 2 ) or surface defects/adatoms. In these cases, there exist large frequency differences between the NV and paramagnetic spins, because of the large zero-field splitting of the ground state of the NV center. At 23.4 mT applied below, ω 0,-1 /2π is 2.215 GHz while g e = 2 corresponds to 655 MHz. The radiofrequency (RF) pulse tuned to the dark spin, applied amid the Hahn echo sequence on the NV spin [Fig. This mechanism is equivalent to the instantaneous diffusion, in which two paramagnetic spins share the same transition frequencies and thus are flipped simultaneously by a single resonant pulse. When the decay is singleexponential (q = 1), the instantaneous diffusion time T id is given by 50,51 be averaged out, and the coherence of the NV centers can be extended. Continuous drive experiment was performed even later, but the coherence was more or less stable, with T 2,echo = 19.0 μs and p = 1.76 (the data not shown). This is extended to T 2,drive = 36.5 μs with q = 1.64 (♦). It is not fully clear why we did not find DEER signals from many of the NV centers tested. One clue is the short correlation time τ c associated with the broadband (white) noise observed in Sec. IV, which indicates that the surface defect spins fluctuate in much faster timescale than the radiofrequency pulse can drive coherently. It is then possible that this particular NV center with which DEER was observed might have coupled accidentally to defects not originating from the surface, such as V 2 , which should have a density much less than 10 17 cm -3 globally but could have locally due to insufficient annealing. This speculation is partly supported by the fact that T 2,drive of 36.5 μs under continuous driving is still well within the observed T 2 -d NV trend in Fig. 