Electrical double layers play a key role in a variety of electrochemical systems. The mean free path of secondary electrons in aqueous solutions is on the order of a nanometer, making them suitable for probing of ultrathin electrical double layers at solid-liquid electrolyte interfaces. Employing graphene as an electron-transparent electrode in a two-electrode electrochemical system, we show that the secondary electron yield of the graphene-liquid interface depends on the ionic strength and concentration of electrolyte and applied bias at the remote counter electrode. These observations have been related to polarization-induced changes in the potential distribution within the electrical double layer and demonstrate the feasibility of using scanning electron microscopy to examine and map electrified liquid-solid interfaces. The processes related to the formation and dynamics of the electrical double layers (EDLs) at the solid-liquid electrolyte interfaces are crucial to the operation of electrochemical devices, The application of traditional surface-sensitive methods such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, atomic emission spectroscopy, near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy etc., that use electrons to probe electroactive liquid interfaces started in the early 80s Graphene-capped microchannel arrays (MCA) filled with liquid electrolytes have been used in this study. The microscope contrast and brightness settings were kept fixed throughout SEM imaging to ensure reliable comparative analysis. A through-the-lens secondary electron detector with acceptance half angle of ca. 19 and an energy filter were employed to collect electrons with energies predominantly between 0 eV and 50 eV (Fig. To verify the experimental finding, the SE yields were simulated using the JMONSEL (Java Monte Carlo Simulation of Secondary Electrons) simulator (see Methods and SI). Under this definition, the channels' contrast value depends exclusively on the polarizationinduced electron yield variations of the electrolyte (and graphene membrane) and is free of the influence of possibly varying image contrast/brightness, beam-induced carbonaceous contamination, etc. Figure V bias to the Pt back electrode. The images reveal noticeable and reproducible alternations of the SE signal from the liquid-filled cells upon cell polarization. To quantify the effect of the applied bias on the SEM contrast variation, we plot the difference between the contrast values with and without polarization ΔC(V) = C(V) -C(0) as a function of bias comparatively for aqueous 10 2 mol/m 3 CuSO4 solution, pure water and toluene (Fig. Compared to apparent variations of ΔC for polar liquids, the contrast changes for nonpolar ones (toluene) are negligible (Fig. An EDL is formed at the graphene-electrolyte interface and the potential profile within the EDL depends on the type and concentration of the electrolyte, applied bias, and geometry of the liquid cell and electrodes (see description below). Despite the relatively large (ca. 200 nm) penetration depth of the primary 2 keV electrons, the SE signal SS originates from a very narrow, few nanometer thick top layer which includes the bilayer graphene and graphene-electrolyte interface and thus can be defined as SS=SG+SEL where SEL is the secondary electron signal from the electrolyte slab. One can exclude the "chemical" component in SEL due to adsorbed ions in our case, since their concentration is about two orders of magnitude lower than that of the solvent, even at a bias of -1 V (see discussion below). Therefore, SEL is determined by the SE yield of the solvent to a large extend. The electrostatic field induced by electrolyte polarization can be non-zero inside the graphene and cannot be completely screened by bilayer graphene. The contrast change due to redox reaction like Cu plating is ruled out for the selected bias window since the SE modulations occur much faster (Fig. To substantiate the above conclusions, we start with FE modeling of the potential distribution inside the electrochemical cell and in the vicinity of the electrified graphene-electrolyte interface as a function of liquid medium type, its concentration, and bottom electrode potential. Figure With the non-conducting toluene, which does not form an EDL, the potential distribution along the channel is divided into three distinct parts: with the potential of the bottom electrode along the entire length of the inner channel coated with the metal deposit, the intermediate potential in the middle (defined by the floating potential of the Si matrix), and near zero (ground) potential at the very top of the channel (see magnified inset in Fig. In the case of diluted electrolytes and water with impurities (as our case is), the screening by EDLs is incomplete, as seen in the potential map in Figure With increasing ionic concentration, the Debye length of the electrolyte decreases, and the potentials of the silicon substrate and the deposited metal films become increasingly screened by the EDLs. At high salt concentrations, when the EDL thickness becomes on the order of 10 nm or less (for a concentration of 10 2 mol/m 3 , the Debye length in CuSO4 is about 0.5 nm), the electrode potentials are completely screened by the Debye layers in the electrolyte. In this case, the electrolyte potential is uniform across the whole electrolyte volume except the EDLs at its boundaries and is determined by the ratio of the EDL layer capacitances at the electrodes, which is equal to the ratio of the areas of the electrode deposited films in contact with the electrolyte. Thus, with the ratio of the electrode areas equal to 100 μm × 30 μm 13 μm ×6 μm ≈ 40 (here the top and bottom channel circumferences and metal deposit depth are used), the electrolyte potential is approximately equal to the potential of the larger, bottom, electrode up to the EDL (Fig. We now discuss the influence of the potential at the liquid-solid interface and in the vacuum on the SE emission signals recorded from the graphene-capped electrolytes. Details of the JMONSEL simulation are provided in the SI. Here we note that bilayer graphene was modeled by an equal thickness graphite slab. Since the measured SEM contrast was defined according to Eq. 1, we normalized JMONSEL simulated SE yields similarly. To do so, we determined for each bias the simulated SE yields for electrons incident on the graphite-covered center of an empty electrochemical cell, on the center of a filled one, and on a gold region 2 μm outside of the edge of a cell (see modeling details in SI). The simulated yield for the 10 2 mol/m 3 CuSO4 cell is shown in Figure To evaluate the relative contribution of the aforementioned effects, the SE yield of the graphitewater interface was simulated under different conditions as indicated in the legend of Figure The curves labeled with the "AP" suffix counted only electrons that hit the detector within a finite entrance aperture (19 half angle). The one without this suffix includes all SEs emitted within 2 steradians. The curve labeled with "E ⃗ = 0" was simulated with the graphite/vacuum interface above the cell artificially shifted to 0 V potential. (The potentials inside the cell were shifted by the same amount, thereby keeping all potential differences, i.e., the electric fields, the same inside the cell.) Thus, all 3 simulated curves have the same electric fields inside the sample, and all have negative slopes. The solid red simulated curve (marked AP) includes the bias-induced electric field outside the sample and the finite detector aperture. It is the one that most closely agrees with the experimental data (EXP). The remaining two simulated curves neglect either the external field or the finite aperture contributions. They agree well with each other but differ more strongly from the measurement, especially at higher biases. Finally, we want to comment on the partitioning of the detected SE between the capping electrode and electrolyte and the overall escape depth of the collected SEs. For that, for every simulated detected SE, we determined the z coordinate corresponding to its deepest penetration into the sample. For this purpose, the part of its parent electron's trajectory prior to its own generation is treated as though part of its own trajectory and likewise for earlier ancestors. Electric fields below this z of deepest penetration can have had no influence on this electron's fate. Fields between deepest penetration and the detector have influence but not always much. In particular, electrons at deep parts of this causal chain are likely to have been more energetic and therefore less sensitive to electric fields. For this reason, this metric should be treated as a bound. Figure To summarize: we have used liquid electrochemical cells with an electron transparent two-layer graphene electrode to elucidate the effect of the electrolyte polarization at the graphene-liquid interface on the SE emission using SEM. We have found that the SE emission from such an interface is sensitive to the formation and re-structuring of the EDL and can be recorded using typical in-lens SE detector of the SEM. Finite element analysis modeling of the potential distribution near the interface coupled with Monte Carlo simulations explains the general trends of bias-dependent contrast and determines its values. The proposed method is most useful for studying electrochemical systems where laterally heterogeneous interfaces are present and highresolution polarization mapping is required. As we have shown recently, care has to be taken in these cases to minimize the radiation damage of the electrolyte Fabrication of MCA include the following steps (see detailed procedure in Supporting Information): (i) Bottle-shaped microchannels were formed using reactive ion etching of lithographically defined Si wafer. (ii) 100 nm thick thermal oxide was grown on the Si surface. (iii) 200 nm Au on 10 nm Cr and 30 nm Pt electrodes were deposited onto the MCA's front and back surfaces. (iv) Bilayer Gr was transferred using a PMMA sacrificial layer onto the Au electrode. (v) PMMA was dissolved in hot acetone. (vi) MCA was filled with a liquid electrolyte using a substitutional filling. (vii) Backside openings of the filled channels were sealed using a water immiscible epoxy cured by UV irradiation. To determine the SE yield, we simulated 1 million beam electrons incident on each relevant position (e.g., the center of the cell or the graphite-covered gold near the cell). Each electron's trajectory consisted of a series of steps, each of which was undisturbed flight (corrected for the effect of the electric field determined by the finite-element model below) terminated by an "event." data interpretation. The manuscript was compiled by A.K. using contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.