On-chip mode-division multiplexing (MDM) has been emerging as a promising technology to further enhance the link capacity and bandwidth of data communications with multiple mode channels. Both mode converters and mode exchangers are indispensable fundamental components for flexible mode operations. While several configurations have been developed previously, it is still very challenging to efficiently manipulate arbitrary high-order modes in a versatile way to reduce the R&D and prototyping costs. Here we initiate a breakthrough with a simple yet universal generic mode operator building block concept utilizing metasurface structures. The programmable arbitrary high-order mode operators can realize mode conversion and exchange simultaneously with competitive and uniform performance, high stability and compact footprints, offering a quintessential step change for on-chip multimode optical interconnections. dvanced multiplexing technologies have been playing extremely important roles to satisfy the continuously increasing demands for high capacity of data communication Previously, significant efforts have been devoted to realize efficient on-chip mode conversions. The working principles of these devices can be generally categorized into the following four types Compared with the abundant demonstrations of on-chip mode conversions, only a few mode exchangers have been proposed An ideal mode converter or mode exchanger should have the merits of mode manipulation with low insertion loss (IL), low crosstalk, broad bandwidth, compact footprints, and large fabrication tolerance. On-chip MDM systems, where particular modes are allocated to optimally perform desired functionalities, however, currently require considerable designs and optimization iterations for different mode operators, leading to long development times In this paper, we propose for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, a universal scheme to program arbitrary high-order mode operators in an easy yet generic building block approach. This method is inspired by electronic Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA), where any arbitrary high-order mode operators can be implemented by a simple topology consisting of basic low-order mode operators to realize different multimode functionalities through programming. We first introduce our design philosophy with the primitive TE 0 -TE 2 mode operator exploiting fully etched dielectric metasurface slots in the SOI platform, which will function as the basic building block for high-order mode operators. The simulated insertion loss is less than 1 dB and the crosstalk are lower than -10 dB across the wavelength band from 1500 nm to 1600 nm. The operating principles are theoretically analyzed using the beam shaping technique together with the coupled mode theory (CMT). After that, any even-order mode operators can be acquired by simply programming parallel arrangement of a set of building blocks with an appropriate waveguide width. Employing the same approach, any odd-order mode operators can be realized by directly shifting and chopping part of the even-order mode operators with a fixed width. We emphasize that the performance of all the programmed arbitrary ultra-high-order mode operators can still maintain impressively well with the insertion loss less than 1.5 dB as well as crosstalk lower than -8.5 dB over an ultra-broad bandwidth of 150 nm, leading to a considerable progress to the de facto multimode photonics solutions. Mode operator building block. Previously we have reported an ultra-compact mode-order converter by exploiting a fully etched silica slot on a silicon waveguide, which can efficiently serve as both a power splitter and a phase shifter at the same time Although the structure is originally intended for mode conversion, it can actually implement the function of mode exchange. To demonstrate this, we input TE 2 mode from the left of the structure and the simulation results are shown in Fig. ) where d is the central distance between adjacent building blocks, and w extra is the applied extra waveguide width to better confine the guided modes. The optimized parameters from FDTD simulations are d=0.92 μm and w extra =0.19 μm, respectively. As an example, the structure of the TE 0 -TE 6 mode operator is presented in Fig. where w offset is the width of the truncated part, and the optimized value is 0.46 μm. As an example, the schematic diagram of the TE 0 -TE 5 mode operator is shown in Fig. Obviously, the performance is remarkably improved with the crosstalk lower than -12 dB from 1450 nm to 1650 nm for all the six occasions. We noted that the taper won't work for the mode exchangers, considering that high-order modes will evolve into various different modes after transmitting through the short tapers. A novel universal design for arbitrary high-order mode operators based on the programmed metasurface building blocks on silicon has been demonstrated and illustrated in Fig. The proposed programmable building block concept can be efficiently migrated to other platforms (e.g., InP, Si 3 N 4 , etc.) as well as other wavelength-bands (e.g., mid-infrared band, etc.), which will definitely open the opportunity to better control the multimode photonics onchip. The simultaneous manipulation of multiple modes will not only increase the link capacity in optical communication systems, but also potentially find applications in quantum information processing In conclusion, by employing the programmable compact metasurface building blocks, we report a universal methodology to realize the mode conversion and mode exchange between the fundamental mode and arbitrary high-order mode for the first time. All the even-order and odd-order mode operator can be efficiently realized by programming the parallel array of the building block, i.e., the TE 0 -TE 2 mode operator and coarsely control the waveguide widths. The proposed devices feature constant performance of broad bandwidth (from 1450 nm to 1600 nm), low insertion loss (<1.5 dB), low modal crosstalk (-8.5 dB), compact footprints and robustness to the fabrication variations. Moreover, the crosstalk of the mode converters can be improved to be lower than -12 dB by adding a taper. This will give significant inspirations to other device Coupled mode theory. The evolution of optical field in a perturbed structure can be described by the CMT model (see the detailed analysis in Section 1, supporting information). Fig. 