Ferroelectric memristors are intensively studied due to their potential implementation in data storage and processing devices. In this work we show that the memristive behavior of metal/ferroelectric oxide/metal devices relies on the competition of two effects: the modulation of metal/ferroelectric interface barriers by the switchable ferroelectric polarization and the electromigration of oxygen vacancies, with the depolarizing field playing a fundamental role in the latter. We simulate our experimental results with a phenomenological model that includes both effects and we reproduce several non-trivial features of the electrical response, including resistance relaxations observed after external poling. Besides providing insight into the underlying physics of these complex devices, our work suggests that it is possible to combine non-volatile and volatile resistive changes in single ferroelectric memristors, an issue that could be useful for the development of neuromorphic devices. Memristors are defined as capacitor-like structures displaying reversible and non-volatile electrical resistance changes upon the application of electrical stimulus Ferroelectric memristors On the other hand, for devices involving thicker ferroelectric layers (i.e. tenths of nanome-ters) tunneling electronic transmission is negligible and the polarization-dependent memristive effect is usually attributed to the modulation of the Schottky barriers at ferroelectric/metal interfaces Different reports on ferroelectric memristors evidence a relaxation of the ideally nonvolatile resistive states with time, with typical time-scale of minutes One possible scenario to explain the resistance relaxations in ferroelectic memristores is related to a loss of polarization with time due to the existence of a strong depolarizing field These results indicate that further effort should be performed to disentangle the role of electronic effects and OV electromigration in the memristive behavior of systems including ferroelectric oxides. With this aim, in the present work we show for two different symmetric memristive metal/ferroelectric oxide/metal systems that distinct features of the remanent resistance vs. voltage loops can be rationalized in terms of a competition between electronic effects, linked to the polarization inversion, and the electromigration of OV, both modulating the metal/ferroelectric Schottky barriers. Aided by phenomenological simulations that reproduce several non-trivial features of the experimental memristive reponse, we show that the driving force for OV electromigration in absence of external electrical stimulus is the depolarizing field present on the ferroelectric due to incomplete charge screening by the metallic electrodes. Moreover, our work provides strong evidence and physical insight about the coexistance of both non-volatile and volatile resistive changes in ferroelectric-based devices, an issue that might be useful for the development of neuromorphic computing devices. We have characterized two metal/ferroelectic/metal systems: a commercial Pt/PZT/Pt capacitor (Radiant Technologies AB ferroelectric capacitor) and a SrRuO 3 /BaTiO 3 /SrRuO 3 (SRO/BTO/SRO) device. In the first case, the polycrystalline PZT 20/80 layer is 255 nm thick, the Pt bottom and top electrodes are 150 and 100 nm thick, respectively, and the device area is 10 5 μm 2 . In the second case, epitaxial BTO thin films (90 nm thick) were deposited by pulsed laser deposition on NdScO 3 substrates. After that, interdigital SRO/Pt top electrodes were deposited and shaped by standard lithographic techniques. The device geometry is shown in Figure We notice that we chose to perform electrical AC measurements due to the difficulty in performing standard DC characterization given the very high 2-points resistance of both systems (>10 8 Ω). We recorded simultaneously capacitance-voltage (C-V) and remanent resistance-voltage (usually called Hysteresis Switching Loops or HSLs) curves from AC measurements by using a standard LCR-meter set in RC parallel circuit mode, which allows extracting values for R and C. The stimuli protocol consists on the application of alternated writing and (undisturbing) reading DC pulses, with a superimposed small AC signal in both cases (frecuencies f between 100Hz and 1MHz were tested), as shown in Fig. Figures However, a distinct feature is observed in both HSLs: the resistance of the top part of the "tables presents a noticeable positive (negative) slope for negative (positive) voltages. This behavior is at odd with the one exhibited by (non-ferroelectric) symmetric memristive complementary interfaces To simulate the memristive behavior of the devices, we consider a symmetric metal/ferroelectric/metal (M/FE/M) system where both metal/ferroelectric interfaces are Schottky type and connected in a back-to back configuration. The barrier heights depend on the direction of the electrical polarization and on the local concentration of OV at the interfaces. We assume for the ferroelectric oxide that the presence of OV locally reduce its resistivity, as is the case of BTO Bearing these considerations in mind, we propose for the two-point resistance of the device the following phenomenological equation: being R ef f an effective (constant) resistance, while A F E (P ) and M OV are two adimensional factors. A F E (P ) modulates the interfaces resistances and is a function of the actual ferroelectric polarization P , while M OV depends on the OV distribution along the complete device, as we will show below. We start by deriving the relation between A F E and the device polarization P (which we assume as single domain) by considering, in the first place, a scenario with no OV electromigration. As it is customary in memristive devices, the HSL is constructed by applying a read pulse V R after the write one V W , which induces the resistive change. V R is small enough to warrant that both Schottky interfaces, named L and R respectively, remain reversely biased. The current I for a Schottky interface biased with a voltage V can be written as being β(V, T ) a constant for given temperature T and voltage bias V . The barrier height φ α for a metal/ferroelectric Schottky junction can be expressed as where φ 0 α is the bare barrier height -related to the difference between the metal work function and the insulator electron affinity-and ∓γ| P | is the correction due to the presence of ferroelectric bound charges at the interface. If the polarization points to the Schottky interface then the barrier height will decrease, while in the opposite case the barrier height will increase. We now consider the symmetric M/FE/M system comprising the two series back-to-back Schottky interfaces L and R, as it is sketched in the inset of Figure On the other hand, when the polarization is reversed (P < 0), the current will be limited by interface R and thus given by . The last two equations can be written in compact form as: where we assume that both interfaces are identical (γ L = γ R = γ) and we define the constants ] and γ = e k B T γ, respectively. Equation ( Under the assumption that the device resistance is dominated by the interfaces and solely modulated by the direction of the ferroelectric polarization, a remanent two point resistance R(P ) can be computed as: being R 0 = V R /I 0 , with resistance dimension. By comparing Eqs. ( Therefore we obtain : which gives the modulation of the device resistance with the amplitude and direction of the ferroelectric polarization P . FIG. In our case, the obtained A F E vs V W is a demonstration of the complementary behavior in M/FE interfaces. However, it significantly differs from the experimental HSL displayed in Figure In the following, we will show that by taking into account the electromigration of OV in the modelling as a competitive memristive effect with the ferroelectric one, allows to properly collect the physics of our devices. To determine the M OV factor in Eq.( To each nanodomain we assign a site i and define its resistivity, ρ i , in terms of the local density of OV, δ i . According to where ρ 0 is the resistivity in absence of OV. The factors A i satisfy A i δ i < 1 ∀i, and for simplicity are taken as constants along each specific region L, C and R, respectively. In the simulations we consider A L ∼ A R < A C , to capture the fact that the regions close to the Schottky barriers are more resistive that the central C zone. For a given OV configuration, the two point resistance R OV of the complete domains path is where we have defined the resistance R 0 = ρ 0 L, being L the typical lenght of each nanodomain. We now define the adimensional prefactor M OV appearing in Eq.( which is computed straigthforwardly from Eq.( In the VEOV model where δ i and δ j are the OV densities at sites i and j respectively. We define V 0 as the activation energy for OV diffusion -we take as V 0L , V 0C or V 0R depending on the region L,C or R, respectively-and ∆V i as the voltage drop at site i. Both are adimensional quantities written in terms of the thermal energy k B T . In the following we assume that ∆V i can be written as the sum of two terms. The first one is the voltage drop due to the external bias V W and the second is the contribution from a depolarizing voltage arising from the existance of a depolarizing field E dp due to incomplete screening of the ferroelectric bound charges at both M/FE interfaces We assume for the depolarizing field E dp = -βP Therefore, the voltage drop ∆V i at site i is written as where R OV i = ρ OV i L and ξ = βL. Given an external voltage V W (t) applied at time t, the OV density at site i is updated for each simulation step according to Eqs. ( In order to restrict the dynamics of OV to the active region, we take the rates p 01 = p 10 = p N N +1 = p N +1N = 0. In addition, as the total number of OV is conserved, it is satisfied that To match the experiments, we chose the stimulus V W (t) as a linear ramp following the δ i (t k+1 ), with which we compute, at time t k+1 , the local resistivities ρ i (t k+1 ), the local voltage drops under the applied voltage V W (t k+1 ) and the factor M OV (t k+1 ) from Eq.( Following this alghoritm, we compute the evolution of the M OV vs V W , which accounts in Eq. ( We recall that in standard memristive systems driven by OV electromigration the timewidths and intensity of writing pulses are key parameters that tune the memristive response It is therefore critical for the overall OV dynamics the time windows in which the external voltage is switched ON and OFF, respectively. To collect these features in our simulations, we simulated three situations with τ W /τ OF F = 1/99, 1/9 and 1/4, where τ W and τ OF F are the ON and OFF external voltage time windows, respectively. We assume in all cases that two consecutives write pulses are separated by a time-width of 1000 a.u. In Figure The final OV configuration suggests that the main contribution to M OV comes from the L interface while the R interface -with a high OV density-presents a marginal contribution. In the case of τ W /τ OF F = 1/4 (longer writing pulses), the overall behaviour is the same (transfer of OV from L to R interfaces) but with a slower dynamics, which produces initially a slighty erratic curve followed by a non-monotonic evolution of M OV when the writing voltage goes from -V M AX to -V 0 . Notice that between -V M AX and -V B , M OV decreases and further increases between -V B to V 0 . This behavior reflects the competition between the L and R interfaces to the value of M OV , the first (second) one increasing (decreasing) its contribution to the resistance as it becomes drained (filled) of OV. Therefore, wider writing pulses partially delay (and thus counterback) the action of the depolarizing field, unveiling the described (more complex) OV dynamics. Finally, Fig. In this case, both the ferroelectric and OV electromigration (including the effect of the depolarizing field) memristive effects are included. We notice that the maximum depolarizing field reached in the simulations was lower than the coercive field E C (roughly E DP ≤ 0.5 E C ), in order to describe a realistic situation where no strong sample depolarization takes place. For τ W /τ OF F = 1/4 (long writing pulses) the simulated M OV M F E displayed in Fig. With the evolution of A F E M OV vs. V W already figured out, according to Eq.( For the simulation we use τ W /τ OF F = 1/99, which is very close to the experimental ratio (τ W /τ OF F ) EXP ≈ 0.012 given by the used stimulus protocol (see Sec.II for details). For the voltage scale, we considered 1 a.u. = 1 V. The simulated curve displays an excelent agreement with the experimental data, with all the relevant features of the experimental HSL collected by the simulated one. We also notice that we constrained the quantitative simulation to the Pt/PZT/Pt system as the SRO/BTO/SRO device presents a slight asymmetric electrical response (see Figure Finally, we notice that in the scenario discussed above, where OV drift is strongly driven by the depolarizing field acting in absence of external stimuli, remanent resistance states should display time relaxations after the application of single write pulses. In order to explore this, we have performed an additional experiment in our Pt/PZT/Pt systems. A voltage writing pulse (+6V, larger that the maximun voltage excursions of the HSL showed in Figure The inset of Fig. were simulated using the model described above, as also shown in the inset of Fig. In summary we have found that, besides the modulation of the interfacial barriers by the direction of the ferroelectric polarization, the electromigration of OV appears as a competing effect in the memristive response of symmetric metal/ferroelectric/metal devices. The driving force for OV electromigration is the depolarizing field linked to incomplete charge screening at ferroelectic/metal interfaces. With these ingredients, we have been able to model and reproduce several non-trivial features of the experimental electrical behavior, including HSL and resistance relaxations. Our work sheds light on the non trivial interplay between two relevant mechanisms that contribute to the resistance change in ferroelectric memristors, and in particular highlights the key role played by OV electromigration. We recall that the combination of both non-volatile and volatile (relaxations) resistance changes offers oportunities for the development of devices with neuromorphic capabilites, able to mimic the behavior of synapses and neurons, respectivey, in a single device. Moreover, the volatile effect could be tailored by engineering the interfaces in order to control the screening lenghts and tune the intensity of the depolarizing field.