We perform thermodynamic and inelastic neutron scattering (INS) measurements to study the lattice dynamics (phonons) of a cubic collinear antiferromagnet Cu3TeO6 which hosts topological spin excitations (magnons). While the specific heat and thermal conductivity results show that the thermal transport is dominated by phonons, the deviation of the thermal conductivity from a pure phononic model indicates that there is a strong coupling between magnons and phonons. In the INS measurements, we find a mode in the excitation spectra at 4.5 K, which exhibits a slight downward dispersion around the Brillouin zone center. This mode disappears above the Néel temperature, and thus cannot be a phonon. Furthermore, the dispersion is distinct from that of a magnon. Instead, it can be explained by the magnon-polaron mode, which is new collective excitations resulting from the hybridization between magnons and phonons. We consider the suppression of the thermal conductivity and emergence of the magnon-polaron mode to be evidence for magnon-phonon coupling in Cu3TeO6. Magnons and phonons, which are quanta of spin waves and lattice vibrations, respectively, constitute two fundamental collective excitations in condensed matter physics. They coexist and propagate in ordered magnets, while in the case where magnetoelastic effect is strong, they are coupled and exhibit rich physics. For example, previous studies identified several spectroscopic signatures that could be attributed to magnonphonon coupling, such as renormalization of spin-wave excitations 1-3 , enhancement of spontaneous magnon decay In ferrimagnet yttrium iron garnet Here, we report comprehensive results of specific heat, thermal conductivity and INS measurements on Cu 3 TeO 6 . We find that the specific heat and the thermal conductivity are mostly contributed by phonons and the magnetic contributions are negligible. However, our measured thermal conductivity shows an obvious suppression due to the magnon-phonon coupling. In our INS measurements, we observe an anomalous mode located around 16.8 meV at 4.5 K, which disappears above T N and is believed to be a magnon-polaron mode due to the hybridization between magnons and phonons. Our results on the suppression of the thermal conductivity and emergence of the magnon polarons are compelling evidence for the magnon-phonon coupling in Cu 3 TeO 6 . Single crystals of Cu 3 TeO 6 were grown by the flux method as described in Ref. 60. Specific heat and thermal conductivity were measured using the Heat Capacity Option and the Thermal Transport Option, respectively, integrated in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from Quantum Design. Neutron scattering measurements were performed on 4D-Space Access Neutron Spectrometer (4SEASONS) at Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility (MLF) of Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) Results of the thermodynamic measurements including specific heat and thermal conductivity on Cu 3 TeO 6 are shown in Fig. where N A , k B , T , Θ D , J and S are Avogadro constant, Boltzmann constant, temperature, Debye temperature, antiferromagneitc exchange interaction and spin, respec-tively; x and y represent the number of total atoms and magnetic ions per formula unit, respectively. The first and second term in Eq. 1 correspond to the specific heat contributed by phonons (C ph ) and magnons (C m ), respectively . From Eq. 1, we find it difficult to experimentally distinguish the lattice and the magnetic contributions from the total specific heat, because they both follow the T 3 power-law behaviors at low temperatures. However, if we take J of ∼ 11 meV and S of 1/2 for Cu 3 TeO 6 (Ref. 56) in Eq. 1, the magnetic specific heat C m is at least three orders of magnitude smaller than C ph . Therefore, we simplify the low-temperature specific heat as C ph . In the inset of Fig. The temperature evolution of the thermal conductivity κ for Cu 3 TeO 6 is shown in Fig. However, in a real material, defects and impurities are inevitable and can also scatter phonons. Moreover, magnons start to establish below T N in Cu 3 TeO 6 that can affect the thermal conductivity by acting either as the carriers of heat current or scatterers of phonons where , ω, and v are reduced Planck constant, phonon frequency, and phonon mean velocity, respectively, and z is defined as ω/k B T . Here, with the Debye temperature Θ D of 466 K, v is calculated to be about 3900 m/s, using the equation , where n is the number of atoms per unit volume. The relaxation time τ (ω, T ) in Eq. 2 can be approximated by Here, the three terms correspond to phonon scattering by sample boundaries, point defects and phonon-phonon U processes, respectively To fit our data in Fig. The thermodynamic results indicate that while the thermal transport is dominated by phonons, magnons and phonons couple in some way and affect the overall thermal properties. To figure out the lattice dynamics and the underlying origin of the magnon-phonon scattering in Cu 3 TeO 6 , we performed INS measurements. Neutron scattering can directly measure the scattering function S(Q, E), which is proportional to the imaginary part of the dynamical susceptibility χ (Q, E) through 74 where E and Q represent the energy and momentum transfers, respectively, and (1 -e -E/kBT ) -1 is the Bose factor. The scattering function contains both magnon and phonon information. In Cu 3 TeO 6 , since magnetic order does not enlarge the size of its primitive unit cell, it is difficult to distinguish the magnon and the phonon excitations according to their different locations in the momentum space. However, taking advantage of their different dependences of intensities against Q, i.e., intensities increase as a function of |Q| 2 for phonons but decrease for magnons, we can probe the phonon excitations at large Qs. Also to eliminate the influence of Bose statistics, the measured neutron scattering intensities are divided by the Bose factor throughout the paper. In Fig. After orientating the phonon excitations in the mo- mentum space, we map out the phonon excitation spectra dispersing up from (8, 0, 0) at 4.5 and 100 K in Fig. To better reveal the temperature dependence of the additional mode observed, the constant-Q cuts at (8, 0, 2), where the intensities of optical magnons further decrease, are plotted in Fig. What is the origin of the mode at 16.8 meV around the zone center shown in Figs 3(a) and 4(a)? Since this mode disappears at high temperatures, it cannot be a phonon. We do not think it is a magnon either because: i) This mode is absent around the Γ point at low Qs as shown in Ref. 56 where topological magnons were observed at low Qs. If it were a magnon, the intensity would be much stronger as of other magnons due to the magnetic form factor. In fact, the high-Q data obtained from the experiment that led to the work in Ref. 56 did reveal some hints on this mode, which motivated us to carry out more detailed INS studies with doubled sample mass in the current work. ii) This mode is not reproduced by the linear spin-wave calculations using the J 1 -J 9 model. As demonstrated in Ref. 57, this model can fit the experimental magnon spectra quite well, but this mode with a downward dispersion appears to deviate from the calculated upward spin-wave excitations. iii) As shown in Fig. The magnon-polaron mode can be generated around the anticrossing region where a gap will be opened at the intersection of the magnon and phonon dispersions due to magnon-phonon coupling The occurrence of the hybridized mode between magnons and phonons indicates the magnon-phonon coupling in this system, which is what our thermodynamic results also imply. It is worth noting that phonons are the dominant carriers of heat current in Cu 3 TeO 6 [Fig. ). The v ph(m) and l ph(m) are velocities and mean free paths for phonons (magnons), respectively. In Cu 3 TeO 6 , the magnetic specific heat is analyzed to have negligible contributions to the total specific heat (Eq. 1). Provided similar v m and l m with v ph and l ph respectively, the contribution of magnons to the thermal conductivity is also negligible. Nevertheless, magnons can still manifest themselves by scattering phonons In summary, our specific heat and thermal conductivity measurements indicate phonons are the dominant carriers of heat current in Cu 3 TeO 6 . Magnons manifest themselves by scattering phonons, causing the suppression of thermal conductivity around T N . Our INS measurements find an additional mode located at about 16.8 meV, and we attribute it to a magnon-polaron mode. We consider the suppression of thermal conductivity and the emergence of the magnon-polaron mode to be evidence for magnon-phonon coupling in Cu 3 TeO 6 . Considering that the new mode is close to the linear magnon band crossings 