Resistive solid state sensors are widely used in multiple applications, including molecular and gas detection. Absorption or intercalation of the target species varies the lattice parameters and an effective thickness of thin films, which is usually neglected in analyzing their transport properties in general and the sensor response in particular. Here, we explore the case of palladium-based thin films absorbing hydrogen and demonstrate that expansion of thickness is an important mechanism determining the magnitude and the very polarity of the resistance response to hydrogenation in high resistivity films. The model of the resistance response that takes into account modifications of thickness was tested and confirmed in three Pd-based systems with variable resistivity: thin Pd films above and below the percolation threshold, thick Pd-SiO2 granular composite films with different content of silica, and Pd-rich CoPd alloys where resistivity depends on Co concentration. Superposition of the bulk resistivity increase due to hydride formation and decrease of film resistance due to thickness expansion provides a consistent explanation of the hydrogenation response in both continuous and discontinuous films with different structures and compositions. Volume of the unit cell changes in multiple physical phenomena: due to thermal expansion, under external stress, at phase transitions, due to intercalation and hydrogenation, due to magnetostriction and in many others. When the material is in the form of a thin film grown on a rigid substrate, the lateral in-plane changes are restricted by adhesion to the surface, and the lattice modifications are oriented normal to the plane. This leads to variation of the effective film thickness. Since the changes of the film cross-section are relatively small, their effect on the electrical and thermal conductance properties is usually neglected. We show in the following that modifications of geometry in palladium and palladium based materials absorbing hydrogen can affect significantly the outcome of the experiments and their interpretations, and thus have to be considered. The catalytic and hydrogen-absorbing properties of palladium make it the metal of choice in almost every aspect of hydrogen-related technologies, including the hydrogen storage and detection. Palladium lattice expands when hydrogen is absorbed, and the volume of free standing material grows as: ∆V V ≈ 0.19 • c H , where c H is hydrogen concentration given in H atoms per Pd atom [H/Pd]. Increase of resistivity depends on hydrogen concentration, which is used for constructing the hydrogen metal phase diagrams Absorption of hydrogen in interstitial sites in bulk free standing Pd yields isotropic lattice expansion: where a 0 is the lattice constant of bulk Pd, c H is hydrogen concentration, ∆a is the change in the lattice constant ∆a = a(c H ) -a 0 , and α H the expansion factor, α H = 0.063. Let's assume a material with the volume absorption of hydrogen and the respective thickness expansion. Resistance of a film before (R 0 ) and after hydrogenation (R 1 ) are given by: and where: ρ 0 is the initial resistivity, t 0the nominal thickness, l and w are the length and width of the film that don't change during hydrogenation because of adhesion to the substrate. Thickness of the hydrogenated film is: Following the Matthiessen's rule, ρ 1 = ρ 0 + ∆ρ H , where ∆ρ H is an additional resistivity scattering term due to absorption of hydrogen and formation of the hydride. For simplicity, we assume here that resistivity is not affected by strain. The change in resistance is: Since the change in resistivity is calculated by using the nominal film thickness t 0 , it is given by: Notably, the geometrical (thickness expansion) term depends on the initial resistivity of the material. For thick Pd films with resistivity 10 -15 μΩcm, depending on the microstructure, and the hydride term ∆ρ H ≈ 6 μΩcm, Polarity of ∆ρ is expected to reverse from positive to negative when resistivity exceeds the value: ρ 0c = ∆ρ H γ ⁄ , which is about 48 μΩcm for [111] Pd at c H = 1. To texture. Resistance was measured using the Van der Pauw protocol. The hydrogen induced resistance changes were extracted from measurements performed in dry nitrogen and in 4% H2/N2 mixture gas at 1 atm pressure at room temperature. Topology of the selected thin samples was studied by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using 5 nm thick films grown directly on TEM grids. I. Continuous films. 1) Thin Pd films. It is well known that the electrical conductivity of very thin metal films fabricated by standard vacuum deposition techniques can be much lower than that of the corresponding bulk material. where σ 0 is the bulk conductivity, exponent m is 1.2 for 2-dimensional systems, and t c is the critical percolation thickness below which metallic clusters become finite. Divergence of resistivity at a finite thickness is the trademark distinguishing the percolation mechanism from the diffusive surface and grain boundaries models. where R N 2 and R H 2 are the resistance values measured in a pure nitrogen atmosphere and in nitrogen/hydrogen mixture with 4% of H2, respectively. t is the film nominal thickness. As seen, the data follow the predictions of Eq. 2. ∆ρ is positive in low resistivity thick films and becomes negative in thin high resistivity films. The highest positive value, ∆ρ = 6 μΩcm is found in the thickest 100 nm film in agreement with Ref. 22. The cross-over from positive to negative response occurs at about 7 nm thickness for which the resistivity is about 42 μΩcm. Topology of the 7 nm thick film (TEM not shown) corresponds to the stage 2 mentioned above: there are isolated voids in the otherwise continuous metallic film. It is important to note that all samples presented in Fig. To resolve the question whether the in-plane or the out-of-plane swelling is the decisive mechanism of the hydrogenation response, we used a different system where resistivity of 3) CoPd alloys. Equation 2 predicts that the resistivity response of any expanding in hydrogen material is negative if its initial resistivity is sufficiently high. To test the generality of this prediction, we examined one more system: the CoPd alloys. Ferromagnetic CoPd alloys attracted attention recently An obvious question to ask is whether the mechanism of a negative resistivity response to hydrogenation in solid continuous films is different from the discontinuous ones, in other words whether the in-plane or the out-of-plane expansion is the mechanism dominant in thin discontinuous films. The lateral in-plane expansion of hydrogenated Pd is prohibited at the interface with the substrate but can occur when the distance from the substrate grows. Finite element simulation of the volume expansion of the initially flat Pd islands predicted considerable in-plane expansion, growing with the island height. To clarify the point, we extended the measurements to disconnected Pd structures below the percolation threshold in ultrathin films and in thick Pd-SiO2 mixtures with high SiO2 concentration. Measurements of resistivity as a function of temperature were used to establish the continuity of metallic films. Excluding the low temperature range, resistivity of metals increases with temperature with a positive resistivity temperature coefficient . When metallic film is discontinuous, insulating gaps appear across the conductance paths. If thickness of these gaps is small the charge is transferred by thermally assisted tunneling, characterized by a negative resistivity temperature coefficient dρ dT < 0 ⁄ . Since the total resistance of the conducting network is determined by its highest value components, i.e. the tunnel junctions if present, polarity of the resistivity temperature coefficient indicates the continuity or discontinuity of the metallic structure. Thus, dρ dT > 0 ⁄ indicates a continuous metallic structure, while dρ dT < 0 ⁄ the discontinuous one. Typical temperature dependence of the normalized resistivity as a function of temperature between the room and 77K is shown in Fig. Following this interpretation, granular films demonstrating a resistivity minimum are below the geometrical percolation threshold. Thus, the entire series represent the samples above, at and below the continuity threshold. Similarly, in thick granular Pd100-x -(SiO2)x films (Fig. Below the percolation, the measured resistance is due to the intergranular tunneling. The cross section of tunnel junctions increases with the expanding Pd thickness at the same ratio as the cross section of continuous films, therefore the correlation between the hydrogenation response and the initial resistivity remains constant in both continuous and discontinuous films. Obviously, one cannot exclude random changes in the in-plane profile of discontinuous ultrathin Pd films. However, a systematic correlation between the hydrogenation response and resistivity over more than four orders of magnitude indicates that the same mechanism is responsible for the reduction of resistivity in both continuous and discontinuous Pd matrices. To 