Dabconium hybrid perovskites include a number of recently-discovered ferroelectric phases with large spontaneous polarisations. The origin of ferroelectric response has been rationalised in general terms in the context of hydrogen bonding, covalency, and strain coupling. Here we use a combination of simple theory, Monte Carlo simulations, and density functional theory calculations to assess the ability of these microscopic ingredients-together with the always-present throughspace dipolar coupling-to account for the emergence of polarisation in these particular systems whilst not in other hybrid perovskites. Our key result is that the combination of A-site polarity, preferred orientation along 111 directions, and ferroelastic strain coupling drives precisely the ferroelectric transition observed experimentally. We rationalise the absence of polarisation in many hybrid perovskites, and arrive at a set of design rules for generating FE examples beyond the dabconium family alone. It is a remarkable recent discovery that some dabconium hybrid perovskites are ferroelectric (FE) with spontaneous polarisations comparable to that of BaTiO 3 . octonium, D 3h point symmetry), the corresponding perovskites do not have polar ground states. This principle has now matured into the so-called "quasispherical theory", whereby the local polarisation arising from asymmetric substitution of spherical cations is clearly linked empirically to FE response in perovskites and beyond: Here we seek to understand whether the different microscopic ingredients of hydrogen-bonding rules, distortion strain coupling, and the always-present through-space dipolar interactionseither on their own or in combination-can account for the observed FE transition observed experimentally in dabconium perovskites. We use a coarse-graining approach supplemented by straightforward calculations and Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to identify ground states for various combinations of these ingredients. Our key result is that the pairing of strain coupling and dipolar interactions stabilises the R3 polar ground state when the two interactions are not too dissimilar in strength. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations on a range of suitablychosen [MDABCO]RbI 3 polymorphs, we demonstrate that our simple theoretical model provides a sensible coarse graining of the energetics of this particular system, and hence provides a first-order explanation for its FE behaviour. Finally, we show that this crucial dipolar-strain combination drives collective polarisation only when there is a driving force for alignment of the A-site dipole along 111 ; the corresponding ground states for 100 and 110 are non-polar. In this way we rationalise the absence of polarisation in many hybrid perovskites, and arrive at a detailed set of design rules for generating FE examples beyond the dabconium family alone. Our starting point is to consider in turn the implications of each of these three interaction types by themselves. Taking first the case of hydrogen-bonding, we recall that each MDABCO 2+ ion forms its strongest hydrogen bonds with a triplet of halide ions that share a triangular face of the AX 12 cuboctahedron (see SI for further discussion). ( Here the sum is over all X-site anions in the MC configuration (a supercell of the aristotypic ABX 3 cell), n j is the number of MD-ABCO cations strongly hydrogen-bonded to the j th anion, and H > 0 is the energy penalty for double-bonding. The ground state of Eq. ( ]. There is a strong conceptual parallel to the disordered 'chain' structure of paraelectric BaTiO 3 , where Ti-O covalency drives a strongly-correlated nonpolar state. where D is the dipolar interaction strength and the sum is over all distinct A-site cations i, j with MDABCO orientations S i , S j ∈ 111 . The vector ri j is the normalised vector between the two cations, r i j their absolute separation, and a the unit-cell length. Our MC implementation ( This sum is over neighbouring A-sites i, j, with orientations S i , S j ∈ 111 as above. The magnitude of J determines the strength of strain coupling, and if J > 0 (as it likely is for the dabconium perovskites; see further discussion below) this coupling is ferroelastic. The ground state of Eq. ( In the context of magnetic and liquid-crystal statistical mechanics, this is a 'nematic' phase with quadrupolar (cf strain)-but not dipolar-order. Consequently, we can conclude that none of the three microscopic interactions proposed in the literature can by themselves account for inversion-symmetry breaking in the dabconium perovskites. Hence, we consider the different combinations of the interactions in turn, in order to examine whether applied together they explain the polar R3 ground state observed experimentally. We next show that hydrogen-bonding rules, applied in conjunction with dipole-dipole interactions or strain coupling, also fail to produce a macroscopic polarisation. To do this, we compare three very simple (ordered) models of MDABCO orientations that all strictly obey the hydrogen-bonding rules discussed above (i.e. E HB = 0) [Fig. Since Models 1 and 2 involve alignment of A-site cations parallel and antiparallel to a single common axis, the corresponding E strain terms are identical, irrespective of the value of J. Hence both are ground states of any interaction model based on hydrogen bonding and strain coupling together-and there is nothing to favour the observed R3 state over the R 3 AFE alternative. By a similar argument, the dipolar interaction energy of Model 3 (E dip = -2.204D; determined by numerical evaluation of Eq. ( By contrast, the combination of dipole-dipole interactions and strain-coupling does give a polar ground state with R3 symmetry. We obtain this result using MC simulations driven by the combined interaction energy setting J D. Fig. The variation in DFT energies amongst Models 2, 4, and 5all of which have the same relative coarse-grained energy E = +2.094D-likely reflects the importance of deviations away from 111 in A-site orientations. The DFT-relaxed structure of model 4 in particular shows relatively large deviations of this type, which reduce the dipolar energy cost of its AFE ordering pattern and contribute to its stability relative to the other AFE models. Importantly, if we re-run our MC simulations allowing the vectors S i to adopt any orientation-yet retaining some bias towards the 111 axes But some anisotropy of this type is important. As a final calculation, we carried out a set of MC simulations using Eq. ( We might now claim to understand the origin of the FE phase in systems such as [MDABCO]RbI 3 . The dipole moment of MDABCO 2+ is certainly important, but equally important is that this moment is aligned along a 111 body-diagonal of the perovskite cage. The displacement of MDABCO 2+ ions along this same axis amplifies the corresponding effective dipole moment. From a design perspective, there are two aspects one might wish to control-(i) A-site dipoles with a tendency to orient preferentially along 111 , and (ii) ferroelastic strain coupling. The former is likely the easier (or at least more obvious): use ovoid Asite cations with three-fold rotational symmetry, small enough to stabilise the perovskite structure and antiferroelastic strain coupling is less obviously navigated, With these design principles in mind, it is straightforward to rationalise why many well-known hybrid perovskites with polar A-site cations are nevertheless themselves apolar: the A-site dipoles are not aligned along 111 and/or the strain coupling is antiferroelastic. But the rules we develop are by no means exhaustive, since (obviously) other mechanisms can and do also drive FE order (see Refs. 39,40 and the ODABCO[NH 4 ]Cl 3 example in Ref. 1 for relevant counterexamples). So the key remaining challenge is to develop a more general understanding of which combinations of local symmetry breaking and various short-and long-range interactions can break inversion symmetry in order/disorder FE materials. | 1-6 J o u r n a l N a me , [ y e a r ] , [ v o l . ] ,