Index modulation (IM) is one of the candidate technologies for the upcoming sixth generation (6G) wireless communications networks. In this paper, we propose a space-time-modulated reconfigurable intelligent metasurface (RI-MTS) that is configured to implement various frequency-domain IM techniques in a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) array configuration. Unlike prior works which mostly analyze signal theory of general RI-MTS IM, we present novel electromagnetics-compliant designs of specific IMs such as sub-carrier index modulation (SIM) and MIMO orthogonal frequency-domain modulation IM (MIMO-OFDM-IM). Our full-wave electromagnetic simulations and analytical computations establish the programmable ability of these transceivers to vary the reflection phase and generate frequency harmonics for IM. Our experiments for bit error rate show that RI-MTS-based SIM and MIMO-OFDM-IM are lower than conventional MIMO-OFDM. T IME-modulated antenna arrays, whose radiated power pattern is steered by varying the width of the periodic pulses applied to each element, are long known to have applications in side-lobe reduction Recent developments in spatio-temporally (ST) modulated MTSs have unlocked a new class of nonlinear and nonreciprocal behaviors, including direct modulation of carrier waves Contrary to these works, we focus on EM analysis and implementation of RI-MTSs for wireless communications. In particular, we consider transceiver for index modulation (IM) that is identified as one of the preferred 5G/6G technologies Our prior work Consider a MIMO-OFDM wireless system with N t transmit and N r receive antennas. In OFDM, a frequency-selective fading channel is handled by dividing the spectrum into multiple flat-fading subchannels of equal bandwidth X a e j2πat/Ts , 0 ≤ t ≤ T s , where X a are data symbols and T s is symbol duration. The length of the entire message bit sequence is N L = MN s , where each message sequence vector is a M-bit codeword. The transmit signal at the RF stage is x ∈ C N t ×1 . For line-of-site (LoS) communications, the multipath fading channel follows a Rician distribution where K is the Rician K-factor of the channel, H LoS ∈ C N r ×N t is the LoS channel component that is unchanged during the channel coherence time, and H nLoS ∈ C N r ×N t is the nLoS fading component representing random multipath fading. The Rician K-factor is the ratio between the power in the direct path (LoS) and the power in the other scattered nLoS paths. Assuming a narrowband block-fading channel, the received signal is where y ∈ C N r ×1 is the output of N r receive antennas and n ∈ C N r ×1 is the circularly symmetric white Gaussian noise. The BER is computed after decoding the received symbols usually via maximum likelihood (ML) detector In a conventional wireless communication transceiver with a passive reflector (Fig. We model MTS using generalized sheet transition conditions to relate electric field vector E = [E x E y E z ] T , where (•) T denotes the transpose, on both sides of the MTS via surface electric susceptibility tensors χ in the Cartesian coordinate system (magnetic field H and susceptibility χ M are defined similarly): where ẑ is the unit vector, ω is the angular frequency, ∇ is the gradient operator, subscript "av" represents average of fields on either side of MTS, and subscript t refers to tangential field components which are transverse to z where E i is incident field and Γ(t) is time-varying complex reflection coefficient. Note that Γ(t) = Z s (t)-Z 0 Z s (t)+Z 0 , where the complex surface impedance Z s characterises the behavior of each meta-atom and Z 0 = 377 Ω is free-space impedance. To perform OFDM-IM, Fourier transform of (6) yields the angular frequency response where * denotes convolution. Given an incident wave of E i (ω), the spectrum of the scattered wave E r (ω) is controlled by varying Γ(ω) of each meta-atom. If Γ(t) is a periodic signal, then it is a linear combination of complex exponentials i.e., Γ(t) = ∞ m=-∞ a m e jmω 0 t = ∞ m=-∞ a m e T 0 , where T 0 is the modulation period, ω 0 = 2π T 0 , and a m is the Fourier series (FS) coefficient of the m-th harmonic. The corresponding reflected wave in the spectral-domain is We ST-modulate Γ for each meta-atom to radiate the mth harmonic frequency or a combination of harmonic frequencies to the desired steer angle. We now propose our meta-atom design and determine its steady-state Γ(ω) at each coding state. Consider a MTS whose N 1 × N 2 meta-atoms are indexed by integers p and q along x-and y-axes, respectively. The inter-element spacing in the x (y) dimension is d x (d y ). Given time-varying complex reflection coefficient Γ t pq of the pq-th meta-atom, the approximate far-field pattern reflected by a ST-modulated MTS that is illuminated by a plane wave at time t is E pq (θ, φ)Γ t pq e j(kc((p-1)dx sin θ cos φ+(q-1)dy sin θ sin φ)) , where L is the number of time-steps in the coding sequence per modulation period T 0 . This provides the amplitude and phase of the mth frequency harmonic reflected from the RI-MTS as a function of Γ n pq . By varying the slope of the phase coding sequence according to m, we shift f c to f c + m f 0 where X m encapsulates the modulated amplitude and phase of each sub-carrier m. A time shift t q in the periodic time-varying coding sequence is equivalent to spatial phase shift E pq (θ, φ)a m pq e j( 2π λc ((p-1)dx sin θ cos φ+(q-1)dy sin θ sin φ)) . We selected the dimensions of the meta-atom (Fig. We validated our approach and design through numerical simulations. We nominally considered a 20 × 20 meta-atom with element spacing of d x = d y = λ c /6 at f c = 28 GHz. The meta-atoms are arranged in columns on a rectangular lattice. Control signals independently address the top and/or bottom half of each column to spatially steer the reflected beam to the desired receiver or create multiple sub-apertures for MIMO and spatial modulation techniques. A larger aperture provides more antenna gain for the transmitter, which results in higher SNR at the receiver, or a greater number of sub-apertures for higher communications capacity. A time-harmonic phase coding sequence with period T 0 = 1 μs is used to provide f 0 = 1 MHz harmonic spacing. By specifying the complex weights X m in (12), we control the amplitude and phase of each harmonic (Fig. The full-wave simulation verification of finite RI-MTS array scattered radiation pattern at θ s = -30 • is plotted in Fig. We verified the communications performance of our design through BER performance for RI-MTS-based single-input single-output (SISO) and MIMO-OFDM-IM. In the signal model of (3) for OFDM-IM, we set 2 out of N s = 4 subcarriers and p 1 = 2 index bits. We benchmark our design against conventional OFDM and PSK systems in terms of their bpcu. Using only 2 out of 4 available subcarriers, this OFDM-IM system achieves a 50% reduction in instantaneous bandwidth compared to traditional OFDM. The number of transmit antennas were the same as the number of receive antennas for each case (N t = N r ). We divided the RI-MTS into 2 and 4 sub-apertures for MIMO operation. We set K = 10 dB to be consistent with the experimental characterization at f c = 28 GHz We modeled and demonstrated an ST-modulated RI-MTS to perform key IM schemes for 5G/6G wireless networks. Our RIS-based implementations do not require conventional phase shifters, mixers, or a lossy RF manifold network, but need a control network to individually address the antenna elements. Consequently, these RI-MTS architectures hold the promise to achieve direct frequency modulation and beam scanning in significantly less size, weight, and power consumption compared to conventional phased arrays.