We report on sub-cycle terahertz light-field emission of electrons from tungsten nanotips under extreme conditions corresponding to a Keldysh parameter γK ≈ 10 -4 . Local peak THz fields up to 40 GV/m are achieved at the apex of an illuminated nanotip, causing sub-cycle cold-field electron emission and acceleration in the quasi-static field. By simultaneous measurement of the electron bunch charge and energy distribution, we perform a quantitative test of quasi-static Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling theory under field conditions that completely suppress the tunnel barrier. Very high bunch charges of ∼ 10 6 electrons/pulse are observed, reaching maximum energies of 3.5 keV after acceleration in the local field. The energy distribution and emission current show good agreement with Fowler-Nordheim theory even in this extreme field regime. Extending this model to the single-shot regime under these conditions predicts peak electron distributions with a spectral purity of 10 -4 . THz field-induced reshaping and sharpening of the nanotip is observed, reducing the tip radius from 120 nm to 35 nm over roughly 10 9 THz shots. These results indicate THz-driven nanotips in the extreme field limit are promising electron sources for ultrafast electron diffraction and microscopy. Light-matter interactions enter the extreme limit when the energy scale of the field interaction meets or exceeds a characteristic excitation energy of the system Intense, single-cycle terahertz (THz) pulses illuminating metal nanotips provide a means to explore this extreme light-matter interaction regime These GV/m local fields exceed the threshold for subcycle cold-field emission from the metal nanotip In this work, we demonstrate sub-cycle THz field emission of electron pulses from a tungsten nanotip in the extreme field limit corresponding to γ K ∼ 10 -4 , deep into the quasi-static regime. Average emission currents > 0.1 nA are measured corresponding to bunch charges of ∼ 10 6 electrons/pulse. We simultaneously measure the electron energy distribution, with peak energies up to 3.5 keV, comparable to previous work The electron energy distribution and bunch charge are measured simultaneously via a Faraday cup detector positioned less than 1 cm away from the tip along the emission axis, with a varying stopping potential (V s ) applied to a grid placed before the detector. Additionally, an electrical connection is made to the tip allowing a direct measurement of the total current being drawn through the tip. These two currents are measured simultaneously using two Keithley 6517B electrometers. Three dimensional finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed to model the local THz fields coupled to tungsten nanotips. The nanotip shape was approximated as a prolate spheroid, which allowed the expansion of the fields in spherical coordinates where the Helmholtz equation is separable Cold field emission of electrons from metal nanotips under dc and quasi-dc field conditions, depicted in Fig. where a and b are Fowler-Nordheim constants. The function v ≈ 1 -F loc /F φ accounts for image charges and exponentially suppresses the emission, although is valid only for F loc < F φ A linear field dependence of the high energy peak is observed in Fig. In the quasi-static limit, the Fowler-Nordheim (F-N) equations can simulate the emission dynamics of the high energy distribution. The emission current and final electron energy were calculated using a time-dependent, one dimensional finite-element simulation taking into account the near-field decay of a hyperboloidal tip η/[1 + 2x/R], The calculated energy distribution is obtained by averaging and is shown in Fig. The peak current density J peak and bunch charge/pulse under varying THz peak field is shown in Fig. Comparative scanning electron microscope images of a freshly fabricated tungsten nanotip and a tip exposed to ∼ 10 9 high field THz pulses are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated sub-cycle THz driven cold-field electron emission from a tungsten nan-otip under extreme local field conditions. Electron bunch charges and peak current densities on the order of 10 6 electrons/pulse and 10 10 A/cm 2 are quantitatively measured. Energies distribution up to 3.5 keV are observed and are accurately described by Fowler-Nordheim emission with ballistic acceleration in a quasi-static field. Seeing no signature of saturation in the emission current for increasing F loc , combined with the field-induced sharpening of the nanotip and the predicted single-shot spectral purity of 10 -4 indicates that THz driven nanotip field emission holds promise for ultra-bright, ultrafast electron sources. The local electric field used in our experiment exceeds the critical field (F φ ). Figure Numerical three-dimensional finite-difference time domain simulations have been performed to gain insight on the local field enhancement and its decay, modelling a tungsten nanotip as a prolate spheroid. The measured THz transient was used as the input field with the light polarization aligned with the tip axis. Simulations were performed at different tip radii: R=25 nm, R=40 nm and R=100 nm for a tip length L=0.9 mm (Fig. The field enhancement decay is obtained by taking a cut of the field along the tip axis at the peak of the THz pulse (Fig. 