The elementary excitations in metallic glasses (MGs), i.e., β processes that involve hopping between nearby sub-basins, underlie many unusual properties of the amorphous alloys. A highefficacy prediction of the propensity for those activated processes from solely the atomic positions, however, has remained a daunting challenge. Recently, employing well-designed site environment descriptors and machine learning (ML), notable progress has been made in predicting the propensity for stress-activated β processes (i.e., shear transformations) from the static structure. However, the complex tensorial stress field and direction-dependent activation could induce non-trivial noises in the data, limiting the accuracy of the structure-property mapping learned. Here, we focus on the thermally activated elementary excitations and generate high-quality data in several Cu-Zr MGs, allowing quantitative mapping of the potential energy landscape. After fingerprinting the atomic environment with short-and medium-range interstice distribution, ML can identify the atoms with strong resistance or high compliance to thermal activation, at an unprecedented accuracy over ML models for stress-driven activation events. Interestingly, a quantitative "between-task" transferring test reveals that our learnt model can also generalize to predict the propensity of shear transformation. Our dataset is potentially useful for benchmarking future ML models on structure-property relationships in MGs. Metallic glasses (MGs), as a unique class of amorphous materials, exhibit a high atomic packing density with pronounced topological and chemical short-to-medium range order It remains as a long-standing challenge to unravel the role of static structure in controlling the elementary excitations in MGs: is there a structural indicator that can be tapped into to predict how resistant or compliant different local regions are to externally stimulated activation? Over the past several decades, many efforts have been devoted to addressing this critical question. Recently, the emerging machine learning (ML) technique, based on well-crafted representations of atomic environment, has been proven to be promising for establishing atomic-level structureproperty relationships in liquids and glasses In this work, we develop ML models to predict the propensity of thermally activated elementary excitation, from the atomic environment of the static MG structure. We systematically probe the activation energies in six MGs, including Cu64Zr36 prepared using different quenching rates, as well as Cu50Zr50 and Cu80Zr20, using ART We employ molecular dynamics (MD) simulation to prepare six Cu-Zr model MG samples: i) different compositions yet with the same cooling rate (Cu50Zr50, Cu64Zr36, Cu80Zr20 quenched from liquid at 10 10 K/s), and ii) same composition but with different cooling rates (Cu64Zr36 MGs with the quenching rates of 10 9 to 10 12 K/s) (see Methods for simulation details). We then apply ART to probe the energy barrier for thermally-activated events Figure beyond what is present in a single MG. Later, we will feed this combined dataset to ML and test if ML is capable of mapping out the characteristic atoms at both the high Eact (hard) and low Eact (soft) ends of these Cu-Zr MGs. In practice, we initiate 50 independent events around each atom along random activation pathways using ART and extract an ensemble-averaged activation energy Eact for the atom. (b) Distribution of Eact in the six model glasses as well as their combined Eact spectrum. The median (quantile 50%) and quantiles 5% and 95% are marked as vertical dashed lines in the combined Eact spectrum, and the median (quantile 50%) is marked in the spectrum of each model glass. We make use of a set of interstice distribution descriptors to represent the local atomic environment After featurizing all atoms in the six MGs, we feed the data to a scalable tree boosting ML algorithm, XGBOOST As we are dealing with an imbalanced dataset, we do random equal undersampling three times to create three data samples, each with 3,000 positive class atoms (the highest or lowest Eact atoms) and 3,000 negative class atoms. We then perform 5-fold cross-validation on each of the data samples, and average the predictions on the test sets (i.e. averaged over 5 × 3 = 15 test sets). The repeated undersampling procedure is very useful for reducing the variance introduced by data undersampling. We use the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) as the scoring metric of the classifiers. The ROC curve characterizes the tradeoff between the true positive rate (TPR) and negative positive rate (FPR) Besides outputting a "label" (0 or 1) to predict whether an atom belongs to a class or not, XGBOOST (and many other ML algorithms) can also give continuous probability estimates, in the range of [0, 1], to reveal the confidence level of predictions. The probabilities can reveal the uncertainty of prediction, allow some flexibility in using the model, and provide a more nuanced way to assess the model. However, raw class probabilities from nonlinear ML algorithms are often not well calibrated and should be carefully checked before interpretation. Specifically, if the predicted probabilities match the "real" class probabilities, such probabilities are referred to as calibrated. For instance, when the positive class probability of some data points is 0.70, ideally these points should indeed have a probability of 0.70 to be positive. This ideal calibration occasion is illustrated by the diagonal line in Fig. For simplicity, only atoms with ph or pl > 0.50 are highlighted in the ph and pl maps: ML predicts that the probability of these atoms having highest 5% Eact or lowest 5% Eact is greater than 0.50; If setting a class threshold as 0.50, these ph or pl > 0.50 atoms would be classified as the high or low Eact class, respectively. A good correspondence can be seen between the high Eact atoms and high ph atoms, as well as between the low Eact atoms and high pl atoms. As reflected by the relatively lower prediction score in the L-Eact task, there are more false positive atoms (high pl yet high Eact) and false negative atoms (low pl yet low Eact) in predicting the low Eact atoms, but still the prediction quality is sufficiently good. These results reveal that a solid relationship between local structure and thermal activation propensity can be established by combining interstice features and ML. Next, we compare our ML results based on interstice features with those fitted from several other representations. Here we consider a total of five pure structural representations and three physical signatures for comparison (Table Most of the presented scores are from XGBOOST, while the best scores of the radial symmetry functions are from SVM (Table 1-8. Besides, an additional feature indicating whether the atom is Cu (0) or Zr (1) is added to each representation to help ML decisions. This is very helpful for representations that cannot well distinguish the atom types from the features themselves. We start with two "baseline" models built with: i) two one-hot-encoded (0 or 1) variables designating whether the nearest-neighbors around an atom form a <0, 0, 12, 0, 0> (<0, 0, 12, 0> if omitting occasional facets with >6 edges) or <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> Voronoi polyhedron or not; ii) five integer Voronoi indices (n3, n4, n5, n6, and n>6), where nx represents the number of x-edged facets in the Voronoi polyhedron Next, we combine a group of SRO features as the third structural representation, including characteristic motif signatures and Voronoi indices As the last pure structural representation, we derive a set of radial symmetry functions For an atom i, the radial symmetry functions are described as, where α represents an atom specie in the system (Cu or Zr). rij is the distance between atoms i and j. r is a variable constant and σ is set as 0.2 Å. The sums are taken over all atom j whose distance to i is within a cutoff R c (6.5 Å). This set of features can be considered as the Gaussian- The relatively lower accuracy in the current L-Eact task (also corresponds to soft end) suggests that identifying atoms susceptible to β relaxation in the solid-state MGs could be harder than that for the parent supercooled liquids, as manifested by that the same set of features achieve a lower score in the former problem. Other possible factors are i) the natural prediction accuracy difference between Cu-Zr MGs described by EAM potential and supercooled liquids described by pairwise L-J potential and ii) the combination of different composition, different quenching rate in a single dataset may increase the ambiguity for the radial symmetry functions. Finally, we compare the results of pure structural representations with the results of three physical signatures, namely flexibility volume Vflex Eact. We find that the pure structural representations (interstice, SRO + coarse-grained MRO, and radial symmetry functions) are still very competitive compared with these physical signatures (Table Thus far, we demonstrate that our ML model, employing the interstice features that start from static atomic positions only, can well predict the heterogeneity of thermal-activated elementary excitations in Cu-Zr MGs. We next look into how the ML models make decisions based on the input features. ML algorithms such as XGBOOST allow quantification of feature importance, which evaluates how each descriptor improves the performance measure, e.g., Gini index for XGBOOST, and thus can be particularly useful for model interpretation. For ease of interpretation, we first remove some highly-linearly-correlated features (Pearson correlation coefficient > 0.70) and then reduce the feature number to 10 by a brute-force recursive feature-elimination procedure: i) train a model with N features and derive the ML performance; ii) iteratively eliminate each of the N features, retrain a ML model with the remaining N -1 features and calculate the performance loss compared to the original model (if any); iii) eliminate the feature with the least performance loss. This is based on that basically, dropping unimportant features should not degrade performance significantly. We recursively repeat the above procedure until the feature dimension is reduced to 10. Figure We then select typical hard and soft Cu (Zr) atoms and show the distribution of tetrahedron volume interstice, Vis, and bond distance interstice, dis-dist, in their local environment to demonstrate the inherent structural contrast between the hard and soft atoms. Typical atoms with high Eact (~2.9 eV) and low Eact (~0.7 eV) are selected, and the red and purple histograms show the spread of interstices, Vis and dis-dist, present in the coordination polyhedron (SRO) and in the neighboring clusters (MRO), respectively (Fig. Next, we use principal component analysis (PCA) As mentioned earlier, in addition to thermally activated events, another important type of elementary excitation is the local shear transformation activated by stress This prompts us to ask: how would our ML models trained for predicting the thermal excitation propensity perform, when they are used to identify STZs? Is it possible for the models to work well when transferring to such a different task? This "between-task" test is challenging in several ways: i) STZs and Eact are basically different properties, stimulated by different stimuli and thus yielding different data; ii) the features considered important for predicting Eact may not be optimal for identifying STZs. The ii) point is very likely, as in a previous work using the interstice features to identify STZs in MGs, only ~50% of the most important features were MRO features We calculate the non-affine displacement (D 2 min) relative to undeformed state, at 4.0% shear strain, as an indicator of the plastic susceptibility of each atom. The correlation between D 2 min and pl is presented in Fig. We vary the threshold of pl in designating the positive/negative classes in this STZ task, calculate the TPRs and FPRs and derive the ROC curve in Fig. For the thermal activation data, as used in this work, the absence of non-uniform stress eliminates the loading-related noises, and probing sufficient elementary ART events can guarantee a wellconverged Eact to indicate the susceptibility to thermal excitation. In addition, upon deformation, the activation of STZ proceeds in a progressive way, that is, not all soft atoms will move in a strain step; therefore, it usually requires a relatively large strain to collect sufficient plastic events. However, this can introduce more cascade activation events to reduce the controllability of the initial undeformed structure, and the existence of long-range elastic field in the process of deformation would also increase the length scale of plastic heterogeneity, making it beyond the scope of SRO and MRO that can be described by the structural representation. For the ML exploration of atomic-level structure-property relationships in amorphous alloys, a goal of common pursuit is developing novel structural representation and machine learning scheme. This paper, instead, focuses on another important aspect -finding of a suitable target property, with minimized data noises, to convincingly test the power of ML in correlating the structure with the property. Through what has been presented above, we have demonstrated that the thermally activated elementary excitation is an excellent choice in this regard. Compared with previous ML models on shear transformations in glasses, the merits of our present success on thermally activated events in MGs are multifold: i) We reached an unprecedentedly high accuracy for ML prediction of elementary excitation in MGs. In this work, ML can accurately identify atoms with the highest 5% and lowest 5% thermal activation energy in a dataset merged from six different MGs, reaching an AUC-ROC of 0.942 and 0.888, respectively. These scores are significantly higher than that achieved in predicting the propensity of shear transformation. As discussed, this is mainly because the thermal activation does not suffer from the effect of non-uniform, oriented stress ii) Our ML model is able to link with both local favored and unfavored structural motifs, rather than only identifying the latter as in previous ML literature iii) We have demonstrated that the data from multiple compositions or processing histories can be combined to connect with underlying structural signatures. This results from the comparable magnitude/range of activation barriers, for different compositions and processing histories in the same MG system. Such treatment can notably increase the variety of local environments surveyed, and allows for structure-property relation mining in more general terms. iv) Our analysis provides a repertoire of descriptors that are essential to the ML decision. We demonstrate how the ML models make decisions based on the interstice features and interpret why these features work in representing the inherent structural contrast in MGs. Our data-centric results also highlight the importance of MRO features in determining the activation heterogeneity that has implications on the underlying glass physics. v) We have conducted a quantitative "between-task" transferring test that successfully transfers the model fitted for pinpointing the low thermal activation energy atoms to identifying STZs upon AQS shear deformation. This success points to some common structural origins of the thermal-activated and stress-activated β processes. Taken together, these advances underscore the structural impact on the β processes and their heterogeneity, and the insights shed light on the role of β processes as a basic unit event underlying a variety of properties of MGs We have made our MG configurations and thermal activation energy data public in figshare with the DOI of https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12485795, which could serve as a valuable benchmark for future ML studies in MG research. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using LAMMPS Initial perturbations in ART were introduced by applying random displacement on a small group of atoms (an atom and its nearest-neighbors) The flexibility volume of atom i is defined as 41 : ( where and are the equilibrium position and instantaneous position at time t of the atom i, and Vi is the corresponding atomic volume. The calculation was obtained on short time scales when the mean square displacement is flat with time and contains the vibrational but not the diffusional contribution. Each sample was kept at equilibrium under a microcanonical ensemble (NVE) at room temperature for the calculation, which was taken over 100 independent runs, all starting from the same configuration but with momenta assigned randomly from the appropriate Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. Atomic shear moduli at room temperature were evaluated using the fluctuation method. For a canonical (NVT) ensemble, elastic constants can be calculated as the sum of three contributions: where the superscript I, II and III represents the fluctuation, kinetic contribution and the Born term, respectively (see Ref. 42 for more details). To reduce the statistical error in our simulated samples, the average atomic shear modulus (G) was evaluated as (5) The local elastic moduli tensor is computed at the coarse-grained scale using the average atomic shear moduli of center atom and its nearest neighbors. V flex,i V flex,i = x i (t)-x i ( ) * Except for Interstice distribution, an additional feature indicating whether the atom is Cu (0) or Zr ( of this baseline model in classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms is ~0.48, indicating that indeed only ~0.48 of the highest Eact atoms are among the icosahedra and <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> atoms. Not surprisingly, this heuristic model works worse in classifying the lowest