We fabricate monolayer MoS2 field effect transistors and study their electric characteristics from 10 -6 Torr to atmospheric air pressure. We show that the threshold voltage of the transistor increases with the growing pressure. Hence, we propose the device as an air pressure sensor, showing that it is particularly suitable as a low power consumption vacuum gauge. The device functions on pressure-dependent O2, N2 and H2O molecule adsorption that affect the n-doping of the MoS2 channel. Following the great success of graphene Microscopic pressure sensors that can rapidly detect small pressure variations are of high demand in robotic technologies, human-machine interfaces, electronic skin, sound wave detection, and health monitoring devices. Pressure sensors are very important in many other fields, such as automobiles, aircrafts, well drilling, and medical applications. The exceptional mechanical properties of MoS2 nanosheets The MoS2 monolayer flakes were grown by CVD on a heavily doped Si substrate covered by 285 nm SiO2, spin coated with 1% sodium cholate solution. The molybdenum needed for the growth was provided by a saturated ammonium heptamolybdate (AHM) solution, which was annealed at 300 °C under ambient conditions to turn AHM into MoO3. The substrate and the AHM solution were placed in a three-zone tube furnace, along with 50 mg of S powder, positioned upstream in a separate heating zone. The zones containing the S and the AHM were heated to 150 °C and 750 °C, respectively. After 15 min of growth, the process was stopped, and the sample was cooled rapidly. MoS2 nanoflakes with different shapes and thicknesses, depending on both the local stoichiometry and temperature, were formed Figures To investigate the working principle of the device, we measured the transfer characteristics over a gate voltage loop (backward and forward sweep) in air and vacuum. Figure Owing to their high electronegativity, molecular O2, N2 and H2O, adsorbed on MoS2 surface (Figure We have fabricated and electrically characterized monolayer MoS2 field effect transistors. We have found that the threshold voltage of the transistor increases monotonously with the air pressure, as effect of reducing n-doping caused by adsorption of electronegative O2, N2 and water. Therefore, we have proposed the transistor as an air pressure sensor, highlighting its suitability as a vacuum gauge with long duty cycle and low power consumption.