Methods to efficiently determine the relative stability of polymorphs of organic crystals are highly desired in crystal structure predictions (CSPs). Current methodologies include use of static lattice phonons, quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA), and computing the full thermodynamic cycle using replica exchange molecular dynamics (REMD). We found that 13 out of the 29 systems minimized from experiment restructured to a lower energy minima when heated using REMD, a phenomena that QHA cannot capture. Here, we present a series of methods that are intermediate in accuracy and expense between QHA and computing the full thermodynamic cycle which can save 42-80% of the computational cost and introduces, on this benchmark, a relatively small (0.16 ± 0.04 kcal/mol) error relative to the full pseudosupercritical path ap-proach. In particular, a method that Boltzmann weights the harmonic free energy of the trajectory of an REMD replica appears to be an appropriate intermediate between QHA and full thermodynamic cycle using MD when screening crystal polymorph stability. Predicting the solid-solid stability of organic crystals a priori is of great interest in the materials design of pharmaceuticals, energetic materials, and small molecule semiconductors. Polymorphism, the presence of alternate packings in the solid phase, can lead to significant difference in the physiochemical and mechanical properties. It has been shown that solubility, A class of prediction algorithms generally classified as "crystal structure predictions" (CSP) provide one avenue to determine solid stability, with recent emphasis on using free energy to rank the generated crystals. Given a molecule of interest, a CSP exhaustively generates possible solid arrangements and estimates their stability. The most common way to generate structures is through random or quasi-random generation techniques, The exact free energy difference between two crystals, given a molecular model, can be determined by relating them along a thermodynamic cycle using molecular dynamics (MD), but is prohibitively expensive. In molecular dynamics two polymorphs are simulated with NPT simulations over a specified temperature range, and the free energy as a function of temperature is estimated. These functions of G(T ) for each polymorph can then be related by determining their free energy difference at a reference temperature. The ability of MD, especially with replica exchange or other enhanced sampling techniques, to overcome crystal restructuring and converge to a free energy minimum config-urational ensemble is the largest benefit obtained from spending the comparatively large computational cost (10-20K CPU hrs / polymorph). For a given potential, we have shown that irreversible crystal restructuring away from direct minimization of the experimental crystal is a common phenomena when polymorphs are heated in MD. Due to the frequency at which we see crystal restructuring occur for pairs of polymorphs, we should logically conclude that this behavior will be more common in a CSP, which generates far more crystal structures than are found in experimental databases. Therefore, using REMD seems to be advisable when screening CSPs, but we can reduce the temperature range over which REMD is performed to save computational cost. In previous work we ran REMD from 10 K to 250-400 K depending on the system of interest. The benefit of running temperature REMD below 100 K is to find an appropriate lattice minimum for QHA and to compare how QHA performs relative to REMD at low temperatures, as discussed in our previous work. Performing the PSCP contributes to 42% of the computational cost of the determination of ∆G(T ) on average. This percent will change if different PSCP paths are approaches are used, but the approximate percentage will in most cases be similar. If a harmonic-based approach could be used instead to connect the polymorph G(T ) curves, there could be significant speed up with potentially little error introduced if the systems behaved harmonically below a given T . Even if an approach did not perfectly capture the exact MD-derived free energies, it could help provide a screen to reduced the need for the more computationally expensive full PSCP approach. Ideally, we would be able to remove both the low temperature REMD simulations and the PSCP to reduce the computational cost by 80% with little cost to the accuracy in the polymorph free energy dif- Figure ferences. In the remainder of this paper, we explore various approximations to lower the cost to compute ∆G(T ) and evaluate any sacrifices to the accuracy of PSCP. The quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) assumes that there is a single static lattice that can be used to determine the free energy at any given temperature and pressure of interest. In QHA we determine the lattice geometry C that minimizes the free energy F in eq 2 to determine the Gibbs free energy at the temperature and pressure of interest. Where U is the crystal's potential energy and A v is the Helmholtz free energy of a harmonic oscillator. Here we use the classical equation for the vibrational free energy (A v ) in eq 3 because we are using a classical potential. The vibrational free energy is a summation of the 3×N vibrational phonons (ω k ) of the crystal lattice, where N is the number of atoms. At higher temperatures the free energy difference between of QHA using classical and quantum statistics should be negligible. To solve eq 1 we determine the crystal thermal expansion, The expense of QHA can be simplified by assuming a one-dimensional anisotropic thermal expansion in conjunction with the constant Grüneisen parameter approximation. For each set of lattice parameters (C) the lattice phonons (ω) must be computed, which can be expensive if done exactly through diagonalization of the mass-weighted Hessian. It has been shown that assuming a constant Grüneisen parameter (γ k = -1 ω k ∂ω k ∂η ) can be used to determine how a particular phonon changes due to a strain placed on the crystal. This approach is shown to introduce error < 0.01 kcal/mol for the computed solidsolid free energy differences. An absolute free energy difference between polymorphs can be determined by computing the free energy for restraining the atoms and turning off the inter-and intramolecular interactions at a reference temperature to complete the thermodynamic cycle. In the current work we use eq 4 to describe changes to the potential energy function due to changes in the harmonic restraints or interactions. Where the path the crystal follows to the restrained non-interacting ideal gas state is obtained by: 1. restraining the atoms (λ 1 = 1 → 0) with a force constant of k x,1 ; 2. turning off (γ 1 = 1 → 0) the intermolecular interactions (U inter ) and torsions (U tors .); 3. applying a second larger restraint (λ 2 = 1 → 0) to the atoms with a force constant of k x,1 + k x,2 ; and then 4. turning off (γ 2 = 1 → 0) the bonds and angles. Temperature replica exchange molecular dynamics (REMD) allows us to quickly converge to the thermodynamic minimum at all temperatures of interest. REMD will periodically exchange the states of the replica based using the probability of observing the state in the other replica. By exchanging neighboring temperatures, replicas, the crystal is constantly annealing from high to low temperature, allowing the system to reach a stable thermodynamic state faster. Once an appropriate lattice minimum is found from REMD, one could in theory replace the reference free energy difference between polymorphs computed with PSCP by performing QHA and using this value in eq 5, assuming that the crystal was sufficiently harmonic below a given temperature. Since an accelerated sampling method such as temperature REMD is required to overcome the free energy barriers to even local restructuring, it introduces significant error to use QHA started from CSP-or experimentallyminimized structures to determine the polymorph free energy differences without additional REMD. Using QHA as an approximation for PSCP does save computational time, but requires us to perform REMD down to low temperatures to find a lattice minimum and may be limited to systems that vibrate around a single molecular conformation. In our experience, finding a restructured lattice minimum requires us to run REMD down to 10 K, which can be expensive as outlined above. Additionally, at temperatures as low as 10 K, the conformationally flexible molecules studied here are able to access multiple lowenergy configurations which have slightly different vibrational energies. The reference free energy difference can be directly estimated by averaging the probabilities of the harmonic free energy of the configurations minimized from samples of a molecular dynamics simulation. The full configurational ensemble in a crystal can be reasonably represented by an ensemble of molecular and geometric configurations, each of which belongs to a particular harmonic well. By Boltzmann weighting those harmonic free energies, we can estimate the absolute harmonic energy of the system. Since we can collect these configurations from a moderately high temperature REMD simulation, we can overcome issues of disorder that limit other harmonic methods. Where F is the harmonic free energy computed from eq 2 for some specified N frames of the trajectory at T ref . Each frame is geometry minimized by allowing the molecular coordinates to relax but keeping the box fixed. When approximating ∆G(T ref ) with this method N must be large that ∆G(T ref ) has converged within a desired precision, and we explore the choice of N later in this paper. This method also does not require a lattice minimum to be found, but should be run at a temperature such the error in the approximate ∆G(T ref ) with respect to full molecular dynamics approaches is minimized, or at least is smaller than the level of accuracy the user requires. We point out that this method likely over-counts states sampled within the simulation, as we may incorporate multiple configurations that may minimize to the same minimum structure, but leave that approximation uncorrected at the present time. We evaluate our methods with the polymorphs of the molecules in Figure The quasi-harmonic approximation is performed on the lattice minimum found by energy minimizing the experimental crystal and found by energy minimizing the 10 K replica of temperature REMD. We selected 5 random configurations from the equilibrated 10 K NPT simulation from REMD and energy minimized each one. For all polymorphs, all 5 lattice minimum were within 0.015 kcal/mol of one another and the lowest energy structure was used to run QHA for the restructured crystal. All harmonic approximation calculations were run using the Tinker molecular modeling package 8.7. Here the lattice minimum were found using xtalmin to a tolerance of 10 -5 and the lowest energy minimum was selected for QHA. QHA was performed using our Python wrapper package that is available on GitHub at http://github. com/shirtsgroup/Lattice_dynamics. Boltzmann-weighted HA was completed by performing multiple instances of HA on the fixed geometry configurations found with REMD of the NPT molecular simulations. For the reference temperature of interest, N configurations were selected from the equilibrated replica and the coordinates were optimized using Tinker's minimize command, which holds the lattice geometry fixed. The harmonic energy was then computed using our GitHub package Lattice_dynamics and then finite-temperature-crystal-scripts was used to compute eq 6 and eq 5. Convergence plots for each polymorph pair can be found in the Supporting Information ( In previous work we have discussed the prevalence of crystal restructuring due to REMD simulations and shown its affect on the error between QHA and REMD+PSCP. Here, ∆G ) is the polymorph free energy difference at 300 K computed with one of the approximations and ∆G P SCP (T = 300K) is the absolute free energy difference at 300 K using REMD+PSCP. The optimal temperature to compute a reference free energy difference between polymorphs is dependent on the approximation used. In REMD+PSCP the free energy difference is independent of the reference temperature (T ref ) that PSCP is computed at. However, this is not the case for the approximations. In Figure Boltzmann-weighted HA is a more robust method since the free energy difference can be computed at all temperatures in which REMD can be performed. In Figure as it starts to approach its simulated melting point. Using REMD+Boltzmann-HA or extrapolated QHA produces the smallest error (RMSE=0.15 kcal/mol) relative to REMD+PSCP, with REMD+Boltzmann-HA being the most stable. For all approximations we want to look at the minimum value of the RMSE that is inclusive of all polymorph pairs (n =18). In the case of REMD+QHA this is at 150 K where the RMSE is 0.24±0.07 kcal/mol, which is 0.09 kcal/mol greater than the RMSE of REMD+Boltzmann-HA and extrapolated QHA, 0.15±0.02 kcal/mol. REMD+Boltzmann-HA is the most robust method because it 1) doesn't require extrapolation, and 2) errors remain with 0.02 kcal/mol of the minimum RMSE using reference temperatures between 100-250 K. The optimal reference temperature and generated error is both molecule and polymorph dependent as seen in the Supporting Information (Figures S 16 -S 33). Chlorpropamide (Figure S 30) is a good example of this phenomenon where the largest error (0.28 kcal/mol) for REMD+Boltzmann-HA is for T ref = 200 K, but the smallest error (0.02 kcal/mol) is at T ref = 300 K, falling outside of the general range for all systems. If it is feasible, determining a reference free energy difference at a couple of temperatures with REMD+Boltzmann-HA may be beneficial to determine the robustness the result to the temperature reference. The RMSE of the various approximations that use REMD are between 0.10-0.33 kcal/mol at 300 K, and are functions of the size and flexibility. In Figure 4.3 There are several approaches to choose from approximate the free energy before computing the full thermodynamic cycle Boltzmann-weighted HA provides the most efficient way to compute the polymorph energy differences to still include the full statistical ensemble from REMD. In table 1 we report the error for each approximation with their relative computational times. Both approximations (REMD+QHA & REMD+Boltzmann-HA) introduce similar amounts of error (RM SE =0.15-0.17 kcal/mol) relative to REMD+PSCP, but REMD+Boltzmann-HA outperforms REMD+QHA because it is able to eliminate low temperature replica from REMD in addition to the PSCP. If the speed/accuracy trade-off favors speed, QHA independent of REMD is the fastest, but introduces the most error relative to REMD+PSCP. REMD+Boltzmann-HA may be ideal for an initial screening of a CSP followed by using PSCP on select low energy systems. We present a range of approximations for predicting the free energy differences of polymorphs which can be easily be implemented as a screening method for CSPs. We have previously used the PSCP to determine an absolute reference free energy difference to complete a thermodynamic cycle between two polymorphs. Table Determining a polymorph free energy difference with Boltzmann weighted HA for these systems requires 10 -40 frames from an NPT trajectory when using a reference temperature between 50 -300 K. Figures In equation M5 the error for using an approximate ∆G(T ref ) can be computed as: Here we can move all temperature dependence to the left side of the equation to get a constant value of the error for the approximation: Once we solve this, we can evaluate the error in the free energy at any temperature of interest. 9 System Dependent Results 