We theoretically investigate the optical response in a hybrid quantum optomechanical system consisting of two optically coupled micro-cavities in which a twolevel system (qubit) is embedded on a movable membrane. The qubit can either be a defect which interacts with the mechanical oscillator via the linear Jaynes-Cummings interaction or a superconducting charge qubit coupled with the mechanical mode via nonlinear interaction. We find that coherent perfect transmission (CPT), coherent perfect synthesis (CPS) and optomechanically induced absorption (OMIA) can be generated by suitably adjusting the system parameters. We find that the qubit and its interaction with the mechanical oscillator emerges as a new handle to control these quantum optical properties. The presence of the qubit results in four points where CPT and CPS can be realized compared to the pure optomechanical case (i.e. in the absence of qubit) where only three points are attained. This shows that the presence of the qubit gives us more flexibility in choosing the appropriate parameter regime where CPT and CPS can be attained and controlled. We also find that OMIA shows three distinct peaks both in the linear and nonlinear cases. In the absence of the qubit, OMIA is converted to optomechanically induced transmission (OMIT). An increase in in the qubit decay rate also shows a transition from OMIA to OMIT. Our study reveals that the optical response of the nonlinear case is relatively rapid (more sensitive) compared to the linear case to changes in the system parameters. This demonstrates the potential use of this hybrid system in designing tunable alloptical-switch and photon-router both of which forms an important element of a quantum information network. Since the past few decades there has been tremendous advancement in the understanding of light-matter interaction in hybrid optomechanical systems Hybrid electro-optomechanical systems demonstrate strong Kerr nonlinearities even in the weak-coupling regime The OMIT phenomenon can be used to slow In this paper, we investigate a double cavity optomechanical system with movable mirror in the middle, in the presence of linear/non-linear interaction of a two level system and the mechanical mode of the movable mirror. The linear interaction is acheived by embedding a quantum dot on the movable middle mirror while the nonlinear interaction is generated by coupling a superconducting qubit with nanomechanical oscillator We consider a hybrid double-cavity optomechanical system composed of two fixed mirrors with partial transmissivity and one movable mirror located between the two fixed mirrors (membrane in the middle) as shown in fig. The system is driven from left and right fixed mirrors by two control(probe) fields with amplitudes, cL = 2kP cL ωc and cR = 2kP cR ωc ( L = 2kP L ωp and R = 2kP R ωp ) respectively. Here the subscripts L(R) denotes the left (right) cavity. We assume both the cavities have the same decay rates κ. Both the left and right control (probe) modes have the same frequency ω c (ω p ). Here P cL , P cR , P L , and P R are the relevant field powers. We now discuss the two cases that we will be analyzing in the paper. The first case is that of a two-level system(qubit) linearly coupled to the mechanical oscillator. The qubit could be an intrinsic defect inside the mechanical resonator, a quantum dot or another two level system. The mechanical oscillator is coupled to the qubit via the linear Jaynes-Cummings interaction. The radiation-pressure Hamiltonian describes the interaction between the cavity modes and the mechanical mode. However there is no direct interaction between the qubit and the optical modes. Thus the total Hamiltonian is the frame rotating with respect to the control field frequency ω c can be written as, Here, ∆ c = ω 0 -ω c denotes the detuning between the cavity mode and the control field, is the optomechanical coupling constant, δ = ω p -ω c is the detuning between the probe and the coupling field and θ is the relative phase between the left and right probe fields. Also, ω q is the transition frequency of the two level system while σ + , σ -and σ z are the usual Pauli operators describing the two-level system. The parameter g describes the linear coupling strength between the mechanical resonator and the qubit. The linear system has been studied earlier in the case of EIT We now describe the optomechanical system in which the qubit is interacting non linearly with the mechanical mode Here g N is the coupling strength between the superconducting qubit and the mechanical oscillator. The origin of g N is the Josephson coupling energy in a Cooper-pair box. We now proceed ahead to study the quantum dynamics of the linear and non-linear case systematically. Considering relevant dissipation and quantum or thermal noise, the quantum dynamics of the total system's operators is given by the following quantum-Langevin equations Here b in , σ - in are the zero-mean-value environmental noise operators of the mechanical oscillator and the two-level qubit respectively. Also c 1 in (c 2 in ) is the zero-mean-value quantum noise operators of the left(right) cavity. The probe fields are small compared to the control and hence can be considered as comparable to noise. In the classical limit, we drop the fluctuations, the probe fields and replace the operators by their expectation values. We can generate the steady-state mean values by setting all the time derivative to zero and with the factorization assumption Where, ∆ 1,2 = ∆ c ∓g 0 (b s + b s * ) is the effective detuning of the cavity modes. Note that the term g 0 (b s + b s * ) ≤ ∆ c , when g 0 is weak (g 0 ≤ ω m ) and the number of photons in the two cavities are same. This is evident from the expression for b s since if We now derive the quantum Langevin equations by substituting the ansatz b = b s + δb The quality factor Q of the mechanical oscillator is high (ω m γ m ). Introducing the slowly varying operators for the linear terms of the fluctuations as We thus obtain the linearized quantum Langevin equations for the fluctuations as Note that we will be considering ω m g 0 |c 1s | and g 0 |c 2s |. Here x = δ -ω m . We take the qubit to be in the ground state i.e, < σ z >= -1. We now use the ansatz < δs >= δs + e -ixt + δs -e ixt , with s = b, c 1 , c 2 and σ -. Under steady state condition < δ ṡ >= 0, we obtain the following expressions, Here G = g 0 c 1s is the effective optomechanical coupling related to coupling power P cL . Without loss of generality, we assume c 1s and c 2s to be real-valued. In addition, |c 2s /c 1s | = n, as the photon number ratio of the two cavities. Following the procedure adopted in the linear case, we now write down the corresponding equations for the non-linear case. The quantum-Langevin equations are derived as :- Note that we have now a non-linear term in the equation for σ -. The corresponding steady state values are found from the above equations as where G N = g N |b s | is the effective qubit-mechanical coupling strength. The linearized quantum-Langevin equations for fluctuations are now written as Analogous to eqns.( In the next section we will investigate the optical response of the linear and non-linear system. To study the optical response of the system, we utilize the input-output theory The oscillatory terms can be removed if we set outj = outj+ e -ixt + outj-e ixt , (j = L, R). Note that the components outL+ and outR+ have same frequency ω p as the probe fields L and R while the output components outL-and outR-have the frequency 2ω c -ω p . We will now discuss Coherent Perfect Transmission (CPT) and Coherent Perfect Synthesis (CPS) for both the linear and non-linear system. We consider here the possibility of acheiving CPT in the parameter regimes where and R = 0 . These conditions essentially means that we observe the left probe field from the right mirror after it passes through the double cavity system and perfectly transmitted through the right mirror. Note that the right probe field is taken to be absent. Taking R = 0 and n = 1, we get from eqns.( We first consider the linear case. In fig. We now consider the non-linear case corresponding to a superconducting charge qubit attached to the membrane in the middle. Proceeding in a manner similar to that for the linear case, the four transmission point appear at, G N = 0.4k which is slightly higher than g = k case. For all the above cases, exactly at x = 0, CPT is observed only when g(G N ) = 0. Thus in the presence of the two-level system, we can design an "All Optical Switch" functioning around x = 0. From the above analysis, we can conclude that the non-linear system is comparatively more suitable to generate four CPT points. Around x = 0 points both for linear as well as non-linear case, we observe two transmission points. As one tunes x across the x = 0 point, we can switch between zero transmission to large transmission ( CPT in case g or G N is very low ). Thus these systems have the potential to be used as "all optical switch". Moreover, the width of the transmission around x = 0 is very small for small g(G N ) and it widens as we increase g(G N ).This indicates that at small values of g or G N , the functioning of the optical switch is more sensitive i.e, a small variation of x around x = 0 causes a sharp change in the transmission. In this sub-section, we consider the possibility of achieving CPS under the conditions In order to avoid energy loss via fast mechanical decay, we consider a high-Q quantum mechanical mode by taking γ m → 0. In addition we also assume that energy is not loss due to decay and Plots for the non-linear case is depicted in fig. Thus we see that in CPS we can have a coherent control over the perfect transmission and perfect reflection of the left and right probe fields. These observations are a result of constructive or destructive interference between L and R at the two cavity mirrors. This interference is seen to be influenced by the presence of the two-level system coupled to the middle movable membrane and that we can control the transmission by the adjusting the two-level parameters which is seen to emerge as a new handle. In optomechanically induced transparency (OMIT), probe excitations are transferred to mechanical oscillations and again converted back to probe field. A perfect destructive can be set up between the intracavity probe field and the fluctuations that returns to the cavity from the mechanical oscillator. As a result the probe field can not exist in the cavity, and the cavity then becomes transparent. A system can also be designed such that a constructive interference take place that leads to optomechanically induced absorption (OMIA) , we obtain the following expressions for linear coupling and for nonlinear coupling as, . peak (at x = 0) is extremely narrow for the nonlinear case as compared to the linear case. In the absence of the two level coupling with the mechanical oscillator i.e, (g = G N = 0), the OMIA structure transforms to OMIT structure similar to that found in The mechanical oscillation leads to creation of sidebands of the optical field. The dominant sideband has the same frequency as the probe field. This coherent process leads to interference between the sidebands and the probe field. In the absence of the qubit, destructive interference is generated leading to cancelation of the intracavity field, resulting in a transparency window in the cavity output. On the other hand, presence of the qubit induces a sideband that is in-phase with the probe field and hence leading to a constructive interference. This results in a opaque window in the cavity. The additional absorption peaks (at x = 0) appear due to constructive interference between higher order sidebands ( generated due to the nonlinearity in the system ) and the probe fields. In equations ( Here in eqn. The steep curve again indicates the possibility of using the nonlinear hybrid system as an optical switch. We now check the influence of σ z on the OMIA. If σ z = 0 (both upper and lower level equally populated ) then the influence of qubit-mechanical oscillator vanishes and the OMIA is converted into OMIT as in In summary, we have studied the optical response properties of a hybrid double cavity optomechanical system in the presence of a linear and nonlinear qubit-mechanical oscillator interaction. Our results illustrate that coherent perfect transmission and synthesis can be achieved at four different points which scans a wide parameter regime. From our studies it is clear that the qubit and its interaction with the mechanical mode appears as a new handle to control photon transport through the system. We further found that the case of nonlinear interaction to be more sensitive to variations in the system parameters compared to the linear case thus making it a suitable candidate for all-optical-switching. In addition, we have shown that the system exhibits opto-mechanicanically induced absorption. The system can be made to switch between OMIA and OMIT by tuning the parameters of the qubit and qubit-mechanical coupling. Thus the hybrid system can be made to operate as a tunable-photon-router as well as an all-optical-switch. Such a four-mode hybrid system with a tunable and sensitive optical response properties provides a platform for novel photonic quantum devices which can form a part of a wider quantum network.