Real-space modulated Charge Density Waves (CDW) are an ubiquituous feature in many families of superconductors. In particular, how CDW relates to superconductivity is an active and open question that has recently gathered much interest since CDWs have been discovered in many cuprates superconductors. Here we show that disorder induced by proton irradiation is a full-fledged tuning parameter that can bring essential information to answer this question as it affects CDW and superconductivity with different and unequivocal mechanisms. Specifically, in the model CDW superconductor Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 that develops a 1D CDW below 77 K and s-wave superconductivity below 4 K, we show that disorder enhances the superconducting critical temperature T c and H c2 while it suppresses the CDW. Discussing how disorder affects both superconductivity and the CDW, we make a compelling case that superconductivity and CDW are competing for electronic density of states at the Fermi level in Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 , and we reconcile the results obtained via the more common tuning parameters of pressure and doping. Owing to its prototypical, 1D, Peierls type CDW and the s-wave, weak-coupling nature of its superconductivity, this irradiation study of Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 provides the basis to understand and extend such studies to the more complex cases of density waves and superconductivity coexistence in heavy fermions, Fe-based or cuprates superconductors. 9 K 26 . Chemical doping also points to a competition scenario: the CDW state is suppressed and T c continuously increases up to at least 6 K for increasing doping The article is organized as follows: Part. II presents the materials and methods. Part. III presents how irradiation induced disorder raises T c and reduces T CDW . Part. IV presents the evolution of H c,2 as a function of disorder. Part. V reconciles the different evolutions of T c with pressure, doping and disorder by discussing how they relate to the CDW suppression mechanisms. Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 has a tetragonal unit cell with lattice parameters a = 12.484(1) and c = 4.190(2) Å38 and space group symmetry P4/mbm. The CDW forms along the c-axis on quasi 1D chains of lutetium atoms. The samples are high quality single crystals that grow in needle shape along the c-axis, and have been characterized previously For the irradiations, the sample is mounted onto an aluminum sample holder that allows for linear and rotational motion. In order to avoid heat damage of the sample we use a relatively low beam current of 500 nA and a cooling stage that maintains the sample at -10 • C during irradiation. The incident proton beam of 4.7 mm diameter is homogenized by passing through a 1 μm gold foil placed at 240 mm upstream from the sample. The beam is defined through a 7.8 mm aperture placed at 40 mm upstream. This set-up is calibrated with the help of a Faraday cup placed down-stream from the sample which captures all protons passing the aperture while the sample is moved out of the beam path. The sample is electrically connected to the sample holder and the irradiation chamber which, in turn, is isolated from all other electronics and from the beam pipe through plastic rings. This approach allows to accurately determine the irradiation dose by integrating the current from the chamber, not affected by spurious effects due to the emission of secondary electrons. The sample was irradiated in four sessions at Western Michigan University to a rather high cumulative dose of 12x10 16 p/cm 2 (protons per cm 2 ). Such a high dose is known to start to degrade some superconducting properties in several families of superconductors 22 . After each irradiation we measured the resistivity using a Keithley 2182 voltmeter and 6221 current source, with currents ranging from 50 μA to 1 mA, in an helium 4 cryostat with a 7 T magnet. Contacts were made with sputtered platinum and silver epoxy Epotek H20E. Typical contact values are < ∼ 5 Ω. The voltage contacts were spaced 200 μm apart along the c-axis. The large increase in resistivity below 80 K is caused by a CDW which gaps density of states at the Fermi level and increases electronic scattering. Contrary to T c , the CDW transition temperature shifts to lower temperature, the transition width increases, and the amplitude of the increase is reduced for increasing irradiation dose. dropped to 50% (midpoint). Fig. Fig. We note that Matthiessen's rule seems to fail both above and below T CDW in Fig. But one needs to be very careful when applying Matthiessen's rule in a CDW system. In the CDW phase, the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level decreases (gapped charge carriers) but there are also fewer electrons to scatter off, meanwhile the CDW will also contribute to electronic scattering. So, the resistivity can go either way at the CDW transition. A blatant example of this mercurial behavior are the 1T and 2H polytypes of the dichalcogenide compound TaS 2 : the resistivity increases in the CDW phase of 1T-TaS 2 (dominated by DOS effects), while the resistivity decreases in the CDW phase of 2H-TaS 2 (dominated by electron scattering effects). Note that a similar effect of increase/decrease in resistivity can also occur at a SDW transition as observed in BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 : irradiating the sample with electrons makes the transition split into an upturn and subsequent downturn upon cooling 40 . Besides, the CDW is commensurate in Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 , so that there is also a Fermi Surface reconstruction, and it is a system with tens of electronic bands, eleven of which cross the Fermi level. 29 Finally, a short range CDW order can persist above the damage level erasing the trace of transition in the resistivity versus temperature curve, as evidenced in NbSe 2 in Ref. 41, and short range CDW correlations can also persist above T CDW (e.g. CDW satellite peaks already appear in x-ray below 85 K in Ref. 33). Such a short range CDW order will not lead to Fermi surface reconstruction but will still contribute to transport properties. The simultaneous variations of T CDW and T c are summarized in Fig. As irradiation dose increases, the superconducting transition width is reduced whereas the CDW transition width increases, evidencing the different mechanisms through which disorder affects them (see text). of irradiation dose. T c increases almost linearly at a rate of +0.14 K/10 16 p/cm 2 (or 0.093 K/μΩ.cm) and starts saturating after the last irradiation. T CDW decreases linearly in the whole range of irradiation doses at a rate of -1.85 K/10 16 p/cm 2 (or -1.18 K/μΩ.cm). According to Anderson's theorem 42 , in an isotropic s-wave superconductor small concentration of non-magnetic defects should not affect T c while magnetic defects should be pair-breaking and reduce T c . Generally, the effect of pair-breaking scattering is described by Abrikosov-Gorkov theory Rather, such an increase of T c with irradiation dose arises naturally from a competition scenario betwen the CDW and superconductivity, if irradiation suppresses the density wave more than superconductivity Quantitatively, Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 is a weak coupling limit s-wave superconductor (∆C/γT c = 1.41 26 , close to 1.43), so that the electronic density of states released by the CDW should yield an exponential increase of T c following the standard formula for a BCS superconductor: where α ≈ 1.14 in the weak coupling limit, θ D = [315 -366] K is the Debye temperature The evolution of the residual resistivity as a function of irradiation dose is presented in Fig. But on the other hand, irradiation increases the number of defects and reduces the size of CDW domains, both of which should raise electronic scattering and increase the residual resistivity. Here, we can at least conclude that the increased scattering more than compensates the increased density of states, as the residual resistivity increases overall. We also find that ρ max -ρ min , the amplitude of the jump in resistivity at T CDW , is reduced after irradiation (see Fig. We also note that there appear to be slight discrepancies in the literature values of T c and T CDW in pristine single crystals As expected from the increase of T c we find an increase of the in-plane upper critical field (H c,2 ) for increasing irradiation dose. Our measurements of H c,2 are reported Fig. So usually, in the dirty limit H c,2 (0) ∝ T c , however here H c,2 (0) ∝ T 2 c . This unusual scaling can be easily explained by the fact that 1/τ 0 varies linearly with T c due to the competition with the CDW, namely: the prefactor φ 0 1.76 k B 2hv 2 F is independent of irradiation dose, whereas 1/τ 0 is usually proportional to the irradiation dose for uniform non-overlapping defects in metals 55 , and in this compound, empirically, T c increases linearly with the irradiation dose (see Fig. Interestingly, the competition scenario between CDW and superconductivity still requires clarification in Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 . Indeed, pressure studies 26,28 show a binary effect on T c : below 2 GPa, T c is 4 K and constant, whereas above 2 GPa, T c is 9 K and constant; in contrast doping studies The variations as a function of irradiation dose of the width (15 -85 %) of the superconducting and CDW transitions are summarized in Fig. The Anderson theorem remains valid even in the presence of cascade defects, as they are not magnetic defects. Thus, here the decreased superconducting-transition width after irradiation shows that the irradiation damage caused by proton irradiation is very uniform, to the point that disorder in the sample is actually more uniform after irradiation. Let us now turn to how disorder influences the CDW. By contrast to the superconducting transition, as shown in Fig. While the almost linear variation of residual resistivity with irradiation dose points to the main contribution arising from scattering in the unitary limit, 4-MeV proton irradiation produces a complex morphology of defects: beyond vacancy-interstitial pairs (atomic point defects), cascade-type clusters of defects are also generated. These clusters are typically a few nanometers in diameter, and, because of this larger size, they are expected to be less pairbreakers for superconductivity than point defects as bigger defects should scatter in a smaller volume of reciprocal space and be closer to or larger than the coherence length. There is also experimental evidence for this lesser pair breaking effect: an extreme example is commercial superconducting tapes based on cuprates. Despite the huge density of tiny nanoparticles in these tapes, T c is almost the same as in the clean bulk cuprate and proton irradiation also does not affect T c much in these tapes. In Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 the cascade defects are expected to not be pair-breaking at all as we know that non-magnetic defects do not decrease T c in an isotropic s-wave superconductor (which is the case here until proven otherwise). However, nonmagnetic defects irrespective of their sizes do suppress the CDW order, which is consistent with the Imry-Ma theorem 65 , and some earlier studies. 66,67 Therefore, the cascade defects have pair-breaking effect only on the CDW phase. In addition, we expect the cascade-type defects produce strong pinning of the CDW and contribute to the broadening of the CDW transition. Therefore, for the study of the coexistence of superconductivity and CDW, it could be seen as a benefit of proton irradiation that it provides these few nanometers wide cascade-type defects. These cascades should indeed mostly suppress the CDW while not affecting much superconductivity (even if of the d-wave type Two different mechanisms have been proposed for CDW suppression by disorder: (i) a pair-breaking mechanism Thus this mechanism cannot account for the broadening of the CDW transition. (ii) a realspace phase fluctuations mechanism where disorder pins the phase of the periodic spatial modulation of the electronic density and associated lattice distortion. This breaks up the CDW into small domains, which broadens the transition(Ref. 69 §2.7.2). Thus, our data indicate that real-space fluctuations are clearly contributing to the suppression of the CDW by irradiation in this study. In doping studies Conversely, in pressure studies, the mechanism by which the CDW is suppressed must be different as there is no change in the number of defects, hence no pair-breaking nor phase fluctuations. This is also quite strikingly evidenced experimentally To first order, the elastic stiffening modifies only the temperature at which the Chan and Heine criterion is met, without affecting the density of electronic states involved. Thus, we can now reconcile the effects of pressure, doping and irradiation on the CDW and superconductivity, by considering the differences between the three mechanisms of CDW suppression: pair-breaking, real-space phase fluctuations and elastic constants stiffening. The main effect of pressure on the CDW is to reduce We showed that irradiation induced disorder enhances the superconducting critical temperature T c and H c2 while it suppresses the CDW in Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 . We showed how this increase of T c cannot be accounted for by the expected effect of disorder, and instead stems from the increase of density of states at the Fermi level. Our results thus make a very compelling case that superconductivity and CDW are competing for electronic density of states at the Fermi level in Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 . Owing to its prototypical, 1D, Peierls type CDW and the s-wave, weakcoupling nature of its superconductivity, Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 thus provides a platform from which to understand the more complex cases of density waves and superconductivity coexistence in heavy fermions, Fe-based or cuprates superconductors. Recently 72 it was shown that, in an unconventional superconductor mediated by spin-fluctuation, very inhomogeneous conditions may result in an increase of T c . However we do not think this latter case is relevant to the standard s-wave superconductor studied here. Also very recently, it was found that, while the effect of disorder on the dichalcogenide NbSe 2 in bulk form is explained in terms of CDW-superconductivity competition and synergy 41 , in monolayer NbSe 2 a much larger T c dome was discovered as a function of disorder and this has been proposed to be due to the wavefunction multifractality in a 2D monolayer system benefit from low temperature x-ray studies. Likewise, if the CDW modulation survives in the superconducting state, we would expect some comodulation of the superconducting and CDW order parameters, if only around defects and close to vortex cores, which an STM study might be able to evidence, if proper surfaces of Lu 5 Ir 4 Si 10 can be produced.