Heat flux sensors have potential in enabling applications that require tracking of direct and instantaneous thermal energy transfer. To facilitate their use, the sensors have to be robust and feasible to implement, while maintaining high sensitivity and a fast response time. However, most commercially available heat flux sensors are expensive to manufacture and have insufficient temporal responses. In this paper, a novel microelectromechanical heat flux sensor structure is proposed. The electrical performance of the prototype sensors is compared with commercially available heat flux sensors. Preliminary results show that our sensors have similar sensitivity and faster response compared to commercial sensors. Heat flux sensors (HFS) are used in a growing number of applications requiring direct measurement of transferred thermal energy, where the use of commonplace temperature measurement is not practical or sufficient Despite the potential benefits of heat flux measurement, HFSs are employed relatively rarely in the industry, and instead, the transfer rate of heat is calculated based on multiple temperature measurements Recently, increasing attention has focused on employing thermoelectric transducers in IoT applications for both sensing and power generation purposes, which predicts an increasing demand for cost-effective and robust thermoelectric elements Discrete heat flux sensors are most commonly implemented as passive sensor elements that generate a voltage output in response to an imposed temperature gradient Heat flux sensors are typically based on the Seebeck effect which generates a voltage output In addition to the classic plate-type heat flux sensors, heat transfer measurement can be achieved with several other transducer technologies based on the conversion of heat into electricity, including thermopile infrared (IR) sensors, Peltier elements, and thermoelectric generators (TEGs). While both TEGs and IR sensors are widespread in the industry and have low manufacturing costs Manufacturing a mechanically robust contact-type heat flux sensor with fast temporal response is difficult The use of MEMS manufacturing methods has been found to offer a number of benefits for achieving a high density of thermoelectric junctions in IR sensors A common approach to improve the thermoelectric performance of a heat flux sensor is to employ materials with a high thermoelectric figure of merit zT In A prototype batch of heat flux sensors was manufactured onto 6 inch SOI silicon wafers, Fig. Electrical measurements of the sensors were obtained during preliminary electrothermal characterization as described in Relative characterization was performed by conducting a heat flux through the structure periodically in both directions during a 12 min test sequence. The reference heat flux was induced as a combination of conductive and radiative excitation by a combination of a thermal wafer chuck and a black body probe card assembly. During the excitation sequence, the transient and quasi-steady-state heat flux signals of both the DUTs and references, as well as several temperatures around the setting were recorded. All the tested sensors produced a waveform similar to that of the reference sensor, with a slightly different transient response owing to differing thermal properties and contacts of the sensors. The waveforms obtained from the test are shown in Fig. Based on the preliminary measurements of the prototype sensors, the sensors were found to exhibit comparable sensitivities when compared with commercial sensors of similar size. The response time of the sensors was approximately 42 μs, which suggests a significantly faster response time as compared with the commercial sensors with response times of approximately 0.7 s Successfully implemented vertical sensor designs have the potential to ease the construction process of thermoelectric devices in both sensing and thermoelectric generator solutions. In cases where several current TEG designs have vertical-tolateral heat guide structures and thermally and electrically insulating heater materials included, such as 