Here we report the development of high-efficiency microscale GaAs laser power converters, and their successful transfer printing onto silicon substrates, presenting a unique, high power, low-cost and integrated power supply solution for implantable electronics, autonomous systems and internet of things applications. We present 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs laser power converters and successfully demonstrate the transfer printing of these devices to silicon using a PDMS stamp, achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 48% and 49% under 35 and 71 W/cm2 808 nm laser illumination respectively. The transferred devices are coated with ITO to increase current spreading and are shown to be capable of handling very high short-circuit current densities up to 70 A/cm2 under 141 W/cm2 illumination intensity (~1400 Suns), while their open circuit voltage reaches 1235 mV, exceeding the values of pre-transfer devices indicating the presence of photonrecycling. These optical power sources could deliver Watts of power to sensors and systems in locations where wired power is not an option, while using a massively parallel, scalable, and lowcost fabrication method for the integration of dissimilar materials and devices. Micro-transfer printing (μTP) provides a means of monolithically integrating dissimilar materials and components on non-native substrates that is scalable, massively parallel and potentially lowcost There are a wide range of embedded systems, with examples provided in Figure Optical power transfer is an alternative technology that rather than relying on energy harvested from the immediate environment, uses a photonic source such as a laser to send optical power either through free space or over an optical fiber to remotely powered autonomous systems. Microtransfer printing laser power converters offers many advantages over environmental energy harvesting systems including the ability to directly integrate the device with silicon electronics, miniaturization of the power supply for microscale systems Fafard et al. In the rest of this paper, we present the first transfer printing of GaAs photovoltaic microcells to silicon for laser power conversion applications. We begin by introducing our microtransfer printing process and describe the fabrication of high-efficiency single-junction GaAs laser power converters. Transfer printing of these devices is successfully demonstrated using PDMS stamps after the release of the device coupons using photoresist tethers and an undercut etch process. We then compare the performance of these devices before and after transfer-printing onto silicon substrates, with the devices on silicon maintaining higher power conversions at high incident power, while their open circuit voltage exceeds the values of pre-transfer devices indicating the presence of photon-recycling Previously, to integrate many materials and components from various substrates onto a single platform, serial pick and place assembly operations were considered the primary option. There are many potential flaws with these systems. Standard pick and place assembly struggles with small (<100 μm edge) and thin-film devices. Modern pick and place assemblies can operate at high rates, but with the penalty of a reduction in placement accuracy of components making it a less viable option for the integration of state-of-the-art devices as they reduce in size. Micro-transfer printing provides a powerful means to heterogeneously integrate many components onto a single target wafer. For III-V materials, an elastomer stamp is used to pick the few microns thick essential layers of a device and print them to a target substrate. An etch release layer is incorporated into the epistructure of the device between the substrate and the active epitaxial layers. The release layer is designed to be selectively etched with a wet chemical etchant while lithographically defined photoresist tethers anchor the active material to the substrate and keep the device suspended above the substrate. A computer-controlled elastomer stamp is then used to pick the suspended device from the host substrate causing the tethers to fracture at specifically engineered points allowing the devices to be printed to a target substrate of choice. The device fabrication is summarized here and in Figure A fiber-coupled 808 nm multimode laser was used to illuminate the PV devices where the exit aperture of the fiber was 200 μm in diameter with a numerical aperture of 0.2. On-chip performance with and without an ITO spreading layer are compared to devices with an ITO spreading layer and have been transfer printed to gold-coated silicon as outlined in Figure Figures The EQE of the GaAs epi-structure was measured on large solar cell structures to enable full light collection, and is presented in Figure The 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs laser power converters were successfully transfer printed to silicon using a PDMS stamp, achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 47.8% We reported the fabrication of high-efficiency microscale GaAs laser power converters, and their successful transfer printing onto silicon substrates. The 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs laser power converters were successfully transfer printed to silicon using a PDMS stamp, achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 48% and 49% under 35 and 71 W/cm2 808 nm laser illumination respectively. The optimized design of the whole stack for resistance and optical considerations leading to very high efficiency photovoltaic cells on silicon. The transferred devices were coated with ITO to increase current spreading and are shown to be capable of handling very high short-circuit current densities up to 70 A/cm2 under 141 W/cm2 illumination intensity (~1400 suns equivalent). For devices transferred to silicon, the rear back mirror of AuNiGe resulted in photon recycling, thus increasing carrier confinement and enabled large open circuit voltages exceeding the values of pre-transfer devices, and reaching as high as 1235 mV in the final optimized design. Overall, these optical power sources could deliver Watts of power to remote autonomous sensors and systems, without the need for electrical wiring, and using a massively parallel, scalable, and low-cost fabrication method for integrated devices.