One of the ultimate goals of computational modeling in condensed matter is to be able to accurately compute materials properties with minimal empirical information. First-principles approaches such as the density functional theory (DFT) provide the best possible accuracy on electronic properties but they are limited to systems up to a few hundreds, or at most thousands of atoms. On the other hand, classical molecular dynamics (CMD) simulations and finite element method (FEM) are extensively employed to study larger and more realistic systems, but conversely depend on empirical information. Here, we show that machinelearning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) trained over short ab-initio molecular dynamics trajectories enable first-principles multiscale modeling, in which DFT simulations can be hierarchically bridged to efficiently simulate macroscopic structures. As a case study, we analyze the lattice thermal conductivity of coplanar graphene/borophene heterostructures, recently synthesized experimentally (Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaax6444), for which no viable classical modeling alternative is presently available. Our MLIP-based approach can efficiently predict the lattice thermal conductivity of graphene and borophene pristine phases, the thermal conductance of complex graphene/borophene interfaces and subsequently enable the study of effective thermal transport along the heterostructures at continuum level. This work highlights that MLIPs can be effectively and conveniently employed to enable firstprinciples multiscale modeling via hierarchical employment of DFT/CMD/FEM simulations, thus expanding the capability for computational design of novel nanostructures. From the engineering point of view, numerical modeling is currently a fundamental aspect of structural design, which not only substantially reduces the final costs of a product but also enables the optimization toward the improved performance. However, before conducting an engineering simulation, materials properties are ought to be evaluated accurately. In comparison with conventional materials, experimental techniques for the characterization of nanomaterials properties are substantially more complicated, time-consuming and expensive as well. More importantly, for nanomaterials the experimentally reported properties may show considerable scatterings, stemming from diverse sources of uncertainties in the measurements. Like other engineering products, for the practical application of nanomaterials in various technologies, developments of accurate modeling approaches are critical to facilitate the design and further optimizations. In recent years theoretical simulations have played a major role in the astonishing advances in the field of materials science. In this regard, modeling enables researchers to examine the stability and explore the properties of novel materials and structures purely through computer simulations. Notably, first-principles simulations can already be employed to find possible synthesis routes for the design of novel materials The latest advances in the field of machine-learning methods have offered novel solutions to address critical challenges for a number of problems, especially in materials science To this end we used the LAMMPS The computationally demanding section of aforementioned approach is to acquire the thirdorder (anharmonic) interatomic force constants, which usually requires a few hundred or thousand single-point DFT calculations over supercell lattices. In this work, second and thirdorder force constants are calculated using the density functional perturbation theory simulations and passively trained MTPs, respectively, over 10×10×1 super-cells (consisting of 200 atoms). For the evaluation of the third-order anharmonic interatomic force constants, we consider interactions up to the eleventh nearest neighbours. In this case, by using the ShengBTE On the basis of the MTP trained over AIMD simulations within the PBE/GGA functional, the diffusive lattice thermal conductivity of graphene is finally estimated to be 3600 W/mK, which falls within the experimentally measured values of 1500_5300 W/mK , Gao et al. At this stage, we are capable to explore the effective lattice thermal conductivity of graphene/borophene heterostructures by employing the FEM simulations, in which we employ ABAQUS/Standard along with python scripting. For the construction of heterostructures, we develop polycrystalline samples made of 5000 individual grains on the basis of Voronoi cells with mirror symmetry at all edges In conclusion, our study confirms that machine-learning interatomic potentials trained over short ab-initio molecular dynamics trajectories enable efficient first-principles multiscale modeling via hierarchical employment of density functional theory/classical molecular dynamics/finite element simulations. In other words, it is possible to examine the properties and responses of novel complex microstructures, without prior knowledge of properties of building blocks. To show this novel possibility, we explored the lattice thermal conductivity of graphene/borophene heterostructures, a system that to the best of our knowledge there exist no viable classical modeling alternative. Furthermore, it is shown that the developed machine-learning interatomic potentials can be effectively employed to acquire the lattice thermal conductivity not only by classical molecular dynamics simulations but also with the full-iterative solution of the Boltzmann transport equation. First-principles multiscale modeling is believed to offer novel and computationally efficient possibilities to evaluate the properties and improve the design of advanced nanostructured materials. First-principles DFT calculations in this work were carried out using the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) 1.1 Access to the MLIP package. MLIP is a software package implementing MTP. It is distributed upon sending a reasonable request to Alexander Shapeev at a.shapeev@skoltech.ru. Please note that for the classical molecular dynamics simulations using the MTPs, the related plugin with LAMMPS [1] has to be also installed. As explained in the original manuscript, the training sets are created by conducting the abinitio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations at different temperatures. In our work, we employed the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) [2-4] with generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [5]. In the Mendeley dataset, the folder entitled "AIMD-inputs", two samples of VASP input files (namely, POSCAR, POTCAR, INCAR and KPOINTS) for pristine borophene and a graphene/borophene heterostructure at 300 K are included. After the completion of AIMD simulations, OUTCAR file can be used to create the training set (train.cfg) with the following command: ./mlp convert-cfg OUTCAR train.cfg --input-format=vasp-outcar Using the aforementioned command all the configurations will be included in the training set. Shortening of the training set (creating subsamples) can be achieved using the following command: ./mlp subsample train.cfg subsample.cfg 10 In the mentioned case, each first of every 10 snapshots in the original "train.cfg" will be written to the "subsample.cfg". The subsampled training sets at different temperatures or structures should be then merged together to create the final training set, which can be achieved using the Linux "Cat Command". Training of MTP can be achieved by solving the following minimization problem: where , and are the energy, atomic forces and stresses in the training set, respectively, and , and are the corresponding values calculated with the MTP, K is the number of the configurations in the training set, N is the number of atoms in every and w e , w f and w s are the non-negative weights that express the importance of energies and forces and stresses in the optimization problem, respectively, which in our study were set to 1, 0.1 and 0.001, respectively. We note that the weights for the energy and force are the default values. As an example, the training of a MTP can be achieved using the following command: mpirun -n n_cores ./mlp train p.mtp train.cfg --energy-weight=1 --force-weight=0.1 -stress-weight=0.001 --max-iter=2000 --curr-pot-name=p.mtp --trained-pot-name=p.mtp In the mentioned case, where "n_cores" is the number of cores used for parallel training of MTP, "p.mtp" is the input/output (curr-pot-name/trained-pot-name) MTP file, "train.cfg" is the training set in internal *.cfg MLIP format, the option "max-iter" determines the maximum number of iterations in the optimization algorithm. The options "energy-weight", "forceweight", and "stress-weight", respectively, define the w e , w f and w s weights explained earlier. As discussed in the preparation of training sets, from the complete sets of AIMD configurations, only subsamples are selected for the training of first MTPs. Nonetheless, some critical configurations that could result in the improved stability of trained MTPs may have been missed in the created subsamples. Therefore, the accuracy of the developed MTP "p.mtp" using the initial subsampled training set "train.cfg" should be once again checked over the full AIMD configurations "trainF.cfg", and the configurations with high extrapolations grades [6] should be selected, and written to the file "trainN.cfg", via the following command: ./mlp select-add p.mtp train.cfg trainF.cfg trainN.cfg The selected configurations "trainN.cfg" should be added to the original training sets "train.cfg" and the final MTP will be developed by retraining of new clean potentials over the updated training set. This way, the efficient use of conducted AIMD simulations will be guaranteed. 1.4 Structure of MTPs. MTP belongs to the family of machine-learning interatomic potentials by which potentials show flexible functional form that allows for systematically increasing of the accuracy with an increase in the number of parameters and the size of the training. In the folder entitled "Untrained-MTPs", we included three samples of clean MTPs. Depending on the number of parameters, the appropriate MTP should be chosen. Prior to training there are few parameters to be adjusted, such as the "species_count", "min_dist" and "max_dist" which, respectively, define the number of element in the system, minimum atomic distance and cutoff distance of the potential. Please note that "species_count"and "min_dist" will be updated after the training process. Like the classical potentials, by increasing the cutoff distance more neighbors will be included in the calculations which will increase the computational costs accordingly. The number of parameters in a MTP can be calculated via: species_count 2 .radial_basis_size.radial_funcs_count+alpha_scalar_moments+1 Please note that "radial_funcs_count" and "alpha_scalar_moments" are the fixed features of a particular MTP and only "radial_basis_size" can be manually changed to adjust the number of constants. 1.5 Evaluation of phononic properties using the MTPs. In our previous work, we included the full details and numerous examples for the evaluation of phononic properties using the MTP and PHONOPY [7] package in a public Mendeley dataset, please refer to: http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/7ppcf7cs27.1 2. Graphene/borophene grain boundaries. Because of the different atomic structures of borophene and graphene and depending on the various tilting angles of intersecting crystals, graphene/borophene grain boundaries can show diverse configurations. In this work, as shown in Fig. In the provided Mendeley dataset, we included a sample of developed NEMD models for the calculation of a graphene/borophene grain boundary thermal conductance (find "NEMD-Example" folder). In order to define the interatomic potential type, in the LAMMPS ("in.thermal" in our example) script one has to use the following commands: pair_style mlip mlip.ini pair_coeff * * in this case, "mlip.ini" is the interface with MLIP package, which includes the path to the trained MTP potential file (find "mlip:load-from p.mtp"). The type of atoms in a MTP starts from 0 whereas in LAMMPS starts from 1, such that atomic type of 1 in the MTP (or in the training set) matches to the atomic type of 2 in the LAMMPS script. In the NEMD calculations, after applying the temperature difference at two ends and complete equilibration of the system, the applied heat fluxes by the NVT method to the hot and cold reservoirs and established temperature gradient will be averaged and recorded, to calculate the thermal conductivity or thermal conductance at the interface. In the provided example, heat fluxes and averaged temperatures at every slab are written in the "fnvt.txt" and "T-X.txt", respectively. ShengBTE [8] is a package for computing the lattice thermal conductivity on the basis of a full iterative solution to the Boltzmann transport equation. Its main inputs are sets of secondand third-order interatomic force constants and a CONTROL file for the adjustment of computational details. In this work, the calculation of anharmonic interatomic force constants is substantially accelerated by substituting DFT simulations with the MTP-based solution. For the calculation of anharmonic interatomic force constants, ShengBTE [8] provides a script, "thirdorder.py", implementing a real-space supercell approach to anharmonic IFC calculations. In this approach, according to the defined supercell size and cutoff distance, the input geometries for the force constant calculations will be generated. For compatibility with "cfg"-file format, the "thirdorder_vasp.py" script is modified. Moreover, we developed an additional script "fake_vasp_calcs.py", which uses the MTPbased calculated forces and artificially create the VASP output files of "vasprun.xml". This approach provides the possibility of direct comparison of forces by MTP and VASP. In the folder "MTP-ShengBTE-Examples" the complete input files for the graphene, silicon and InAs are included. For every structure, the subfolder entitled "ShengBTE-inputs" includes the complete input files for the ShengBTE solution (namely: CONTROL, FORCE_CONSTANTS_2ND and FORCE_CONSTANTS_3RD). Using the data provided in the subfolder called "Anharmonic-MTP", a user will be able to reproduce the anharmonic interatomic force constants using the previously trained MTP instead of DFT simulations. To this aim, for every structure we included a shell script for complete calculations, named "getFC.sh". Please note that "p.mtp", "mlip.ini" and relate python scripts should be all in this folder for complete calculations. 6. MTP/BTE results for graphene. were taken from [35] and [36,37],respectively. f ICREA Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, 08010 Barcelona, Spain g College of Civil Engineering, Department of Geotechnical Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. *bohayra.mortazavi@gmail.com Related data are availbale via: http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/pbgscy3ptg.1