Efficient spin injection from epitaxial ferrimagnetic NiFe 2 O 4 thin films into a Pd layer is demonstrated via spin Seebeck effect measurements in the longitudinal geometry. The NiFe 2 O 4 films (60 nm to 1 μm) are grown by pulsed laser deposition on isostructural spinel It is further shown that angle-dependent spin Seebeck effect measurements provide a qualitative method to probe for in-plane magnetic anisotropies present in the films. Efficient conversion of heat to electric energy in thermo-electric materials is an active field of research. Recent studies on the interaction between electron spin and heat flow have created a new area of research in spintronics that is commonly referred to as spin caloritronics where θ SH is the spin-Hall angle, ρ is the electrical resistivity of the normal metal, J s is spin current density, and σ is spin-polarization vector, collinear with the magnetization M . Using magnetic insulators as a source of spin current has advantages over magnetic metals because unintended effects such as the anomalous Nernst effect can be neglected due to the absence of conduction electrons Yttrium iron garnet (YIG) is the most widely studied insulating ferrimagnetic material for LSSE experiments because of its low magnetic coercivity and an extremely low Gilbert damping Nickel ferrite (NiFe 2 O 4 , NFO) is also a promising candidate for high frequency applications as its saturation magnetization is much higher than YIG However, so far there have been only few reports of LSSE using NFO thin films. The NFO films used in previous studies were deposited by either chemical vapor deposition method In this work, we report on a systematic study of enhancement in the thermally generated ISHE The thermally generated spin voltage signal increases with decreasing lattice mismatch, whereas the damping parameter decreases. II. EXPERIMENTAL High-quality epitaxial NFO thin films were deposited using pulsed laser deposition followed by in-situ Pd deposition by DC sputtering. For NFO film deposition we used a laser fluence of ∼1 J/cm 2 in an oxygen environment with a background pressure of 1.3 Pa. The temperature of the substrates was kept constant at 700 • C during film growth. We used three different (001)-oriented spinel substrates, namely MAO, MGO, and CGO. The MAO substrates were purchased commercially (CrysTec GmbH), while the MGO and CGO substrates were prepared from high quality single crystals, which were grown at the Leibniz Institute for Crystal Growth The films were structurally characterized using a Philips X Pert X-ray diffractometer. High resolution STEM and high-angle annular dark field imaging (along the [001] direction) were carried out on some of the samples in an aberration-corrected Nion UltraSTEM TM 200 microscope operating at 200 kV. Two different imaging modes were used, the high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) and the low-angle annular dark field (LAADF) imaging modes. The HAADF imaging mode gives rise to the so-called Z-contrast, and it was acquired using an annular detector with a high inner collection angle The films were magnetically characterized using vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) in a PPMS DynaCool TM system (Quantum Design). Room temperature broadband ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements were performed using a coplanar waveguide to determine the effective Gilbert damping parameter of two films deposited on MGO and CGO substrates. The FMR measurements were carried out in the in-plane geometry, i.e. with the quasi-static magnetic field applied in the plane of the film. We used two methods to normalize the V ISHE signal, namely by heat flux and by thermal gradi-ent. For the heat flux setup in Bielefeld, we used a calibrated Peltier element clamped between the sample and one of the copper blocks to detect the heat flux as described in Ref. We also used X-ray reflectivity technique to determine the Pd layer thickness, which is essentially the same (∼ 5.0 ± 0.4 nm) for all the samples. Low magnification STEM images of the films grown on CGO, MGO and MAO substrates are shown in Fig. In our geometry we are sensitive to the x-component of E ISHE (with the distance between voltage probes), and according to Eq. 1 we are sensitive to the ŷ-component of σ and thus M . The background signal is subtracted from data presented here (for raw data please see Fig. After magnetic field reversal the magnetization direction is changed into the opposite direction and V sat of ∼-27 μV is obtained. During the magnetic field reversal process (Fig. The temperature dependence (from 30 K to 300 K) of normalized LSSE voltage for 330 nm thick films is shown in Fig. In Figure an effective SSE coefficient that still includes the heat conductivity of the NFO, any thicknessdependent change of the NFO heat conductivity can affect the thickness-dependence of the heatflux-normalized SSE voltages. The study of this dependence will be part of future work. Our measurements show an increase in normalized saturation electric field (E) generated across the Pd-layer by the heat flux (Φ q ) with increasing film thickness (Fig. The value of ξ deduced from the fits is in the range of 400 to 700 nm. This is lower than the recently reported value obtained from nonlocal magnon spin transport measurements in sputter deposited NFO films (∼3 μm) C. FMR measurements of NFO films on different substrates In addition to the LSSE measurements, we compared the dynamical properties of NFO films (330 nm) deposited on CGO and MGO substrates by FMR in the field along the inplane hard axis geometry. From the measurements, we have estimated the effective magnetization (M eff ) and gyromagnetic ratio (γ ) from fitting the frequency ( f ) versus resonance field (H res ) data (Fig. In summary, thin films of NFO exhibit improved structural, interfacial and dynamical properties when grown on lattice-matched substrates. The results clearly show that higher LSSE signal is obtained for the most closely lattice-matched substrates (MGO, CGO). We find that the thinner films on the CGO substrate provide larger LSSE voltage signal as compared to the other heterostructures and this is consistent with the lower value of the effective Gilbert damping of these films. COMSOL Multiphysics simulation indicates that the temperature gradient across the film is in the range of tens of mK/μm. The measurements using the heat flux method also affirm the importance of lattice matching to enhance spin generated voltage signal that also correlates with the FMR results. Apart from this, LSSE measurements provide a qualitative method to study in-plane magnetic anisotropies by varying the angle between the external magnetic field and the direction of the contacts for the detection of the ISHE voltage. Improved quality NFO thin films exhibit damping parameter comparable to that of YIG/GGG, which makes them attractive for spintronics as well as microwave applications. Further improvement of the LSSE efficiency of NFO could be reached by choosing substrates with even less lattice mismatch compared to MGO and CGO. microscopy (STEM), which shows a substantial decrease of APBs and misfit dislocations with decreasing lattice mismatch. For thinner films (≤ 330 nm), the obtained LSSE results correlate well with the damping parameters as determined by ferromagnetic resonance measurements (FMR).