The controlled modification of the electronic properties of ZnO nanorods via transition metal doping is reported. A series of ZnO nanorods were synthesized by chemical bath growth with varying Co content from 0 to 20 atomic % in the growth solution. Optoelectronic behavior was probed using cathodoluminescence, time-resolved luminescence, transient absorbance spectroscopy, and the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE). Analysis indicates the crucial role of surface defects in determining the electronic behavior. Significantly, Co-doping extends the light absorption of the nanorods into the visible region, increases the surface defects, shortens the non-radiative lifetimes, while leaving the radiative lifetime constant. Furthermore, for 1 atomic % Co-doping the IPCE of the ZnO nanorods is enhanced. These results demonstrate that doping can controllably tune the functional electronic properties of ZnO nanorods for applications. ZnO is a versatile wide bandgap semiconductor with a band-gap energy of about 3.3 eV at room temperature. For an efficient PEC for water splitting, a material system is needed that efficiently absorbs within the visible part of the spectrum in order to increase the light-to-current conversion in the device. Furthermore, since the absorption process is associated with the surface region a route to improve the surface to volume ratio will enhance functional device performance. A viable solution is to use a 3D array of nanowires or nanorods (NRs), because the small diameters introduce a large surface-to-volume ratio and along with the high aspect ratio offer more surface area for the interaction of light with the photoanode. In this way, it is possible to ensure higher light absorption In this work we report a detailed study of the optical properties of the Co-doped ZnO NRs as a function of the level of Co doping, defined here by the ionic concentration in the growth solution. In particular, the steady-state and transient optical properties of Co-doped ZnO NRs are probed through cathodoluminescence (CL), femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (FTAS) and time resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements. Finally, photoelectrochemical measurements including wavelength dependent measurements of the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) are reported as a function of Co concentration, showing how the doping influences the IPCE with respect to the undoped ZnO NRs and establishes the optimum Co 2+ growth concentration for PEC applications. While this paper focuses on the optical properties and carrier dynamics in Co-doped ZnO NRs, it has been demonstrated, in a complementary study that combining ZnO NRs and Co-doping in conjunction with a transparent functionalization of metal-organic framework leads to a more efficient photoelectrochemical cell. The ZnO NRs were grown on the textured seed layers by chemical bath deposition on a 25 nm thick ZnO seed layer deposited by atomic layer deposition on a range of different substrates such as quartz, ITO-coated glass and silicon. Afterwards, the as-grown NRs were thoroughly washed with deionized water and blow dried under a N2 stream. For the cobalt doping, the desired amount of cobalt nitrate hexahydrate was added to the growth solution, with the nominal doping levels being defined by the concentration ratio of the Co 2+ /Zn 2+ in the solution, as 1%, 5% and 20%. Fig. The OPA output was used as the pump and a white light supercontinuum, generated in a femtosecond transient absorption spectrometer of IB Photonics (FemtoFrame II), was used as the probe. The white light supercontinuum is generated for the visible region focusing 3 μJ of 800 nm in a CaF2 crystal. For the samples used here, a pump of 4.51 eV (275 nm) with an excitation intensity of about 260 μJ/ cm 2 was used. The instrument response function was measured to be approximately 70 fs. Further details of the FTAS setup can be found elsewhere. The potentiostat used was an Autolab PGSTAT302N, with illumination coming from a LOT ORIEL solar simulator (LS0106) equipped with a Xe arc lamp that generates an AM 1.5G illumination using a power of 300 mW cm -2 . For the IPCE measurements, a LOT Oriel MSH-300 monochromator was used. Fig. In Fig. For the 20% Co-doped NRs redshifts in the bleaching extend to 2.92 eV and the tail in the visible range becomes relatively more intense as the overall intensity of the bleaching peak diminishes (Figs. In Fig. The CL measurements suggest an increase in the oxygen vacancy defects with the concentration of Co-doping that is related to the smaller ionic radii of Co 2+ compared to Zn. The time dependence of the absorption can be fitted well using a multiexponential model, which shows that the fast decay components become faster with increasing doping. In contrast, the radiative recombination time remained constant within the experimental errors, as expected. Such faster decay with increased doping, indicates more efficient carrier trapping that is induced by the increased surface defects in the doped NRs. In samples with high concentration of oxygen vacancies, the defect states are more delocalized and can overlap with the valence band edge, which also contributes to narrowing of the bandgap. Finally, the IPCE measurements show the efficiency of a photoelectrode to convert an incident photon into an electron, which is a critical quantity in the assessment the performance of a photovoltaic/photochemical material. Co-doping of ZnO NRs has a beneficial effect on the photoresponse of the material. Fig. The IPCE values for all of the doped samples were higher than that obtained for the undoped sample (<40%). In particular, the highest IPCE was for 1% C-doped NRs, which was ~51 % higher at 350 nm, followed by the other doped samples that showed improvements of about 40%. Furthermore, the presence of the Co-doping greatly enhances the IPCE in the near UV region, between 300 nm and 350 nm. In addition, a small red-shift in the IPCE is observed for with doping, which corresponds with the previously detailed optical characterization. Though there is more light absorption in the visible region, this does not translate to a higher current generation in the visible part of the spectrum. This could be due to the fact that there may be an energy barrier or overpotential to overcome, and the absorption at the higher wavelengths is not sufficient to create carriers to overcome this. Fig. The optical properties of Co-doped ZnO nanorods have been systematically studied in order to understanding the influence of doping on the electronic properties and tested their potential for use as photoanodes. It was deduced that more oxygen vacancies are created with increased Co- doping and the luminescence intensity decreases with increasing doping due to the formation of more favorable non-radiative recombination centers. Moreover, it was shown that higher Co-doping leads to the faster decay of the bleaching signal. This could be due to efficient carrier trapping in the presence of more surface defects. On the other hand, the radiative recombination lifetime does not change with doping, although a reduced density of electron-hole pairs recombines radiatively. Co-doping also causes a red shift of the excitonic absorption bleaching. This is attributed to the sp-d exchange interaction between the d-electrons of Co and the band electrons of ZnO as well as the delocalization and overlap of the oxygen vacancy energy levels and the valence band of the ZnO. Finally, measurements show higher photo generated current density for 1% and 5% Co growth concentration values than the undoped ZnO NRs, while 20 % Co has a lower photocurrent density, due to increased rates of non-radiative recombination. All the measurements indicate the importance of the surface defects in determining the optical properties of the ZnO NRs and that the Co doping, at least at growth concentration values around 1%, affects the surface states in a beneficial way for the photo-response properties of the NRs. Doping ZnO with Co hence significantly modifies its opto-electronic properties and has important implications on the photo response of ZnO by increasing light absorption in the visible region and decreasing the carrier lifetime. The nominal 1% Co-doped ZnO NRs have shown the highest IPCE and photo-response. The findings offer a possibility to functionalize ZnO to overcome its shortcomings in its usability as a photoanode. 2+ in solution has been demonstrated by XRD measurements in our previous work.