claimed an inconsistency between thermodynamics and the theory of superconductivity. We argue that he overlooked a crucial term which determines the supercurrent dynamics and ensures energy conservation by providing an internal energy source for the Joule heating. Thermodynamic consistency is restored by restoring energy conservation. The correct dynamics is given by Maxwell's equations in the superconductor. eplplaineplfirst Introduction. -J. E. Hirsch By assuming that λ L entirely parametrized the problem, with Joule heating induced by its rate of change, Refs. A second issue is Ref. force f (x, T ) = -(∂F/∂x) T . Here F (x, T ) is the system's Helmholtz free energy (we assume constant volume and omit it); see Fig. which describes relaxation of x to x eq gives the system's internal energy change where dQ is the heat flow into the reservoir. Ref. Entropy change with fast cooling. -At initial time t i the system is in equilibrium at T (t i ) = T i . For Ref. The first term is the reservoir's entropy change, the second term is the system's entropy change due to heat flow to the reservoir, and the third term, ∆S J , is due to internal (Joule) heating. Let us use Eq. ( As dU = -f dx+T dS, the integrand is dS/dt, so the integral is S(x f , T f ) -S(x i , T i ). Thus ∆S univ depends on the initial and final states, but not on the trajectory between these states, so we recover thermodynamic consistency. If x i = x eq (T i ) and x f = x eq (T f ), then ∆S (b) univ is the same as for adiabatic evolution with the same change of U , so ∆S univ in Ref. Instead one must construct the trajectory x(t), T (t) for protocol (b) by integrating Eq. (1) together with dU/dt = -J, linearised around the initial equilibrium [4]. When the system and reservoir are disconnected at time t i + ∆t, one has x(t i + ∆t) = x(t i ) + O(∆t 2 ) only, because f = 0 initially. Subsequently, x relaxes to its new equilibrium value x eq (T i -∆T ) = x eq (T i ) + O(∆T ). This relaxation is given by Eq. ( Cooling a superconductor. -Our above results for generic x and f apply equally to the model in Ref. where λ eq (T ) is the equilibrium London penetration depth at temperature T , and F 0 (T ) is the free energy density in the absence of currents and fields. The supercurrent j s = -Ac/[4πλ 2 eq (T )] (assuming the local London limit, as in Ref. To describe the dynamics, we plug the currents j s , j n into the relevant Maxwell equation (Ampere's law). We neglect the displacement current, responsible for the emission of electromagnetic waves, as in Ref. in full analogy to Eq. ( For small ∆T , the Joule heating while the system is connected to the reservoir is O(∆T 3 ), since the right-hand side of Eq. ( Part 1 gives details on the short-time calculation outlined in our section "Short time Joule heating" and at the end of section "Cooling a superconductor". Part 2 shows how to maintain thermodynamic consistency near the critical temperature, where the approximation in our section "Cooling a superconductor" is not applicable. Here we derive the system's trajectory for Ref. We follow Ref. Expanding the equilibrium free energy gives It will be seen shortly in Eq. (S.6), that the second-order's coefficient C eq is the equilibrium heat capacity at T i defined as C eq (T ) = dU (x eq (T ), T ) dT . At the same time we expand x eq (T ) about x i as To deal with small deviations from equilibrium, we recall that the force is zero at equilibrium, so we treat it to linear order as Thus the free energy is quadratic in x -x eq (T ) , so it reads where the subscript i indicates that a quantity is evaluated at T i ; for example k i ≡ k(T i ). From this we deduce the entropy, S = -(∂F/∂T ) x and the internal energy U = F + T S. To linear order they read We will find that the dynamics of fast cooling of the system has two parts. The first part is the evolution, between t i and t i + ∆t, during which the system gives heat ∆Q to the reservoir. This first part of the evolution leaves the system in a non-equilibrium state at time t i + ∆t; a state with finite dx/dt. If one then disconnects the system from the reservoir at time t i + ∆t (so no more heat can flow to the reservoir), then the second part of the dynamics occurs in which the system relaxes to equilibrium. In this second part of the dynamics, dx/dt decays slowly to zero, and continues to provide internal (Joule) heating of the system as it decays. Trajectory while coupled to reservoir. -The system's trajectory is determined by Eqs. ( Since we are interested in small temperature changes, we have dropped quadratic terms, hence we can treat the rate of heat flow into the reservoir, J, as a constant between t i and t i + ∆t. Then to get the dynamics when an amount of heat ∆Q is transferred to the reservoir, we need to integrate up to t i + ∆t where ∆t ≡ ∆Q/J. The solution of Eqs. (S.7), (S.8) for x is where we define τ = (η i /k i ) 1 -k i α 2 T i /C eq . However as we dropped the quadratic terms from Eqs. (S.7) and (S.8), this solution only holds at lowest order in t -t i , so , one can set x = x i in Eq. (S.8) and find the temperature: Note the appearance of the heat capacity at constant x, C x = (∂U/∂T ) x = C eq -k i α 2 T i < C eq which was correctly guessed in Ref. Trajectory after decoupling from reservoir. -Now we consider the second part of the dynamics, when the isolated system equilibrates after having been decoupled from the reservoir at time t i + ∆t. Physically this corresponds to (dx/dt) decaying to zero, causing internal heating of the system as it decays. This continued heating will compensate for the overcooling during the time the system was coupled to the reservoir. Since the heat that had flowed to the reservoir by time t i + ∆t is ∆Q, and this does not change during this part of the evolution, the system dynamics are given by Eqs. (S.7), (S.8) with -J (t-t i ) replaced by -∆Q. Solving these equations gives (S.12) C eq -k i α 2 T i , (S.13) for all t > t i + ∆t. These quantities only arrive at their expected equilibrium at t → ∞, but they get exponentially close to equilibrium once t-t i -∆t τ . Here the expected equilibrium temperature after extracting ∆Q of heat is T = T i -∆Q/C eq , and then Eq. (S.2) tells us that the equilibrium value of x at T is x i -α∆Q/C eq . If instead of x we have the field A(r), the description of the relaxation on this stage, though similar conceptually, would be more technically difficult. Expanding A(r) in the basis of eigenfunctions of the radial Laplacian, we would obtain an infinite set of ordinary differential equations for the amplitudes of these eigenfunctions with different relaxation times, instead of a single equation for x with a single relaxation time, τ . The dynamics of this infinite set of amplitudes under these equations are coupled through the equation for U . Finding the explicit trajectory in this case is beyond the scope of our short study. However, as each component decays at a different rate, it is clear that the spatial profile of the field will not have a fixed shape during the decay. This invalidates any "fixed profile" assumption, such as Eq. (1) in Ref. Joule heating for full trajectory. -Now we have the full system dynamics, we can directly calculate the Joule heating. The total Joule heating between time t i and t i + ∆t (when the system is coupled to the reservoir) is given by x(t) in Eq. (S.10), so where we have used J∆t = ∆Q = C eq ∆T . Next, the total Joule heating after time t i + ∆t (when the system relaxes back to equilibrium) is given by x(t) in Eq. (S.12). Integrating this up to times large enough that it has decayed to close to equilibrium -i.e. up to t - ∼ O(∆T 2 ) for small ∆T , because it is completely dominated by the decay to equilibrium, so it is given by Eq. (S.15). Interestingly, this means that the Joule heating is independent of the magnitude of the damping η i , because the timescale for the decay to equilibrium τ ∝ η i . If the damping is small, the Joule heating per unit time is small, but the decay to equilibrium takes a long time, so the total Joule heat generated ∆Q J is independent of η i . As we do not have the explicit trajectories for the situation where we replace x by the field A(r), we cannot give exact forms for the leading order contributions to the Joule heating, as in Eqs. (S.14), (S.15). However it is not hard to see that the evolution from t i to t i + ∆t will have Joule heating of O(∆T 3 ). The fact that the subsequent decay to equilibrium is controlled by a set of decay times that are independent of ∆T , means that it will have Joule heating of O(∆T 2 ). Thus both contributions to Joule heating are of the same order as in the above calculation for x. The main message of this section is that one has to go to O(∆T 2 ) to see the effect of Joule heating on the entropy, it makes no contribution to the O(∆T ) calculation in Ref. In the section "Cooling a superconductor" we make a simplification of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. We eliminate the dynamics of the superconducting order parameter, ψ(r), by assuming it always takes its zero-field equilibrium value. This means we only had to treat the dynamics of A(r), enabling us to make concrete calculations for fast cooling (in particular to find the magnitude of the Joule heating for small ∆T ). This simplification is clearly wrong close to the superconducting transition, where ψ(r) couples to A(r). The simplest way to treat systems close to the transition (or going through the transition) would be to use time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory for coupled dynamics of A(r) and ψ(r), see e.g. section 1.2 of Ref. In this case, to disprove Refs. where ψ(r) is the complex order parameter, and A(r) is the vector potential in the superconductor. The first term, F n , is the free-energy density of the normal phase in zero magnetic field. Taking the functional derivatives of F with respect to A(r) and ψ(r) will give their two conjugate forces; let f 1 (A, ψ) be the conjugate force of A(r), and f 2 (A, ψ) be the conjugate force of ψ(r). These forces are zero at equilibrium, and push the displacements (A(r) and ψ(r)) towards their equilibrium values. The work done by these forces is Now we need equations which give the response of A(r) and ψ(r) to the forces, which will tell us how the system will relax to equilibrium. One can imagine many mechanisms for the relaxation of both A(r) and ψ(r). The one proposed in our Eq. ( univ depends on the initial and final states, but not on the trajectory between these states. This confirms that the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory does not exhibit the thermodynamic inconsistent claimed in Refs. More complicated dynamics. -The introduction of Ref. S.19)