Hyperthermia has been in use for many years; as a potential alternative modality for cancer treatment. In this paper, an experimental investigation of microwave assisted thermal heating (MWATH) of tissue phantom using a domestic microwave oven has been reported. Computer simulations using finite element method based tools was also carried out to support the experimental observations and probe insight on the thermal transport aspects deep within the tissue phantom. A good agreement between predicted and measured temperature were achieved. Furthermore, experiments were conducted to investigate the efficacy of dielectric nanoparticles viz. alumina (Al 2 O 3 ) and titanium oxide (TiO 2 ) during the MWATH of nanoparticle infused tumor phantoms. A deep seated tumor injected with nanoparticle solution was specifically mimicked in the experiments. Interesting results were obtained in terms of spatiotemporal thermal history of the nanoparticle infused tissue During the last few decades, development of medical devices and techniques for numerous diagnostics and therapeutics has been aided by the advancement of electromagnetics and modern electronics. Many ailments, such as spinal nerve disorders, gum infections, cancer, arthritis, ulcers, and chronic pain can be treated by localized application of electromagnetic field. Today, cancer has become a global threat and currently, one in six disease mediated deaths in the world is due to cancer Hyperthermia is a medical treatment where the whole body or an infected region is exposed to high temperatures to either damage or even exterminate cancerous cells. The modality can also be used to make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation and certain drugs (along with chemotherapy). Such thermal approaches are minimally or non-invasive, relatively simple to perform, and have the potential of treating embedded tumors in vital regions where surgery is not feasible or risky. However, in order to reach underlying tumors or thermally ablate large tumors, the activating energy source must sufficiently penetrate through healthy tissues, while minimizing damage to the later. Unfortunately, simple heating techniques have trouble discriminating between tumors and surrounding healthy tissues, and often lead to heat damage of the tissue between the source and the target site. The MWA, which was first introduced in 1994 The major advantages of MWA over other external heating sources are shorter ablation times, larger necrosis volumes, and negligible heat sink effect due to major blood vessels Notably, Cavagnaro et al. Consequently, a detailed understanding of thermal history and distribution in tissues during MWA is yet to be achieved. Also, to ablate large tissue volumes, multiple antennas placed in an array is required, which in turn results in overheating of the surrounding healthy tissue. Experimental understanding of the same is also absent due to the cost and non-clinical availability of such arrays. Further, the aspects of thermal damage to neighboring healthy tissues during MWA require strong attention to minimize post-treatment loss of health and alleviate patient comfort levels. In recent years, the microwave oven (a common kitchen appliance) has gained momentum in research involv-ing heating of biomass and biomaterials In this paper, detailed experimental and computational simulations have been presented to understand the thermal history and distribution within equivalent tissue phantoms during MWA. The study involves the use of a domestic microwave oven for the experimentations, including real time thermal monitoring. The simulations and experiments are conglomerated to provide a realistic model and validation of the thermal states of tissue phantoms during microwave based hyperthermia. The paper then tackles the concern of thermal damage to neighboring healthy tissues by the use of nanotechnology. The region within the phantom which mimics the tumor is infused with dielectric nanoparticles. The thermo-generation aspect of the nanoparticles due to dielectric resonance is appealed to and enhanced heating of the tumor site, reduced hyperthermia time, and reduced damage to neighboring healthy tissue is achieved. Here also, the experiments are supplemented with simulations and very good match is noted between the two approaches. The present study may have strong implications towards development of patientto-patient based guidelines and MWA hyperthermia protocols by clinicians prior to real clinical diagnostics and therapy. The tissue phantom used was synthesized from agar gel. The gel prepared by dispersing agar powder (Sisco Research Labs, India) in warm ( Nanoparticles with agar gel mixture were prepared with the particle concentration of 1% (w/v), in order to mimic MWA of tumors injected with dielectric nanoparticles. The nanoparticle-gel mixture was placed at the center of the phantom sample, and had dimensions of 8 mm × 10 mm (diameter × height). Two different nanoparticles (both procured from Sisco Research Labs, India) were used viz., Aluminum Oxide (Al 2 O 3 ) with average size of 15 nm, and Titanium Oxide (TiO 2 ) with average size of 7 nm. The nanoparticles were chosen as both the materials are good dielectrics, with dielectric constants of Al 2 O 3 and TiO 2 as 10-12 and 100-120, respectively. For the synthesis of nanoparticle mixed tissue phantom, agar powder (2.6% w/v) and nanoparticle (1% w/v) was added to warm ( 40 o C) water. The uniform mixing of nanoparticles was ensured by 30 min stirring using magnetic stirrer. The mixture was then heated to a temperature of 80 o C for 10 min, with constant stirring. The mixture is then poured into the sample cavity (8 mm × 10 mm) in the agar tissue phantom as shown in Fig. Heating of the tissue phantoms was carried out in a microwave oven (2450 MHz frequency, Samsung, India) at power level of 900 W, for continuous heating period of 20 seconds. The glass beaker with the phantom within was the test section. Glass absorbs very less amount of microwaves, thus allowing the phantom to be exposed to majority of the incident radiation. A Teflon sheet was used to fabricate an arrangement for housing thermocouples for temperature measurement at different radial and axial positions. The slotted Teflon lid was placed on top of the phantom surface, equipped with the radially arranged thermocouples to measure the temperature within the phantom at different radial and axial positions, as shown in Fig. Teflon is employed as its insulating property, high melting point, and negligible microwave radiation absorbance ensures minimal aberrations during experiments. The schematic of the experimental set up is shown in Fig. Precision fine wire J type thermocouples were used to measure temperature and were calibrated using a constant temperature bath (Cole-Parmer, USA), The thermocouples were fixed at four radial positions of 0 mm (center), 10 mm, 20mm and 30 mm, respectively, from the center of the Teflon cover. The thermocouples were marked at different axial positions for temperature measurement at different depths, and were kept fixed on a wooden fixture (as shown in Fig. 3. Computational details To predict the thermal history and contour within the tissues, a computational domain is employed to mimic the phantom. It is modeled as a homogenous cylindrical block, neglecting the microvasculature and pores to mimic the actual experimental phantom. The internal cavity of the microwave oven is modelled as a hollow metallic cuboid, connected to a 2.450 GHz microwave source via a rectangular waveguide operating in the TE 10 mode. On the floor of the oven cavity is a circular glass plate (turn table ) with the cylindrical tissue phantom seated on top. The oven cavity has dimensions of 350 mm × 210 mm × 350 mm. The computational domain is shown in Fig. To predict the thermal response of tissue phantoms during microwave heating, the transient heat diffusion equation is solved with initial and boundary conditions. For simplification the following assumptions are resorted to where Q is the heat source term in (W/m 3 ), ρ is the density (kg/m 3 ), C p is the specific heat capacity (J/kg K), k th is the thermal conductivity of the tissue phantom (W/m K). The source term represents the thermo-generation due to the electric field (Q e ) and magnetic field (Q m ) components of microwave radiation, and is expressed as For non-magnetic materials such as tissue phantoms, The solution of the coupled electromagnetic waveform of Maxwell's equations provides the estimated peak electric field strength (E) at any point in the computational domain. The electromagnetic and thermal transport equations have been solved numerically. The electromagnetic wave propagation and absorption, as obtained from Maxwell's equations is simulated. The governing equation of the electric field wave (for a non-magnetic media) is where ω is the angular frequency, 0 is the permittivity of vacuum (8.85×10 -12 F/m), r is the relative permittivity, μ 0 is the relative permeability, k 0 is the wave number in free space and σ is the electrical conductivity. k 0 is expressed as where c 0 is the speed of light in vacuum. The absorbed electromagnetic (microwave) energy is dissipated as thermal energy within the tissue phantom. The volumetric heat generation (Q) within the phantom is function of the local electric field (E) strength as where k is the imaginary part of the dielectric constant of the phantom and f is the frequency of the microwave radiation. The equivalent value for composite consisting of agar gel and injected nanoparticles depends on particles concentration and volume of nanoparticles mixed with tissue phantom. In this study for simplicity, the mean value of specific heat, density and dielectric properties for nanocomposite tissue phantom can be approximated by the respective volume properties of the two materials For other properties: For thermal conductivity (k): where, where η is the volume concentration of nanoparticles which depend upon the number of nanoparticles per unit volume (n) and diameter of nanoparticles (d np ). The subscripts t, np, and mix refers to the tissue phantom, nanoparticles and nanoparticles composite tissue-phantom respectively. But these parametric differences between normal tissue phantom and nanocomposite tissue phantom are not apparently large because the volume concentration of particles is small. The thermophysical and dielectric properties of Al 2 O 3 are taken from the literature An impedance boundary condition has been defined for the inner walls of the oven cavity and the waveguide. This refers that an incident wave can only penetrate into the boundary by a short distance only, and the corresponding equation is as A perfect magnetic body boundary condition is used to define the symmetry boundaries (Eqn. ( The microwave irradiation at 900 W is fed into the oven cavity through the port boundary condition. The port is a rectangular waveguide that operates in TE 10 mode, and excited at 2.450 GHz frequency. The port boundary condition requires a propagation constant β which is expressed as Where ν is the microwave frequency and ν c is the cut-off frequency. Further, the cavity walls are set as adiabatic. The heat transfer analysis is considered only for the phantom. Initially, the temperature distribution within the phantom is set as uniform and is considered from the experiments as The temperature continuity boundary condition The outer surfaces are considered to be insulated since the experimental test section material has very low thermal conductivity. All simulations in the present study have been performed using the Finite Element Method (FEM) based commercial solver COMSOL Multiphysics. The symmetry cut is applied vertically through the oven, wave-guide, phantom and turntable (refer Fig. Figure and at different axial depths whereas, Fig. Having understood the thermal history and distribution during MWA of tissue phantoms, the objective now lies on increasing the core temperature to higher levels to ensure necrosis of the tumor, and to contain the heat within the tumor zone. This could be brought about by injecting nanoparticle based colloids (marked healthy by the use of bio-friendly surface moieties) into the tumor, mostly in conjunction with other drug solutions. For MWA, the nanoparticles to be employed should possess high values of the imaginary part of the dielectric constant (to convert microwave irradiation to thermal energy via polarization hysteresis). The nanoparticles should also possess high thermal conductivity (to increase thermal transport within the tumor zone and confine the same). Nanoparticles mixes with agar gel in proper proportions poured at the center of the tissue phantom and having cylindrical shape as shown in Fig. 