We present the theoretical basis for a new photoemission regime, transient work function gating (TWFG), that temporally and energetically gates photoemission and produces nearthreshold photoelectrons with thermally limited emittance, percent-level quantum efficiency, and control over temporal coherence. The technique consists of actively gating the work function of a generalized photocathode using non-ionizing long-wavelength optical field to produce an adiabatic modulation of the carrier density at their surface. We examine TWFG as a means to circumvent the long-standing trade-off between low emittance and high quantum efficiency, untethered to particle source or photocathode specifics. TWFG promises new opportunities in photoemission physics for next generation electron and accelerator-based xray photon sources. Today's electron sources underpin transformational scientific instrumentation, most notably colliders Traditional photoinjectors are used to produce photoelectrons using first laser pulses with photon energies above the photocathode work function, typically in the ultraviolet (UV) and up to the visible range. The photoelectrons are then quickly accelerated by radiofrequency (RF) fields to generate electron beams in vacuum. There are two established strategies to increase the photoinjector brightness: increasing the gun accelerating gradient to increase the extractable charge density and reducing the transverse electron energy spread The phase-space distribution of an electron beam from a photoinjector is also contingent on the spatiotemporal distribution of the photoexcitation laser. Uniformly-filled ellipsoidal charge distributions are known to best mitigate space-charge induced phase-space dilution because they produce space-charge fields with linear dependence on position within the distribution The main premise of transient work function gating (TWFG) is that a non-ionizing strong field can energetically and temporally control the carrier dynamics and adiabatically modulate the energy bands of a generalized photocathode. This process can be intuitively understood as a short-lived abrupt Schottky barrier that temporarily reduces the photocathode work-function before it is restored to its original state of equilibrium. Gated photoemission in this regime could be implemented, for example, with a monochromatic laser pulse with photon energy below the photoemission threshold in combination with synchronous far infrared (FIR) or terahertz (THz) E-field transient as a gate, such that the monochromatic pulse will only cause photoemission during the transient state. The most prominent feature of this technique is that ultralow intrinsic emittances at moderate to high QEs can be achieved through the interplay between the Schottky barrier strength and the photon energy of the photo-excitation laser. The gating fields will lead to oscillatory non-thermal electron transitions and modify the Fermi energy (EF). This disturbance will cause the energy bands to change alongside EF, thereby enabling near threshold emission (i.e. with thermally limited emittance) without paying the customary QE penalty. Today, efficient long-wavelength nonlinear optical generation techniques We use the three-step model for photoemission Let us begin with the F-D distribution in the photocathode. The electron density of occupied states and the electric potentials experienced by a single electron immediately outside the cathode are shown in Figure where e is the elementary charge and ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The static F a field approximation in (Eq. 2) is generally applicable regardless of the frequency so long as the material response time is faster than the field. Let us provide a few examples in current technologies to illustrate the concept of effective work function. Note that direct current (DC) guns, for instance, can only allow relatively low static accelerating gradients because of breakdown limits. In the case of high-gradient electron guns, such as superconducting radio frequency (SRF) guns, the applied field is in the order of few tens of MV/m at most and durations of several tens of ns or longer, that is, orders of magnitude longer than the material response times, thus practically static in comparison to photoemission timescales where φ Schottky is a long-lived barrier at ~100 meV energy. To take Cu as an example, φ eff is reduced from 4.31 eV to 4.14 eV with a 20 MV/m field, which is why many photoinjectors today operate at ~266 nm wavelength photoexcitation (4.66 eV), corresponding to the third-harmonic of Ti:Sapphire laser systems. But substantially higher field strengths are accessible with long-wavelength optical fields in the FIR and up to the THz region. To follow on the previous simple example, at 1 GV/m peak field, which is well below material breakdown for FIR pulses, yields φ eff = 3.1 eV, now a significant Schottky barrier reduction. We will further describe the ability to generate an abrupt work function modulation from long-wavelength gating fields with the following added considerations to the three-step model: i. The material response is no longer negligibly small compared to the field period and thus must be considered not only in computing φ eff but also in the TWFG model ii. The field emission and breakdown limit can be extended approximately to the single-digit GV/m for THz frequencies and up to the TV/m range in the case of FIR frequencies, depending on the specific material, pulse duration, and average power conditions iii. The gating fields create a transient state of the intrinsic optical and electronic properties of the material arising from a field-dependent adiabatic carrier concentration modulation. Let us examine the long-wavelength field induced carrier dynamics. We denote E F as the highest energy occupied by electrons. Figure In energy space, this Fermi shift equates to Now that we have defined the momentum displacement of the Fermi distribution, let us focus on the application of this shift to near-threshold photoemission (NTP), that is, where hν -φ eff ≲ 300 meV. Extensive studies of the three-step model The interplay between scattering and optical effects yield a wider region of high gated QEs as the photoexcitation energy increases. Continuing on above the gated NTP region, in this case above ~600 MV/m, the fields can be detrimental to effective extraction of charge by creating a sufficient population reversal that shields electrons from exiting the material. This carrier population reversal causes the QEs to be slightly lower compared than those projected in the ungated model. Continually increasing the field strength towards a significant fraction of a TV/m or above, depending on the specific mechanical and optoelectronic properties of the material, sustained strong gating fields could begin to cause permanent material breakdown. It is important reiterating that the %-level QEs are only valid in gated NTP. That is, if the photon energy were to be extended to levels significantly above threshold, the gated QE would then equate the ungated QE, since at that point δE is small compared to |hν -φ eff |. It is also worth noting that the optimal cooperation between the Fermi displacement and the QE depends on the intrinsic material optoelectronic properties and conditions, including temperature and lattice structure, where applicable. But the primary conclusion from this example is that the QE levels for standard materials like Cu are dramatically increased by remaining in the gated NTP region depicted in Figure Let us now continue on with the benefits of this new photoemission process by focusing on emittance. The intrinsic emittance, ε i,x , is by definition a measure of the transverse momentum of the electrons that are emitted, which is related to the mean transverse energy (MTE) by the following expression: where σ x is the initial rms size of the beam along a transverse Cartesian coordinate x and mc 2 is the electron rest energy. The MTE is analogous to the temperature of the photoemitted electrons. For photon energies much larger than the work function, hν ≫ φ eff , we can approximate MTE = (hν -φ w )/3 because of a relatively constant density of states in the portion of the conduction band accessible by a photon of a given energy where Li s is the polylogarithm function of order s, T is the photocathode temperature, and k is the Boltzmann constant. It is important to note that as |hv -φ| ⟶ 0, that is, very close to the photoemission threshold, MTE = kT. That is, if electrons are shifted from the Fermi energy towards the minimum possible emission energy by, for instance, lowering a small band gap photocathode temperature, and photoemission occurs nearly at threshold, the intrinsic emittance could be reduced to near the F-D distribution limit (single-digit meV) since the emitted electrons have less available transverse momentum. This is showcased in Figure The primary objective of this section is to employ the framework described above to exercise a few quantifiable metrics for its application in high-brightness electron guns for linear accelerators and XFELs, that is, at practically high charge levels. Let us focus on ultrafast work-function gating for generating electron beams-single bunch and trains-with ultralow emittance. Here, we employ a regular Cu photocathode cooled at cryogenic temperatures. We consider the material response and employ higher frequency higher strength gating fields with two representative waveform shapes as possible gating field candidates: single-cycle (Figure We present the single-cycle and multi-cycle fields because they represent two interesting emission scenarios. The single-cycle regime resembles a more traditional electron bunch generation scheme, where only one electron bunch will be emitted per pulse. In the multi-cycle scenario, a train of electron bunches spaced by the period of the gating field will be emitted even when using a single photoexcitation laser pulse, thereby enabling the generation of longitudinally bunched electron beams. This temporally shaped emission of the electron bunches could be ideally suited for serial ultrafast electron diffraction (UED), where multiple scattering events could be acquired within one exposure as an equivalent to serial femtosecond crystallography. It could also be exploited for X-ray generation via inverse Compton scattering or bunched to increase a single peak brightness for colliders, for instance. Figure There are a few noteworthy points specific to this example. First, ultralow intrinsic emittances with %-level QEs would not be possible without the transient gate fields, which is why pC charges are generated with few-nJ photoexcitation energies at NTP. The photoexcitation wavelengths are now easier to produce and handle (~350 nm) than the deeper UV that Cu would require to use without gating (< 275 nm). For example, if we were to consider a lower work-function photocathode such as Cs2Te (φ w = 3.8 eV) , the equivalent photoexcitation wavelengths with transient gates would actually shift to the blue-green spectrum (440-480 nm). Longitudinally shaped charge distributions are accessible because photoemission is longitudinally shaped by the gating fields (and not intensity), thereby bringing new alternative solutions to longitudinal shaping of electron bunches directly off the photocathode complementary to UV The potential impact of a new photoemission regime as profound as it is foundational. First, emitting thermally limited electron bunches at practically high QEs and charges cannot be achieved under the current photoemission paradigm and circumventing this trade-off could transform the production of electron beams with increased average flux and peak brightness as well as scaling the brightness of accelerator-based light sources, especially XFELs. To take the LCLS-II gun as an example, we estimate that this new technique could provide normalized emittances as low as ~0.1-0.15 μm rms with 200-300 pC charges, which is orders of magnitude lower than currently projected. Practical operation of XFELs with such low emittances would enable proportionately higher extension of their brightness to even harder X-rays or a significant reduction of undulator lengths for the same X-ray photon energy. XFELs operating in the harder X-ray regime are technically demanding and to achieve laser saturation the undulator must be 100s of m long. Reducing emittance makes the FEL process more efficient because it achieves gain saturation quicker, thereby requiring a shorter undulator and reducing cost. Temporally controlling photoemission can also enable much greater operational capacity of XFELs by providing orders of magnitude higher temporal coherence approaching the Fourier-transform limit for highresolution spectroscopies, such as (resonant) inelastic X-ray scattering, or by providing high brightness multibeam mode operation for multi-color X-ray experiments at harder X-rays or for self-seeded operation with improved coherence and monochromaticity. Gate peak field (GV/m) E gate 0.5