The performance of superconducting circuits for quantum computing is limited by materials losses. In particular, coherence times are typically bounded by two-level system (TLS) losses at single photon powers and millikelvin temperatures. The identification of low loss fabrication techniques, materials, and thin film dielectrics is critical to achieving scalable architectures for superconducting quantum computing. Superconducting microwave resonators provide a convenient qubit proxy for assessing performance and studying TLS loss and other mechanisms relevant to superconducting circuits such as non-equilibrium quasiparticles and magnetic flux vortices. In this review article, we provide an overview of considerations for designing accurate resonator experiments to characterize loss, including applicable types of loss, cryogenic setup, device design, and methods for extracting material and interface losses, summarizing techniques that have been evolving for over two decades. Results from measurements of a wide variety of materials and processes are also summarized. Lastly, we present recommendations for the reporting of loss data from superconducting microwave resonators to facilitate materials comparisons across the field. Superconducting quantum computers consist of two basic components: the qubit, which is used to manipulate quantum information, and the superconducting microwave resonator, a multipurpose component used for qubit protection and readout At millikelvin temperatures and single photon powers, loss in both qubits and resonators is thought to be dominated by coupling to two-level systems (TLS) that may be present in device materials. Microwave energy in the device can couple to an ensemble of defects in nearby amorphous material, causing energy decay Accurate resonator measurements allow us to engineer interfaces and circuit designs to identify regions that contribute a) Electronic mail: coreyrae.mcrae@colorado.edu to loss as well as to identify low-loss materials in order to decrease the qubit footprint and enable multilayer architectures. Resonator measurements can also provide information about losses due to microwave and cryogenic experimental issues, including magnetic In this review, we introduce the general properties of superconducting microwave resonators (Sec. II and summarize in detail the best practices of resonator measurements. These include the evaluation of applicable losses mechanisms (Sec. III), cryogenic and electronic experimental set-up (Sec. IV), and experimental decisions involved in device design and fabrication (Sec. V). Finally, we present a summary of existing TLS loss measurements (Sec. VI) and suggest additional parameters to report in future studies. This provides an overview of metrics that are comparable across various material sets and device implementations. A basic resonator circuit, Fig. neglecting any external coupling. To take advantage of commercial microwave test and measurement equipment as well as commercial RF components, superconducting microwave resonators for quantum computing are generally designed to have resonance frequencies between 4 and 8 GHz. The resonator circuits commonly consist of thin film superconducting metals and thin film dielectrics, with typical thicknesses in the range of hundreds of nanometers, patterned on a crystalline dielectric substrate hundreds of micrometers thick In practice, the resonator, like all superconducting circuits, is coupled to energy dissipation channels, causing loss and reducing its ability to store energy. For superconducting microwave resonators, loss is low compared to normal metal resonators due to the low dissipation nature of the superconducting metal. We can combine all the resonator losses into an effective resistance R. The resonator also has input impedance Z in , defined as: Z in can be plotted as a function of frequency and behaves as a Lorentzian, similar to that in Fig. To quantify resonator performance, we define a dimensionless quantity, the quality factor, as with total time-averaged energy W and power loss due to the resistor defined as where V is the voltage on the resistor R A resonator is normally connected to the measurement circuit through capacitive and/or inductive coupling, which contributes to the resonator quality factor. Thus, the total quality factor Q can be divided into an internal and coupling component, as where Q c is the coupling quality factor and is defined as the rate at which energy stored in the resonator escapes into the larger circuit, and Q i is the internal quality factor and is defined as the rate at which energy is lost to parasitic effects of the environment. The loading will shift the resonance frequency downwards, which is normally negligible as long the coupling capacitance and inductance is small compared to the C and L values of the resonator. Q c is a design parameter as it is determined by specifying the admittance to ground through coupling capacitance and mutual inductance between the resonator and transmission feedline. Conversely, Q i is determined by the intrinsic losses within the resonator itself, and can thus be used as a performance metric of the resonator. 1. Circuit diagrams of three measurement orientations of parallel RLC resonators. (a) Resonator in hanger mode, capacitively coupled to a feedline for measurement in transmission. V g is the source voltage, R 0 is the source and load impedance which is often equal to the transmission characteristic impedance Z 0 for impedance matching, and V 2 is the load voltage. The arrows on the voltages indicate the direction of the microwaves being measured. (b) Resonator in transmission mode, capacitively coupled to an input and an output feedline. (c) Resonator in reflection mode, capacitively coupled to the end of a feedline. Re(S 21 ) The inverse of resonator Q i is sometimes represented as the loss tangent, as for loss δ and tan δ < 10 -2 . Loss is a convenient metric for distinguishing between multiple contributions to performance, as loss contributions add linearly. Q i , tan δ , and δ are all used to compare resonator performance in different contexts, where tan δ and δ are generally used to denote performance when loss mechanisms are being analyzed, and Q i is used to compare general performance, especially for highperformance devices. Although tan δ conventionally refers to dielectric loss, δ will be used in this review to refer to any loss, regardless of dissipation channel. Resonators are typically characterized with a vector network analyzer (VNA). To measure a resonator with a VNA, microwave signals are sent into the circuit input port (port 1) through a feedline coupled to the resonator, and the response is measured through the output port (port 2). The amplitude and phase of the signal are sampled, achieving an S 21 measurement. The complex S 21 can be visualized by breaking it into a magnitude and phase component, or into a real and imaginary component, as shown in Fig. Resonator circuits can be designed in several form factors. Fig. Superconducting resonators, while low loss, nevertheless suffer from various forms of intrinsic loss. Characterizing the origins of that loss is the subject of much ongoing research. The dependence of resonator loss on experimental conditions such as applied power and temperature can be used to allocate the loss to several mechanisms. Resonator loss mechanisms that are most important to quantum circuits include two-level systems (TLS), radiation, magnetic vortices, and quasiparticles originating from stray infrared (IR) light and microwave-induced pair-breaking. In practice, superconducting microwave resonators generally exhibit total losses in the 10 -5 to 10 -6 range. In addition to being sources of dissipation and degradation of resonator performance, these loss mechanisms are also sources of decoherence in qubit applications as well as sources of noise impacting superconducting detector applications. For these reasons, considerable effort has been made over the past two decades to understand resonator loss mechanisms and reduce their negative effects. Table Amorphous solids exhibit very different thermal, acoustic, and dielectric properties from crystalline solids at low temperatures, which can be modeled by the two-level system (TLS) model introduced by As first shown by According to the TLS model, TLS induce a power-and temperature-dependent resonator loss δ T LS and temperaturedependent resonance fractional frequency shift ∆ f / f 0 given by where ω is the angular frequency, δ 0 T LS is the intrinsic TLS loss, n is the average photon number in the resonator, n c is the characteristic photon number of TLS saturation, ∆ f = ff 0 is the difference between measured resonance frequency f = ω/2π and TLS-free resonance frequency f 0 , Re(Ψ) is the real part of the complex digamma function, and F is the filling factor of the TLS material, defined as the fraction of the resonator's total electrical energy stored in the TLS material. TLS are present in parts of the resonator (such as interfaces and dielectrics) and not others (such as superconductors and air), which reduces the effective loss due to these systems. When more than one TLS medium is present, as is the case in the vast majority of physical circuits, Fδ 0 T LS in Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 are replaced by a sum of contributions from each TLS material ∑ n F n δ 0 T LS,n where where U tot is the total electric energy stored in resonator, U n , F n , V n , ε n are the electrical energy, filling factor, volume and dielectric constant of the nth TLS medium. The intrinsic TLS loss δ 0 T LS is an important dielectric property that characterizes the microwave dissipation in the material. It is physically set by the density and electric dipole moment of the tunneling states in the material, and is therefore an intrinsic property of the material. Values of δ 0 T LS can be compared directly between different dielectric materials. It is clear from Eqs. 7-8 that TLS-induced loss and frequency shifts are dependent on geometry, through the filling factor F, as well as power, temperature, and frequency. Theoretical curves are plotted in Fig. The standard theory of TLS in glasses assumes each TLS has a random energy minima and barrier height and hence there is an uniform energy distribution of TLS A superconducting metal possesses a complex surface conductivity σ 1 + iσ 2 that is both a function of frequency and temperature. This behavior, and the resulting thermal quasiparticle loss, is reviewed in α, defined by the second fraction on the right, is known equivalently as the conductor participation ratio or the kinetic inductance fraction, and it is analogous to the dielectric filling factor above. Thermally excited quasiparticles are intrinsic to the superconductor itself. At higher temperatures, quasiparticle density increases and the superconducting energy gap ∆ is reduced. This changes both R S and λ in the equation above. The change in surface impedance has the effect of shifting the frequency down and reducing the quality factor according to Temperature sweep data can be compared to numerical integration of Mattis-Bardeen's formulas for AC conductivity of a BCS superconductor The loss due to thermally excited quasiparticles is reduced exponentially as the bath temperature approaches zero. According to Mattis-Bardeen theory As mentioned above, thermally excited quasiparticles contribute negligibly to resonator loss in the quantum computing low temperature regime. Quantum experiments, however, find a non-equilibrium quasiparticle population that leads to loss and degradation of the quantum circuit Vortices of trapped magnetic flux form islands of normal metal in an otherwise continuous superconducting film, and thus can dissipate power when current is present at the core of the vortex. A systematic study of microwave response of vortices was carried out by Strictly speaking, radiative loss refers a resonator losing its energy by radiating into free space. This loss generally increases with frequency and device dimension In addition to the previously described loss mechanisms, a resonator's Q i can be reduced through unwanted hybridization with nearby lower-Q modes, including slotline modes, box modes, chip modes, and even other on-chip devices Box modes are modes sustained within the free space in the sample box FIG. Fig. where δ other is the sum of all power-independent losses acting on the resonator, including loss from radiation, quasiparticles generated from infrared or thermal sources, vortices, and parasitic modes. These power-independent losses can usually be suppressed to δ other 10 -6 by the use of mitigation strategies (see Sec. IV and Sec. V). Fig. Superconducting qubits are sensitive to all of the above loss mechanisms, in addition to losses specific to Josephson junctions where f 10 is the frequency of the qubit state. The exact circuit used for qubit implementation greatly affects the participation of the these loss mechanisms. Direct comparison experiments have shown striking correlations between TLS loss in resonators and qubits The random nature of TLS-resonator photon exchange leads to effective fluctuations in the dielectric constant. These fluctuations manifest as phase or frequency noise, and are equivalent to resonance frequency jitter Noise due to TLS fluctuators is the dominant noise source for MKIDs. Therefore, understanding the TLS physics, searching for material with lower TLS loss, and developing techniques to reduce the negative effects have become a common interest to and an important joint effort for the superconducting quantum computing and detector research communities. A dilution refrigerator (DR) is commonly used to cool devices to millikelvin operating temperatures. Fig. Due to the extreme environment, small measurement signal, and susceptibility to environmental coupling, superconducting microwave resonators can be deceptively difficult to measure accurately. Impedance mismatches in the measurement largely come from components inside the DR, which are not commonly included in calibration and can affect measurement accuracy. Microwave setup, measurement mode, thermalization, and number of photons inside the resonator all play significant roles in measurement outcomes. Magnetic shielding and IR absorption and filtering can be implemented to minimize losses due to trapped vortices and RF induced quasiparticles, as discussed in Sec. III. Sample packaging can also affect measurement outcomes. Unless carefully designed, box modes can be present that couple to the resonator. Normal metals situated close to the device such as in silver paint can lead to irreproducible high power losses. Al, Cu, and gold-coated Cu are all commonly used packaging materials and exhibit different magnetic shielding and thermalization behavior. Refer to Stainless steel coaxial cables are widely used in superconducting quantum computing experiments, especially to connect the room temperature plate of the refrigerator to the 4 K plate, due to their low loss, moderate thermal conductivity, and low passive thermal loads. From 4 K down to 15 mK, cables made of superconductors such as NbTi are commonly used to reduce loss and increase thermal isolation. At the base temperature plate, cryogenic coaxial semi-rigid cables are used for connecting different components and devices. Besides the cable materials, thermalizing microwave lines can be achieved with cavity attenuators In order to reduce the room temperature thermal noise to at least two orders of magnitude lower than the single photon power level, the input line needs roughly 60 dB of added attenuation On the output, the same level of attenuation as the input is required. Since the HEMT can block radiation from above the 4 K plate, a double-stage isolator with total isolation of nearly 40 dB is commonly mounted to the 15 mK stage. As these isolators contain magnets, careful placement is essential in order to avoid magnetic loss. SMA connectors, coaxial cables, wirebonds, and on-chip transmission lines often have impedances deviating from 50 Ω. A mismatch between these components and the 50 Ω VNA source impedance creates unwanted reflections, causing ripples in the transmission baseline and an asymmetric resonance lineshape, and impeding Q i and Q c extraction. These reflections can also lead to overestimation of power at the resonator. Calibration of the microwave environment can correct these errors. The commonly used two-port thru-reflect-line (TRL) and short-open-load-thru (SOLT) calibration methods A resonator can be measured in three commonly used modes: hanger [Fig. where f 0 is the resonance frequency. One advantage of hanger mode is its natural frequency multiplexing: devices can be designed such that multiple resonators share a microwave input and output line on a single package or chip. Transmission mode is commonly used for directly measuring half-wave (λ /2) CPW resonators which is a mirror image of a hanger-type resonance. A drawback of inline transmission resonator measurements is that calibrating unity transmission is difficult because cable loss and resonator loss become indistinguishable The reflection mode is realized by coupling the resonator to the input microwave transmission directly through a capacitor or inductor and then measuring the reflection. Since the reflected signal cannot be detected directly at the input port, a non-reciprocal device must be adopted. By using a circulator or a directional coupler to separate the incoming signal to the resonator and the reflection from the resonator, the transmission S 21 can represent the reflection to the input and can be described by (Castellanos-Beltran, 2010) differing from the hanger case by a factor of 2 in signal. The line shape is also a Lorenztian dip in magnitude, but the phase shift can be 2π, π or less than π, depending the ratio between Q i and Q c . Eqs. 14-16 assume perfect impedance matching to the environment and a flat, featureless background, which are assumptions rarely satisfied by measured S 21 data. In order to extract Q c , Q i and f 0 from measurement, some background normalization or removal method, as well as a correction of the rotation angle φ , must be implemented. φ describes the rotation of the resonance circle in an Im(S 21 ) v.s. Re(S 21 ) plot, as in Fig. A summary of common fitting models and methods for hanger mode measurements are outlined below. To the authors' knowledge, there exist no methods for correcting rotation caused by impedance mismatch in transmission and reflection measurement modes, leading to inaccuracies not present in hanger mode fitting. The φ rotation method (φ RM) where e iφ is used to account for circuit asymmetry. A circle fit, rotation and translation to origin, and phase angle fit are implemented to determine an initial guess of parameters, followed by a direct fit to Eq. 17. The diameter correction method (DCM) where Qc = Q c e -iφ is the complex coupled quality factor. By accounting for the origin of the rotation as a component of Q, a correction of 1/(cos(φ ) -1) is applied to the Q i value, which increases in magnitude with increasing circuit asymmetry. The inverse S 21 method (INV) where Q * c = (Z 0 /|Z|)Q c is the rescaled coupling quality factor, Z 0 is the cable impedance, and Z = |Z|e iφ is half the inverse sum of the environment impedances on the input and output sides of the resonator. Similarly to the DCM model, the coupled quality factor is used to absorb the impedance mismatch in order to return Q i accurately. However, unlike DCM, INV cannot be used to determine Q c without environment impedance, which is very difficult or impossible to determine. In practice, DCM and INV give largely similar values for Q i , though an exhaustive comparison has yet to be performed, while φ RM systematically overestimates Q i as a function of φ . Python fitting code exists for all fitting methods mentioned above, 1 as well as the lesser-known closest pole and zero method (CPZM) In measured S 21 data, total signal transmission is shifted from 0 dB by the total attenuation, losses and amplification in the measurement setup. As well, a nonlinear background exists due to external reflections, which cause ripples in transmission, and parasitic modes, which cause broad resonance features. Normalization is required in order to fit the data into the models above. 1 https://github.com/Boulder-Cryogenic-Quantum-Testbed/measurement/ When Q is high enough, the resonance linewidth is much smaller than the background features and a linear normalization can be used by performing a linear fit to off-resonant points on either side of the resonance. Alternatively, a hightemperature background removal can be performed The effects of normalization on reported Q i and Q c are not well-understood, so the use of a traceable protocol is essential for fit reproducibility. In order to avoid thermally-populated quasiparticle loss Resonator thermalization methods include using oxygenfree high thermal conductivity copper to act as an ideal cold resistor and thermal link for sample thermalization, and shielding the sample from black-body radiation from higher temperature stages. On-chip refrigeration can also be performed Vortex loss has been shown to cause up to 10% of measured loss, and can be suppressed by magnetic field shielding Resonator loss variability has been observed for a single resonator over different cooldowns Repeated measurements of the exact same resonator have been shown to yield different Q i values at both low and high power, though the variation at high power is more pronounced (at a difference of up to two times or more), but show no change in intrinsic TLS loss Resonators exposed to the same processing conditions on the same chip can fall within a range of Q i and Q c values. Time fluctuations of 1/Q i due to TLS loss have been seen to scale with the magnitude of the loss and fluctuate at ∼ 20% of the mean The term "materials loss" encompasses all forms of intrinsic loss induced in a superconducting microwave resonator due to its constituent materials and interfaces. The main source of materials loss in planar devices is TLS loss, but other types such as piezoelectric loss are applicable in rare instances. Materials loss is present in three general regions, as shown in Fig. 3D cavity resonators obviate both radiative and bulk dielectric losses by maximizing the participation of vacuum. They are susceptible only to loss in the cavity wall's surface oxide and conductor loss extending into the wall a distance of the London penetration depth The low power loss δ LP , the resonator-induced intrinsic TLS loss Fδ 0 TLS or simply the material's intrinsic TLS loss δ 0 TLS are the most common metrics used to compare losses. The TLS loss is extracted from a power or temperature sweep using Eq. 7 or Eq. 8, while δ LP is the loss at some "low enough" power, typically on the order of a single photon occupation in the resonator, where it is expected that TLS loss contribution is dominant. This is often determined empirically when loss plateaus at low power. Due to their sensitivity to TLS, resonators are seemingly ideal devices for measuring the intrinsic losses of dielectric materials and extracting the TLS loss of materials. However, measuring the TLS loss of a single material can prove difficult. Every interface, substrate, and deposited dielectric contributes to the filling factor, i.e., the total TLS loss in proportion to the amount of capacitive energy stored in it (see Sec. III for more information). Therefore, the device must be carefully designed, and loss extraction analysis methods are often required, in order to determine an accurate and precise TLS loss value for a single region or material of interest. Dielectric loss has been measured using a wide variety of device structures including CPW resonators, distributed-element microstrip resonators, lumped element resonators with parallel plate capacitors, and lumped element resonators with interdigitated capacitors. Changes in the design of planar, multilayer, distributed, or lumped element resonators can be used to optimize the resonator's sensitivity to bulk or surface dielectric losses. Since TLS loss is capacitive On the other hand, multilayer devices involving deposited dielectrics and multiple wiring layers (such as microstrip or parallel plate lumped element resonators) can concentrate fields in the thin film or bulk dielectric of interest. Multilayer resonators also have a lower participation of native surface oxides, which are difficult to control during processing and often require simulation to disentangle their loss from the loss of interest. However, these devices necessitate more fabrication steps and can thus introduce unwanted interface losses that are difficult to distinguish from the loss of interest. It has been assumed that lumped element inductors introduce a negligible fraction of capacitance into lumped element resonators In 3D cavity resonators, losses due to surface oxide and conductor loss can be effectively scaled as the ratio of surface area to volume, depending on the cavity geometry. Alternatively, a piece of bulk dielectric material of interest can be inserted inside a 3D cavity for loss study A resonator is coupled to a feedline by creating a capacitive or inductive link. The fraction of the resonator's total capacitance or inductance respectively that is used for this circuit element should be carefully tuned to ensure a close match between Q i and Q c at the temperature and power of interest in order to measure the resonator's loss accurately. For Q c Q i , Q c dominates the signal vs. frequency lineshape and the accuracy of measured Q i is decreased. For Q c Q i , the resonator becomes difficult to measure due to reduced signal Theoretically, if an accurate equivalent circuit model of a resonator measurement setup is known, the coupling loss can be calculated by 1/Q c = Re[Y (ω 0 )]Z r , where Y (ω 0 ) is the total admittance to ground through the coupling components at resonance frequency and Z r = L C is the characteristic impedance of the resonator Regardless of the form factor of the resonator chosen, the experimenter must be careful to allocate the contribution of materials to the overall loss measured by the resonator. The resonator-induced intrinsic TLS loss, Fδ 0 T LS depends on both the intrinsic TLS loss, δ 0 T LS , of the material as well as what fraction of the capacitive energy is stored in the material of interest, its dielectric participation ratio or filling factor F. Each material in the device, including substrate, native oxides, interfaces, and deposited dielectrics, will have its own filling factor. The filling factor of a dielectric can approach 100 % in the case of a thick parallel plate capacitor, or be extremely small, < 10 -9 as in the surface oxide of a 3D cavity In planar circuits such as CPWs, the filling factor depends on the thickness of the dielectric as well as the geometry of the electrodes. In a CPW, the width of the center trace and gap between center trace and ground plane have a significant effect on the measured loss of the resonator In addition to resonators, it is also possible to take advantage of the geometry dependence to reduce TLS loss in qubits. Indeed, The removal of dielectric material is another method for decreasing TLS loss. This can be done by etching excess substrate in the gaps of the CPW, trenching the substrate Detailed simulations using 3D finite element solvers are often necessary to precisely calculate the amount of TLS loss, particularly of low filling factor or low loss materials. Finite element models have been used to calculate the filling factor of different resonator geometries Several rules of thumb exist that give intuition into filling factor behavior. Roughly, scaling up the CPW or IDC conductor width and gap by a factor of 2 decreases the interface contribution by a factor of 2 as well The total TLS loss of even the simplest resonator depends on all materials in the circuit, as shown in Fig. Since the performance of a device with multi-step fabrication can be affected by all the steps in the fabrication process While the applications of some microwave resonators, e.g. photon detectors or MKIDs, are at high photon numbers, quantum information applications require operation at single photon occupation. Power sweeps down to the single photon regime are necessary to measure TLS loss and predict how the devices would perform in qubit circuits. It can be very difficult to determine the actual power within the resonator, but estimation methods exist. The average number of photons in the resonator can be estimated from the power at the input of the resonator, applied power P app , as where Z 0 is the characteristic impedance of the microwave environment to which the resonator is coupled, Z r is the resonator characteristic impedance, and < E int > is the average energy stored within the resonator. To understand the dominant loss mechanism in a resonator material system, it takes much more than measuring loss at the lowest cryostat temperature at single photon powers. Measuring the temperature and power dependence of loss can be used to elucidate a great deal about the dominant loss mechanism present in the device under test. Both power and temperature sweeps can be used to fit for TLS loss in a superconducting microwave resonator. By measuring loss as a function of power at a temperature well below where the TLS are unsaturated, T bath hω 2k B , the TLS model in Eq. 7 can be used to determine δ 0 T LS . Additionally, measuring loss as a function of temperature at low powers and fitting to the same equation yields similar results. Ideally, fits to the saturation of both temperature and power dependent loss are measured to find self-consistent results. Deviations could be an indication that an assumption about the temperature or power at the device are not accurate In addition to dependence on loss, the frequency of the resonator itself can shift depending on microscopic loss effects among the ensemble of TLS. In Accurate extraction of TLS loss from temperature sweep data is only possible when the frequency shift is dominated by TLS around T bath ∼ hω 2k B . This condition is met by Nb resonators with the characteristic hook shape seen in Fig. Tables summarizing a selection of existing measurements in literature for δ LP and Fδ 0 T LS are given for deposited dielectrics (Table For experiments that only report the low power loss, in order to compare to TLS loss values, the high-power loss must be orders of magnitude smaller than the low power loss, and it must be demonstrated that the low power regime is being reached. Of special note, uncontrolled thermalization, unwanted noise, and unshielded magnetic fields can lead to systematic under-or over-reporting of loss. It is the opinion of the authors that, at minimum, base temperature and power dependent sweeps be published along with filling factors of the TLS material, Q c , and resonator fitting information. Other parameters that would be highly useful include etch type and material deposition parameters. Due to the numerous variables affecting the reported loss values, is it difficult to make definite conclusions from literature comparisons. However, some trends can be seen. They are outlined below along with noteworthy results from individual studies. High-purity crystalline substrates, float-zone intrinsic or other high resistivity Si and Al 2 O 3 are common, but other substrates have also been investigated As shown in Table Epitaxial materials have generally higher performance than amorphous materials. Whether the benefit is due to crystallinity or overall cleanliness is disputed, but superconductors grown epitaxially have demonstrated lower TLS loss than other growth methods As shown in Table Losses at the metal-substrate and substrate-air interfaces are thought to contribute significantly to overall loss, and much effort has been made to explore deposition and cleaning techniques to mitigate and understand these induced losses The liftoff or etch process used to fabricate the resonator is also important to its performance. Etching may affect the sidewalls of the superconductor as well as alter the surface of the underlying substrate While the highest performance substrate-based resonators are typically single-layer and do not have deposited dielectrics, more complex circuits implement multilayer processing and deposited dielectrics. However, deposited dielectrics have been found to possess widely varying losses (Table A crucial dielectric barrier in superconducting qubit circuits is the tunnel barrier oxide in the Josephson junction of the qubit itself. The vast majority of these Josephson junctions are made from Al 2 O 3 grown at room temperature. This thin Al 2 O 3 present in tunnel junctions is a source of TLS loss. Bulk loss of an amorphous Al 2 O 3 junction has been measured to be on the order of 10 -3 One current design philosophy is to statistically avoid strongly coupled TLS in Josephson junctions by minimizing the junction volume Superconducting microwave resonator measurements are an effective way to probe low power cryogenic losses in bulk and thin film dielectrics, interfaces between materials, and surface oxides. In this regime, TLS loss is often the dominant type of materials loss, and can be distinguished from other losses by its unique association with the capacitor and by its power and temperature dependence. Experiments probing the temperature, power, frequency, geometric and magnetic field dependence of loss can be used to determine the interplay be-tween various loss mechanisms. In order to perform accurate measurements, experiments must be carefully designed and executed. Common pitfalls producing inaccurate resonator measurement results include: • A lack of thermalization, which leads to artificially low reported intrinsic TLS loss; • The measurement of low power loss (in the place of TLS loss) when power-independent losses are large, which produces a seemingly high intrinsic TLS loss; • Measuring in reflection mode, which could report inaccurate Q i values due to impedance mismatches that cannot be corrected; • Measuring in transmission mode, which has the same drawback as above plus insufficient baseline information, making separating Q c and Q i impossible; and • Using a resonator design with a low filling factor for the material of interest, if other loss mechanisms are not negligible. Many different methods have been used to determine interface, thin film, and bulk dielectric loss at low powers and temperatures in superconducting quantum circuits. A review of the current body of work in this field lacks strong conclusions due to the many discrepancies in reporting of experimental parameters. The state-of-the-art in terms of planar superconducting geometries give losses in the low 10 -6 range, which has been shown for several materials sets. Deposited dielectric performance is currently limited to ∼ 10 -5 . Promising directions for future work can be divided into two subfields: loss metrology, and materials research. Fruitful future projects in loss metrology include investigations into: thermalization of samples (including the impact of the sample box material and design, mounting method, and thermalization time); precise and unobtrusive calibration for millikelvin S 21 measurements; time fluctuations in Q i and Q c (including the effect of sampling rates and power regime); and resonator fitting (especially regime-dependent variations between DCM and INV models). Continuing to report noise values and further develop techniques for measuring noise could also be important for obtaining a complete picture of loss mechanisms in resonators. In terms of materials research, we anticipate continued performance improvement in both dielectrics and superconducting metals. Towards reducing TLS loss, promising avenues include interface engineering and development of novel dielectrics. Given the diversity of substrates, metals, and passivation layers currently employed, there exist materials or conditions that have yet to be explored to their full potential. Separately, planar resonators and 3D cavities alike will benefit from development of superconducting bonding. In the former case, high quality superconducting enclosures will be helpful to mitigate radiative loss and parasitic modes. In the case of 3D cavities, low-loss superconducting bonds enable scalable geometric constructions, including multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuits. The authors advocate that future work in this area report TLS loss rather than low power loss, and publish base temperature, associated Q c values, filling factors of the target materials for more accurate comparison between experiments and to avoid limiting the value of published results. Ideally, TLS loss would be extracted using both power-and temperature-dependent sweeps to demonstrate self-consistent results, although that is not always possible due to the additional complexity in experimental set-up. The inclusion of multiple or repeated resonator measurements, periodically in the same cooldown and over repeated cooldowns, as well as the use of a traceable resonator fit, would also strongly increase experimental reliability. Finally, the simultaneous measurement of multiple resonator parameters such as loss, frequency shift, and noise can yield a more comprehensive picture of TLS behavior, as well as reveal non-TLS loss mechanisms that may be present.