The performance of organic semiconductor devices is linked to highly-ordered nanostructures of self-assembled molecules and polymers. We employ many-body perturbation theory and study the excited states in bulk compolymers. We discover that acceptors in the polymer scaffold introduce a, hitherto unrecognized, conduction impurity band. The donor units are surrounded by conjugated bands which are only mildly perturbed by the presence of acceptors. Along the polymer axis, mutual interactions among copolymer strands hinder efficient band transport, which is, however, strongly enhanced across individual chains. We find that holes are most effectively transported in the π -π stacking while electrons in the impurity band follow the edge-to-edge directions. The copolymers exhibit regions with inverted transport polarity, in which electrons and holes are efficiently transported in mutually orthogonal directions. Donor-acceptor (D-A) semiconducting copolymers represent arguably the most variable class of semiconducting materials in organic electronics. Answering these questions requires a theoretical investigation of the copolymers' electronic structure in the condensed phase. In principle, such simulations need to capture the non-local inter-molecular interactions In contrast, acceptors are typically chosen so that they have a higher electron affinity than donors, In a single copolymer strand (i.e., 1D periodic system with repeated D and A subunits), the quantum confinement is reduced in the direction of the polymer axis. Consequently, the fundamental gap of the infinite chain decreases with the polymerization length; for an infinite system, it is 4.08 ± 0.04 eV, which is 1.48±0.05 eV less than for an isolated monomer For quantitative predictions of the band gaps in the condensed phase, many-body methods turn out to be indispensable as dynamical electron-electron interactions are responsible for the non-local (inter-chain) interactions. Indeed, the ionization potential for the 2D slab computed with the sGW method is 5.48±0.02 eV (Figure ??a), in excellent agreement with thin-film experiments that provide an estimate of 5.4-5.5 eV. The donor behavior dominates the highest valence state; it has conjugated character and delocalized π orbitals (see more details in Figure In contrast, the lowest conduction band of the copolymer comprises states localized only on the acceptors (Figure In calculations with distinct A molecules, we found that the exact energy separation between the conjugated and localized states depends only a little on the choice of acceptors The first contribution mostly depends on the local 52 properties of the copolymer. The electronic structure (and charge transport) strongly depend on the bond arrangement between the donor and acceptor subunits. As noted above, AIB is composed of localized states centered on the acceptor subunits. The corresponding wave function near the conduction edge does extent to the D-A joint appreciably (Figure The sensitivity of LCB is directly related to the character of the wave function near the D-A bond. Going from the low energy part of the LCB (near the X point of the Brillouin zone) to the band edge, the wavefunction develops a nodal plane across the D-A joint (Figure The presence of the nodes is associated with increased QP kinetic energy. A close inspection of various torsion angles reveals that the nodes across the D-A bond are suppressed when going from 1D to 3D conformation. The band edge is kinetically stabilized (Figure While the local properties are clearly responsible for the electronic structure modification, the non-local many-body effects are equally important and influence the excited states. These electron-electron interactions are decomposed into two principal contributions: (i) nonlocal exchange (due to the fermionic nature of the charge carriers), and (ii) time-dependent correlations among electrons and holes (which include vdW interactions responsible for the cohesive energy of the bulk). The significance of the many-body treatment is illustrated by the fact that LCB and AIB widths increase by ∼ 25% and ∼ 46% if the non-local and dynamic description is used instead of the common mean-field approach (e.g., in local and static density functional theory -see Table ??). We first inspect the behavior of the conjugated states. While the exchange interaction In the latter case, there is an increased spatial overlap with a large number of occupied orbitals, and energy decrease is observed for states near the X-point. The exchange-driven band widening is a signature of the conjugated bands, and it is not observed otherwise. To document this, we provide complementary calculations for additional polymer strands (polyacetylene and polyethylene, with and without conjugated bonds) in the SI (Table ??). In general, this effect is dramatic for copolymer systems. In the absence of electronic correlation (which reduces the exchange through dynamical screening), LCB would widen by an additional 40%. This increase can be paralleled with a (spurious) infinite-range response to hole localization observed for bare exchange interactions. The lowest conduction band is very different. The impurity states are strongly localized along the copolymer axis. As a result, local and non-local interactions are insensitive to crystal momentum, and the band is narrow. Further, there are no increased interactions along the π -π stacking, and the AIB electronic states thus appear to be molecule-like. Hence, the acceptor band is flat along Γ → Y as well. There is thus a low likelihood of electron band-transport in the face-on or polymer axis directions. AIB, however, unexpectedly exhibits cooperative effects along the edge-to-edge stacking (Figure Along Γ →Z, the AIB thus behaves like the conjugated states in the polymer axis. These properties indicate that AIB can sustain electron transport along the edge-to-edge stacking direction. In summary, we investigated a prototypical example of D-A copolymers, FBT, and explained its electronic structure and the propensity to band transport in the condensed phase. Our many-body calculations are in excellent agreement with available experimental data and, for the first time, they provide insight into the quasiparticle (added hole and electron) states of bulk copolymers. The results show that acceptors, which typically act as strong potential wells for electrons, form a previously unrecognized "impurity" band. In contrast, the donors groups are responsible for delocalized lower (valence) and upper (conduction) conjugated bands. The delocalized states and they surround the acceptor band, but they only mildly affect each other. The intra-chain transport is negatively impacted by the condensed phase stacking, which affects the rotation between the donor and acceptors. On the other hand, electronic states delocalize across the copolymer strands and form wide bands that likely support efficient transport. Electronic correlations (responsible for the cohesive van der Waals forces) universally suppresses band dispersion, but non-local exchange interactions drive it in selected directions. The large width of valence bands along the π -π stacking indicates that hole transport is possible in the face-on direction. Surprisingly, we observe a strong propensity for electron transport along the edge-on stacking within the acceptor impurity band. Hence, D-A copolymers exhibit an orthogonal ambipolar transport network, which has been so far reported only in heterogeneous mixtures of p-type polymer and a small n-type molecule. 