This paper presents illustrative electromagnetic modelling and simulation of graphene antenna using a two-dimensional graphene sheet of zero thickness and a three-dimensional graphene slab of finite thickness. The properties of the antenna are analyzed in terms of the S11 parameter, input impedance, VSWR, radiation pattern, and frequency reconfiguration using the fullwave electromagnetic simulator. Furthermore, this work numerically studies the modelling of graphene antenna using a three-dimensional graphene thin slab and the impact of graphene slab thickness on the performance of graphene antenna. The world's first two-dimensional (2D) material graphene gained momentum for the realization of effective new devices in various fields due to its extraordinary electrical, mechanical and optical properties. Owing to unique electromagnetic (EM) properties such as tunable conductivity and slow-wave propagation, graphene attracted more attention for EM applications in a wide frequency range from microwave to X-rays. Indeed, graphene is capable of the surface plasmon polariton (SPP) propagation at terahertz (THz) frequency range This paper illustrates the EM modelling and simulation of the graphene 2D sheet and 3D slab antenna. Section 2 explains briefly the EM modelling and simulation of graphene using 2D sheet and 3D slab by means of computational EM simulators. Section 3 presents the EM modelling and analysis of graphene antenna using graphene as 2D graphene sheet of zero thickness and 3D graphene thin slab of non-zero thickness. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section 4. Graphene is a single layer of sp 2 -bonded carbon atoms packed in a hexagonal (honeycomb) lattice. The extraordinary electronic, optical and mechanical properties of graphene stimulated great research interest in numerous fields in the past few years. Graphene is a zero-overlap semimetal or zero-gap semiconductor with very high electrical conductivity. Graphene has very high electron mobility, which can theoretically reach 200,000 cm 2 /Vs at room temperature, the current density is in the order of 10 9 A/cm, and the velocity of fermion (electron) is the order of 10 6 m/s, which is 300 times smaller than the velocity of light In an EM simulator, graphene is modelled as a thin conductive sheet. The graphene surface conductivity σ s contains contributions from intraband and interband transitions. The intraband conductivity is dominant over the interband term in the THz frequency regime. The intraband conductivity of graphene contributes a large imaginary part of conductivity, which in turn, leads to plasmonic behaviour. The intraband conductivity of graphene can be approximated by the Kubo formula where e is the electron charge, ω is angular frequency, K B is the Boltzmann's constant, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, T is temperature, μ c is the chemical potential, scattering rate Γ is the electron-phonon scattering due to the carrier intraband scattering related to plasmonic loss = 1/2τ, and τ is the relaxation time related to impurities and defects in graphene. In most of the EM simulators, graphene is modeled as a 2D graphene sheet. The 2D graphene sheet can also be approximated by a 3D thin slab in the EM simulators. The 3D conductivity of graphene can be evaluated as where t is the thickness of the graphene layer. The conductivity of graphene reduces when the graphene thickness increases In this section, we illustrate aspects of the modelling of graphene antenna using a 2D graphene sheet of zero thickness and 3D graphene thin slab of non-zero thickness. where L is the length of the graphene antenna, λ SPP is the SPP wavelength, and m is an integer which determines the order of the resonance. We modelled a graphene dipole antenna at 1 THz frequency. The proposed antenna structure is simulated using FEM solver Ansys HFSS 17. Fig. At 1 THz frequency, the SPP wavelength of the graphene dipole antenna is nearly equal to one-third of free-space wavelength (λ SPP ≈ λ 0 /3). It can be seen that the graphene antenna enables high miniaturization and radiates at sub-wavelength scale. S (1, 1) parameters, input impedance, VSWR and radiation pattern of the graphene dipole antenna are shown in figure EM modelling and simulation analysis of graphene dipole antenna using as 2D graphene sheet and 3D graphene slab has been carried out. Antenna design using a 2D conductive graphene sheet of zero thickness provided good impedance matching and no mismatch loss was found. The EM modelling and simulation of the 3D graphene slab is dependent on its thickness. The conductivity of graphene reduces when the thickness of the 3D graphene slab increases, which leads to a decrease in current density in the antenna structure and impedance mismatch. Given the illustrative simulative results, our message for the users is to take care of the selection of graphene thickness for modelling graphene antennas in the EM simulator.