Spin hydrodynamic coupling is a recently discovered method to directly generate electricity from an electrically conducting fluid flow in the absence of Lorentz forces. This method relies on a collective coupling of electron spins -the internal quantum mechanical angular momentum of the electrons -with the local vorticity of a fluid flow. In this work, we experimentally investigate the spin hydrodynamic coupling in circular and non-circular capillary pipe flows and extend a previously obtained range of Reynolds numbers to smaller and larger values, 20 < Re < 21, 500, using the conducting liquid metal alloy GaInSn as the working liquid. In particular, we provide experimental evidences for the linear dependence of the generated electrical voltage with respect to the bulk flow velocity in the laminar regime of the circular pipe flow as predicted by Matsuo et al. [Phys. Rev. B. 96, 020401 (2017)]. Moreover, we show analytically that this behavior is universal in laminar regime regardless of the cross-sectional shape of the pipe. Finally, the proposed scaling law by Takahashi et al. [Nat. Phys. 12, 52 (2016)] for the generated voltage in turbulent circular pipe flows is experimentally evaluated at Reynolds numbers higher than in previous studies. Our results verify the reliability of the proposed scaling law for Reynolds numbers up to Re = 21, 500 for which the flow is in a fully developed turbulent state. Fluid dynamical processes in connection with quantum many body phenomena are known from quantum turbulence at low temperatures close to absolute zero Recently, Takahashi et al. To do so, we have designed and developed an experimental apparatus which allows us to measure the generated voltage V ISHE in both laminar and turbulent regimes and thus to extend the range of previously obtained flow Reynolds numbers. Our measurements are performed using circular capillary tubes with diameters D ranging from 0.1 mm to 1.2 mm for a wide range of Reynolds numbers Re = U b D/ν from 20 to 21,500 where U b and ν = 3.3 × 10 -7 m 2 s -1 are the bulk flow velocity and the kinematic viscosity of GaInSn as the working liquid, respectively. The GaInSn eutectic alloy is used due to its low kinematic viscosity, low melting temperature (10.5 • C) and, importantly, its low toxicity. The present experiments extend the previous measurements of Takahashi et al. The experimental set-up is designed to investigate the spin hydrodynamic coupling and measuring the regarding generated electrical voltage V ISHE produced by laminar and turbulent flows of GaInSn in different capillary tubes. Figure . 1 shows a schematic illustration of the apparatus which comprises a pressurized feeding vessel (2) and a collecting container (4) both made of plexiglass, a capillary tube (3), a weight scale V ISHE Capillary tubes with different diameters, lengths and cross-sections can be easily mounted via different adapters to the system. The majority of measurements were carried out using capillary tubes made of borosilicate glass (Hilgenberg GmbH) with circular cross-section and different diameters of D= 0.1, 0.4, 0.8 and 1.2 mm to cover a wide range of Reynolds numbers Re. In order to investigate the effect of the capillary tube cross-sectional shape on the spin hydrodynamic coupling in laminar regime, additional measurements were performed using a rectangular capillary tube with a sectional dimension of W × H = 0.334 × 0.149 mm 2 and a hydraulic diameter of D h Rec = 2W H/(W + H) = 0.2 mm. For the sake of comparability, the length of all capillaries was chosen to be L = 200 mm. The generated voltage V ISHE was measured by means of a nanovoltmeter (KEITHLEY 2182A) and two very thin wires (d = 0.4 mm) made of Platinum (Pt) implemented in the top and bottom vessels as electrodes. The liquid GaInSn in the top vessel is connected to ground to prevent the accumulation of static electric charge. The temperature of the vessels was also monitored using calibrated PT100 resistance thermometers with an uncertainty of ±0.1 • C. The whole apparatus was placed inside a thermally controlled chamber and the system was operated for a few hours before each set of experiments to reach stable conditions at 26 • C. Nevertheless, temperature differences may occur due to the Argon gas compression and expansion in the set-up. Considering the upper vessel height L = 50 mm and the thermal diffusivity κ of GaInSn from Table As mentioned before, Takahashi et al. where λ, e, and σ 0 are the spin diffusion length, the elementary charge, the reduced Plank constant and the electrical conductivity of the liquid metal, respectively. Takahashi et al. Turbulent flow Laminar flow The gap between the viscous sub-layer and the log-law region which is called buffer layer is neglected by Takahashi et al. is referred to Takahashi et al. where θ SHE and σ are the spin Hall angle and the spin-polarization vector where u τ = τ w /ρ is the turbulent friction velocity considering τ w and ρ as the wall-shear stress and the fluid density, respectively. It is also well-accepted that the log-law describes the velocity profile away from the viscous sub-layer along the wall normal direction y in canonical flows as follows where κ + and B are the von Krmn constant and the additive coefficient, respectively. Takahashi et al. Figure . 2(a) shows the mean flow velocity profile, the corresponding mean vorticity field and its gradient for a turbulent circular pipe flow in cylindrical coordinates with z being the streamwise and r the wall-normal direction, respectively. Clearly, the mean vorticity field ω of a circular pipe flow consists of only one component in azimuthal θ direction ω θ (r) = -∂ r u z (r). Based on eq.( Therefore, the radial vorticity gradient in the log-law region, especially close to the wall where it is more significant, is the main source of the induced spin and charge current in the same r and transversal z direction, respectively (see Fig. where Re δ0 τ = u τ δ 0 /ν ≈ 11.6 is the friction Reynolds number based on the viscous sub-layer thickness δ 0 . Note that this value for Re δ0 τ can be achieved when one considers the viscous sub-layer thickness as the height, y = r 0r, where the logarithmic velocity profile (see eq. ( The same procedure described above was conducted by Matsuo et al. As shown in Fig. The validity of eq. ( In this section, we first present and discuss the obtained experimental results on the spin hydrodynamic coupling at low Reynolds numbers (20 < Re < 1700) where the flow is assumed to be fully laminar. Regardless of the flow regime, the voltage signal measurement was carried out for a total measurement time of 10 seconds to avoid possible thermoelectric effects. Indeed, despite a moderately high relative Seebeck coefficient of GaInSn and Pt electrodes S GaInSn-Pt = +4.48 μVK -1 , no significant influence of the Seebeck effect on the measured voltage V ISHE is observed as the temperature of the top and bottom vessels remain constant during this short period of time. Two sets of measurements were performed using narrow circular capillary tubes with diameters of D = 0.1 mm and 0.4 mm to ensure that laminar flow could be established. Figure . 3(a) shows, as an example, the time evolution of the voltage V lam ISHE signal for different imposed pressure or pressure differences ranging from 1 bar to 6 bar. The flow is generated at t = 0 and is ceased after 10 seconds. No voltage V lam ISHE ≈ 0 is recorded until the liquid metal is driven into the capillary. As soon as the flow starts, a sharp jump is observed in the voltage signal as clearly can be seen from Fig. x-y , i.e. j C z ∝ (j S xyj S yx ). Based on Takahashi and Maekawa x-y turns out to be, it should be again a linear function of the bulk flow velocity given the vorticity field ω x-y = U b f (x, y) as a source term on the right hand side of eq. ( ) FIG. seen, they all collapse into a single linear curve. Note that the measured voltages for the rectangular capillary tube also fall onto the same curve utilizing the hydraulic radius r h0 Rec = D h Rec /2 as the scaling parameter. However, despite this observation, we do not argue that the hydraulic radius r h0 Rec is a universal parameter for scaling the generated voltage V lam ISHE in a capillary tube with a non-circular cross section. As discussed above, to propose a universal scaling, the general solution of eq. ( It is also interesting to have a look at the similarity between eq. ( Using the friction factor for a laminar flow f lam = 64/Re, the pressure drop correlation can be reformulated as follows: where μ is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. From the similarity between eqns.( The above equation shows that using the same working liquid, the generated voltage V lam ISHE should be the same at the same imposed pressure even for capillary tubes with different lengths and diameters. Figure Measurements were also performed for turbulent flows in circular capillary tubes with different diameters of D = 0.4 mm, 0.8 mm and 1.2 mm. respect to the Reynolds number 700 < Re < 3200 where both laminar and turbulent regimes are covered. Here, the transition from laminar to turbulent can be clearly identified from the measured voltages V ISHE where it increases linearly in laminar Re < 2000 and nonlinearly in fully turbulent Re > 2500 regimes with the critical transition Re being about 2300. As discussed before, the nonlinear behavior of the voltage with respect to the turbulent friction velocity u τ which is itself a nonlinear function of the Reynolds number Re was predicted and verified by Takahashi et al. We also calculated the constant coefficients of the fitted curves presented in Figs. 4(b) and 5(b) for the scaling laws of the spin hydrodynamic coupling for laminar and turbulent flows. Based on eqs. ( ) for laminar and turbulent flow, respectively. Note that except for ξ lam and ξ turb , all the parameters in C lam and C turb are considered to be independent of the flow. Hence, the ratio between ξ lam and ξ turb can be obtained as ξ turb /ξ lam = 1.60. Finally, we briefly discuss the possibility that the generated electrical voltage could be the result of a dynamo effect in the electrically conducting fluid flow. In magnetohydrodynamics, the dynamics of the magnetic field B is given by the induction equation where β is the magnetic diffusivity. The dimensionless magnetic Reynolds number R m relates the magnitudes of both terms on the right hand side of eq. ( We have presented liquid metal pipe flow experiments in a narrow capillary that generates a measurable nanovoltage caused by the collective coupling of the spins of the freely moving electrons to the macroscopic vorticity of the charged fluid. We extended the original experiments by Takahashi et al. Our presented experiments are an independent confirmation and extension of the work of Takahashi et al. 