Silicon waveguides have enabled large-scale manipulation and processing of near-infrared optical signals on chip. Yet, expanding the bandwidth of guided waves to other frequencies would further increase the functionality of silicon as a photonics platform. Frequency multiplexing by integrating additional architectures is one approach to the problem, but this is challenging to design and integrate within the existing form factor due to scaling with the free-space wavelength. Here, we demonstrate that a hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/silicon hybrid waveguide can enable dual-band operation at both midinfrared (6.5-7.0 μm) and telecom (1.55 μm) frequencies, respectively. Our device is realized via lithography-free transfer of hBN onto a silicon waveguide, maintaining near-infrared operation, while mid-infrared waveguiding of the hyperbolic phonon polaritons (HPhPs) in hBN is induced by the index contrast between the silicon waveguide and the surrounding air, thereby eliminating the need for deleterious etching of the hBN. We verify the behavior of HPhP waveguiding in both straight and curved trajectories, and validate their propagation characteristics within an analytical waveguide theoretical framework. This approach exemplifies a generalizable approach based on integrating hyperbolic media with silicon photonics for realizing frequency multiplexing in on-chip photonic systems. Introduction: Creating on-chip optical technologies for high-speed optical processing In the near-infrared (near-IR), integrated silicon photonics have arguably become the most important subfield after decades of development Hyperbolic polaritons (HPs) Here we address this challenge by realizing guided mid-IR and near-IR light within a hybrid hyperbolicmaterial/silicon waveguide heterostructure (Fig. Because the hybrid system is based on the relatively mature silicon photonics platform, maintaining the architecture of existing silicon waveguides in the near-IR can save significant redesign. Thus, the samples employed here use pre-patterned silicon waveguides fabricated on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers with a 220-nm thick device layer, a common choice for silicon photonics. For mid-IR operation, 10 B enriched hBN (~99% enriched Using s-SNOM with mid-IR excitation from a line-tunable quantum cascade laser (QCL), spatial mapping of the evanescent optical fields on the structure can be directly monitored at the defined incident laser frequency. Consistent with prior works Alternatively, polaritons can be directly launched from the edge of patterned silicon structures under hBN or the edge of the hBN flake and then propagate across the surface and interfere with the incident field at the tip, producing fringes with spacing λ HPhP To form a waveguide mode, two criteria must be satisfied 31 : (i) total internal reflection and (ii) constructive interference of the optical mode within the waveguide. In our geometry, we have exfoliated and transferred hBN flakes onto pre-patterned silicon waveguides, with the surrounding region where silicon was etched away resulting in freely suspended hBN (Fig. where E 0 is the amplitude, k is the in-plane wavevector, r is the position vector, ω is the frequency of the incident light and t is time. Prior research has shown that the in-plane propagating hyperbolic waves follow Snell's law In detail, the HPhP-WG modes (β) are the eigenvalues of the characteristic equation for the TE modes of a slab waveguide: where κ = √k f 2 -β 2 and γ = √ β 2 -k s 2 , and d is defined as the width of the underlying silicon waveguide, and k f and k s are complex-valued wavevectors of HPhPs supported over the silicon and suspended regions, respectively (details of the HPhP-WG derivation are included in SI, section 3). Thus, the mid-IR HPhPs confined within the thickness of hBN (the z-axis) are guided within the waveguide region (the x-axis) and propagating in the y-axis. This does not influence the silicon waveguide underlying hBN, and the near-IR light remains confined within the silicon cross-section (x-z plane) and propagating in the y-axis, as shown in Fig. To experimentally confirm the existence of HPhP-WG modes and compare the difference between HPhP-WG and normal HPhPs, we transferred a h 10 BN flake onto a 0.7-μm-wide silicon waveguide (see optical images in SI, Fig. While the above-referenced prototype is suitable to identify the difference between HPhP-WG and HPhPs dictated simply by the substrate properties, the tip-launched nature of the excitation of the HPhP-WG modes in this geometry leads to the observation of the halved wavelength Although the HPhP-WG modes are conceptually visualized, additional modal analysis is necessary for more comprehensive understanding. Accordingly, the cross-sectional line scans at 1450 cm -1 and 1500 cm -1 are extracted and plotted against the calculated modal profile, as shown in Fig. similar to the analytically calculated fundamental TE mode (Fig. While analyzing the s-SNOM images offers excellent qualitative agreement with both analytical calculations and three-dimensional simulations for the HPhP-WG mode profiles at several discrete frequencies, the wavevector analysis of HPhP-WG modes in the heterostructure system is required to validate the degree of quantitative agreement. Predictive capabilities of the HPhP-WG wavevector are imperative for developing more advanced applications, such as understanding out-of-plane coupling in chemical sensing concepts and for the design of more complicated waveguide geometries, such as onedimensional photonic crystal structures In on-chip photonics, there is a requirement to be able to transmit information not only along linear trajectories, but also to propagate light around bends with varying degrees of curvature to route and process optical signals. To demonstrate that HPhP-WG modes can be guided around such curves, we also have investigated curved waveguides. The width of the curved waveguide was designed to be 0.6 μm, with a break in the ring structure included to serve as the launching point for the HPhPs. We fabricated structures featuring inner radii that are sub-wavelength in scale of 1, 2 and 3 μm in an effort to demonstrate propagation around different curvatures (Fig. The potential for guiding long-wavelength mid-IR light through our hybrid HPhP-silicon waveguide platform opens significant opportunities for frequency multiplexing that could significantly expand operational bandwidth in on-chip silicon photonic approaches. However, while the HPhP-WG modes can indeed be described by analytical slab waveguide model and support HPhP wavelengths commensurate with the modal wavelengths of the silicon waveguide modes in the near-IR, this is only useful if the presence of the hyperbolic material is determined to be benign towards near-IR operation. As hBN has a low refractive index at near-IR frequencies, its effect on the silicon photonics platform at 1.55 μm should be minimal. To affirm this, we employ an electromagnetic eigenmode solver to determine the various allowed modes within a 0.7-μm wide silicon waveguide on SOI, with the primary guided modes presented in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated a novel approach for frequency multiplexing of near-IR and mid-IR signals through a hybrid, hyperbolic-silicon photonic waveguide platform. Within this geometry, we have illustrated that two disparate frequencies of light can be guided within the same structure with comparable wavevectors. Benefitting from the nature of HPhPs, which strongly confines light to deeply sub-diffractional dimensions, yet remains sensitive to the local refractive index, the utilization of the patterned substrates to create HPhP-WGs in hBN becomes possible. We demonstrate that both the fundamental and high order HPhP-WG modes can be supported within a 0.7-μm wide hBN/silicon heterostructure without the need for patterning of the hBN, despite a free-space wavelength that is approximately ten times larger than the waveguide width. Moreover, we show that these HPhP-WG modes can be routed on-chip, exhibiting propagation around bends in ring waveguide designs featuring radii up to six-fold smaller than the free-space wavelength, further validating the waveguide nature of the mode and illustrating its utility. Finally, these HPhP-WG modes in the mid-IR can in principle be supported simultaneously with the silicon waveguide mode in the near-IR, as the presence of the hBN exhibits negligible impact upon near-IR light propagation for pristine samples. This, therefore, uncovers a potential generalizable solution for expanding operational bandwidth with minimal cross-talk due to the large spectral mismatch between signals, but within a single nanoscale integrated platform. Moreover, this approach of exploiting the underlying patterned substrates instead of the hyperbolic material offers a generic way to manipulate HPhPs without deleterious impacts upon optical loss. aforementioned lithography steps were performed at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Numerical simulations. Three-dimensional finite-element simulations in the mid-infrared were conducted in CST Studio Suite 2018 using the frequency domain solver with open boundary conditions. In these simulations, polariton modes are only launched by a current point dipole above hBN, and field profiles are extracted using frequency monitors. All results used thicknesses consistent with that measured in topographic maps of the samples. Numerically calculated eigenmodes of the HPWG-WG were conducted in COMSOL. Modes for the silicon waveguides were calculated in the near-infrared in Lumerical MODE Solutions using a finite-difference eigenmode solver. Dielectric functions were taken from ref. Near-field measurements. Near-field nano-imaging experiments were carried out in a commercial (www.neaspec.com) s-SNOM based around a tapping-mode atomic force microscope. A metal-coated Sitip of apex radius R ≈ 20 nm that oscillates at a frequency of Ω ≈ 280 kHz and tapping amplitude of about 100 nm is illuminated by monochromatic quantum cascade laser beam at a wavelength λ = 6.9 μm and at an angle 60° off normal to the sample surface. Scattered light launches HPhPs in the device and the tip then re-scatters light (described more completely in the main text) for detection in the far-field. Background signals are efficiently suppressed by demodulating the detector signal at the third harmonic of the tip oscillation frequency and employing pseudo-heterodyne interferometric detection. Near-IR measurements. The near-IR propagation characteristics were measured using TE-polarized light (electric field polarized across the waveguide) from a tunable semiconductor laser source that was endfire coupled into the waveguides through tapered fibers. The transmission intensity, captured by a fibercoupled optical power meter, demonstrates some reduction in transmitted power after the transfer of an hBN flake atop the sample, likely due to handling-induced wear. 