In the context of magnetic hyperthermia, several physical parameters are used to optimize the heat generation and these include the nanoparticles concentration and the magnitude and frequency of the external AC magnetic field. Here we extend our previous work by computing nonlinear contributions to the specific absorption rate, while taking into account (weak) inter-particle dipolar interactions and DC magnetic field. In the previous work, the latter were shown to enhance the SAR in some specific geometries and setup. We find that the cubic correction to the AC susceptibility does not modify the qualitative behavior observed earlier but does bring a non negligible quantitative change of specific absorption rate, especially at relatively high AC field intensities. Incidentally, within our approach based on the AC susceptibility, we revisit the physiological empirical criterion on the upper limit of the product of the AC magnetic field intensity H 0 and its frequency f , and provide a physicist's rationale for it. Magnetic hyperthermia is a promising route for cancer therapy which consists in injecting a low treatment dose of magnetic nanoparticles (NP) in the targeted cells. The NP are heated with the help of an AC magnetic field and the optimization of the whole process depends on several factors, such as the magnetic field itself (in strength and frequency), NP size and concentration, and solution viscosity. The effect of all these physical parameters has been a) Electronic mail: jean-louis.dejardin@orange.fr b) Electronic mail: francois.vernay@univ-perp.fr c) Electronic mail: hamid.kachkachi@univ-perp.fr studied by many research groups by computing the hysteresis loop of the magnetization as a function of the AC field intensity, for a given frequency. where ω is the angular frequency of the AC field. E and H are the real amplitudes of the electric and magnetic field and the bar stands for time average. ǫ ′′ and μ ′′ are respectively the imaginary parts of the permittivity and permeability of the medium. Eq. (1) shows that the heat dissipated in the system is proportional to the field frequency and to the square of its amplitude. This result does not exclude situations where ǫ ′′ and μ ′′ are functions of the applied fields with the first correction to Q of order 4 in H with a coefficient given by the imaginary part of the cubic susceptibility. In the context of magnetic hyperthermia, averaging over one cycle of the AC magnetic field, H AC = H 0 exp (iωt) e x , yields the energy dissipated per cycle. The SAR is then shown to be directly proportional to the imaginary component of the AC susceptibility χ ′′ (ω). In a previous work Nonlinear AC susceptibility for magnetic nanoparticles has been studied by many authors. In the remainder of the paper, we will apply the formalism of Ref. [28] to investigate the effects of nonlinear AC susceptibility and their competition with the dipolar interactions in the specific absorption rate of an as-sembly of monodisperse magnetic nanoparticles with oriented uniaxial anisotropy, in a longitudinal DC magnetic field. Our investigation thus takes into account the effect of the competition between the DC field and the dipolar field. In particular, we will compare the linear and nonlinear contributions to the SAR as we increase the AC field amplitude. The paper is organized as follows: in the next Section we present our model and hypotheses and in Section III, the first nonlinear correction to the susceptibility and to the SAR is derived. The results are discussed in Section IV, which is followed by our conclusions. As stated earlier, several physical parameters influence the SAR (nanoparticles size, material, temperature, field intensity, frequency,...). The aim of the present work is not to provide a systematic investigation of the whole parameter space, but rather to pinpoint the role of the nonlinearities of the magnetic susceptibility. Hence, in order to make a consistent quantitative analysis, we consider, as in Ref. 19, a monodisperse assembly of N single-domain nanoparticles with oriented uniaxial anisotropy, each carrying a magnetic moment is attributed an (effective) uniaxial anisotropy constant K eff with an easy-axis in the z direction. The magnetic moments m i are located at the vertices of a simple 2D square super-lattice of parameter a, in the xy plane. The geometry of the system is sketched in Fig. In the present work, we consider the same system setup as in Ref. 19, namely of oriented uniaxial anisotropy for all nanoparticles and a longitudinal DC magnetic field, in the intermediate-to-high damping regime, and in the high-anisotropy limit. In this case, the cubic contribution to the AC susceptibility is given by Eq. (37) of Ref. 28, i.e. where eq,free = - and η = ωτ , τ is the (longitudinal) Néel relaxation time, and χ eq is the cubic contribution to the equilibrium susceptibility. The high-energy barrier limit requires σ = K eff V /k B T ≫ 1, where K eff is considered to be the largest energy scale in the present calculations and k B is the Boltzmann constant. This limit applies in the context of hyperthermia experiments (at temperature T ≃ 318K). Indeed, for iron-cobalt nanoparticles of volume V ∼ 5.23 × 10 -25 m 3 (i.e. spheres of radius R = 5 nm), with an effective anisotropy constant K eff ∼ 4.5 × 10 4 J.m -3 and a density ρ ≃ 8300 kg.m -3 , we have σ ≃ 5.4. Taking account of dipolar interactions (DI) together with uniaxial anisotropy and DC magnetic field (H ex = H DC e z ), the energy of a magnetic moment m i within the assembly, reads (after multiplying by where x = βmH DC and E DI i is the contribution from the long-range DI, with the usual notation: In summary, the variable energy parameters of our calculations are ξ and x, in addition to the AC field amplitude H 0 ; the frequency ω = 2πf of the latter and the remaining parameters will be held constant. We will adopt a perturbative approach to derive analytical expressions for the SAR as a function of ξ, x, H 0 and use them to investigate the effect of x, ξ, as we vary H 0 in the wide range explored by experiments. The AC susceptibility is a complex quantity that can be written as χ (x, σ, ξ, ω) = χ ′iχ ′′ . As usual, it can be expanded in terms of the amplitude H 0 of the AC field 24 χ = χ (1) + 3H 2 0 χ (3) + . . . . χ where χ (1) eq is the equilibrium susceptibility. According to the Debye theory (1) eq , see Eqs. ( eq,free + ξχ eq,int , where ξ = ξC (0,0) , is the genuine coefficient that accounts for the DI intensity ξ and the super-lattice through the lattice sum C (0,0) which evaluates to C (0,0) ≃ -9 for the square sample shown in Fig. In the linear regime with respect to the AC magnetic field, i.e. restricting the expansion in Eq. ( (3) eq ). So, in principle one should perform the latter expansion for both χ (1) eq and χ (3) eq . However, writing eq,free + ξχ (3) eq,int , similarly to Eq. ( free + ξχ (3) int (10) where SAR free is at least one order of magnitude smaller than that of χ (1) eq,free (in absolute value), and ξχ (3) int is even smaller. The calculation of the latter is rather involved and would require, for instance, the generalization of the work by Raihker and Stepanov (3) free , remembering that, at any rate, the whole approach assumes weak DI. In conclusion, we will compute the following correction to the SAR (3) free (11) where χ (3) free is given by Eq. ( The physical parameters used in the following are basically the same as those used in our earlier work We decided to focus our investigation on solid samples, with nanoparticles on the vertices of a square lattice. Other sample geometries could be investigated by computing the appropriate lattice sum C (0,0) , even nonperiodic systems can be tackled by randomly depleting the initial sample. However, in such samples, the main effect would then be to effectively modulate the dipolar field by changing the value of ξ. The impact of the nonlinearities in these systems would remain the same since Right panel: nonlinear SAR (SAR = SAR the correction in ξχ int are of higher-order in comparison to the free contribution. On the other hand, as discussed earlier, the study of samples with solid matrices makes it possible to simplify the problem by avoiding extra degrees freedom and related loss sources (Brownian motion and field-induced stirring). This is necessary for a more precise and conclusive study of heating due to susceptibility losses, especially for small nanoparticles for which the latter dominate The first term of expression (10), i.e. SAR The two different scaling laws, SAR In Fig. On the other hand, this addresses another issue regarding the critical product 7 H 0 f ≃ 4.85 × 10 8 A.m -1 .s -1 , considered as a physiological limit. From the physicist standpoint, this limit should be considered as an approximation of a more general condition. Indeed, the expansion of Eq. ( eq,free /χ (1) eq,free 1. This leads to H 0,c ∼ kB T μ0m which, for the present sample evaluates to 7.2 mT and thereby H 0,c f ≃ 3.2 × 10 8 A.m -1 .s -1 . For fields below H 0,c , a criterion based on the quantity (H 0 f ) 2 makes sense both from a physiological and a physical point of view. According to Eq. ( In the present investigation we have expressed the specific absorption rate (SAR) in terms of the out-of-phase of the dynamical susceptibility and have thereby provided analytical formulae that account for intrinsic and collective effects, as well as the first nonlinear correction to the AC susceptibility. In particular, the competition between the DC field and dipolar interactions which, according to our previous study, leads to a nonmonotonous behavior for the SAR, carries over, at least qualitatively, to the nonlinear regime for the AC field intensity. This implies that the DC field, even in the regime of higher AC field intensities, remains a key parameter for optimizing the SAR for such 2D arrays of nanomagnets. Incidentally, we discussed applications to hyperthermia and the corresponding (physiological) upper limit on the product H 0 f . We have seen that nonlinear contributions to the SAR bring an extra dependence on the AC field intensity and frequency. As a consequence, it is more relevant, from the physical point of view, and as long as the SAR is used for assessing the efficiency of magnetic hyperthemia, to consider instead the factor (H 0 f ) 2 with which the SAR globally scales.