We present a systematic study of electrical resistivity, Hall coefficient, magneto-optical imaging, magnetization, and STEM analyses of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 single crystals. Sharp diamagnetic transition and magneto-optical imaging reveal homogeneity of single crystal and prominent Bean-like penetrations of vortices. Large anisotropy of electrical resistivity, with  c / ab > 100, and semiconductor-like  c suggest that the electronic state is quasi two-dimensional. Hall effect measurements indicate that KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 is a multiband system with holes as main carriers. Magnetization measurements reveal significantly larger J c compared with that in other iron-based superconductors with different values of J c depending on the direction of magnetic field. Origin of these J c characteristics is discussed based on microstructural observations using STEM. In addition, further enhancement of J c in KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 for future application is demonstrated in terms of heavy-ion irradiation. The discovery of iron-based superconductors (IBSs) in 2008 Although critical current density, J c , in KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 has not been reported yet, recent report on J c in CsCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 at 2 K under self-field is comparable to that in well-studied 122-type materials In this paper, we characterize the superconducting properties of KCa Single crystals of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 were grown using the self-flux method with KAs as flux. Details of sample growth and basic physical properties have been reported in ref. Figure MO imaging of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 was performed to evaluate its homogeneity and quality. Figures H c2 is defined by the two different criteria of 0.9 n and 0.5 n . Here,  n is the normal state resistivity estimated from the extrapolation of the resistivity using the power-law form with n = 1.3 as shown in the broken line in Fig. and 407 kOe, for 0.9 n and 0.5 n , respectively. Using these data, the anisotropy parameter γ = H c2 ab /H c2 c is also evaluated as 8.2 and 7.4 for 0.9 n and 0.5 n , respectively. These estimated values of  and H c2 ab (0 K) are similar to that in the previous report To discuss the anisotropy of KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 , we measured  c for sample No. 3 (520 x 326 x 13 m 3 ). significantly larger than that in doped and non-doped BaFe 2 As 2 (∼100 These results can be understood by the quasi two-dimensional Fermi-surface sheets revealed by the first-principles calculations The absolute value of R H around T c is two times larger than that at 300 K. The absolute value of R H in our single crystal is smaller than that of R H in polycrystalline sample The J c in KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 was evaluated by measuring the irreversible magnetization. First, in-plane J c for H//c-axis, which we simply call J c , was evaluated from magnetization measurements. In the conventional method, J c can be evaluated using the extended Bean model where M [emu/cm 3 ] is M down -M up . M up and M down are the magnetization when sweeping the field up and down, respectively, and a [cm] and b [cm] are the sample width and length (a < b) For some magnetization data, however, since the self-field is significant,  is reduced in the return branch and causes a non-negligible errors in the calculation of J c . So J c was calculated from the magnetization of the second quadrant of the magnetic hysteresis loop in Fig. Evaluated J c as a function of temperature is summarized in Fig. . Next, we demonstrate further enhancement of J c by swift-particle irradiation. It is well known that point or columnar defects created by swift-particle irradiation work as pinning centers for vortices and increase J c In the case of compounds with tetragonal symmetry, three kinds of J c should be considered. One of them is in-plane J c when the field is applied along the c-axis as discussed above. The others are two independent critical current densities for H//ab-plane, one flows in the ab-plane and another flows along the c-axis. We tentatively designate the former as J c2 and the latter as J c3 (following the definition in ref. . J c under the self-field for H//c-axis is ~9 and ~1.5 times larger than J c H//ab at 2 K and above 15 K, respectively. While temperature dependence of J c H//ab below 10 K is weaker than that of J c for H//c-axis, values and temperature dependence of both components of J c become similar above 15 K. One of the possible reasons for the significantly large and anisotropic J c could be the presence of natural defects in the pristine KCa 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 . In the case of CaKFe 4 As 4 , where anisotropic J c was also observed, novel planar defects nearly parallel to the ab-plane were detected by STEM observations We have presented a systematic study of anisotropic physical properties and critical current density Significantly large enhancement of J c is sustained even at high temperatures and high fields. 2 Fe 4 As 4 F 2 single crystals by measuring anisotropic electrical resistivity, in-plane Hall coefficient, and anisotropic irreversible magnetization. The quality and microstructure of single crystals were also characterized by magneto-optical imaging and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). The electronic structure of With these values of (36 K), the residual resistivity ratio (RRR) is defined by (300 K)/(36 K), resulting to RRR ~ 11.4 or 12.3, respectively. In a similar compound of CaKFe 4 As 4 , RRR ((300 K)/(35 K)) of ~15 has been reported