Carbon Fibers (CFs) are the key solution for the future lightweight vehicle with enhanced fuel efficiency and reduced emissions owing to their ultrahigh strength to weight ratio. However, the high cost of the current dominant polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-based CFs hinders their application. The use of low-cost alternative precursors may overcome this issue. Unfortunately, low-cost CFs derived from cheaper single component precursors suffer from poor mechanical properties. Developing composite CFs by adding nanoadditives is very promising for low-cost CFs. Therefore, a fundamental understanding of carbonization condition impacts and polymer/additives conversion mechanisms during whole CF production are essential to develop low-cost CFs. In this work, we have demonstrated how the carbonization temperature affects the PAN/graphene CFs properties by performing a series of ReaxFF based molecular dynamics simulations. We found that graphene edges along with the nitrogen and oxygen functional groups have a catalytic role and act as seeds for the graphitic structure growth. Our MD simulations unveil that the addition of the graphene to PAN precursor modifies all-carbon membered rings in the CFs and enhances the alignments of 6-member carbon rings in carbonization which leads to superior mechanical properties compare to PAN-based CFs. These ReaxFF simulation results are validated by experimental structural and mechanical characterizations. Interestingly, mechanical characterizations indicate that PAN/graphene CFs carbonized at 1250 o C demonstrate 90.9 % increase in strength and 101.9% enhancement in Young's modulus compare to the PAN-based CFs carbonized at 1500 o C. The superior mechanical properties of PAN/graphene CFs at lower carbonization temperatures offers a path to both energy savings and cost reduction by decreasing the carbonization temperature and could provide key insights for the development of low-cost CFs. Since the commercialization of carbon fibers (CFs) in the 1960s, the remarkable properties of CFs such as high modulus and tensile strength, low density and notable chemical resistance have made CFs a primary candidate for light-weight material applications. However, the high cost of CF production currently limits exploitation of these properties to military, aerospace and sporting industries To date, renewable and low-cost precursors such as pitch, lignin, rayon, and cellulose have been examined to reduce the cost of CFs, however, their poor mechanical properties impose usage limitations In this study, the impact of the carbonization temperature on PAN/graphene nanocomposite CFs are investigated by coupling atomic-scale simulation to experimental validation. Atomistic ReaxFF simulation and experimental results jointly unveil how graphene sheet acts as a seed for the growth of graphitic structure and modifies the arrangement of CF all-carbon membered rings under different carbonization temperatures. The addition of graphene enhances the alignment of 6-member carbon rings and minimizes pore size and defects which leads to superior mechanical properties. Compared to pure PAN-based CFs, the PAN/graphene composite CFs demonstrate higher strength and Young's modulus even at lower carbonization temperatures. As such, the demonstrated impacts of the graphene additives on PAN-based CFs could give us a pathway to decrease the final product cost of CFs by replacing expensive PAN precursor by low-cost graphene/polymer composite precursor and increasing energy efficiency by decreasing the carbonization temperature. To achieve atomistic insights into PAN/graphene nanocomposite CFs and make comparison with current PAN-based CFs, reactive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations based on the ReaxFF potential are used. ReaxFF is an interatomic potential based on bond-orders between atoms and can be obtained by training the potential against quantum mechanics (QM) data, such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) In this study, we implement the C/H/O/N-2019 force field parameters developed by Kowalik et al. To build our systems, in order to simulate initial stages of carbonization process, a proposed oxidized PAN chain Initially, NVT ensemble at 300K for 60ps is used to equilibrate the systems (Fig. Pure PAN and PAN with 0.075 wt.% graphene (PAN/graphene) precursor fibers were produced by a lab-scale wet-spinning setup, in which PAN (Goodfellow, mean particle size: 50 μm, copolymer: 99.5% AN/0.5% MA, molecular weight: 230 kg /mol) was used as precursor powder, DMSO as the solvent and the coagulation bath is DMSO/DI-H2O system. The added graphene was prepared through a modified shear-exfoliation method. The details of graphene preparation, PAN/DMSO spinning dope, and spinning parameters can be found in our previous work Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, FEI Quanta 650) was used to investigate the morphology of CFs. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman patterns were recorded by Pro Multi-Purpose diffractometer (MPD) equipped with Cu Kα radiation with λ = 0.15406 nm in a 2θ range from 10° to 80° and Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw InVia equipped with a 514 nm laser beam), respectively. Tensile tests were carried out by an MTS Nano Bionix® testing system with a 0.5 N load cell and a displacement rate of 10 -4 mm min -1 . The gauge length of the samples was fixed at 20 mm in this work. Young's modulus, E, is calculated based on the stress-strain curve in the elastic region. In order to acquire atomistic perspective on how the graphene inclusion affects chemistry, structure and mechanical characteristics of PAN/graphene CFs in the initial stage of carbonization process, ReaxFF molecular dynamics (MD) simulation are employed. A detailed investigation of the MD simulation trajectories unveil that graphene surface carbon atoms are relatively inactive and do not form bonds with the polymer matrix even at high temperatures, due to their conjugated sp 2 electronic configuration. On the other hand, the graphene edges have catalytic effects on the formation and evolution of graphitic structures as illustrated in Fig. Simultaneously, the other 7-membered N-containing ring changes to a 6-membered all-carbon ring by losing its nitrogen atom (orange circles in Figs. MD simulation trajectories suggest that the N-containing groups and gases in PAN/graphene CFs play an important role in the evolution of graphitic structure by converting carbon radical species into the graphitic network. This agrees with our previous findings on PAN/PBO blends CFs Therefore, we analyze the role of the N and O-containing groups/gasses for PAN/graphene CFs and how the carbonization temperature affects them. We also propose various mechanisms for N2 production, as one of the main gases, emitted during the carbonization process. The evolutions of N-containing and O-containing species at different carbonization temperatures are shown in Figs. the second nitrogen atom, N2 (Figs. shows the best mechanical properties. It is crucial to consider the number of all-membered carbon rings in predicting the performance of the CFs, and at 2200K we have the least number of allmembered carbon rings. The all-membered carbon ring formation could provide the nucleation site for more extensive graphitic structure growth, and structurally the growth can be characterized by the partial carbon-carbon (C-C) radial distribution function (RDF), as shown in Fig. Significant increases in peak intensities that correspond to the C-C 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd neighbors can be observed as the carbonization temperature increases from 2200 K to 2800 K. The 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd peaks associate with the distances between a target carbon atom and its 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd sp 2 bonded neighbors. The higher intensity at the designated distances represent that a higher proportion of carbon are graphitized. The peaks at the 1 st neighbor distance of 2500 K and 2800K exhibit roughly identical intensities, but that at 2800K demonstrates slightly higher intensities at the 2 nd and 3 rd C-C neighbor distances (Fig. The massive edge growth at 2500 K can be also seen from Fig. Based on the ReaxFF MD simulation results, we expect superior mechanical properties of PAN/graphene CFs compare to PAN CFs at each carbonization temperatures due to improved alignments of 6-member all-carbon rings which leads to minimized pores and defects. In addition, enhanced PAN/graphene CFs mechanical properties with increase in carbonization temperatures is expected due to higher amount of all-carbon membered rings formation and carbon content. Later in this paper, these results will be verified by experimental mechanical testing. The reason why there is no notable change in the XRD patterns for both PAN and PAN/graphene is the relative low carbonization temperature. Usually, the temperature needs to be increased more than 2000 o C in order to see the clear revolution in graphitic structure The typical D band at 1350 cm -1 is ascribed to the breathing mode of point photons of A1g symmetry, while the G band at ∼1585 cm -1 results from the first-order scattering of the E2g phonon mode of in-plane sp 2 C atoms Specifically, for PAN/graphene CFs, when the carbonization increased from 1000 o C to 1500 o C,the strength increases from 668 to 1922 MPa (Fig. However, we did not see a significant increase in terms of the tensile modulus at the carbonization temperature of 1500 o C for pure PAN CFs, which can result from the porous microstructure of the lab synthesized PAN precursor, the higher carbonization temperature introduced more structural defects, like the cavity and boundaries, which will cause the stress concentration for PAN CFs. Even though, when we compared the mechanical properties of PAN CFs and PAN/graphene CFs, at the same carbonization temperature, the overall mechanical properties of PAN/graphene CFs are much better than those of the PAN CFs, which suggests the importance of graphene addition. In In this study, atomistic scale simulations and experimental characterizations are jointly employed to uncover carbonization condition impacts on PAN/graphene CFs properties and how the addition of graphene affects the carbon rings formation, alignment of 6-membered all-carbon rings, as well as the mechanical properties of PAN/graphene CFs at different carbonization temperatures. Our simulations demonstrate that the graphene edges have a catalytic role and act as seeds for the growth of graphitic structure with improved alignment. The graphene sheet can guide the formation of nitrogen-containing groups as a key component in capturing and converting carbon radical species into graphitic network. We find that a higher carbonization temperature leads to more 6-membered all-carbon rings, higher gas emissions and increased carbon content of the 