We analyze the properties of the edge states of the one-dimensional Kitaev model with long-range anisotropic pairing and tunneling. Tunneling and pairing are assumed to decay algebraically with exponents α and β, respectively, and α, β > 1. We determine analytically the decay of the edges modes. We show that the decay is exponential for α = β and when the coefficients scaling tunneling and pairing terms are equal. Otherwise, the decay is exponential at sufficiently short distances and then algebraic at the asymptotics. We show that the exponent of the algebraic tail is determined by the smallest exponent between α and β. Our predictions are in agreement with numerical results found by exact diagonalization and in the literature. Topological phases of matter have been attracting great interest since the discovery of the integer and fractional quantum Hall effect An extension of the Kitaev model has been recently discussed which describes algebraic decay of the tunneling and/or pairing terms In this paper we perform an analytical study of the spatial localization of the Majorana edge states in the longrange Kitaev models. Our analysis includes anisotropic and isotropic pairing and tunneling terms with the same or different algebraic exponents. For this model, we determine analytically the asymptotic scaling of the edge modes' tails. Our findings are supported by numerical calculations that are in good agreement with the numerical results reported in the literature for specific parameter choices We consider N polarized Fermions on a lattice with open boundary conditions. Their Hamiltonian has the form of a Kitaev model with long-range interactions: where ĉi and ĉ † i are the Fermionic annihilation and creation operators that fulfill the anticommutation relations , and δ i,j is the Kronecker delta. Here, μ is the chemical potential. The other coefficients j α r and ∆ β r scale the tunneling and pairing terms between two sites at distance r. They depend on the distance according to the power law decay given by: with the exponent α, β > 1. We denote the parameters J and ∆ by tunneling rate and the pairing strength, respectively. The coefficient N γ = N r=1 r -γ warrants normalization. For γ = α, β > 1, which is the case we consider, N γ → ζ(γ) for N → ∞ and ζ(γ) is the Riemann zeta function For sufficiently fast decaying interaction and hopping terms the system possesses two different phases separated by the quantum critical point μ c = 2J The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ĤBdG is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, and is a 2N × 2N matrix. In order to give its form in a compact way, first we write the vector-operator Ĉ as where |1, n ĉn + |0, n ĉ † n = (0, . . . , 0, ĉn , ĉ † n , 0, . . . , 0) T is a 2N component vector whose elements are all zeroes except for the 2n and the 2n + 1 components. Using this definition, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian can be written as In Eq. ( and the Pauli matrices with [τ l , τm ] = i n lmn τ n , where lmn is the Levi-Civita tensor and the indices are n, m, l ∈ {x, y, z}. In this work we are interested in the properties of Majorana edge states. Majorana edge states are eigenstates of Hamiltonian with {γ i , γj } = δ i,j . For convenience, we define the Majorana vector operator The Majorana vector operator is connected to Ĉ by the relation where the last equality defines the matrix A = A 2 ⊗ 1 N connecting the two representations, with Using Eq. ( where To obtain this expression we have used that For later convenience we further elaborate on this notation. We define the generalized lowering operators by The raising operators are the hermitian conjugate: Using these definitions, we rewrite Eq. ( and respectively. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian for the Majorana vector operators takes then the form This is the Hamiltonian form at the basis of our treatment. We now consider first the case of the isotropic Kitaev chain with μ = 0. We thus set ∆ = J in Eq. ( where τ-= τx -iτ y and τ+ = τ † -are the spin lowering and raising operators, respectively. The Majorana edge states are the eigenstates of Ĥ0 with zero eigenenergy: They are the exact eigenstates for any power-law exponent α. Independently of the exponent, they are localized at edge of the Kitaev chain, at site n = 1 or n = N , respectively. From definition (10) they correspond to the Majorana modes γ1 and γ2N . These operators commute with the Hamiltonian γ † Ĥ0 γ. These edge states still exist for finite but small μ and even for the anisotropic Kitaev chains. The analysis of the properties of the edge states in the anisotropic Kitaev chain is the aim of the next section. In this section we discuss the properties of the edge modes when the Kitaev chain is anisotropic, namely, when the exponent of the power law decay are not equal, α = β, and/or the coefficients of tunneling and pairing differ, J = ∆. We thus seek for eigenmodes γE that commute with Ĥ, Eq. (1), in the thermodynamic limit N → ∞: We write the eigenmodes as a linear superposition of the modes γj with scalar coefficients h j : where we have introduced the vector h = (h 1 , h 2 , ..., h 2N ) T . Edge modes are characterized by coeffcients h whose modulus is expected to be maximum close to the edges, which are here given by = 1 and = 2N , and which shall decrease with the distance from the closer edge. From Eq. ( where in the last equality we have used that ĤT M = -ĤM . Therefore, Eq. ( For the remainder of this section we want to present how we intend to derive h. Let us first formulate the eigenvalue problem where we use Dirac's notation of operator for matrices and ket (bra) vectors for right (left) eigenvectors. We define the Hamiltonian such that ĤM = Ĥ0 + Ĥ1 . For Ĥ1 = 0 eigenstates of ĤM at E = 0 are the vectors |v 0 = a|e 1 + b|e 2 , with a and b scalars. In particular, vectors |e 1 and |e 2 form a basis for the kernel of Ĥ0 for J = 0. We now consider the perturbation and search for eigenstates with E ≈ 0, which are localized at the edges. For this purpose we introduce the projector P into the subspace spanned by |e 1 and |e 2 , and the projector Q = 1 -P onto the orthogonal complement of the kernel of Ĥ0 , such that Q + P = 1 is the unity matrix 1. We note that P projects on the edges, while Q contains the chain's bulk. We now make some general considerations. By taking the projection of Eq. ( We note that, since we expect E ≈ 0, then the scalar product | v 0 | Ĥ1 |v | 1, thus the states we search for have small overlap with the bulk. We further find the structure of |v by considering that Eq. ( Using Eq. ( which ensures that 1 Substituting Eq. (30) in Eq. ( namely, we shall find the eigenvalues E for which Γ has a non-trivial kernel. In particular, for edge state we should obtain E = 0 in the thermodynamic limit N → ∞. Let us now use the explicit forms of Ĥ0 and Ĥ1 to calculate the matrix 1 This can be performed after considering that Q projects on the bulk of the chain. Therefore, in the thermodynamic limit we can apply the Fourier transform to derive the spectrum and the eigenvectors of ĤM and Ĥ1 . For this purpose we define the k vectors Here, Li γ (z) = ∞ r=1 z r /r γ denotes the Polylogarithm and |z| ≤ 1 Now the problem of finding the inverse in Eq. (31) reduces to invert 2 × 2 matrices. This can be solved analytically and gives, for E = 0, with Later on we will check the consistency of the assumption that the eigenvectors have vanishing energy by estimating the scaling of E with the chain's size. We can now determine the probability amplitudes h for the eigenstates at zero eigenvalue. This reduces to calculate the projection of the edge state that we will call |e , which is |v given by Eq. ( where The function |A(n)| 2 gives the spatial occupation of the chain site n of the eigenmode at zero eigenvalue. By construction, for ĤM = Ĥ0 it reduces to the edge state As it has been used here, the probability amplitude A(n) can be found taking the continuum limit, when the summation k goes over to a continuum of k-values in the interval [0, 2π). Using the residue theorem it can be rewritten as the sum of the integral along the contour, I(n), and of the residues, R(n), as it follows The integral is taken along the contour illustrated in Fig. where the interval of integration along the imaginary axis and the real axis are [0, M ] (M > 0) and [η, 2π -η], respectively. The individual paths are C η (y) = η + iy with y ∈ [0, M ], C M (y) = y + iM with y ∈ [η, 2π -η], and C 2π-η (y) = 2π -η + i(M -y) with y ∈ [0, M ]. The summation over the residues in Eq. (37) goes over the complex numbers k 0 with 0 < Re(k 0 ) < 2π and Im(k 0 ) > 0 for which Res[e i(n-1)k M(k), k 0 ] does not vanish and reads Res e i(n-1)k M(k), k 0 . Both residues and integral contributions determine the behavior of |e at the chain bulk. Below we argue that the residues contributes to A(n) with an exponential decay (see Eq. ( By inspection of Eq. ( where the a are the coefficients. Moreover, since M(k) is meromorphic there exists a finite and positive index L k0 such that a (k 0 ) = 0 for < -L k0 . This index determines the order of the pole of M(k) at k 0 . Using Eq. ( where P k0 (n) is a polynomial in n which depends on the coefficients of the Laurent expansion as using the expansion of e i(n-1)(k-k0) close to k 0 . Since all poles are isolated, then the behavior of Eq. ( where Pk 0 (n) = iP k 0 (n)e i(n-1)Re(k 0 ) . If k 0 is a pole of order one, then the polynomial P k 0 (n) is simply a constant independent on n. When ξ = 0, a pole lies on the real axis. This occurs at the critical point, where there is no localized mode. This treatment allows us to determine the critical values. To derive the phase diagram it is sufficient to find the zeros of F (k) in Eq. (32) which lie on the real axis in the interval k ∈ [0, 2π]. The gap closes at k = 0 and k = π. For k = π we obtain the threshold For k = 0 we obtain therefore the topological phase is bounded as follows in agreement with Ref. We will now extract the behavior of the integrals in Eq. (38). For this purpose we use that C M dke i(n-1)k M(k) vanishes in the limit M → ∞. In this limit the integral to solve is Here, M(k) is given in Eq. (34), and its imaginary part specifically reads: with the function F (k) of Eq. (32). In order to determine the behavior for n 1, we expand Im(M(iy)) in leading order of y using the Taylor expansion of the Polylogarithm where the real part is here only well-defined for γ / ∈ N, while the coefficient of the imaginary part is Γ(1 -γ) sin(π(1 -γ)) = π/Γ(γ). In leading order in the expansion, Eq. ( and Λ = Jπ/(μ/2 + J) 2 . Substituting in Eq. ( which is valid for n 1. This expression shows that the integral vanishes for J = ∆ and α = β. In this case the decay of the edge state is dominated by the residues and is purely exponential. Otherwise, when J = ∆ or α = β the behavior of I(n) is dominated by an algebraic decay with the smallest exponent between α and β. In this case the contribution of the integral determines the decay of the edge mode in the bulk. This result is in agreement with the behavior reported in the specific limits We have analyzed the properties of the spatial dependence of the zero eigenmodes focusing on their behavior away from the edges. Our study shows that their form is determined by the properties of the integral (36), whose integrand is determined by the ratio between the coefficients of Ĥ0 and of ĤM in Fourier space. In particular, the asymptotic scaling is determined by the properties of the coefficients of the Hamiltonian ĤM , while the properties of the coefficients of Ĥ0 enter into the scaling factors. The results we obtained did not make use of perturbation theory. Nevertheless they were derived under the assumption that the resulting eigenvector |v are at zero energy, so that we could set E = 0 in Eq. ( where we took |v 0 = |e 1 in Eq. (30). For |v 0 = |e 2 the overlap is maximal and reads This integral can be calculated using the residues theorem as above. It is composed by the sum of an exponential scaling exp(-ξN ) and an algebraic scaling N -min{α,β} , where the second contribution vanishes for α = β and ∆ = J. This provides an estimate how the energy scales for every finite N value and shows that the assumption E = 0 is correct in the thermodynamic limit. In this section we investigate numerically the spatial distribution of the edge states and their energy. This is done by determining the smallest positive eigenenergy E edge of ĤM , Eq. ( that the eigenstate |e occupies site n. Figure finding γ in good agreement with the analytical result γ = 2 min{α, β}. The effect of the contribution R(n) of the residues in Eq. ( as gray dashed line. While we observe for the isotropic case (subplot (a)) very good agreement in the full range of n, we see that the exponential behavior is still in good agreement for small n in the anisotropic case (subplots (b)-(d)). However, for larger values of n, in the anisotropic case, we observe eventually that the algebraic tail becomes dominant as expected. We have analytically determined the spatial decay of the edge states in the long-range Kitaev chain. The expressions we obtain are general and hold for any choice of the tunneling and pairing rates and of the exponents of the algebraic decay, as long as these are larger than unity. Our result allows to determine the boundaries of the topological non-trivial phase. Within this phase, it predicts that the edge modes are exponentially localized at the chain edges in the isotropic case, namely, when the pairing and tunneling rates are equal and decay with the same exponent. By means of this model we can extrapolate the characteristic length as a function of the parameters. This behavior agrees with the numerical results reported in Refs. Our approach could be generalized to higher dimensional cases, e.g. two or three dimensional systems 