Low dimensional structures in the non-trivial topological phase can host the in-gap Majorana bound states, identified experimentally as zero-bias peaks in differential conductance. Theoretical methods for studying Majorana modes are mostly based on the bulk-boundary correspondence or exact diagonalization of finite systems via, e.g., Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism. In this paper, we develop an efficient method for identifying the Majorana in-gap (edge) states via looking for extreme eigenvalues of symmetric matrices. The presented approach is based on the Krylov method and allows for study the spatial profile of the modes as well as the spectrum of the system. The advantage of this method is the calculation cost, which shows linear dependence on the number of lattice sites. The latter problem may be solved for very large clusters of arbitrary shape/geometry. In order to demonstrate the efficiency of our approach, we study two-and three-dimensional clusters described by the Kitaev and Rashba models for which we determine the number of Majorana modes and calculate their spatial structures. Additionally, we discuss the impact of the system size on the physical properties of the topological phase of the magnetic nanoisland deposited on the superconducting surface. In this case, we have shown that the eigenvalues of the in-gap states depend on the length of the system edge. In 2001 Kitaev proposed realization of the Majorana bound states at the ends of a one-dimensional (1D) chain of spinless fermions with an inter-site paring Currently, there are known several experimental setups where the Majorana quasiparticles realization is expected in low dimensional systems (Fig. Experimental works also report the existence of the Majorana in-gap (edge) modes around two-dimensional topological superconducting domains Motivation. Several experimental methods are used to confirm the presence of the Majorana edge modes. Most of them are based on the quantization of the differential conductance The presented method can be used to study the MZMs realization in the system. The method is based on the fact that the MZMs operators are integrals of motion of the system The paper is organized as follows. First, in Sec. II we derive the algorithm. We show analytically, that the presented method correctly reproduces the spectrum of the system. Additionally, we discuss the numerical implementation and performance evaluation of the discussed method. The basic examples and tests for the Rashba chain are shown in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we compare results obtained within the presented method applied to the systems and models well established in the literature. In particular, we reproduce the physical behaviors of the MZMs in the case of the twodimensional Kitaev model (Sec. IV A), the two-dimensional Rashba stripe (Sec. IV B), and the three-dimensional Rashba wire (Sec. IV C). Next, in Sec. V we present original results for the magnetic nanoisland, i.e., the system with irregular shape and site-dependent quantities. We discuss here, the scaling of the in-gap states with the size of the system. Finally, we summarize our method and results in Sec. VI. Main aspects. First we define Majorana fermions and MZMs. Majorana operators are defined by the following commutation relation which lead to the following properties of Majorana fermions Majorana zero modes, Γ n , are states which are indistinguishable from their antistates, so they fulfill mentioned above conditions for Majorana fermions, and additionally, they have to commute with the Hamiltonian H Every fermionic Hamiltonian, without many-body interaction, can be written in terms of Majorana operators The matrix M has to be real and it can be always chosen in the upper triangular form, which is proven by the commutation relations for Majorana operators (see Appendix A 1). Any set of Majorana operators can be transformed to another set of Majorana operators by the orthogonal transformation, therefore the Hamiltonian can be always rewritten in another basis, Operators γn are Majorana operators defined by the following equation where matrix O describes the orthogonal transformation (O T O = 1) from one Majorana fermion basis to the other. If under some transformation O, certain operators γn do not appear in the Hamiltonian, then the latter operators represent MZMs. We would like to formalize this condition in terms of matrix M. The Hamiltonian can be rewritten in terms of the new matrix Thus, the operator γn is a MZM operator Γ n = γn , if ∀ m (h nm -h mn ) = 0. Such operator is the integral of motion. It commutes with the Hamiltonian [H, Γ n ] = 0 simply because it does not appear in the Hamiltonian. This condition can be written as a single compact equation, and can be further expressed using the matrix elements of the original Hamiltonian (see Appendix A 2 for more details) The latter equation is similar to the eigendecomposition of the matrix -(M -M T ) 2 , where the minus sign is added to obtain positive spectrum of eigenvalues, Thus, by the numerical diagonalization of the matrix -(M -M T ) 2 , and looking for eigenvalues λ n = 0, one finds the number of MZMs as well as their spatial structure. If the Majorana operators {γ i } are defined in the base of real lattice nodes, then the spatial distribution of the MZM operator Γ n has the general form where the coefficients α in have to fulfill normalization condition ∑ i α 2 in = 1. The coefficients {α in } could be obtained from a transformation that is inverse to that introduced in the Eq. Spectrum of the system. Next, we establish a relationship between the defined above eigenproblem where the unitary matrix . Then, the Hamiltonian (4), originally written down in terms of Majorana fermions, can be expressed via standard creation and annihilation operators, where H i j = iU(M i j -M T ji )U -1 . In the above transformation, the non-uniqueness of matrix M, described in Sec. A 1, is clearly visible. Since the matrix U is unitary, the eigenvalues of the matrix -M -M T 2 from the Eq. ( Numerical implementation. The study of the topological phase in a general tight-binding model (e.g. in the presence of the disorder, untypical shape, etc.) is typically associated with the formulation of the problem in terms of the real space Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian (cf. Appendix B). In practice, this is equivalent to the eigenproblem of the large sparse matrix. This type of problem can be solved in several methods. The first and the most basic solution is the exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in the matrix form. This method can be extended to the iterative solution of the BdG Hamiltonian based on the kernel polynomial method We notice that the full diagonalization is associated with the computational complexity O(N 3 ), while the presented method based on the Krylov subspace has the complexity O(N), where N is the size of the Hamiltonian in the matrix form We implemented the described method using the C++ programming language and the Armadillo To evaluate our numerical implementation, we perform a numerical test for the 3D system (described in more details in Sec. IV C). In this case, the number of elements in the Hamiltonian in matrix form is the biggest, i.e. the eigenproblem is computationally most expensive. Numerical calculations were executed on the machines with the following hardware specification Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-7900X CPU @ 3.30GHz (20 threads/10 cores). The test of our approach, was executed in the two cases: (i) 10 threads and (ii) 20 threads (and 10 cores in the both cases). The calculation time is shown in Fig. The calculation time versus length L (or total number of sites) of the 3D Rashba nanowire (more details about model in Sec. IV C), i.e., an example system with 5 × 5 × L sites. The evaluation was performed on machine with Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-7900X CPU @ 3.30GHz. Red filled and blue empty points correspond to the result obtained on 10 and 20 threads calculations, respectively. First, we start with a test-case and study the 1D Rashba chain. This system is described by the Hamiltonian The first term describes free electrons in the chain where a † iσ (a iσ ) denotes creation (anihilation) operator of particle in i-th site with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, t i j denotes a hopping integral, while μ is the chemical potential. We assume equal hopping between the nearest-neighbor (NN) sites (i.e., t i, j = t = 1). The second term describes the Zeeman magnetic field h. Third term describes the Rashba spin-orbit coupling where α is the spin-orbit coupling, x is the unit vector in xdirection (along chain), while σ a (a = x, y, z) denote the Pauli matrices. The third term describes on-site superconductivity where ∆ corresponds to the superconducting gap. Next, we compare numerical results obtained from the method described in Sec. II and from the standard technique based on the BdG equations briefly summarized in the Appendix B. In order to apply our algorithm for studying topological phase, first, the Hamiltonian H 1D should be expressed in the Majorana operator basis: Then, the terms of H 1D are given by: Here, one can notice, that a similar strategy can be used also for two-and three-dimensional systems, as discussed further on. Moreover, this method can also be extended to inhomogeneous systems, e.g., with site-dependent parameters where W is the half-band-width, which for 1D chain W = 2t. As a consequence, Eq. ( The emergence of the non-trivial topological phase can be discussed via the spectrum of the system (Fig. The presented method allows for studying the spatial structure of the MZMs [Eq. where L i describes how much γ's located at site i contribute to all MZMs in the system. Therefore, M in Eq. ( In a realistic (finite) system, the MZMs are characterized by exponential suppression of energy splitting i.e., [Γ, H 0 ] ∝ exp(-L/ξ M ) In this section, we discuss results obtained from our method for a few important models hosting MZMs: two-dimensional Kitaev model (Sec. IV A), two-dimensional Rashba stripe (Sec. IV B), and three-dimensional Rashba wire (Sec. IV C). One of the most important models studied in the context of MZMs is the Kitaev model Here, operators a † i and a i denote creation and annihilation of the spinless fermion in the i-th site of the lattice. The first term describes hopping between the neighboring sites. The last term corresponds to the p + ip pairing, which can be effectively induced in some systems by the interplay between the s-wave superconductivity, the spin-orbit coupling and the external magnetic field Our results can be compared with the results shown in Ref. Next, we single out a range of μ for which the system hosts MZMs. This can be done in a relatively simple way by studying the energy spectrum and the existence of the zero energy in-gap states (cf. Fig. Here, we specify the numerical condition for the presence of the MZMs. In an infinite system, the existence of MZMs is equivalent to the presence of eigenmodes with λ n = 0 and each such eigenmode represents a single MZM. However, the numerical studies are carried out for large but finite systems. Then, the MZMs do overlap with each other and are not strict integrals of motion. Hence, we look for solutions λ n < ε, where we take ε = 10 -6 . In order to improve identification of the MZMs and to eliminate ambiguity connected with the choice of ε, we check whether the nearly-degenerate, eigenvalues λ n < ε are separated from the rest of the spectrum by a gap that is much larger than ε. The existence of the latter gap is clearly visible in Fig. Similarly to the Kitaev model, also the Rashba chain described in Sec. III, can be extended to the 2D form The kinetic term, H 0 , and the superconducting term H SC are unchanged and take the same form as previously [cf. Eq. ( where the magnetic field can be arranged in x (h x = 0 and h z = 0) or z (h x = 0 and h z = 0) directions. Also the Rashba spin-orbit coupling term takes the two-dimensional generalized form The boundaries of non-trivial phases with MZMs in this model have been determined by analysing the spectrum λ n , which is shown in Fig. Our method allows for study not only the topological phase diagram (i.e. the ranges of μ and h z , when the system hosts the MZMs) but also the number of independent pairs of MZMs in the system. Due to presence of the spin-orbit coupling, the number as well as the spatial structure of the MZMs typically depends on the direction of the magnetic field with respect to the system's plain. For comparison, we present results for the in-plain magnetic field (Fig. Here, O is an orthogonal matrix, O T O = 1, and N is the number of independent MZMs in the system. Since rotation does not change commutation relations, The numerical efficiency of our method allows for studying also three-dimensional systems. Here, as an example, we investigate the extended Rashba model on a three-dimensional lattice The kinetic and superconducting terms are the same as previously and are expressed, respectively, by Eqs. ( The spin-orbit coupling takes the form Similarly to the case of a two-dimensional system, the topological phase diagram is composed of several parabolic-like structures shown in Fig. One particular realization of eight MZMs is shown in Fig. Increasing the length of the nanowire N x does not change the main result. In Fig. Finally, we discuss the realization of the topological in-gap states in the magnetic nanoisland. Such setup has been realized experimentally in the form of Co magnetic island grown on Si and covered by Pb monolayer Typically, nanoislands have an irregular shape and can be described by the Hamiltonian with site-dependent parameters: where a † iσ (a iσ ) denotes creation (anihilation) operator of particle in i-th site with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓}, niσ = a † iσ a iσ , t i j denotes a hopping integral, μ is the chemical potential, h i is site dependent magnetic field, α is the spin-orbit coupling, while ∆ corresponds to the superconducting gap. Here h i corresponds to the magnetic moments of the atoms inside the nanoisland. When h i is strong enough, the topological domain occurs. In our calculations we take α/t = 1, ∆/t = 1, and μ/t = 4. Additionally, we assume h i /t = 2 inside nanoisland and 0 otherwise. Similarly to the previous cases, in the homogeneous system transition to the non-trivial topological phase occurs at some critical magnetic filed, here at h c = ∆ 2 + (4t -μ 2 ) In contrast to quasi-1D structures discussed in the previous sections, in the 2D case we observed several topological in-gap states associated with the the edge states around the nanoisland boundary [Fig. Here, it should be noticed that the spectrum of the system does not contain exact zero energy Majorana modes, as reported before Increasing the radius R, we check how the energy spectrum scales with the size of the island. In Fig. The main purpose of the present work is to derive and test a new method for identifying the MZMs in an arbitrary tightbinding model without many-body interactions or when the latter interactions may be introduced within a mean-field-like approximation. The basic idea behind our method is to find an orthogonal transformation of the Majorana fermions (not to be confused with the MZMs) such that selected fermions are missing in the transformed Hamiltonian. Then, the missing Majorana operators represent true zero modes, i.e. the MZMs. However, as we show in Sec. II, the presented method can be generalized to the system which does not contain the MZMs. What is more important, the presented method correctly reproduces the spectrum of the system. Because the algorithm is based on the Krylov method, the time of eigenstates computation is proportional to the size of the system. Our method is not limited by any specific form of a noninteracting Hamiltonian and can be applied to a system with arbitrary shape or geometry. The main advantage of our method is that the topological in-gap states can be identified via looking for extreme eigenvalues and the corresponding eigenvectors of a semipositive definite, symmetric matrix. Due to the latter property, one may apply the Lanczos algorithm and study tight-binding models containing up to 10 6 lattice sites (for a single band model). This opens a new way to study the edge states in the topologically nontrivial systems of relatively large sizes. We have compared numerical results obtained via the presented method and within the Bogoliubov-de Gennes technique and we have found that both methods are in excellent agreement (cf. Sec. III). Additionally, we have applied our method to a few commonly studied models and compared numerical results with the results from the literature-e.g. for the 2D Kitaev model, 2D Rashba stripes, or 3D Rashba nanowire (cf. Sec. IV). Finally, we have applyied the presented method to study the realization of the topological phase in the magnetic nanoisland deposited at the superconducting surface (cf. Sec. V). This study was motivated by recently realized experiments Presented comparative analysis shows that the discussed method can be successfully applied for different types of systems (independently of its dimension, geometry, shape, etc.). Finally, we note that our method has an additional important property. Namely, it targets not only the Majorana zero modes but general problem of the topological in-gap states. From this, our method can be applied to study of various type of physical phenomena, like Majorana zero modes, localized ingap states, or edge states in high order topological insulators. The Eq. ( Three terms: ∑ m h 2 nm , ∑ m h 2 mn , ∑ m 2h nm h mn are calculated in the next three Equations: (A5), (A6), and (A7), respectively: In the general case, the Hamiltonian H describing the finite size system in real space, can be diagonalized by unitary transformation where η n nad η † n are the new fermionic annihilation and creation operators. This transformation leads to the Bogoliubovde Gennes equations in the form E n Ψ in = ∑ j H i j Ψ jn , where Here, the block matrices denote: H i jσ σ free-electron term (in the form of spin-conserve hopping term), H i jσ σ spin-orbit coupling (in the form of spin-flip hopping terms), while D s i j and D t i j spin-singlet and spin-triplet superconducting term. For instant, in the case of described 1D lattice with s-wave on-site superconductivity (Sec. III), we have H i jσ σ = tδ i, j + (μ + σ h)δ i j , H i jσ σ = -iασ y σ σ δ i+1, j -δ i-1, j , and D s i j = ∆δ i j while D t i j = 0. From solution of the BdG equation, one can determine measurable physical quantities, e.g. the local density of states (LDOS) 