Lithium based deep eutectic solvents (DESs) are excellent candidates for eco-friendly electrolytes in lithium ion batteries. While some of these DES have shown promising results, a clear mechanism of lithium ion transport in DESs is not yet established. This work reports the study on the solvation and transport of lithium in a DES made from lithium perchlorate and acetamide using Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation and neutron scattering techniques. Based on hydrogen bonding (H-bonding) of acetamide with neighbouring molecules/ions, two states are largely prevalent: 1) acetamide molecules which are H-bonded to lithium ions (~ 36 %) and 2) acetamide molecules that are entirely free (~ 58%). Analysing their stochastic dynamics independently, it is observed that the long-range diffusion of the former is significantly slower than the latter one. This is also validated from the neutron scattering experiment on the same DES system. Further, the analysis the lithium dynamics shows that the diffusion of acetamide molecules in the first category is strongly coupled to that of lithium ions. On an average the lithium ions are H-bonded to ~ 3.2 acetamide molecules in their first solvation. These observations are further bolstered through the analysis of the H-bond correlation function between acetamide and lithium ions, which show that ~ 90% of lithium ionic transport is achieved by vehicular motion where the ions diffuse along with its first solvation shell. The findings of this work are an important advancement in understanding solvation and transport of lithium ion in DES. Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have become ubiquitous in a variety of applications ranging from manufacturing to pharmaceutical industries. Since their discovery A number of deep eutectic solvents (DESs) based on lithium salts have been synthesised Ionic liquid (IL) based electrolytes for lithium ion batteries have been explored quite extensively as potential substitutes to combustible organic solvents Recently, we have carried out a detailed study of diffusion mechanism of acetamide in a DES synthesized from acetamide and lithium perchlorate (LiClO4). It was established that the long-range diffusion of acetamide is strongly hindered in the DES compared to molten acetamide An all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of acetamide with lithium perchlorate was carried out in the molar ratio of 78:22, to simulate the deep eutectic solvent (DES). The initial configuration of the system was prepared by randomly arranging 400 acetamide, 56 lithium and perchlorate ions in a cubic box, to account for the appropriate mole ratio. The CHARMM forcefield version 27 The major advantage of MD simulations is the ability to obtain atomistic information from simulation trajectories that are inaccessible from experiments. The hydrogen-bonding (Hbonding) nature of the system can be characterised by the H-bond time correlation function which can be explicitly calculated from MD simulations. An H-bond between two molecules/ions can be characterised by geometric conditions, i.e., if the donor (oxygen in acetamide or perchlorate) and acceptor (amide nitrogen or lithium) are within a cutoff distance of Rcut. Further, when characterising H-bond between two molecular structures, a cutoff angle, (θcut) is also considered between atoms connecting the H-bond where, Npairsis the total number of pairs, t0 is an arbitrary time origin, and the angular brackets denote average over these arbitrary time-origins. where, rn(t) is the position of the n th molecule/atom and N is their total number in the simulation box. The angular brackets indicate the same as indicated for eq. (1). While MSD is a good indicator of the typical timescale of relaxation process, its detailed profile can be obtained by modeling IISF, which can be calculated from MD simulation trajectories as follows, whereQ is the reciprocalspace vector and the bar denotes average over all orientations in the reciprocal space. The values of Q are restricted by the geometry of simulation box, given by Q = 2nπ/L, where L is the edge length of the cubic box. The other symbols have the same meaning as mentioned earlier for eq. ( The deep eutectic solvent (DES) was synthesised from a solid mixture of acetamide and lithium perchlorate, in the mole fraction 78:22, which was kept heated to a temperature ~ 340 K for about an hour, until a clear solution was formed. The obtained DES remained in liquid state upon cooling down to room temperature (300 K). Quasielastic neutron scattering (QENS) experiments on the DES at 365 K were carried out at the FOCUS spectrometer in Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), Switzerland. The spectrometer was used with incident neutron wavelength of 6 Å, which offers an energy resolution of ~ 45 μeVand a Q-range of 0.4 to 1.6 Å -1 . Standard vanadium was used to measure the resolution of the spectrometer. The obtained neutron scattering spectra are dominated by incoherent scattering owing to the enormously large incoherent scattering cross-section of hydrogen atoms Our method of analysis focuses on classifying the acetamide (ACM) molecules in different states based on their hydrogen-bonding (H-bonding) network with the neighbouring molecules and ions. Similar studies were carried out in order to understand the reorientational mechanism of acetamide in different DES by Das et al A single acetamide molecule can act as both an H-bond donor (oxygen site) as well as an H-bond acceptor (amide hydrogen). The H-bond between the molecules and ions are defined using geometric conditions that have been described in section 2.2 in detail. While there is more than one acceptor site in each acetamide, we consider it to be a single possibility in our state strong H-bonding of acetamide with the ions in the DES The mean-squared displacement (MSD) for the centre of mass (COM) of both bound and free acetamide molecules in the DES are calculated from their MD simulation trajectories (eq. 2) and shown in Fig. Further, to proceed with the detailed analysis of the dynamics of bound and free acetamide molecules, their IISF, Ib(Q,t) and If(Q,t) were also calculated from their individual MD simulation trajectories using eq. ( where, the subscript b/findicates that this model will be used for both bound and free acetamide The fitting based on eq. ( indicating that the former is significantly slower compared to the later.The relaxation rate ζ1is modeled through the Singwi-Sjolander model of jump diffusion where, Db/f and τb/f correspond to the jump diffusivity and mean residence time between jumps for bound and free acetamide molecules. Clearly, in the Q→ 0 limit, we recover the asymptotic Fickian diffusion with simple quadratic Q-dependence.The description based on eq. ( of dynamical parameters for bound and free acetamide molecules in DES at 365 K based on the model described by eq. ( Jump diffusivity (cm The EISF, C0(Q), and the relaxation rate ζ2 are the parameters that describe the localized motion of acetamide between jumps. Fig. where, ravg is the average radius of the exponential distribution. The fits based on above equation for the EISF, C0(Q), is shown in Fig. To summarize, we have established that there two kinds of acetamide molecules depending upon whether they're free or strongly boundto a lithium ion through an H-bond. The latter category of molecules show significantly slower jump diffusion compared to the average diffusivity in the system, which suggests these molecules play a crucial role in the slowing down of acetamide dynamics in DES compared to pure acetamide. Comparison of the experimental results from QENSis discussed at the end of this section. Prior to that, we shall describe the transport mechanism of lithium ions in the system and the role played by the bound acetamide diffusion in its transport. Lithium transport plays an important role in the application of DES as a liquid electrolyte for lithium ion batteries. The lithium H-bond with acetamide in the DES can be understood in more detail by studying the nature and dynamics of its solvation shell. The number of acetamide molecules in a solvation shell, denoted by NACM, for each lithium ion is calculated by counting the number acetamide moleculeswhenever it is H-bonded with lithium ion at each timestep. The average of number of acetamide molecules coordinating with each lithium ion is ~ 3.2. This is similar to the coordination numbers inLiTFSI in ethylene carbonate and imidazolium ionic liquids As mentioned earlier, the lithium transport in ionic liquid electrolytes is achieved by structure diffusion and vehicular diffusionmechanisms whereλ * is the stretched relaxation rate and β is the stretching exponent. The fitting of Ch(t) as shown in Fig. where, P(λ, β) is the distribution ofrelaxation rates, λ, in the system. The distribution can be directly computed by evaluating the following integral for a given value of βand λ The distribution of relaxation rates, calculated for the obtained value of fitting parameters is shown in Fig. In order to estimate the fraction of lithium undergoing vehicular motion and structure diffusion, we split distribution of timescales into two regions.Structure diffusion of lithium ions can be recognized based on two necessary criteria. Firstly, they take place by exchange of the acetamide molecule in its solvation shell, which happens only when their H-bond is broken. Secondly, the displacement of the ions will be of the order of the size of an acetamide molecule (~ 3 Å). Given the jump diffusivity of lithium ions calculated in the previous section, we can estimate the typical time taken for such a displacement of δxto be 6DLi/(δx 2 ), which in the present case, is found to be ~ 100 ps.Therefore, the fraction of ions involved in structure diffusion can be calculated by integrating the distribution of H-bond lifetimes which are less than 100 ps, corresponding to relaxation rates beyond λ ~ 10 -2 ps -1 .Fig. Finally, we present a brief experimental corroborationfor two dynamically distinct kinds of acetamide molecules -bound to lithium and free. Neutron scattering in any hydrogeneous media is dominated by incoherent scattering from hydrogen in the system. Incoherentquasielastic scattering gives us information about the stochastic dynamics in the system. Therefore, diffusion of acetamide can be directly observed from QENS data of the deep eutectic solvent. Unlike MD simulations, the contribution of bound and free acetamide cannot be individually observed in QENS experiments.However, we can obtain a combined scattering law for considering both. Let where, Lj and Lj+loc are the Lorentzians corresponding to jump diffusion and jump+localised diffusion with ΓjandΓj+loc as the respective half-width at half maximum (HWHM) and C0 is the EISF of localised motion. Here we have ignored the ballistic component as it is significantly fast and will not contribute in the observable range of a neutron spectrometer. It should also be noted that while different Lorentzians are considered for bound and free acetamide molecules, the same EISF, C0(Q), is considered for both -as inferred from the results of MD simulation. Using eq. ( wherein we have combined jump + localised diffusion component of both the bound and free acetamide molecules. The LorentzianLj b and Lj f correspond to the jump diffusion of bound and free acetamide molecules respectively and the LorentzianLj+loc b+f corresponds to the combined jump + localiseddiffusion for both of them. As described in eq. ( 