Entropy stabilization has garnered significant attention as a new approach to designing novel materials. Much of the work in this area has focused on bulk ceramic processing, leaving entropy-stabilized thin films relatively underexplored. Following an extensive multi-variable investigation of polycrystalline (Mg 0.2 Co 0.2 Ni 0.2 Cu 0.2 Zn 0.2 )O thin films deposited via pulsed laser deposition (PLD), it is shown here that substrate temperature and deposition pressure have strong and repeatable effects on film texture and lattice parameter. Further analysis shows that films deposited at lower temperatures and under lower oxygen chamber pressure are ∼40x more electrically conductive than otherwise identical films grown at higher temperature and pressure. This electronic conductivity is hypothesized to be the result of polaron hopping mediated by transition metal valence changes which compensate for oxygen off-stoichiometry. High entropy alloys are a well established field of work with applications in metallic property optimization Single phase films were deposited using a KrF (248nm) excimer laser with pulse rates between 10 Hz and 30 Hz and laser energies ranging from 100 -350mJ. Film structure was found to be rather insensitive to laser parameters, so a pulse rate of 20 Hz and laser energy of 200mJ were selected as standard for continued study. Both Zn and Cu from the (Mg 0.2 Co 0.2 Ni 0.2 Cu 0.2 Zn 0.2 )O target ablated in slightly lower concentrations than the other cations in the target, so separate CuO and ZnO targets were used to supplement depositions and grow stoichiometric films, with ZnO requiring approximately 1.2% more laser pulses and CuO requiring approximately 3.5% more. Substrate temperature and chamber (oxygen) pressure combinations of 200 • C, 300 • C, or 450 • C and 50 mT or 100 mT were explored. The rest of this report focuses on samples deposited with a substrate temperature of 200 • C or 450 • C and oxygen pressure set to 50mT or 100mT; trends reported here are consistent across the rest of the deposition space. Substrates used in this study were Borosilicate [Eagle2000] glass (EXG) and Pilkington NSG TEC 15 Glass with approximately 340nm of fluorinated tin oxide coating (FTO, 13-15 Ω/sq). Samples were characterized using a variety of methods to validate their structure and composition before analyzing properties. Each thin film was measured in 44 different locations in order to confirm consistency of the film across the 2" x 2" substrate. Crystal structure and phase purity of PLD Targets were confirmed using a PANalytical PW3040 X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) and Cu-kα radiation. XRD data for films were collected at the Stanford Linear Accelerator on Beamline 1-5 (measurements calibrated with a LaB 6 standard, however BL 1-5 does not correct for tilt of sample. Data presented here is measured to be approximately 0.08 Q low) and with a Bruker D8 Discover with Cu-kα radiation. Composition was confirmed using a Fischer XUV xray fluorescence tool (XRF) in addition to energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) data collected using a FEI Talos F200X transmission electron microscope (TEM), which was also used for bright field and high angle annular dark field imaging. Top electrical contacts were deposited through a shadow mask using a Temescal FC2000 e-beam tool, with 10nm of Ti and 50nm of Pt. Current density measurements were taken with a Keithley 2400 source meter. Microstructure of the top down was taken with an FEI Nova 630 SEM, while the cross sections were imaged using a Hitachi 4800 SEM in order to manage sample charging. The opensource COMBIgor package for commercial Igor Pro Arrays of XRF measurements (Table XRD confirms that the rock salt structure of the films matches that of the desired rock salt ESO (Mg 0.2 Co 0.2 Ni 0.2 Cu 0.2 Zn 0.2 )O (Fig. Figure Films of approximately 1 μm thickness were grown on FTO coated borosilicate glass in order to enable through-thickness current density measurements. Measuring the conductivity of these films as a function of applied voltage reveals different electrical behavior for the LTLP samples from the other two types of films. Measurements collected on HTLP samples reveal a nonlinear re-Fig. The results presented here are consistent with previously published data as represented by Table Single phase rock salt (Mg 0.2 Co 0.2 Ni 0.2 Cu 0.2 Zn 0.2 )O samples can be deposited efficiently using PLD, and temperature and partial pressure of oxygen can be used to control crystallographic texturing. Thin film samples grown on FTO with a lattice constant of 4.22 Å and either (111) or (002) texturing (HTHP or HTLP, respectively) demonstrate a nonlinear electrical resistance between 1 and 3 MΩcm, while (111) textured films with a lattice constant of 4.19 Å (LTLP) are significantly more conductive, with resistivity values on the order of 50 kΩcm. The primary difference in microstructure for resistive versus conductive films is that the conductive films have a more random grain structure with nucleation occurring throughout the films, and the resistive films show columnar grains with nucleation occurring primarily at the substrate. It is unclear whether this is correlation or causation. The smaller lattice constant also indicates a shorter hopping distance for any induced charge in the material system. This, coupled with a likely oxygen off-stoichiometry during growth, makes polaron hopping a likely candidate for the conduction mechanism. Ultimately, this work indicates that thin film samples grown on FTO at 50mT pO 2 and a substrate temperature of 200 • C are more electrically conductive than samples grown at higher substrate temperatures with a more organized microstructure by approximately 40x. The data presented here are consistent with previous reports on this material, but also shows that manipulating microstructure and crystal lattice can have dramatic effects on electrical conductivity. 1-7 J o u r n a l N a me , [ y e a r ] , [ v o l . ] ,