The Aharonov-Casher effect is the analogue of the Aharonov-Bohm effect that applies to neutral particles carrying a magnetic moment. This can be manifested by vortices or fluxons flowing in trajectories that encompass an electric charge. These have been predicted to result in a persistent voltage which fluctuates for different sample realizations. Here we show that disordered superconductors exhibit reproducible voltage fluctuation, antisymmetrical with respect to magnetic field, as a function of various parameters such as magnetic field amplitude, field orientations and gate voltage. These results are interpreted as the vortex equivalent of the universal conductance fluctuations typical of mesoscopic disordered metallic systems. We analyze the data in the framework of random matrix theory and show that the fluctuation correlation functions and curvature distributions exhibit behavior which is consistent with Aharonov-Casher physics. The results demonstrate the quantum nature of the vortices in highly disordered superconductors both above and below Tc. The Aharonov-Casher (AC) effect FIG. The phenomenon of persistent currents is an illuminating demonstration of the AB physics. Essentially when a ring encircles a magnetic flux Φ a persistent equilibrium current proportional to ∂E ∂Φ , where E is the energy, is predicted A different direction from the neat realizations described above is to seek manifestations of AC physics in disordered samples (equivalent to mesoscopic disordered metals that exhibit universal conductance fluctuations (UCF)). Here, one gains in avoiding difficult preparation of the sample, but has much less control on the details (Fig. In this letter we describe measurements of spontaneous voltage in amorphous indium oxide (a-InO) films where the disorder is tuned so the samples are close to the superconductor-insulator transition (SIT). Indeed, it has been recently shown that the physics in the vicinity of this transition is determined by the Aharonov-Bohm-Casher effect The studied samples were a -InO films of thickness 30nm that were e-beam evaporated on MEMpax TM borosilicate glass or gateable doped Si/SiO of thickness 0.4mm (sse Fig The natural parameter to vary for obtaining different sample realizations for the AC effect is the gate voltage which controls the charges trapped between the islands and the various loops of vortex trajectories. However, for our 2D disordered samples on conventional substrates, obtaining detailed enough structure for analysis requires unattainable large voltages. Fig. Fig. It should be noted that unlike AB effect, AC physics does not depend directly on the magnetic flux penetrating the sample and thus is not expected to be washed out when the orientation of the field is varied from perpendicular to parallel to the film. Indeed, Fig. Fig Since in these conditions one can not model (nor control) the details of the sample one must look for global and statistical properties of the reproducable voltage in order to verify its origin. The experience of mesoscopic physics has taught us that even for disordered systems certain universal properties can be teased out of the data, which attest to the physics of the system The basic logic is similar here. We start with a rather general random matrix Hamiltonian (For more details see supplemental material [44]) describing a disordered 2D Josephson array composed of irregular placed and shaped superconducting islands. Depending on the magnetic field and on the charges trapped between the islands a reproducible random persistent voltage between two points on the edge of the sample is expected. Keeping track of all the influences of magnetic field on the vortex motion is a rather herculean task. Nevertheless, we can exploit the theory developed for correlations characterizing the response of the spectrum to the external parameter. This corresponds to the identification of the persistent voltage with the current and its derivative with the curvature. The correlation where . . . is an average over different systems and ranges of x. After a renormalization of the parameter X = C i (0)x, a universal behavior emerges as long as δX is larger than some non-universal value and β = 1 for the orthogonal ensemble (GOE) and β = 2 for the unitary one (GUE). It is important to note that since x depends on a non-universal parameter of the system δ , which is hard to obtain, one can determine X only up to a factor. This leads to an unusual correlation curve since the correlation should be maximum at δX = 0, and approaches zero from below an large δX, which means that there is a negative minimum of the correlation at some intermediate value of δX. For the curvature, a universal distribution is expected where Corrections to this distribution, which are especially notable at low values of k as result of non-universal features have also been discussed Here we analyze the results of seven different samples, for one of them, we analyze the data for 7 different angles of the magnetic field with respect to the sample plain, and for another sample at a range of temperatures between T = 0.42K and 3.26K. After subtracting the stray voltage background V 0 we antisymmetrize the data in the following way: where V is the average over (V (H) -V (-H))/2 for the whole range of measurement so V AS (H) = 0 . In order to substantiate these observation we calculate the correlation: where . . . H denotes an average over the available values of the magnetic fields. The samples show a peak in the correlation which then turns into negative values and then returns to values around zero. Rescalling the correlations such that δX = aδH, with a a sample specific constant results in a very similar correlation curve for all samples (see Fig. Although as seen in Fig. In summary, granular samples around the superconducting transition are promising candidates for experimental studies of additional features of random matrix theory. In our disordered superconductors, that incorporate "electronic granularity", the correlations and curvature of the voltage fluctuations fit much better the expectation for a system that follows the universal features of random matrix theory than those of non-correlated noise (e.g. 1/f noise). Nevertheless, it would be strange if non-universal features would not appear in realistic sample and open venues for further study. Although some features such as level spacings and wave function properties have been extensively studied experimentally in systems such as quantum dots We are grateful to I. Volotsenko for technical help and to K. Behnia, E. Shimsoni, N. Trivedi and V. Vinokur for useful discussions. This research was supported by the Israel science foundation, grant No. 783/17. For studying universal voltage fluctuations (UVF) in the disordered superconductors, we fabricated amorphous InO x x films on MEMpax TM borosilicate glass or doped Si/SiO 2 substrates by photolithography and ebeam vapour deposition. As shown in Fig. For determining the noise floor of our measurement setup we compare the responses of a sample at two temperatures, below and above the superconducting T c (3K). At 1.7K where the sample is superconducting, the antisymmetric voltage fluctuations have an amplitude of ∼6 μV (Fig. A magnetic field sweep adds an additional dc voltage due to inductive pickups from the measurement leads. At a constant field sweeping rate, this voltage appears as a constant background voltage over which the voltage fluctuations are superposed. The fluctuations themselves are independent of the sweep direction and antisymmetric w.r.t. the field. This is illustrated in the Fig. The rate of sweep has minimal effect on the observed fluctuations, except for the fact that small features may Comparison of measurements by two protocols. Black line: As-measured signal during a field sweep (mean subtracted). Red symbols: As-measured signal under the same conditions in using a relaxation + acquisition protocol (mean subtracted), data being collected after waiting ∼ 60 sec at each field value. sometimes get washed out for a sweep that is too fast, due to the built-in filters of the measuring instrument (Fig. As suggested by Wigner in the context of modeling the spectra of heavy nuclei, when one cannot fully describe the Hamiltonian of a complex system, some properties which depend on the symmetry of the system nevertheless may be captured. By representing the Hamiltonian as a random matrix and studying the emergent statistics of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of an appropriate random matrix ensemble For associating the statistical properties of the voltage fluctuations and the properties of random matrices, one should connect statistical properties of the eigenvalues of a random matrix to the voltage. For a simply connected geometry the experiment the voltage between two points on the edge of the sample is associated to the derivative of the systems energy with respect to the charge trapped in the void. For a complex multiple connected system of the type measured in the experiment, the dependency is much more complicated, akin to the difference between the AB response of a ring to a network. Nevertheless, the basic connection between the voltage and the derivative of the energy with respect to an external parameter holds. Thus, we should look for statistical properties of derivatives of the eigenvalues of random matrix ensemble with respect to an external parameter. As detailed in the main text, we concentrate on two such properties. Correlations between the parametric derivatives of the eigenvalues at different values of the parameter x (x)/δ respectively. Note that the mean level spacing δ is nonuniversal. The measured voltage V AS (H) or V AS (V g ) are proportional to the velocity, j, while ∂V AS (H)/∂H or ∂V AS (V g )/∂V g correspond to the curvature K. The proportionality depends on system specific properties, which are undetermined by the measurement. The correlation C(δH), as defined in Eq. ( Fortunately, For the curvature, we have the distribution as function of the normalized curvature k = K i /| K | 