There are few known semiconductors exhibiting both strong optical response and large dielectric polarizability. Inorganic materials with large dielectric polarizability tend to be wide-band gap complex oxides. Semiconductors with strong photoresponse to visible and infrared light tend to be weakly polarizable. Interesting exceptions to these trends are halide perovskites and phase-change chalcogenides. Here we introduce complex chalcogenides in the Ba-Zr-S system in perovskite and Ruddlesden-Popper structures as a new family of highly polarizable semiconductors. We report the results of impedance spectroscopy on single crystals that establish BaZrS3 and Ba3Zr2S7 as semiconductors with low-frequency relative dielectric constant (ε 0 ) in the range 50 -100, and band gap in the range 1.3 -1.8 eV. Our electronic structure calculations indicate the enhanced dielectric response in perovskite BaZrS3 versus Ruddlesden-Popper Ba3Zr2S7 is primarily due to enhanced IR mode-effective charges, and variations in phonon frequencies along 〈001〉; differences in the Born effective charges and the lattice stiffness are of secondary importance. This combination of covalent bonding in crystal structures more common to complex oxides results in a sizable Fröhlich coupling constant, which suggests that charge carriers are large polarons. Dielectric response controls the fundamental optoelectronic properties and the functional usefulness of semiconductors. The low-frequency dielectric response controls band bending and charge transport at semiconductor junctions, and the high-frequency response controls light-matter interaction. Dielectric response is also responsible for screening fixed and mobile charges, leading to polaron effects and controlling the interaction between charge carriers and lattice defects. In a recent contribution, we highlighted the relative dearth of semiconductors that combine band gap in the visible (VIS) and near-infrared (NIR)the essential range for much device technologywith strong dielectric response Here we report experimental measurements and theoretical calculations of the dielectric response of two complex-structured chalcogenide semiconductors, BaZrS3 in the perovskite structure, and Ba3Zr2S7 in the Ruddlesden-Popper structure. We find that both are highlypolarizable, with low-frequency relative dielectric constant (ε r,0 ) in the range of 50 -100. Our results are consistent with expectations that semiconductors in the perovskite and related crystal structures are highly-polarizable, and they frame a hypothesis that polaron transport effects will be strong in chalcogenide perovskites. The strong low-frequency dielectric response is intriguing in light of the long radiative lifetime previously reported in Ba3Zr2S7 BaZrS3 is isostructural with GdFeO3 in the distorted-perovskite structure, in space group Pnma We performed impedance spectroscopy measurements on single-crystal samples that we grew using the salt flux growth technique, as reported previously The small sample size presented a challenge to accurate impedance measurements. The typical crystal dimensions are 100 × 100 × 100 μm 3 , and the typical capacitance is in the range of 0.1 -1 pF, making it essential to remove stray capacitance from the measurement circuit. To do so, we made custom test fixtures that maintain shielding to within ≈ 5 mm of the wired sample (Fig. We performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Vienna ab-initio simulation program with PAW pseudopotentials and the PBEsol functional For BaZrS3 we find experimentally that ε r,0 = 80 ± 14 representing seven unique samples and eleven independent measurements. For Ba3Zr2S7 we find ε r,0 = 72 ± 37, representing five unique samples and nine independent measurements. In Fig. In Figs. 3c and 3f we show representative Nyquist plots of the impedance data measured between 0.1Hz and 1MHz, as described above, together with fits using an R-CPE parallel circuit model. The results for sample impedance obtained from the Nyquist analysis is in good agreement with that obtained by direct capacitance measurements at high frequency. Our experimental measurements of ε r are subject to a number of uncertainties. Calculating ε r from the measured capacitance relies on accurate measurements of the sample dimensions. Our μCT measurements are subject to a spatial resolution limit of 5 μm, which results in an uncertainty of ≈ 2% in ε r,0 . The statistical uncertainty in the best-fit parameters in the Nyquist analysis is ≈ 1%, and the statistical uncertainty in the high-frequency impedance measurements is lower still. We conclude that the spread in the dielectric constant (Fig. The contribution of each optically-active phonon mode μ to the total ionic dielectric response, here averaged over the principal axes, is given as where Z μα * are the effective charges for mode μ, obtained as a mass-normalized sum of the atomic Born effective charges tensors (available in Supplementary Table Phonon mode contributions to the ionic part of the low-frequency dielectric tensor for BaZrS3 (pink) and Ba3Zr2S7 (black). The abscissa indicates the phonon frequencies; modes that contribute less than 5% of the total dielectric response are omitted for clarity. The insets show atomic motions for the dominant mode in each direction for each material: for ε 11 , 63.8 cm -1 for PS, 102.2 cm -1 for RP; for ε 22 , 74.8 cm -1 for PS, 102.2 cm -1 for RP; for ε 33 , 45.6 cm -1 for PS, 161.3 cm -1 for RP. Atomic displacements are indicated with arrows; PS = perovskite. Fig. The response and explanation for ε 22 is similar to that for ε 11 . In the case of ε 22 the dominant modes for the perovskite and the RP are closer in frequency than for ε 11 , and again have comparable mode-effective charges. Therefore, the difference between ε 22 for the two phases is smaller than for ε 11 . The second-most dominant perovskite mode at 118.3 cm -1 (B3u) is higher in frequency than the second-most dominant RP mode (102.2 cm -1 , Eu symmetry). This suggests that the a axis of the perovskite is mechanically softer than the b axis; indeed, a/b=1.02, and thus the vibrational modes along [100] in BaZrS3 are lower in frequency than those along [010]. Similar to the behavior along the x direction, the 74.8 cm -1 (B3u) perovskite mode has motion of Zr, apical S, and Ba along the y direction, while the 118.3 cm -1 mode has motion of all S atoms and Ba along the y direction. The 73.0 cm -1 (Eu) RP mode has motion of Zr, equatorial and axial S, and interfacial Ba along the y direction, while the 102.2 cm -1 (Eu) mode has motion of Ba and equatorial and axial S in the y direction. The out-of-plane response ε 33 shows the largest contrast between the two phases, as expected due to the broken octahedral corner-connectivity along the long axis of Ba3Zr2S7. We find two dominant modes for each phase, and the dominant perovskite mode at 45.6 cm -1 (B2u) occurs at lower frequency than the dominant RP mode at 161.3 cm -1 (A2u). This perovskite mode at 45.6 cm - 1 involves motions of all atoms along the z direction. The RP mode at 161.3 cm -1 also involves all atoms moving along the z direction, with the interfacial Ba and S atoms exhibiting larger displacements than the atoms in the bilayer. There are several additional modes in the range 60-150 cm -1 that contribute to ε 33 in the RP. The different ε 33 response between the two phases can be further understood by analyzing the mode effective charges (MECs). The dominant, low frequency mode in the perovskite (45.6 cm -1 , B2u) has a MEC that is approximately 100% larger than the low-frequency modes in the RP, which make relatively little contribution to the ionic response: -0.815 eÅ for the perovskite mode at 45.6 cm -1 (B2u) vs. -0.418 eÅ and -0.357 eÅ for the RP modes at 73.2 cm -1 (A2u) and 76.9 cm -1 (A2u), respectively. The second-most dominant mode in the perovskite, at 115.3 cm -1 (B2u), has a MEC of -1.82 eÅ. For the RP, the dominant mode at 161.3 cm -1 (A2u) has a MEC of -1.75 eÅ, and the second-most dominant mode at 283.4 cm -1 (A2u) has a MEC of -2.79 eÅ. The contribution of these large MEC values to the ionic response is curtailed by the higher mode frequencies (c.f. the ν μ 2 term in the denominator of Eq. ( BaZrS3 and Ba3Zr2S7 have among the strongest low-frequency dielectric response reported for semiconductors with band gap in the VIS-NIR. In Fig. The large low-frequency dielectric response suggests that polaron effects may be prominent in the charge transport properties and optical spectra of these and related complex chalcogenide semiconductors. The Fröhlich coupling constant (α) parameterizes the interaction between charge carriers and polar phonons, and the tendency toward polaron formation. We estimate α ≈ 0.8 -2 for BaZrS3, and α ≈ 1 for Ba3Zr2S7, using available data for phonon frequency and electron effective mass In conclusion, we find that complex chalcogenides in the Ba-Zr-S system in perovskite and Ruddlesden-Popper structures are highly-polarizable semiconductors, with low-frequency dielectric constant comparable to or even exceeding the highest reported values for semiconductors with band gap in the NIR-VIS, including halide perovskites. We showed that the anisotropy in the dielectric response is sensitive to the 3D connectivity of the transition metal-sulfide octahedra, which manifest in changes in IR mode-effective charges and frequencies. This family of complex chalcogenide semiconductors therefore combines strong optical absorption, excellent environmental stability, and strong dielectric response, and consists of abundant and non-toxic elements 