Superconductivity is often found in a dome around quantum critical points, i.e. 2 nd -order quantum phase transitions. Here, we show that an enhancement of superconductivity is avoided at the critical pressure of the charge-density-wave (CDW) state in 2H-NbSe2. We present comprehensive highpressure Hall effect and magnetic susceptibility measurements of the CDW and superconducting state in 2H-NbSe2. Initially, the 2 nd -order CDW transition is suppressed smoothly but it drops to zero abruptly at PCDW = 4.4 GPa thus indicating a change to 1 st order whilst the superconducting transition temperature Tc rises continuously up to PCDW but is constant above. The putative 1 storder nature of the CDW transition is suggested as the cause for the absence of a superconducting dome at PCDW. Indeed, we show that the suppression of the superconducting state at low pressures is due to the loss of density of states inside the CDW phase whilst the initial suppression of the CDW state is accounted for by the stiffening of the underlying bare phonon mode. The interplay of competing orders is of fundamental and practical interest With both superconductivity and charge-density-wave (CDW) order stabilised by the opening of a gap on (parts of) the Fermi surface, a mutual competition between the two states has been anticipated since early studies The interplay of CDW order and superconductivity in 2H-NbSe 2 remains disputed 2H-NbSe 2 samples were grown by J. A. Wilson High-pressure measurements used moissanite anvils cells with a culet size of 800 μm for both the electrical and magnetic measurements. Both types of measurement used metallic gaskets which were prepared by indenting 450μm thick BeCu to approximately 60μm followed by drilling a 450μm hole. Pressure was determined at room temperature by ruby fluorescence, with multiple ruby flakes placed within the sample chamber as a manometer. The uncertainty of the pressure is taken as the standard deviation between pressure estimates from rubies across the sample chamber, both before and after a measurement. A comparison with the pressure obtained from ruby at room temperature and the superconducting transition of a piece of lead revealed good agreement to within 0.2 GPa for the pressure cells used for magnetisation measurements. The effect of different pressure media is discussed in S I of the supplementary information. For the electrical measurements, six bilayer electrodes were deposited on one anvil in a three-step process without breaking vacuum. Firstly, the anvil was cleaned using an RF argon plasma etch, followed by sputtering 20 nm of nichrome, and finally evaporation of 150 nm gold. To ensure potential electrical shorts between electrodes, any nichrome overspray was removed using TFN etchant. Gold contacts were evaporated on top of the sample. Epo-Tek H20E silver paint was used to connect the samples to the electrodes on the anvil. A four-probe AC method was used to measure the resistance with a current I = 1 mA. The six electrodes were used to measure V l , the longitudinal and V t , the transverse voltages, respectively. The Hall coefficient was calculated from the antisymmetric part of V t (H) under reversal of the magnetic field H as For the electrical measurements, the gaskets were insulated using a mixture of Stycast epoxy 2850FT and BN powder; the mixture was pressed between the anvils to above the maximum pressure required for the experiments and then cured whilst pressurised. A 400 μm hole through the insulation was drilled for the sample space. A Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) was used to measure the DC magnetic moment of the sample inside the pressure cell as detailed in section S IV of the supplementary information. The transition temperature, T c , has been determined as the temperature where χ(T ) has dropped by 10 % of the normalised step, i.e. close to the onset of the transition. This procedure results in uncertainty less than 0.05 K of T c . Our high-pressure Hall effect measurements show the suppression of T CDW under pressure in Figure The CDW transition temperature drops abruptly above 4.3(1) GPa as can be seen from both the isobaric temperature dependence and the isothermal pressure dependence of the Hall coefficient. The peak in the isobaric temperature dependence d∆R H /dT is reduced in amplitude above 3 GPa as shown in Figure 8.5 K. The measurements presented in Figure Our measurements of T c (P ) differ significantly from the two previous studies which extend beyond the critical pressure of the CDW by Smith et al. We use measurements of the upper critical field H c2 to characterise the Fermi velocity, v F , on the strong coupling Nb cylinders. At all pressures, we observe a linear dependency of H c2 (T ) below T c as presented in Figure At the critical pressure of the CDW phase, we observe a jump in the Fermi velocity suggesting a collapse of the CDW gap (dotted line in Figure We find that the stiffening of the bare longitudinal acoustic phonon from which the CDW develops can account for the suppression of T CDW under pressure. We use electron-phonon coupling dependent on the ingoing and outgoing momentum and the specific shape of the Fermi surface of 2H-NbSe 2 including the orbital character. The model was developed earlier by one of us as outlined in sections S V and S VI of the supplementary material A partial competition for density of states (DOS) is the main driver for the evolution of T c (P ). We use the experimentally determined phase boundary (solid line in Figure Our study provides the most comprehensive and consistent dataset of the boundary of the CDW phase in 2H-NbSe 2 to date and suggests a 1 st -order transition at P CDW = 4.4 GPa. The combined evidence of a drop in T CDW (P ) at P CDW extracted from the isobaric and isothermal analysis of the Hall effect and the jump in v F (P ) at P CDW suggest that the 1 st -order transition at P CDW is an intrinsic characteristic of the CDW in 2H- Our work is the first high-pressure study to find indications of a 1 st -order transition at the critical pressure of the CDW order. The previous pressure study by The XRD measurements of Feng et al. cannot rule out a 1 st -order transition at 4.4 GPa Indications of a 1 st -order transition were observed before in electron-irradiated 2H-NbSe 2 but were attributed to disorder effects Our detailed measurements lead us to different conclusions on the interplay between superconductivity and CDW order compared to previous studies. The increase in T c is in clear anticorrelation with T CDW (P ) as highlighted in Figure The 1 st -order nature of the CDW close to P CDW maybe the reason for the absence of a dome-shaped enhancement in T c (P ) upon suppression of the CDW. At a 2 nd -order quantum phase transition, i.e. a quantum critical point, a superconducting dome was observed in many systems including at the CDW QCP in 1T-TiSe 2 While we have shown clearly that CDW is suppressing superconductivity, our data also reveal that superconductivity has no effect on T CDW . Firstly, the gradual suppression of T CDW for P < 4 GPa cannot be driven by the superconductivity because T CDW > T c . Secondly, whilst the drop of T CDW occurs at the pressure where the power-law fit predicts T CDW < T c (H = 0), our Hall-effect data have detected the CDW transition in high magnetic fields where superconductivity is suppressed. In addition, the suppression of the amplitude (peak height) of the CDW signature in R H (T ) is based entirely on data where T CDW > T c (H = 0). Thus, our data suggest that the drop of T CDW at 4.4 GPa is intrinsic to the CDW in 2H-NbSe 2 and not driven by competition with superconductivity. Hence, we conclude that the competition between superconductivity and CDW is mostly unidirectional in 2H-NbSe 2 with only superconductivity suppressed by CDW but not the other way around. Such a unidirectional competition is supported by previous Xray measurements at ambient pressure which show that the intensity of the CDW reflection is not reduced at T c in zero field and not enhanced upon suppressing superconductivity in large magnetic fields In summary, our results lead to several profound conclusions about the interplay of CDW order and superconductivity in 2H-NbSe 2 . (i) Superconductivity is sup-pressed inside the CDW phase due the reduced electronic density of states available for superconductivity, (ii) Superconductivity is not reducing T CDW . Instead the suppression of T CDW under pressure is consistent with the stiffening of the underlying bare phonon mode. (iii) T CDW drops abruptly at P CDW = 4.4 GPa indicating a 1 st -order transition. (iv) Superconductivity is not enhanced at P CDW potentially due to CDW fluctuations being cut off at the 1 st -order transition. The phase boundary T CDW (P ) has been extracted from both d∆R H /dT and R H (P ) presented for measurements in μ 0 H = 10 T in the main manuscript. An important observation is the abrupt drop of T CDW at 4.4 GPa. This is best seen in R H (P ) in the inset of Fig. In Fig. In Fig. At 15 K and 20 K, a second kink at 4.4 GPa towards constant R H (P ) happens at the same pressure like the single kink at 5 K and 10 K. The origin of this second kink remains elusive and we can only speculate that it is related to fluctuations of the CDW order for pressures below 4.4 GPa. In fact, strong fluctuations have been inferred from ARPES experiments We have studied the influence of different pressure media and sample preparation on superconductivity under pressure in 2H-NbSe 2 . In Fig. The comparison of T c (P ) from these three measurements shows very good agreement up to P = 5.5 GPa (cf. Fig. Our measurements of T c (P) differ significantly from previous studies extending to beyond the critical pressure of the CDW as highlighted in Fig. Suderow et al. used methanol:ethanol which provides good hydrostatic conditions up to 10 GPa We could identify a difference in the sharpness of the superconducting transition in χ(T ) to correlate with the ). We note that the broad transitions in glycerol above the solidification pressure (Fig. With best hydrostatic conditions and sharp transitions in χ(T ) correlated to a sharp kink in T c (P ) at the critical pressure of the CDW we conclude that the behaviour observed with argon as a pressure medium reveals the intrinsic behaviour of 2H-NbSe 2 under pressure. Fig. The upper critical field H c2 (T ) has been extracted from temperature sweeps measuring T c at a fixed field. At each field T c was determined as the temperature where the resistivity reaches 10 % of the normal state value (see Fig. We use the Ginzburg-Landau equation to extract the Fermi velocity v F from the slope of the critical field. Our measurements show a linear slope over a similar large temperature range as previous studies A pressure cell mirror symmetric about the sample position was used. Thus, the MPMS software is able to reliably fit a dipole function with the amplitude giving the total magnetic moment of the sample and pressure cell. We remove the background contribution arising from the pressure cell by subtracting a Curie-Weiss type contribution fitted to the field-cooled measurement as illustrated in Fig. The demagnetisation factor, D, of the sample was calculated using the rectangular prism approximation Small variations in χ at low temperatures are associated with uncertainty of the sample position relative to the SQUID pick-up coils. We employed diagrammatic expansions based on the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), assuming the CDW to develop from a structured electron-phonon coupling dependent on both the ingoing and outgoing electron momenta and the orbital content of the bands. This model, which has as its only free parameter the overall magnitude of the electron-phonon coupling (fixed by T CDW (P = 0)), has previously been shown to agree well with the full range of experimental observations on the charge ordered state in 2H-NbSe 2 . The Random Phase Approximation provides the following expression for the softening of the bare (hightemperature) phonon mode Ω 0 (q) as a function of momentum transfer q as the temperature decreases towards the CDW phase transition at T CDW : Ω(q, T ) 2 = Ω 0 (q)(Ω 0 (q) -D 2 (q, T )) where D 2 (q, T ) is the generalized susceptibility to CDW formation and Ω softens to zero. A CDW with wavevector Q CDW results. The one free parameter in the model, the magnitude of the electronphonon coupling, is set to give the measured value of T CDW = 33.4 K at P = 0. Generally, the effect of increased pressure is to increase the frequency of phonons. Thus, we model high pressures as an increase of Ω 0 , the frequency of the longitudinal acoustic mode from which the CDW develops in 2H-NbSe 2 . We find that the momentum transfer q at which D 2 (q, T ) peaks is largely independent of temperature down to T = 0 in agreement with temperature and pressure-dependent X-ray diffraction results As a consequence of the increase of Ω 0 (Q CDW ) at higher pressures, a larger D 2 (Q CDW , T ) is required to reach Ω = 0 necessary to achieve the CDW transition. As D 2 increases with decreasing temperature, this corresponds to a decrease in T CDW with pressure. In our model calculations, we analyse the isothermal behaviour: For a fixed D 2 (Q CDW , T ), i.e. for a fixed temperature, we find the pressure P CDW (T ) at which Ω(q, T ) 2 = 0 corresponding to the boundary of the CDW phase. The value of D 2 (Q CDW , T = 0) sets the maximum bare phonon energy (and therefore pressure) from which a CDW can develop. From this we extract a pressure scaling factor to fit the experimentally observed phase boundary. This scaling corresponds to a rate of stiffening of the bare phonon mode. Finally, by inverting the relation we obtain T CDW (P), the phase boundary plotted in Fig. Our calculation of T c as a function of pressure is based on the change of the density of states (DoS) at the Fermi level, g EF (∆ CDW ), as a function of the CDW gap magnitude ∆ CDW . The total DoS g EF (∆ CDW ) is calculated from the contributions of the two Nb d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals g Nb EF (∆ CDW ), captured by our model of the Fermi surface developed in Refs. where G (E, k) is the retarded electronic Green's function at energy E and wavevector k. We calculated the Green's function, including the CDW gap, using the Nambu-Gor'kov method We relate the CDW gap to pressure by scaling to the fitted T CDW (P ) in Fig. In order for the total density of states g EF to be consistent with the Sommerfeld coefficient, we add a constant value of 0.0013 meV -1 which is associated with the DoS from the Se-orbitals. We use the BCS expression to calculate the transition temperature of the superconducting state where the coupling constant V = 0.035 was obtained to fit the zero-pressure T c using the zero-pressure g EF (which is consistent with the experimentally determined DoS from the Sommerfeld coefficient).