More than 20 crystalline and amorphous phases have been reported for ice so far Comprehensive observation of hydrogen ordering in ice VI was conducted by dielectric experiments in the pressure range 0.88-2.2 GPa. Ice VI was initially obtained at room temperature and its dielectric properties were determined in both cooling and heating runs in the temperature range 100-150 K, using a newly developed pressure cell (see Methods). After the heating runs, the sample was subsequently heated to room temperature for annealing. Then, the sample was compressed again, and dielectric measurements were conducted at different pressures (Fig. Phase transitions from ice VI to its hydrogen-ordered phases were observed at around 120-130 K, along with sudden weakening of the dielectric response of ice VI with decreasing temperature (Fig. Neutron diffraction experiments were conducted at 1.6 and 2.2 GPa to confirm whether ice XIX is a hydrogen-ordered crystalline phase distinct from ice XV. Both cooling and heating runs were conducted at each pressure in the temperature range 80-150 K. A transition from ice VI to ice XIX was also observed in the neutron diffraction experiments, as appearance of new peaks due to symmetry lowering (Fig. The reflection conditions show that the unit cell of ice XIX has a primitive lattice. The reduced unit cell parameters of ice XIX, a and c, corresponding to the unit cell of ice VI, are expanded and contracted, respectively, upon hydrogen ordering (Fig. On the other hand, no significant volume change was observed in our neutron diffraction experiments, in contrast to the expected negative volume change (∆V < 0) upon hydrogen ordering, probably due to the small volume contraction. For the structure analysis of ice XIX, we considered candidates of its space group based on the group-subgroup relationship between ice VI and XIX, in addition to the experimentally confirmed reflection conditions. There are 36 subgroups for the space group of ice VI, P4 2 /nmc, considering the primitive unit cell of ice XIX. Among them, thirteen space groups, having h0l: h + l = 2n and 0kl: k + l = 2n reflection conditions, can be excluded from the observed reflection conditions. We conducted Rietveld analyses using structural models with 18 space groups of the remaining candidates, except for the lower-symmetry space groups: Pc, P2 1 , P2, P1 ̅ and P1-this cut-off is based on indices of the subgroups of P4 2 /nmc (see details in Supplementary). Notably, we do not rule out the possibility that the actual crystal structure of ice XIX having one of these space groups, although sufficient refinement agreements were obtained for the 18 candidates from our neutron diffraction data. A structural model of each candidate was constructed using a partially ordered model adopted in an earlier study Past arguments for the second hydrogen-ordered phase of ice VI should be mentioned here The existence of such a phase (β-XV 8 ) in decompressed samples from above 1.45 GPa was first suggested by Gasser et al. using various measurements at ambient pressure This study first demonstrates the existence of multiple hydrogen-ordered phases for a hydrogen-disordered phase, and clarifies the effectiveness of applying pressure to induce phase competition among the hydrogen-ordered phases. Based on previous theoretical studies However, such a wide variety of hydrogen-ordered configurations and their stability evaluations might be a good benchmark for modern theoretical trials toward modelling biochemical and environmental processes with large water molecules, such as using topological graph invariant theory We conducted in-situ dielectric measurements under high pressure using a newly developed cell assembly. One of the most notable features of our development is that along with measuring the dielectric properties of the sample, the sample pressure can be simultaneously estimated using the ruby fluorescence method. This feature allows us to closely investigate the phase structure of ice in terms of its hydrogen ordering. The cell assembly is based on a piston-cylinder-type high-pressure apparatus (see details of the cell assembly in Supplementary Information). In the dielectric experiments involving ice VI, HCl (99.9%, Wako) was introduced as a dopant (concentration: 10 -2 M) to accelerate the hydrogen ordering of ice VI The neutron diffraction measurements were conducted at PLANET beamline 11 at the Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility of J-PARC, Ibaraki, Japan Initial candidates of ice XIX were determined based on the group-subgroup relationship between ice VI and XIX, using the SUBGROUPS program opened on the Bilbao crystallographic server 