Fe3-xGeTe2 is a layered van der Waals magnetic material with a relatively high ordering temperature and large anisotropy. While most studies have concluded the interlayer ordering to be ferromagnetic, there have also been reports of interlayer antiferromagnetism in Fe3-xGeTe2. Here, we investigate the interlayer magnetic ordering by neutron diffraction experiments, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spin-polarized STM measurements, density functional theory plus U calculations and STM simulations. We conclude that the layers of Fe3-xGeTe2 are coupled ferromagnetically and that in order to capture the magnetic and electronic properties of Fe3-xGeTe2 within density functional theory, Hubbard U corrections need to be taken into account. Magnetic layered materials, due to their reduced dimensionality, have exceptional physical properties and potential applications in spintronics As shown in Fig. Bulk Fe 3-x GeTe 2 has been reported to be a van der Waals magnetic material with a relatively high magnetic * berlijnt@ornl.gov ordering temperature and large easy-axis anisotropy In our work, a series of experimental and theoretical methods has been employed to study the interlayer magnetic ordering of Fe 3-x GeTe 2 . This includes neutron diffraction, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) around Fe-II vacancies, spin-polarized STM measurements across step-edges and Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. Our results indicate that Fe 3-x GeTe 2 is ferromagnetically ordered between the layers. In order to reach agreement of the theoretical results with the experimental observations we have found that the DFT+U method is needed to treat the local Coulomb interactions among the Fe-d orbitals. Neutron diffraction experiments and samples Neutron scattering was performed on a 5 gram powder sample of composition Fe 2.9 GeTe 2 and a single crystal sample of concentration Fe 2.76 GeTe 2 with dimensions up to 10 mm. The preparation and characterization of these samples are described in Ref. Scanning tunneling microscope and samples STM and spin-polarized STM was performed using a variabletemperature Omicron STM instrument. The sample was grown using the chemical vapor transport method as described in the Ref. Theoretical methods. DFT First, to investigate the possibility of interlayer AFM, neutron diffraction experiments were performed as shown in Fig. To better understand the origin of the STM contrast above the Fe-II vacancies and Fe-II atoms we analyzed the relaxed positions and local density of states of the Te atoms that are located directly above the Fe-II atoms. For all the considered Fe-II vacancy supercells and values of the Hubbard U, in both the FM and AFM configuration, the Te heights above the Fe-II vacancies are lower than the Te heights above the Fe-II atoms In our work we find that the interlayer magnetic coupling in Fe 3-x GeTe 2 is FM and that in order to capture this theoretically, Hubbard U corrections need to be included within DFT. This conclusion is consistent with some earlier studies that highlight the importance of correlation effects in Fe 3-x GeTe 2 One question that remains unanswered is why the DFT calculations show that upon including a Hubbard U correction, Fe 3-x GeTe 2 undergoes an AFM to FM transition. More generally this ties to the question what the nature is of the FM interlayer coupling. In the van der Waals system CrI 3 it has been concluded that the interlayer magnetic coupling is controlled by the supersuperexchange mechanism Another question is how the magnetization measurements can be interpreted given that there is no AFM in Fe 3-x GeTe 2 . Specifically in Ref. Using neutron diffraction, scanning tunneling microscopy, spin-polarized STM and DFT+U based total energy calculations and STM simulations we have studied the question whether the magnetic interlayer ordering in Fe 3-x GeTe 2 is FM or AFM. Based on our experimental results and the previous results in the literature we conclude that Fe 3-x GeTe 2 is FM. The resolution of the out-of-plane magnetic order is important given that it controls the time-reversal and inversion symmetry and therefore many physical properties such as the topol-ogy, second harmonic generation and piezo electricity to mention but a few. To theoretically reproduce the experimental observations we have learned that it is necessary to include Hubbard U corrections beyond pure DFT. This conclusion derived from the interlayer magnetic coupling will help understanding the electronic and magnetic properties of Fe 3-x GeTe 2 in general. [Supplementary Information] Interlayer magnetism in Fe3-xGeTe2 