Exciton-polaritons in organic materials are hybrid states that result from the strong interaction of photons and the bound excitons that these materials host. Organic polaritons hold great interest for optoelectronic applications, however progress towards this end has been impeded by the lack of a first principles approach that quantifies light-matter interactions in these systems, and which would allow the formulation of molecular design rules. Here we develop such a first principles approach, quantifying light-matter interactions. We exemplify our approach by studying variants of the conjugated polymer polydiacetylene, and we show that a large polymer conjugation length is critical towards strong exciton-photon coupling, hence underlying the importance of pure structures without static disorder. By comparing to our experimental reflectivity measurements, we show that the coupling of excitons to vibrations, manifested by phonon side bands in the absorption, has a strong impact on the magnitude of light-matter coupling over a range of frequencies. Our approach opens the way towards a deeper understanding of polaritons in organic materials, and we highlight that a quantitatively accurate calculation of the exciton-photon interaction would require accounting for all sources of disorder self-consistently. The dispersion of a photon in a material intersects with that of an exciton, and their interaction leads to two new hybrid polariton states. The upper and lower polaritons are separated by an energy gap of width ∆ (shaded region), which is referred to as the stop-band. Excitons are bound electron-hole pairs that appear in semiconductors, and are critical to the optoelectronic response of these materials. These quasiparticles are connected to a finite oscillating polarization that emits an electromagnetic wave, which can act on an incident wave, leading to a light-matter interplay. Once a photon is close to resonance with an exciton, light-matter coupling can become strong, and the two cannot be treated independently, as it was first realized in the pioneering works of Pekar 1, 2 and Hopfield 3 more than six decades ago. This coupling between polarization and photons is captured by introducing the quanta of a new quasiparticle referred to as a polariton, which describes the propagation of electromagnetic energy in matter. The building block of organic semiconductors is often organic molecules, the large size and weak intermolec-ular van der Waals interactions of which lead to phonon modes with low frequencies, hence strongly activated at room temperature. These slow nuclear motions lead to large variations of the electronic interactions between neighboring molecules. where the operator H exc-vib describes the exciton-vibration interactions. For a single exciton state with energy ω exc , coupled to a photon of energy ω ph , the exciton-photon Hamiltonian can be written within the so-called resonance approximation: 32 Here a † (a) is the creation (annihilation) operator of the photon state, and c † (c) the creation (annihilation) operator of the exciton. The constant g quantifies the magnitude of the exciton-photon interaction and is related to the width of the stop-band ∆ of Figure While first principles approaches have been used in several cases to parametrize the exciton-vibration interactions encoded in H exc-vib , Here we develop a theoretical framework for simulating exciton-photon interactions in organic systems fully from first principles. We exploit the relationship of the microscopic relation equation 2 to the classical macroscopic theory of polaritons to provide a first principles extraction of the stop-band width ∆. We exemplify our approach by studying variants of the conjugated polymer polydiacetylene (PDA) (Figure The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of our theoretical approach for describing light-matter interactions. We apply our methodology to disorder-free PDA in section 3. An overview of the studied systems is also provided in this section, alongside a discussion of their exciton properties and the experimental determination of the magnitude of light-matter interactions. We then proceed to discuss the role of static disorder in the sense of limiting the infinite conjugation length of disorder-free chains, in section 4. The impact of dynamic disorder (vibrations) on light-matter interactions is discussed in section 5, along with a detailed outline of the employed methodology for accounting for its effect. We summarize the entirety of our results and discuss potential future avenues in the Conclusions of section 6. Consider an electromagnetic wave E, B interacting with a material of dielectric (ω). The wave equation for the electric field in frequency space reads: For the moment, and for the sake of simplicity, let us consider a bulk isotropic material, for which the electric field can be treated as a plane wave: By substituting equation 4 into 3 we obtain: The transverse eigenmodes of the system satisfy the condition E = 0, therefore: It thus becomes obvious that if one obtains the dielectric response (ω) of a material, the dispersion of the light field in the material, i.e. the polariton dispersion, can be obtained by solving equation 6. This method is agnostic to the level at which the electronic structure is computed, and our GW -BSE methodology provides but one possibility. Let us now consider the so-called resonance approximation to equation 6, as a useful way of gaining physical intuition on the origins of the stop-band. However, we emphasize that we do not make use of this approximation to obtain the simulated results presented in this paper, and it only serves as a way of developing intuition. Unless we are at resonance with an excited state ω = ω o , the imaginary part of the dielectric response is negligible, therefore equation 6 can be approximated as: Equation 7 shows that there will only exist real solutions for the wavevector k once Re( (ω)) is positive. While this is generally the case, Re( (ω)) can become negative in the vicinity of an optical transition i with a high oscillator strength f i . This can be seen within a Lorentz oscillator model of the dielectric response: 41 The real part can be written as: where 0 is the background dielectric response, N the number of molecules per unit volume, m the electron mass and γ i the dephasing rate. In the vicinity of a transition i, ω = ω i + δω, and only keeping terms in first order of δω we obtain the condition for Re( (ω)) < 0 to be: where ω 2 p = N e 2 0m the plasma frequency of a material. The width of the frequency region over which condition 10 holds and thus Re( (ω)) < 0, defines the stop-band width ∆. Therefore, the brighter an optical transition, the more likely it is that it will lead to a forbidden region for light propagation in the material. Since the oscillator strength of a material satisfies the sum rule: with Z the number of electrons per molecule, we conclude that materials with fewer bright optical transitions are more likely to satisfy condition 10 and lead to strong light-matter interactions. This provides the motivation for studying extended one-dimensional systems like PDA, as elaborated in the following section. Before proceeding to the results section, we would like to highlight two points regarding the range of applicability of the presented methodology. First of all, this has been discussed in the context of a general Lorentz oscillator, and the frequencies ω i appearing in equation 8 need not correspond to exciton states. While here we focus on exciton-polaritons, optical phonons and plasmons can also form hybrid states with light, n Figure we calculate correspond to the bulk of an infinite material structure. However, these states can also form at the surface of a material, only propagating along the interface between different media. These states are referred to as surface polaritons, and have a finite dispersion within the stop-band of the infinite 'bulk' polariton states that we study here. 3 Application to disorder-free PDA Polydiacetylene (PDA) is a conjugated polymer with an alternating sequence of single-double-single-triple carbon-carbon bonds, as visualized in Figure A. If we were to disregard the absorption from the exciton over a finite region of frequencies, then every incident photon with an energy within the stop-band region would be reflected, giving a reflectance of R = 1, 50 since no propagation of light can take place within the forbidden region. However, the finite damping γ that appears in the dielectric function of equation 8 due to the absorption of an exciton, leads to weaker reflectance and a 'gap' within the forbidden region of the stop-band 4, 51 (as also seen in Figure Therefore, it is not always the case that one can identify the stop-band as a region of high reflectance, and its internal structure can be rich. This is the case with the reflectivity spectra of Figure appears on the low-energy side of the dip due to the absorption from an exciton state, and the one for which the reflectance reaches values at least as large as the maximum of the first peak. This way of determining the stop-band is similar to previous work, Our reflectivity measurements show that the stop-band width is 2.64 eV and 1.16 eV for the blue and red chains respectively. We discuss the origin of this large difference between the red and blue chains with the aid of simulations below. The measured values are within the expected range, as the stop-band width has been shown to surpass values of 1 -2 eV in several organic materials. Let us now examine some of the details of the experimental reflectivity spectra. For the blue chains, the reflectance dips around the energy of the bright singlet exciton state at 1.97 eV, and a vibronic peak is also weakly resolved at 2.15 eV. Furthermore, a small dip appears at 1.85 eV, and this has been discussed to be due to minority chain populations with different geometries, which are present within the samples. The PDA variants of Figure The absorption of the model PDAs and real red system as computed from GW -BSE is given in Figure The computational details for the electronic structure calculations are given in Appendix B. We were not able to obtain converged exciton properties for the real blue PDA system, and we exclude it from any further computational analysis. The first thing to observe from Figure Moreover, it is interesting to note the difference in the exciton energy between the real and model red structures. Since the polymer backbone is identical in both cases, it is only the side-chains that can be causing the observed difference. The side-chains of the real red PDA consist of two phenyl rings, which are highly polarizable and hence provide significant screening to the Coulomb interaction that binds electron-hole pairs together. In contrast, in the model system the field lines of this Coulomb interaction are not screened by a medium, since the side-chains have been substituted by hydrogen atoms. Consequently, the exciton is more strongly bound in the model chain, further stabilizing its energy. For the real blue system, the side-groups largely consist of non-polarizable alkyl chains, hence the screening they provide is much weaker compared to the red PDA. This is reflected by the fact that the exciton energy of the model blue system, where the side-chains have been substituted by hydrogen atoms, closely reproduces the experimental value from the absorption spectrum of Figure Here xx (ω) is the only non-zero component of the dielectric tensor of the material, and in the y and z directions, the vacuum dispersion holds: It should be emphasized that even when we include the effect of exciton dispersion on the polariton states, the resulting theory values for the stop-band width remain largely unchanged. We see from Table Furthermore, the comparison of the predicted ∆ values for the real and model red systems suggests that the introduction of polarizable side-chains leads to weaker exciton-photon interactions. This is likely due to two reasons. Firstly, the dielectric screening that they provide to electron-hole pairs (Figure The values predicted by the calculations for the stop-band width are in reasonable agreement with experiment, as summarized in Table For normal incidence of light, the reflectance can be calculated as: where n(ω) the complex refractive index of the material. For the model blue chains this is plotted in Figure Before moving on to consider the effects of disorder, we would like to comment on the speed of energy transfer in these materials, as predicted by the results of this section. First, let us consider the case of purely excitonic motion. The quantity that we need to compute in order to quantify the speed of band-like exciton motion is the exciton group velocity: where E exc the exciton energy and q the exciton wavenumber. Following photoexcitation, a wavepacket is generated on the exciton potential energy surface, the momentum of which is narrowly distributed around q = 0, since light induces close-to-vertical transitions within the Franck-Condon approximation. The center of mass of this Γ-point exciton will then travel with the velocity of equation 14. We are interested in energy transfer in the direction of the chains, which we define to lie along the x axis, we thus approximate v g,exc as the average along the respective dimension of reciprocal space. To this end, we calculate the exciton energy at the band-edge X, using a supercell calculation that is outlined in Appendix B, and we obtain: Now let us consider the group velocity of a polariton v g,pol close to the exciton resonance, which can be computed from the solution of equation 12 for different energies of the incident light. The result for the model blue chains is given in Figure In a realistic film of PDA, the system deviates from the perfectly periodic behavior in more than one ways. As we saw when discussing the experimental reflectivity spectra, unpolymerized chains of diacetylene can be present, as well as minority populations of chains at different conformations. Imperfections in the chain polymerization can lead to breaks in the conjugation of the system, or even to the termination of the polymer structure after a finite number of monomers. Here we consider such effects limiting the chain conjugation, and we ignore atomic defects and vacancies, due to the pure character of the samples as discussed previously. In order to understand the impact of finite conjugation lengths on the exciton and polariton properties, we study five different finite systems consisting of one to five diacetylene monomers, which we terminate on both sides with hydrogen atoms. For simplicity, we choose to terminate the chains after the occurrence of a triple bond, so that the carbon atoms at the boundaries only need to bond with a single hydrogen. As an example, Figure We perform GW -BSE calculations on these oligomers, introducing a vacuum of 20 Å between their periodic images. We thus obtain (ω) for each of these, and similar to the previous section, compute the energy of the first singlet exciton E(S 1 ) and the stop-band width ∆, which we visualize in Figures We have chosen to construct the oligomer chains so that they are planar, and hence by increasing the number of monomers, we approach the periodic limit of the model blue PDA chains of the previous section, which is also noted on Figure First of all, it is clear from Figure We therefore conclude that the presence of static disorder, in this case in the form of finite chain lengths, reduces the magnitude of light-matter interactions. However, the large measured stop-band width of ∆ = 2.64 eV for the blue chains suggests that conjugation-limiting effects are not important in PDA. Naturally, breaks in the conjugation and imperfect polymerization do occur, however the results suggest that the vast majority of chains extend beyond 15 diacetylene monomers, for which number the periodic limit is reached, and the maximal light-matter coupling is obtained. Here we do not compute the effect of static disorder on the reflectance of PDA, as this would require explicit inclusion of e.g. unpolymerized diacetylene monomers within a supercell of PDA, making the cost of these calculations prohibitive. We now proceed to discuss the effects of dynamic disorder on light-matter coupling. A purely electronic structure calculation predicts that there is only a single bright exciton state in PDA, the vertical transition peak in the computed absorption spectrum of Figure This effect reduces the width of the region in which Re( (ω)) < 0 following an excitonic transition, as we show in Figure where I is the identity, k runs over the phonon modes of the system, which have frequencies of ω k . The energy of the first singlet exciton refers to the infinite periodic limit. The Huang-Rhys factors are calculated as: where we approximate the first derivative V ep,k of the exciton energy along mode k using the finite difference formula: with δu(k) being a small dimensionless displacement along mode k. At a practical level, the calculation of V ep,k requires two GW -BSE calculations at the displaced configurations of each mode, and constitutes a very computationally intensive process. We were therefore only able to obtain a full parametrization of the Hamiltonian 17 for the two model chains, which only have a small number of phonon modes due to the small size of their unit cell. The existence of the side-chains for the real red chains, for which we previously calculated the exciton properties, makes the task of computing exciton-phonon interactions a very formidable one, and we thus limit the following analysis to the model chains. When computing the Huang-Rhys factors of PDA, one needs to account for the fact that the exciton can travel a finite distance of N monomers coherently, before being scattered by a phonon. Therefore if λ k,unit is the value obtained within a unit cell exciton calculation where the phonon mode k has been displaced, then the actual value of the Huang-Rhys parameter is: 57 We estimate the exciton coherence length N as: where v g,exc the exciton group velocity from section 3, τ scatter the timescale for the exciton to be scattered by a phonon, and L DA the length of a single diacetylene monomer. Since we find that the excited state surface of the double-bond stretch is the steepest, i.e. has the largest value of V ep,k , we approximate τ scatter by the period of 23 fs of this mode, giving us an exciton coherence length of N = 15 monomers for both model chains, in good agreement with previous estimates on similar systems. where there are M vibrational modes in total. The basis state |1, ṽk is the short-hand notation for |1, ṽk = |1, 0, 0, ..., ṽk , 0, ..., 0 , i.e. the state where the exciton is populated and the first index set to one, and where among all vibrational modes, only mode k is populated by ṽk quanta. We thus only allow for a single mode to be excited at one time, as a means of simplifying the problem. In principle, every phonon mode can admit an infinite number of quanta, however in practice we need to truncate the associated Hilbert space to only allow for up to N q quanta in each mode. We find that for the model PDA chains N q = 3 converges the results for the dielectric response. Similar to previous works, where W (ω-ω S1 -ω k ) a Lorentzian centered around ω S1 +ω k , for which we use the same width as for the peaks of the purely electronic part Im( (ω)) 0-0 of the dielectric response, as obtained from GW -BSE calculations detailed in Appendix B. Moreover, in Appendix B, we show for the example case of the model blue chains, that the result for the width ∆ vib is largely independent of the peak width γ, for values of γ between 5 meV and 50 meV. The coefficients c (1) 0 denoting the contribution from the purely excitonic basis state |1, 0, 0, ..., 0 . Here we reside to approximating the absorbance α(ω) with Im( (ω)). This is a reasonable approximation for determining ∆ vib , since this quantity depends on the intensity ratio of the 0 -0, 0 -1, 0 -2 peaks etc. The absorbance α(ω) and imaginary dielectric response Im( (ω)) are proportional to each other, which suggests that the error we introduce is small. For the example case of the model blue chains, we visualize the result of including phonon effects on Im( (ω)) in Figure Intuitively, one can understand why these vibrations are most strongly coupled to the exciton from the fact that they transiently lead to structures with a smaller bond-length alternation, i.e. deviating from the Peierlsdistorted structure that gives conjugated polymers such as PDA their semiconducting character, and bring the The main extra contributions to the structure of (ω), compared to the disorder-free case, arise due to the effect of the carbon-carbon double-and triple-bond stretch. Comparing the structure of Re( (ω)) for the cases with and without phonons, we find that dynamic disorder leads to 'breaks' within the region of Re( (ω)) < 0. This leads to a richer structure for the reflectance in panel c, compared to the disorder-free case of Figure material closer to the metallic limit. Therefore, accounting for vibrational effects allows one to predict part of the internal structure of the stopband of an exciton that is strongly coupled to a photon. However, the precise form of the reflectivity, depends very sensitively on the exciton coherence length N , as shown in Figure In this work, we have presented a first principles approach for obtaining the properties of exciton-polaritons in organic materials. Our theory requires input from a calculation of the material's dielectric response, and is agnostic to the methodology used to obtain it. By employing GW -BSE calculations for the electronic structure of polydiacetylenes, we obtain their stop-band width, which characterizes the strength of light-matter interactions. The results are in reasonable agreement with experiment, and we attribute the differences to our treatment of the materials as perfectly periodic, neglecting effects of disorder and additional excitons that weakly couple to light. We compute the speed of propagation of a polariton close to the resonance of light with an exciton, showing that this is an order of magnitude faster than purely excitonic motion. We find the conjugation length of polymer chains to be a critical parameter towards determining the magnitude of light-matter interactions, highlighting one manifestation of how static disorder can lead to weaker exciton-photon coupling. This effect is not important for the polydiacetylenes studied here, due to the purity of these materials. It could however be of relevance for different systems. Furthermore, we discuss the important role of dynamic disorder and show that vibrational effects introduce gaps within the frequency range of large reflectance that characterizes polaritons. We also discuss the screening of the Coulomb interaction provided by the side-chains of polydiacetylene as another potentially important contribution towards determining the magnitude of light-matter interactions. Thus all of the aforementioned factors appearing in realistic materials are important towards an accurate description of exciton-photon coupling. In principle, one needs to account for the above factors at the same time and self-consistently, something which is computationally challenging and will be the subject of a future work. Due to the one-dimensional character of the model PDAs, divergences can occur at small values of q (i.e. at long distances) in the Coulomb term that appears in the many-body calculations. In order to avoid this problem, we use the random integration method, as implemented in yambo. We converge the calculations using 10 5 random q-points in the first Brillouin zone, and by setting the cutoff for the real space components of the Coulomb interaction to 20 Ry. For the model PDAs, we estimate the dispersion of the exciton band along Γ -X as follows. We generate a supercell of size 2 × 1 × 1, thus halving the size of the first Brillouin zone. As a result, the zone-boundary X point folds onto Γ, which appears as an extra exciton state once the BSE Hamiltonian of the 2 × 1 × 1 system is diagonalized. The distance of this new band from the exciton value at Γ gives the width of the exciton band, which we find to be equal to 1.33 eV. All the aforementioned electronic structure calculations are performed on the PDA structures as obtained from X-ray diffraction (for the real red system), or on the structures as obtained from X-ray diffraction and following the substitution of the side-chains with hydrogen atoms. A geometry optimization of these structures is not carried out, as the bond-length alternation of these one-dimensional carbon chains is known to be extremely sensitive to the fraction of exact exchange that the employed DFT functional includes. We calculate the lattice dynamics of the different PDA variants in the harmonic approximation using finite differences. 