Efficient multilayer optics for radiation in the water window range are difficult to manufacture due to extremely small layer thicknesses and severe intermixing of elements between the layers. Therefore, adequate analytics and short feedback loops are of utmost importance for manufacturers to improve performance and efficiency. We show the possibility for non-destructive elemental depth profiling with commercial laboratory equipment using four real-life CrSc multilayer samples. Comparative measurements at the laboratory of PTB at the synchrotron radiation facility BESSY II confirm the results and prove the potential of laboratory equipment for the reliable analysis of stratified materials with sub-nanometer layer thicknesses. Optical systems often require redirection of photon beams which becomes increasingly more complicated for small wavelengths as the refractive index becomes smaller than unity. Periodic multilayer (ML) optics rely on the principle of constructive interference due to reflection on interfaces and can reach efficiencies of tens of percent for specific wavelengths (such as EUV). Depending on the material selection and structure design of the multilayers, these mirrors have their peak reflectivity at specific wavelengths. The CrSc based ML system is a promising candidate as high reflective mirror in the soft X-ray range and particularly in the water window (WW, between oxygen and carbon K absorption edge, from 2.3 to 4.4 nm) A fine understanding of the substructure of a manufactured optic and the involved processes between the materials constituting the stratified structures is thus crucial for developing, optimizing and eventually improving the performance of the multilayer. Therefore, increased effort is dedicated to their characterizations, preferably in the laboratory. To circumvent intermixing of layers diffusion barriers can be introduced which prevent interdiffusion. In this work CrSc ML samples with an additional B 4 C layer are investigated. The samples are deposited on sliced and polished Si (100) wafers using magnetron sputtering, see The laboratory measurements are performed with a Bruker S4 T-STARTM. This instrument was designed for total reflection XRF (TXRF) applications and upgraded with the option to perform angular scans and thus GIXRF measurements Four multilayered samples were available with nominal layer thicknesses and compositions as listed in Table Prior to the presented measurements, all samples were analyzed with hard X-ray reflectometry (XRR) Figure Figure For the laboratory measurements, a Monte Carlo code was developed to calculate the solid angle of detection dependent on the footprint of the excitation beam on the sample and the detection geometry. To simulate the GIXRF profiles an in-house, C++ based code is employed, which has already been used for a variety of other spectrometers The code forward calculates from a sample model the angular dependent fluorescence intensities based on the solution of the Sherman equation for each relevant fluorescence line taking into account the beam divergence of the incident radiation. The necessary fundamental parameters are derived from the Elam data base The evaluation consists of two steps: In the first step, the sample model is derived empirically through forward calculations based on initial guesses. In the second step, this model system is optimized with the help of an iterative fitting procedure. Both steps are descried in the following. For the forward calculation, the sample model must include the number and succession of layers. For each layer the composition, density as well as optical parameters are necessary. The analytical challenge is to establish initial parameters for this calculation and determine the minimal possible number of variable fitting parameters for step 2. The samples were modelled with identical layers in the 100 periods. It must be noted that the information depth of the experiments is limited by the self-attenuation behavior of the excitation and fluorescence radiation. Thus, deeper regions of the multilayer contribute less to the overall observed signals. A severe change of layer geometry as a function of period number can be excluded, because of the measured interference structure in the profiles, but variations in the low percent range are possible and cannot be analyzed with the presented method. The intermixing of layers can be modelled with additional intermixed layers or for example through roughness introduced with Debye-Waller factors (DWF) at the interfaces. Both approaches were tested and it was found, that for severe intermixing between sub-nanometer layers as in the presented case, fitting without DWF decreases the fitting uncertainties while resulting in equal fit results, see SI for details. Therefore, the approach with additional layers was selected. Step 1: As a starting point the layer sequence derived from the manufacturing process is assumed. Concerning densities, 2.52 g/cm 3 for the B 4 C layer is defined and for the Sc and Cr layers values as calculated by Haase et al. Step 2: With this established model, the thicknesses of each individual layer are the only variable fitting parameters in the algorithm with the minimum thickness of 0 nm. The sum of all layer thicknesses and thus the period is restricted by the period thickness as derived for the multilayer from XRR measurements To compare performance and confirm the methodology for the laboratory data the sample MP15004 was measured with both setups -in the laboratory and at BESSY II. The same initial parameters were used to fit the GIXRF data of both data sets. The used algorithm differentiates solely in the deviating instrumental parameters between the two setups: the initial X-ray energy, the beam divergence and the solid angle of detection. In the laboratory setup, a full quantification is not feasible due to the lack of information about the absolute energy distribution of the incident radiation. Therefore, both calculations are normalized to an average intensity value for better comparison. Thus, the shape of the profiles which yields the sample geometry and the layer thicknesses and not the absolute intensities are fitted in the analysis. A full quantification is feasible after calibration of the setup for future analysis. The simulation and fitting time together on an 8.0 GB RAM with an Intel Core i5-3550 CPU with 3.30 GHz machine resulted in a minimal value of 8 hours for one scan, with higher values depending on the number of angular positions. The fitted layer thicknesses are shown in Figure No clear trend for the influence of the sputtering order or the thickness of the B 4 C layer can be observed but for safely drawing such conclusions, a larger number of samples should be measured. It is however observable that solely in the sample MP15004 with the thinnest B4C layer, remnants of a chromium layer are found. The optimal solutions of all other samples resulted in samples without a pure chromium layer. In this work a commercial laboratory GIXRF spectrometer is utilized for the analysis of multilayered samples with sub-nanometer single layer thicknesses and strong intermixing. The small thicknesses in combination with the intermixing pose challenges to the analytical interpretation of the data, rendering this investigation a showcase of the reachable performance of measurements in the laboratory. A comparison to synchrotron data exemplifies that such measurements are feasible even with equal or superior counting statistics in the range of minutes to hours. The feasibility of such measurements with lab equipment renders monitoring and analysis possible on-site at the manufacturers. While for the full quantification of a completely new model system additional methods such as XRR are advisable and computation time is high, such commercial systems are well suited for process control. By monitoring the angular position and height of the interference structure valuable information is gathered without the need for beamtime application at large scale facilities and the accompanying waiting time. And eventually even commercial systems, which are capable of performing both XRR and GIXRF to take advantage of the complementary nature of both techniques, are possible as working demonstrators already exist Design parameters of the investigated chromium scandium multilayer samples. The last column lists the period thickness obtained from X-ray reflectivity measurements