We derive a hierarchy of equations which allow a general n-body distribution function to be measured by test-particle insertion of between 1 and n particles, and successfully apply it to measure the pair and three-body distribution functions in a simple fluid. The insertion-based methods overcome the drawbacks of the conventional distance-histogram approach, offering enhanced structural resolution and a more straightforward normalisation. They will be especially useful in characterising the structure of inhomogeneous fluids and investigating closure approximations in liquid state theory. The distribution functions g (n) are central to the statistical mechanical description of classical fluids, characterising the short-ranged order of their particles' positions Previous measurements of many-body distribution functions using particle coordinates from simulations In this Letter, we address these problems by deriving a hierarchy of equations for measuring g (n) by test-particle insertion The n-body density in the grand ensemble is written as arXiv:2007.04016v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 8 Jul 2020 where U N is the potential energy of N interacting particles, which includes interactions with external fields, the inverse temperature β = 1/k B T , and z is the reduced activity exp(βμ)/Λ d , with μ the chemical potential, Λ the thermal wavelength, and d the system dimensionality. The grand partition function Ξ is given by We use r i to denote a coordinate that varies under integration and s i to denote a fixed position in space, and adopt the notational conventions r N ≡ r 1 , . . . , r N and r (N -n) ≡ r n+1 , . . . , r N Extending the arguments of Widom where on the second line we have made the substitution M = N -(nm) and renumbered r (N -n) as r (M -m) . When this is substituted into Eq. ( where on the final line we have simplified the notation by using P for the ensemble average. Introducing the definition of the distribution functions and rearranging Eq. ( Finally, we use ρ (1) (s i ) = zP (1) (s i ), which may be obtained by setting n = 1 and m = 0 in Eq. ( This hierarchy of equations is the central result of this letter, and allows an n-body distribution function to be expressed as a product of a lower-order m-body distribution function and a ratio of ensemble averages which may be evaluated by test-particle insertion. Here, we will illustrate its use by applying it to measure g (2) and g (3) in a homogeneous system, where the equations are particularly straightforward. We stress, however, that Eq. ( Substituting n = 2 into Eq. ( where we have noted that g (0) = g (1) = 1. In a homogeneous system, P (1) (s i ) ≡ P is spatially uniform, while g (2) (s 1 , s 2 ), P (2) (s 1 , s 2 ) and P (1) (s 2 |s 1 ) depend only on the separation There are therefore two possibilities for measuring g (2) by test-particle insertion. According to Eq. (9a), we first evaluate P (2) (r) by test-insertions of a pair of particles with separation r at random positions in the fluid; dividing by the square of P , which can be measured by one-particle insertions, then yields g (2) . Alternatively, we can perform test-insertions of one particle at a fixed separation r from an existing particle of the fluid; this yields P (1) (r) which can be used in Eq. (9b) In a homogeneous fluid, g (3) is a function of the triangle formed with a particle at each vertex, which here is specified by the side lengths r, s and t, as shown in Fig. with the corresponding insertion methods summarised in Fig. In the second case, we measure P (2) (r, s, t) using twoparticle insertions with an existing particle as the third vertex [Fig. We next test these methods using two-dimensional Monte Carlo simulations in the grand ensemble, with the particles interacting via a purely-repulsive Weeks-Chandler-Andersen (WCA) pair potential We show the results for g (2) in Fig. ous interactions, and that these results agree with those of the two-particle insertion method. Since g (3) is a function of three variables, it is more difficult to visualise than g (2) . Typically, only a subset of g (3) is shown, either where the side lengths are functions of a single variable, e.g. for equilateral and isosceles triangles For the equilateral triangles [Fig. Figures For each plot, the ordinate is chosen to facilitate comparison with g (2) , which is the prediction of the Kirkwood Superposition Approximation (KSA) closure We have derived a hierarchy of insertionbased methods for measuring many-body distribution functions and demonstrated their application in measuring g (2) and g (3) . The methods address drawbacks of the conventional distance-histogram approach, offering improved resolution and a more straightforward normalisation. They are expected to be particularly advantageous in inhomogeneous systems and when scrutinising various closure approximations used in integral equation theories. As well as being effective in measuring g (3) , they will facilitate investigations into expressions for higherorder distribution functions, such as g (4) , which can be used to close the YBG hierarchy at higher levels The authors would like to thank Roel Dullens for critically reading the manuscript. A.E.S. gratefully acknowledges financial support from the University of Oxford Clarendon Fund. Figures The increased noise of the multi-particle insertion methods is more apparent at the higher densities, especially that of the three-particle insertion method which fails completely for ρσ 2 ≈ 0.77 (Fig. We performed Monte Carlo in the grand ensemble. The interparticle interactions were pairwise according to a WCA potential where r is the interparticle separation. We used a square simulation box with side length 50σ, and chose the interaction parameters σ = 1, = 1, and the inverse temperature β = 1/k B T = 1. We set the simulation chemical potential such that μ = 1.25, μ = 4 or μ = 8.5. These gave rise to mean numbers of particles N ≈ 1017 (reduced density ρσ 2 ≈ 0.41), N ≈ 1507 (ρσ 2 ≈ 0.60), and N ≈ 1936 (ρσ 2 ≈ 0.77), respectively. We performed particle displacement, deletion and insertion moves in the ratio 3:1:1. For the displacements, the trial particle position was randomly chosen from a square box around the original position, with a maximum displacement in each direction of 0.6 (ρσ 2 ≈ 0.41, acceptance ratio 52%), 0.28 (ρσ 2 ≈ 0.60, 51%) and 0.19 (ρσ 2 ≈ 0.77, 42%). We initially placed ten particles at random in the box, and then allowed the system to equilibrate for 10 7 moves, such that the equilibrium density was attained. We subsequently took snapshots every 10 4 moves and saved them for analysis. The total number of analysed configurations was 5 × 10 4 . For both the g (2) and g (3) measurements, distance criteria were used to avoid considering pairs and triangles of particles with large separations or side lengths, where the short-ranged structure of the fluid has essentially decayed away. For g (2) (r), pairs with a separation r ≤ 10σ were found and a histogram of the separations was made. This was normalised by the volumes of the annular bins and the number of particles considered to yield ρ (1) (r|0), the conditional one-body density given a particle at the origin 0. Finally, this was divided by ρ to give g (2) (r). For g (3) , triangles were found with at least two sides ≤ 5σ; using the triangle inequality, the maximum length of the third side is then constrained to be ≤ 10σ. A 3D histogram of the side lengths was made with a bin-size of 0.05σ in each variable. In principle, the symmetry of g (3) means each triangle can be included six times (once for each permutation of {r, s, t}), though in practice, those triangles with the third side length > 5σ were only included twice due to the distance criteria. As noted in the introduction of the main text, care must be taken when normalising the histogram to only include the region of each bin which satisfies the triangle inequalities-we used a two-dimensional version In Figs. 2(a) we show the measured g (2) (r) at values of r corresponding to the centre of each bin. In Fig. g (2) : Two-particle Test-Insertions. We measured g (2) at separations corresponding to the centres of the bins used in the distance-histogram measurement, with a maximum r of 5.025σ. To measure P (2) (r), 1000 pairs of particles were inserted per configuration for each separation, at random locations and orientations. The inserted pairs were also separately considered as one-particle insertions to measure P , and Eq. (9a) was used to calculate g (2) (r). g (2) : One-particle Test-Insertions. The number of separations was 5× that used in the two-particle insertion case, since this method provides better statistics. To measure P (1) (r), one insertion per particle was attempted for each separation in all configurations. In each case, the angle of the inserted particle relative to the existing particle was chosen at random from a uniform distribution. To measure P , a separate measurement was performed where 10 4 test particles per configuration were inserted at random points in the fluid, and Eq. (9b) was used to calculate g (2) (r). g (3) : Three-particle Test-Insertions. Separations (r or s) were chosen to correspond to the bin centres used in the distance-histogram measurement. To measure P (3) , 1000 test-particle triangles were inserted for each separation in the configurations specified in the cartoons of Fig. * adam.stones@chem.ox.ac.uk