Nanomaterials possess a wide range of potential applications due to their novel properties compared to bulk matter, but these same properties may represent an unknown risk to health. Experimental safety testing cannot keep pace with the rate at which new nanoparticles are developed and, being lengthy and expensive, often hinders the development of technology. An economic alternative to in vitro and in vivo testing is offered by nanoinformatics, potentially enabling the quantitative relation of the nanomaterial properties to their crucial biological activities. Recent research efforts have demonstrated that such activities can be successfully predicted from the physicochemical characteristics of nanoparticles, especially those related to the bionano interface, by means of statistical models. In this work, as a step towards in silico prediction of toxicity of nanomaterials, an advanced computational characterization of these materials has been proposed and applied to titanium dioxide nanoparticles. The characteristics of nanoparticles and bionano interface are computed using a systematic multiscale approach relying only on information on chemistry and structure of the nanoparticles. Throughout the 21 st century, Feynman's vision of the control of materials down to the atomistic level has begun to take shape in the form of nanotechnology: the study and use of materials of characteristic sizes on the order of 1 -100 nanometers. At this scale, matter behaves significantly differently to bulk materials as a consequence of increased surface area, modified coordination of surface atoms, and different electronic band structures, amongst other properties. Consequently, these nanoparticles (NPs) may exhibit properties varying dramatically from the bulk materials, from absorbing specific wavelengths of light to increased catalytic activity. These effects may be tuned by manipulating the average size and shape of the NP, and as a result, nanoscale particles and fibers have found use in areas as diverse as food, medicine, cosmetics, and construction materials. Yet these beneficial properties may also lead to unintended consequences when nanoparticles are inhaled, ingested, or otherwise taken into the body. Through a variety of mechanisms, nanoparticles may penetrate the cells and tissues and cause adverse effects ranging from inflammation to fibrosis or cancer. In this work, we present details on how a range of quantitative descriptors of NPs and the bionano interface can be calculated for an arbitrary inorganic nanomaterial from first principles using coupled quantum chemistry, atomistic molecular dynamics and mesoscopic methods. These descriptors provide immediate insight into the physical and chemical properties of the given NPs and further form the basis for machine learning and statistical techniques for toxicity prediction, e.g. as input for QSAR models covering the existing corpus toxicological data. As a demonstration of this method, we present results calculated for both the anatase and rutile forms of titania (TiO2), representing the most commonly produced nanomaterials, of a range of sizes and surface charges to demonstrate the broad applicability of the method. We start with evaluation of intrinsic properties of the target nanomaterial, in this case, titania using common electronic structure methods. In what regards the extrinsic properties, we make an attempt to improve the atomistic model of the interface of the material with water and thus provide more accurate and more advanced description of the bionano interactions. To compute the more advanced characteristics of NPs we use the recently proposed multiscale approach • parameterization of the atomistic force-field for the material using electronic structure methods • calculation of interactions of the biomolecule building blocks (amino acids, lipid segments, DNA bases) with the surface of the material and interaction between the building blocks at the atomistic level at the specified conditions • parameterization of the CG force field for biomaterial building blocks and construction of the sample of arbitrary size and shape • CG modelling of interaction of entire biomolecule with the biomaterial surface and calculation of preferred orientation and the mean adsorption energy In Section 2.1 we consider intrinsic properties of the NP, that is, those that depend only on the morphology and material of the nanoparticle. In Section 2.2 we describe the coarse-graining scheme in detail and present results for the binding of proteins to titanium dioxide nanoparticles. In Section 2.3 we present descriptors regarding the interaction of the NP with lipids to parameterize their interaction with cell membranes. The simplest descriptors one can calculate reflect basic geometrical properties of the NP defined in terms of the primary size R, where R corresponds to the radius of a spherical or cylindrical NP, and for cubic NPs we take the length of a side to be 2R. For cylindrical NPs we also require the total length L, which we typically assume to be much larger than R. From these parameters, the surface area A and volume V may be straightforwardly calculated:A = 4πR 2 , 2πRL + 2πR 2 , 24R 2 and V = 4/3πR 3 , πR 2 L, 8R It is well-known that a NP immersed in a biological medium forms a corona of adsorbed proteins, lipids and sugars, and that the composition of this corona is highly dependent on the affinity of each type of protein and lipid present to the NP. The first step in this parameterization is developing a force field for atomistic simulations between biomolecular fragments and the NP. The quality of the force field used in classical atomistic simulations is of primary importance for the simulation to produce reliable results. While there exist validated force fields describing bulk materials or aqueous solutions of organic and biomolecules, they are less developed for description of surface properties of (nano)materials. For modeling of metal or metal oxide surface in aqueous media an additional problem is adequate representation of the material surface which is modified (in comparison to the bulk material structure) by reactions with water building a surface-specific hydroxylated layer containing hydroxyl groups, bound molecular water or other surface modifications. This issue was handled as discussed in the Methods section and a summary of the identified force field types and force field parameters are given in Table • Amino acid side chain analogues • Glycine and proline aminoacids with the backbone fragment (GLY, PRO) • Modified charged forms of aminoacids with pKa values between 4 and 10 (HIS+, GLU-protonated, CYS-, denoted HIP, GAN, CYM) • Segments of the most abundant lipids: choline (CHL) and phosphate (PHO) group of phosphatidylcholine (PC) lipids; amino group (ETA) of ethanolamine lipids (PE), ester group (EST) There are 20 naturally occurring amino acids of which the proteins of living organisms consist. Each full amino acid contains a peptide backbone fragment which is common to all amino acids. In order to avoid redundancy, we excluded the backbone fragment and considered the side chain analogues for all amino acids excluding glycine (for which the side chain analogue is just an H atom) and proline which has a different structure. This set of side chain analogues consists of 18 molecules. Histidine exists in two isomeric forms (denoted as HIE and HID) and we include both of them. These side chain analogues also have the same structure as hydrophobic lipid tails and certain common lipid head groups (phosphatidylserine, PS and sphingomyelin, SM), further extending the range of larger biomolecules covered by this set. The list of molecules introduced here covers all the main types of chemical entities: hydrophobic, polar, aromatic, and charged, and represent all typical molecular fragments present in biofluids. The set of binding free energies of these molecules makes a "fingerprint" of NP with respect to bio-nano interactions and so such a set of descriptors is essential in the predictive scheme of toxicity assessment. As an example of such a bio-nano fingerprint, we computed binding free energy of these molecules to rutile (110) and anatase (101) plane surfaces. These surfaces are the lowest energy surfaces in the respective forms of TiO2, and by this reason one can expect that they represent most of the surface of the NPs. A similar model has been used previously to study adsorption of proteins on a surface of rutile NP. The difference in binding could originate in the specific structure of the anatase surface where negatively charged groups of the molecules can coordinate favorably with hydrated positively charged titanium atoms. On the rutile surface, access to titanium atoms is screened by the bridging oxygen atoms, thus preventing the binding of anionic molecules. The different character of binding of small molecules have consequences for the binding of larger biomolecules and formation of NPs corona. To demonstrate this, we also calculate the binding energy for larger biomolecules assembled from these fragments. The PMFs include only interactions between the biomolecule and the nanomaterial up to a distance of 1.2 nm. The bulk of the nanomaterial interacts with these molecular fragments via the long-range van der Waals interaction which may remain significant at distances beyond the cut-off used for the calculation of the PMFs. To include these effects while avoiding the need to explicitly sum over the interaction between each atom in the NP and in the target biomolecule, we employ the continuum approximation and use the Hamaker approach to write the bulk interaction between two spheres of radius R1, R2 with surface-surface distance d as, ), (1) where the quantity A 12 = π 2 λρ 1 ρ 2 is referred to as the Hamaker constant and is a measure of the magnitude of the long-range dispersion interaction based on the number density of the two materials ρ1, ρ2 and the vdW interaction strength λ. A more rigorous derivation of the dispersion interaction including the effects of the medium in which these particles are immersed is achieved through Lifschitz theory. Clearly, this value will be different for each biomolecule that may interact with the NP. The calculated values for anatase and rutile nanomaterials with twenty common amino acids with are detailed in Table A(anatase-AA) 19. 53 Once the PMFs and Hamaker constants for the set of amino acids and other fragments of interests have been calculated, these can be used as input to calculate the binding energy for biomolecules composed of these fragments. where a is a function of φ, θ and gives the maximum distance between the surface of the NP and the centre of mass of the protein, beyond which the protein is deemed to be unbound. Performing a Boltzmann-weighted average over orientations produces the mean binding energy, A key measure of the degree of interaction between NPs and membranes is the extent to which the NP adheres to or is wrapped by the membrane. According to the Helfrich membrane model In silico material characterization provides valuable information on the NP properties that may not be readily available from experiments. Yet, due to principal technical limitations such as the large required system size or time scale, the computations at the nanoscale are necessarily approximate and often cannot guarantee quantitative accuracy in reproducing experimentally observed properties in absolute terms. The possible mismatches with experimental data may be caused by unrealistic assumptions about the material such as its crystalline order, structure of the NP surface, material purity, or the coating. Unfortunately, such assumptions are unavoidable as experimental datasheets are often lacking the relevant information. In our calculations of intrinsic properties of titanium oxides, we used common quantum mechanical methods on anatase and rutile of bulk TiO2. The methods show different accuracy with respect to different material properties. It is known that the band gap of rutile is lower than anatase TiO2 by ca. 0.2 eV These results indicate that the adsorption energy of free lipid molecules calculated using the coarse-grained model does not necessarily predict the adhesion energy of lipid bilayers calculated using atomistic simulations, highlighting the requirement to calculate the interaction of NPs with both larger-scale structures as well as fragment-based calculations. As discussed in Section 2.2, the anatase surface is more strongly binding to the amino acid molecules than the rutile surface is, and this in turn leads to a difference in the calculated binding energies for the proteins considered as can be seen in Figure The set of descriptors given here is by no means definitive but are selected as a set of reasonably simple properties that can be evaluated using standard computational techniques and as a basis for generating further descriptors. As an example, we note that the binding energies calculated here may be of use in estimating the composition of the protein corona which forms around a NP by using these as input for simple models of the steady-state corona. In this work, we have evaluated a set of descriptorsphysical and chemical properties of NPs that might be most relevant for describing the bionano interface, and thus can be used for predicting the toxicological behavior of novel nanomaterials. These range from simple properties such as the available surface area to the affinity of specific proteins to the NP calculated using a coarse-grained model. Importantly, the described methodology does not rely on any experimental parameters and connects the advanced material properties to the basic descriptors. The proposed descriptors have been calculated for a range of titanium dioxide NPs and may be applied to arbitrary NPs, paving the way for deep-learning approaches to identify both which descriptors are most important for the prediction of toxicity and the rapid assessment of new nanomaterials. Semi-empirical calculations have been performed with the MOPAC computational code. To parameterize the forcefield for the titanium dioxide we used a multiscale approach, where the detailed structure of the hydroxylated layer of a metal oxide nanomaterial, as well as parameters of the force field describing interactions of the fully hydrated surface with surrounding biomolecular solution are obtained from high-quality ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Ab initio MD simulations provide a representative set of snapshots correctly representing thermal fluctuations of the studied systems, which is used for the further analysis. The method is based on partitioning the quantum mechanical electron density into atomic basins. We apply the population analysis method by Manz First, the net atomic charge (NAC), defined by the DDEC6 partitioning method Here z is the atomic number and N is the number of electrons assigned to the atom. n(r) is the total electron density, and w(r) is the spherical weight attributed to the atom by the partitioning method. NACs provide partial atom charges which are routinely used to model electrostatic interactions in molecular simulations with empirical force fields. Second, the cubed atomic moment (CAM) corresponds to the volume occupied by the atom in the material and is proportional to the local polarizability. which quantifies the amount of shared electron density between atoms i and j. Here, w(r) = ∑ w i (r) i is the total spherical weight, n DXH (r, r ′ ) is a normalized probability distribution (over r' such as to exclude exactly one electron) that quantifies the so-called dressed exchange hole. The electron density close to the nucleus is depleted due to the exchange interaction. This concept can be modified for bond order by contraction/expansion of the density to align bond orders with the conventional view. With this definition the bond order between two atoms decreases smoothly to zero as the distance between them approaches infinity. As a training ensemble, we have used trajectories generated in ab-initio molecular dynamics trajectory simulations described previously. Computed net atomic charges were used directly to determine partial atom charges of the force field, with a minor modification providing total zero charge for stochiochemical sample of TiO2. Net atomic volumes were used to determine parameters of the Lennard-Jones potential using the theory developed in Details of how the metadynamics calculations were performed were previously reported in Binding energies for proteins on NPs were calculated using the UnitedAtom tool. Electrostatic potentials were calculated assuming a Debye length of 0.779 nm and Bjerrum length of 0.726 nm as calculated for an electrolyte concentration of 150 mmol in water at 310 K. Binding energies were calculated for radii in the interval 1 -150 nm and for five values of the electrostatic surface potential between -50 and +50 mV. U wall (s) = k(s -a) Here, we present plots of the potentials of mean force (PMFs) calculated for the interaction between the biomolecular fragments and the two TiO2 surfaces. 