Electrons on the lattice subject to a strong magnetic field exhibit the fractal spectrum of electrons, which is known as the Hofstadter butterfly. In this work, we investigate unconventional superconductivity in a three-dimensional Hofstadter butterfly system. While it is generally difficult to achieve the Hofstadter regime, we show that the quasi-two-dimensional materials with a tilted magnetic field produce the largescale superlattices, which generate the Hofstadter butterfly even at the moderate magnetic field strength. We first show that the van-Hove singularities of the butterfly flat bands greatly elevate the superconducting critical temperature, offering a new mechanism of field-enhanced superconductivity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the quantum geometry of the Landau minibands plays a crucial role in the description of the superconductivity, which is shown to be clearly distinct from the conventional superconductors. Finally, we discuss the relevance of our results to the recently discovered re-entrant superconductivity of UTe 2 in strong magnetic fields. The pairing instability of the conventional superconductivity is dictated by the Bloch electronic states near the Fermi surface. These states are described by the semiclassical equations of the motion Recent experiments shed light on this issue and offer the possible candidate materials for unconventional superconductivity in strong magnetic fields. A prominent example is the discovery of the field-boosted superconductivity in UTe 2 In the current work, we investigate the universal features of the Hofstadter superconductivity. First of all, to illustrate the general applicability of our work, we demonstrate that the tilted magnetic field applied to a three-dimensional system can generate the Hofstadter butterfly even with the moderate field strength. The van-Hove singularity of the flat bands in the Hofstadter butterfly is shown to enhance the superconducting critical temperature. Furthermore, the superfluid density of the superconductors arising from the Hofstadter butterfly is described by the quantum geometry of the electronic wave function. It turns out that the quantum geometric properties also determine the superconducting nodal structures and the supercurrent. Our discovery of the quantum geometric superconductivity can be applied to generic quasi-two dimensional materials. Finally, based on our theory, we also discuss the case of the field-induced re-entrant superconducting phase in UTe 2 . 3D Butterfly Spectrum-Our discussion starts with a generic tight-binding model of the quasi-twodimensional cubic lattice with the nearest neighbor hoppings T x,y,z in each direction(T x,y T z ). We only assume that the system preserves the time-reversal and the inversion symmetry, which is dictated by the relation, T x,y,z = T * x,y,z . Upon this model, we consider the application of the tilted magnetic field, B, parallel to the yz-plane. The corresponding vector potential can be generally written as, A = x|B|(0, cos θ, -sin θ), where θ is the tilt angle from the ẑ-axis. Considering the Peierls substitution on the lattice model, we derive the threedimensional version of the Harper's model with the tilted field where , represents the nearest neighbor hopping. The effective potential, V 0 , is explicitly given as, where Φ y(z) is the flux penetrating the xz (xy) planes of the unit cell respectively. If the field direction is normal to the xy-plane, the Landau minibands overlap with each other through the z-directional dispersion. In this case, the Hofstadter butterfly cannot exist unless the field strength is huge. On the other hand, if the field direction is tilted from the plane, the projected lattice normal to the field direction forms a superlattice structure, which enlarges the effective flux(See Fig. Field-Enhanced Superconductivity-After establishing the three-dimensional Hofstadter butterfly system, we now consider the generic form of the pairing interaction in the BCS channel, which can be written as, where the Greek letters represent the spin and the sites in the magnetic unit cell. V αβγδ (k, k ) describes the microscopic interaction. The superconducting critical temperature, T c , can be formally evaluated by solving the self-consistent gap equation where the order parameter is defined as, ∆ γδ (k) By diagonalizing the full tight-binding model in Eq. ( Geometric Supercurrent-The superfluid weight, which measures the change of the free energy, F (q), due to the spatially modulating order parameter, ∆(r, q) = |∆|e 2iq•r , characterizes the superfluid behavior of 3D HBSC. The superfluid weight, D s , can be formally evaluated as, where V is the volume of the system and the subscripts i, j indicate the x, y directions. The superfluid weight, D s = D conv + D geo , can be decomposed into the two independent contributions: , which is proportional to the curvature of the normal bands, (k), and D geo , which is the anomalous contribution from the quantum geometry of the wave functions Furthermore, D geo is independent of the quasiparticle dispersions, and it is the only contribution to the superfluid weigth if the bands are flat ( k = μ). The situation ) and (c) without the field. We find that Tc is enhanced near the vHS of the Landau minibands as compared to the case without the field. We used Tx = Ty = 1, Tz = 0.05, and the onsite interaction strength V = 0.6. of the 3D HBSC fits to this case. More precisely, D geo is dictated by the quantum geometric tensor(QGT) is the superconducting order parameter of the Landau minibands. The QGT is given in terms of the Bloch wave function u(k) of the Landau miniband as, Here, β j (k) = iu † (k)∂ j u(k) corresponds to the Berry connection, and the imaginary component of the QGT corresponds to the Berry curvature Accordingly, the integrand of D s in Eq. ( In contrast to the conventional phenomenology of ordinary superconductors where χ is the phase of the superconducting order parameter. The current density becomes linearly proportional to the order parameter amplitude, as μ decreases. The nonlinear relation in Eq. ( Universal Nodal Structure-The quantum geometry of the Landau minibands also plays an important role in the gap structure of the BdG quasiparticle. To see this, we consider the generic form of the pairing potential between the Landau minibands, which is written as |∆(k)|e iφ(k) a s (k)a s(-k) + h.c., where a s (k) is the annihilation operator of the Landau minibands near the Fermi level with the spin s. We also define the corresponding velocity field of the pairing operator This velocity field is a gauge invariant quantity as it is invariant under the U(1) transformation, u(k) → u(k)e -iΛ (k) , where Λ(k) is a smooth scalar function. We can consider a winding number along a loop on the two-dimensional normal Fermi surface, which counts the vorticity of the velocity where FS represents the Fermi surface, and C i represents the one-dimensional loops encircling each vortex. If the Fermi surface possesses a non-zero Chern number, the right hand side of Eq. ( For example, we can consider the generic tilt angles with the flux, Φ y,z = p y,z /q, of an even integer denominator, q ∈ 2Z. The magnetic unit cell contains the even integer sites, and we can define a half-magnetic unit cell translation with the complex conjugation, Tx, q 2 K, and the additional momentum translation k y,z → k y,z ± π, the product of which forms an emergent anti-unitary symmetry of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Application to UTe 2 -Finally, we discuss the possible connection of the field polarized re-entrant phase of UTe 2 with the 3D HBSC One of the re-entrant phases occurs with the field direction perpendicular to the magnetic easy axis(a-axis), and the other occurs with the tilted field angle ∼ 25 • on the b-c plane the other uranium-based ferromagnetic superconductors(URhGe In such cases, we speculate that the crossing of the vHSs of Landau bands and the Fermi level plays a crucial role in enhancing the superconductivity, thereby realizes as the re-entrant superconductivity at the tilted field. If so, we further speculate that another re-entrant phase dome would appear at higher fields where the next crossing of the Landau level occurs. Moreover, we propose that the effect of the Landau quantization can be experimentally confirmed by the Hall effect measurement near the metamagnetic transition line. We have studied possible superconducting states in a three-dimensional Hofstadter butterfly system. Using the quasi-two-dimensional system subject to the tilted magnetic field, we show that the Hofstadter butterfly spectrum arises from the resulting superlattice structure. It is demonstrated that the superconductivity in the Hofstadter butterfly system possesses a number of intriguing properties that are in stark contrast to the conventional superconductivity. Unlike the superconductivity in the semi-classical regime, the vHSs of the Landau mini-bands in presence of the attractive interaction greatly enhance the superconducting critical temperature. Once the superconductivity is induced in the Hofstadter Landau bands, the superconducting properties are dictated by the quantum geometry of the Landau bands, which is reflected in the geometric supercurrent and universal nodal structure. These behaviors can be experimentally confirmed by the London penetration-depth measurement and thermal Hall measurement The superconducting critical temperature, T c , can be formally evaluated by solving the self-consistent gap equation where the order parameter is defined as, ∆ γδ (k) Here ω n is the Matsubara frequencies and G(k, ω n ) is the Matsubara Green function of the normal Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In general, the definition of the QGT in Eq. ( The QGT in Eq. ( Now the derivative of the Hamiltonian does not have gauge ambiguity. We have utilized Eq. ( In this section, we describe the detailed numerical implementation of the superconducting Kernel matrix. To start our discussion, we would like to define the superconducting kernel matrix in a general setting. We define the Matusbara Green function of the full BdG Hamiltonian for imaginary time, τ , as, where β = 1/T and i, j represents the orbital index. ω n = (2n + 1)π/β is the Matsubara frequency(n ∈ Z). We note that the anomalous Green function is not separately defined. T τ is the imaginary time-ordering such that, The equal-time correlation function can be written in terms of the Green function in the frequency space as, We now aim to evaluate the Green function in the frequency space. In the Nambu basis, we can decompose the BdG Hamiltonian into the normal and the pairing parts respectively. where h 0 (k) and ∆(k) are the normal state Hamiltonian and the pairing potential with the momentum k respectively. To further elaborate the above expansion, we conceive that G 0 (iω n ) has the following matrix structure, The Green function of the BdG Hamiltonian can be decomposed into the normal part and the pairing part as well, where G 0 (iω n ) ≡ (iω n -H 0 ) -1 is the Matsubara Green function of H 0 . In the weak pairing limit, we can expand the above expression, using the relation, ( The second term in Eq. (S9) is the first-order correction from the H pairing to the Green function. By plugging Eq. (S9) to Eq. (S7), the first-order correction is given as, From the above result, we can evaluate the equal-time correlation function in Eq. (S5) as, where N orb is the size of the matrix h 0 . To derive the self-consistent gap equation, we also equate the left hand side of the equation to the superconducting order parameter. To do so, we consider the general form of the interaction as, where N = N x N y N z is the number of the total three-dimensional lattice sites. Taking only the BCS channel where the center of the mass momentum is zero(k + k = 0), Eq. (S12) reduces as, We perform the BCS mean-field decomposition of the above Hamiltonian as, We find that the first order derivative vanishes. Therefore, the second order term vanishes in Eq. S30. We calculate the second derivative of q as, which we decompose into the two parts. The first part, F 4 , is given as, and the second part, F 12 is given as, In the above expression, the first two terms and the last two terms cancel each other. The expression is further reduced to ] n,n . Summing up the contributions of Eq. (S33) and Eq. (S36), we find that the total contribution is given by, In the last equality, we have used Eq. (S20). Accordingly, we find that Finally, we arrive at Eq. ( We consider the gradient coupling to the order parameter in the free energy of the Hofstadter superconductor. According to Eq. ( where γ ≡ μ 2 + |∆| 2 . We now consider the variation of the free energy under the change of the gauge field, A → A + δA. It is given as, We derive the expression of the geometric supercurrent as, which is Eq. ( 