Higher-order topology yields intriguing multidimensional topological phenomena, while Weyl semimetals have unconventional properties such as chiral anomaly. However, so far, Weyl physics remain disconnected with higher-order topology. Here, we report the theoretical discovery of higherorder Weyl points and thereby the establishment of such an important connection. We demonstrate that higher-order Weyl points can emerge in chiral materials such as chiral tetragonal crystals as the intermediate phase between the conventional Weyl semimetal and 3D higher-order topological phases. Higher-order Weyl semimetals manifest themselves uniquely by exhibiting concurrent chiral Fermi-arc surface states, topological hinge states, and the momentum-dependent fractional hinge charge, revealing a novel class of higher-order topological phases. Introduction.-Topological insulators and semimetals with bulk-edge correspondence have invoked paradigm shifts in the study of condensed matter physics In this Letter, we establish such a missing connection. The basic picture is illustrated in Fig. Model for the HOWPs.-To realize the HOWPs depicted in Fig. The tight-binding model based on tetragonal-lattices is depicted in Fig. 2 ) which, together with the time-reversal symmetry, protect the quadrupole topology. The tight-binding Hamiltonian is given by where a(a † ), b(b † ), c(c † ), d(d † ) are the annihilation (creation) operators on the sites 1,2,3,4, separately. In the right side of the above equation, the first term describes the nearest-neighbor couplings, where t N N = γ (λ) for the intra-(inter-) unit-cell coupling. The second term represents the next-nearest-neighbor couplings, where t N N N = t 1 (t 2 ) for the intra-(inter-) unit-cell coupling. A top-down view is shown in Fig. The synthetic gauge fluxes are crucial in our construction. First, they give rise to the emergence of the QAHIs with Chern number C = 1 (-1) for 0 < k z < k W P (-k W P < k z < 0). Second, they yield the QTI phase with a quadrupole index q xy = 1 2 for |k z | > k W P (see Supplemental Materials for the characterizations of these two topological phases [50]). Here, the HOWPs appear at the wavevectors (π, π, ±k W P ) with a topological charge of -1. According to the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem The Chern number and the quadrupole index can be determined through two approaches. On the other hand, the quadrupole index can be extracted from the rotation eigenvalues at the highsymmetry points Here, r - 4 denotes the C4z eigenvalues of ±i. From the C4z eigenvalues in Fig. Topological surface states.-The coexistence of the conventional and higher-order topology is manifested in the topological surface states. Depending on the wavevector k z , the topological surface states can be gapless or gapped. As shown in Fig. We further study the topological surface states by examining the surface LDOS at given energies. We sample three different energies: E 1 is exactly at the energy of the quadratic Weyl points, E 2 is exactly at the energy of the HOWPs, E 3 is an energy above. At E 1 and E 2 , there are Fermi-arc surface states connecting the projection of the quadratic Weyl point at Γ and the projections of the HOWPs at the surface Brillouin zone boundary. These chiral Fermi arcs connecting projections of Weyl points with opposite charges are consistent with the conventional picture Gapless surface states surface Brillouin zone, which is different from the short Fermi arcs observed in many electronic systems Topological hinge states and fractional hinge charge.-We now turn to the manifestation of the higher-order topology at the hinges. First, taking k z = π as an example to illustrate the underlying physics, the bulk and surface spectra are depicted in Fig. One of the remarkable properties of the QTI is the fractional corner charge Phase diagram.-Finally, we study the phase diagram when the intra-unit-cell nearest-neighbor coupling γ is varied. In Fig. -In this Letter, we unveil the concept of HOWPs as a type of Weyl points connected with higher-order topology. When the 3D system is regarded as k z -dependent 2D systems, HOWPs appear as the transition points between the QAHIs and the HOTI with quadrupole topology. Experimental signatures of the higher-order Weyl points consist of the coexistence of Fermi-arc surface states and the topological hinge states, as well as the k z -dependent fractional charge at the hinges. The HOWPs can be realized in tetragonal chiral crystals with the S 4z , C 2x , C 2y , and T symmetries. Potential material candidates in electronic and acoustic systems are suggested in the Supplemental Material 