Identifying the microscopic mechanism for superconductivity in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) is an outstanding open problem. While MATBG exhibits a rich phase-diagram, driven partly by the strong interactions relative to the electronic bandwidth, its single-particle properties are unique and likely play an important role in some of the phenomenological complexity. Some of the salient features include an electronic bandwidth smaller than the characteristic phonon bandwidth and a non-trivial structure of the underlying Bloch wavefunctions. We perform a theoretical study of the cooperative effects due to phonons and plasmons on pairing in order to disentangle the distinct role played by these modes on superconductivity. We consider a variant of MATBG with an enlarged number of fermion flavors, N 1, where the study of pairing instabilities reduces to the conventional (weak-coupling) Eliashberg framework. In particular, we show that certain umklapp processes involving mini-optical phonon modes, which arise physically as a result of the folding of the original acoustic branch of graphene due to the moiré superlattice structure, contribute significantly towards enhancing pairing. We also investigate the role played by the dynamics of the screened Coulomb interaction on pairing, which leads to an enhancement in a narrow window of fillings, and study the effect of external screening due to a metallic gate on superconductivity. At strong coupling the dynamical pairing interaction leaves a spectral mark in the single particle tunneling density of states. We thus predict such features will appear at specific frequencies of the umklapp phonons corresponding to the sound velocity of graphene times an integer multiple of the Brillouin zone size. Since the discovery of superconductivity (SC) Inspired by the growing number of such interesting experiments, we focus on a possible microscopic mechanism for the superconducting instabilities in MATBG due to an interplay of attraction generated by phonons and purely electronic collective modes, such as plasmons. Importantly, we take into account the retarded interaction mediated by the acoustic phonons and incorporate the dynamics of the screened Coulomb interaction within Eliashberg theory One of the unique features of MATBG is the large size of the unit-cell, compared to the inter atomic distance. Consequently, higher order umklapp processes involve momenta which are still small compared to the original Brillouin zone (BZ) and thus, play an important role in phonon-mediated SC 2 Below, we show that the SC transition temperature, T c , due to acoustic phonons of graphene is enhanced significantly upon including the effects of these umklapp processes for a wide range of dopings. On the other hand, pairing due to plasmons is dominant only in a narrow range of fillings ν ≈ 2 -3 and is much less sensitive to the inclusion of umklapp processes. To verify our predictions, we propose a tunneling experiment. As is well known when the coupling is strong enough "dip-hump" features in the tunneling spectra appear at energies that can be associated with the frequency of the bosonic modes that contribute most to pairing The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II, we review the continuum model for MATBG and introduce the Coulomb and electron-phonon interactions, projected to the nearly flat bands. We also highlight some of the technical aspects associated with umklapp scattering and the large-N formulation in this section. In Sec. III, we focus on setting up the (linearized) Eliashberg equations for an inter-valley, spin-singlet s-wave pairing gap and highlight some salient features associated with the pairing kernel. Sec. IV is devoted to our results, which includes a comprehensive study of the filling dependence of T c due to the different sources of attraction, the role of external screening and a discussion of our proposed experimental setup for investigating the fingerprint of umklapp phonon processes. Sec. V concludes with a discussion and future outlook for interesting directions. We describe some of the technical aspects of our work in appendices A -D. The non-interacting part of our model, H 0 , leads to the action, where c ωk{γ};i is the electron annihilation operator in the eight-dimensional space of {γ} ≡ {ξ, σ, n}, with ξ being the valley index of the original graphene layers, σ labeling the electron spin and n tracking the electronic band index of MATBG. We have introduced a fictitious index i = 1, .., N which labels N identical copies of the non-interacting MATBG Hamiltonian, with an eye for carrying out a 1/N expansion 3 . We denote k as the crystal momentum in the original graphene layer, such that the two mini-Brillouin zones (MBZ) are located near K and K points of the original graphene layers, and the k summation ranges over the MBZ, see schematic in Fig. 3 N = 1 corresponds to the physical limit of MATBG. 4 We note that the eigenstates and eigenvalues of the two valleys ξ = ± are time-reversed partners and accompanied by a simultaneous complex conjugation and k → -k transformation. in the usual way by shifting the single-particle energies, E k{γ} → E k{γ} -μ, and control the electron filling. Additional details associated with the bandstructure appears in Appendix A. Let us now turn our attention to the interaction terms in our model. As a result of the large momentum separation between K and K in the original BZ (see Fig. V int ξ,ξ (q, iω)ρ ξ;i (q, iω) ρ ξ ;i (-q, -iω), where the density operators, ρ ξ;i (q, iω), include the formfactors, Λ γγ (p, k) = δ ξξ δ σσ p, {γ} e i(p-k)•r k, {γ } , which necessarily involve states located near the same valley ξ as the Hamiltonian is block-diagonal in the valley space. Here |k, {γ } denotes a Bloch wavefunction of the non-interacting Hamiltonian (see Appendix A). Note that we have assumed explicitly that the interaction term is diagonal in the fictitious i = 1, . . . , N index. The interaction vertex above is a sum of two contributions -the dynamically screened Coulomb interaction (V C ξ,ξ ) and the phonon mediated interaction (V ph ξ,ξ ): To stress the intervalley nature of the pairing in what follows, we make the labels ξ and ξ explicit in both the Coulomb and phonon interactions as well as make the Coulomb and phonon interaction manifestly intervalley only through the δ ξ,-ξ (see below). The microscopic form of the interaction however is the same for both inter-/intravalley interactions with the dependence on valley indices ξ, ξ contained only in the density operators ρ ξ (q, iω) introduced in Eq. ( where the RPA dielectric function is given by ε RPA (q, iω) = κ -2πe 2 Π ee (q, iω)/q. Here Π ee (q, iω) is the electronic polarization of MATBG The second term, the phonon-mediated interaction, arises from the electron-phonon coupling Hamiltonian, where a q , a † q represent the phonon annihilation and creation operators, respectively and ω ph (q) = c s q is the acoustic phonon dispersion for graphene. Note that we have chosen the individual N -dependent normalizations such that both V c ξ,ξ and V ph ξ,ξ have the same 1/N prefactor and can therefore, be compared in a meaningful fashion in the large-N limit. Let us now clarify an important aspect of the underlying scattering processes, that play a crucial role in our subsequent analysis. The summation over the crystal momenta, k, in Eq. ( In order to evaluate the importance of the umklapp processes described above, from now on we restrict our analysis to the m th MBZ, such that m 1 , m 2 ∈ [-m, m]. We refer to such an analysis as including mG processes, see Fig. It is worth noting that these umklapp processes can be equivalently viewed as processes where mini-optical phonons are exchanged. These optical-like modes are a natural consequence of folding of the original acoustic phonon branch of graphene due to the moiré potential We are interested in the linearized gap equation in the pairing channel, ignoring the self-energy corrections to the electron dispersion and quasiparticle weight (for details on how to include them we refer the reader to Ref. where ε αβ is the fully antisymmetric tensor in the indices α, β and we have further assumed that the gap function has no explicit dependence on the angle of k. The latter assumption is consistent with our assumption of intervalley Cooper pairing from valleys that are time-reversed partners, as explained before. Note that the above requires an intervalley scattering, Fig. where the kernel K(...) is given by and where dΩ p denotes integration over the angle between vector k and p for a fixed direction of k. To solve for T c we seek the temperature, at which the kernel has an eigenvector with corresponding eigenvalue -1/T c . To perform the analysis numerically we must first perform the angular average Eq. ( Let us now present our results for the superconducting transition temperature, obtained by solving the eigenvalue problem in Eq. ( We start our discussion by focusing exclusively on the effects of the phonon mediated interaction, Eq. ( As is evident from our results, umklapp scattering processes up to m = 2 have a dramatic effect on T c , which saturates for m ≥ 3. These umklapp phonons are essentially the lowest optical modes resulting from the folding of the original acoustic phonon branch into the MBZ. Thus, we find that the interaction with these lowest optical modes are crucial for understanding the electronic properties of MATBG. In order to clearly demonstrate the effect of umklapp processes on the pairing interaction, it is useful to study the phonon spectral function as a function of energy, defined as where q = q + G, as defined previously (see paragraph following Eq. ( As expected, the BCS dome peaks in the vicinity of the van-Hove singularity, which by virtue of the specific details of the model in Ref. umklapp contributions into account will lead to a saturation. We highlight, however, that this behavior alone is not behind the sharp saturation seen in Fig. The characteristic energy scale associated with the peak of the above spectral function, provided that the form-factors do not lead to a suppression, is set by the graphene sound velocity (c s ) and the length-scales stemming from the moiré period. Using the magnitude of the moiré reciprocal vector G = 4π/( √ 3L M ) as the characteristic size of the MBZ (L M = a 2 sin( θ 2 )), we find the typical frequencies as (11) for the first three mG umklapp processes: 0G, 1G, 2G. These estimates are in reasonably good agreement with the location of the peaks in Fig. The microscopic mechanism responsible for the significant contribution of umklapp processes to the spectral function, which leads to the enhancement of superconducting T C , is intimately tied to the origins of the flat moiré bands. To obtain the electronic dispersion, E k , of carriers in these narrow-bands (see Fig. Let us now briefly comment on the overall similarity of the dome shape to that of other phonon-pairing based approaches. This is best seen by a comparison with, for example Ref. Let us now place the essence of the phonon umklappdriven enhancement of the critical temperature, T C in the context of BCS theory. We note upfront, however, that although it captures some of the trends seen in Fig. T C ≈ 1.14 ω e -1/ λ and similarly denote the characteristic pairing frequency ω in terms of the moment of the same distribution as For the MATBG phonon spectral function plotted in Fig. To a large extent, this is also reproduced in the domes of Fig. Finally, we note that the umklapp-driven enhancement of phonon-mediated superconductivity is not model specific and is a generic property of any moiré narrow-band system with a Bloch wavefunction overlap that is vanishing slowly, on a moiré momentum scale, as a function of the momentum exchange, q. In Sec. IV D, we shall return to a discussion of the electron-phonon spectral function and consider the experimental fingerprints of these modes in the tunneling density of states. We are now in a position to include the effects of Coulomb interactions on pairing. To that end, we begin by evaluating the dielectric function ε RPA (iω, q) numerically Let us begin by studying the problem in the absence of the phonon mediated interaction, i.e. set V ph ξ,ξ = 0, and include only the effects of the Coulomb interaction. In this case, the origin of pairing lies in the frequency dependence of the dielectric function close to the plasma resonance We now explain the microscopic origin for both of these observations. In contrast to a purely attractive phononmediated interaction, the dynamically screened Coulomb interaction is always repulsive. However, as argued in Sec. III, the frequency dependent dynamically screened interaction becomes weak enough at certain momenta, such that the sign-changing gap function can minimize the overall effect of repulsive Coulomb interaction In order to understand the structure of the frequencymomentum regions where the screened interaction becomes weak, it is helpful to plot V C ξ,ξ (q, iω) in Eq. ( The aforementioned local minimum of the pairing interaction occurs at momenta smaller that the moiré reciprocal lattice scale, G. At momenta larger than G, the interaction in Eq. ( While the specific form of the screened interaction, Fig. Let us begin with a discussion of points (iii) and (iv) above, that rely on the plasmon-pole approximation. As described previously, the Coulomb interaction is always repulsive; the dynamical screening can, however, lead to a possible superconducting solution that overcomes the effect of the repulsion. To investigate this matter further, we explore here an idealized limit -the so-called "plasmon-pole" approximation-where the Coulomb interaction in Eq. ( Here, ω pl is the plasmon frequency. We note that the "plasmon-pole" approximation is strictly valid only in the ω v F q limit, which will be of interest to us below. For ω v F q, the interaction can be approximated by its purely repulsive and static Thomas-Fermi screened form. For a wide range of momenta, the plasmons of interest to us originate primarily from inter-band transitions between the nearly-flat and dispersive bands. As argued above, the resulting plasma frequency is independent of the filling and is instead set by the bandwidth, W , of the nearly-flat band and the gap, ∆ band , between flat and dispersive bands as ω pl ≈ √ W ∆ band (see Ref. We can verify our understanding of the interplay of these two results by varying ω pl as an external phenomenological parameter, as done in Fig. We conclude the analysis of the plasmon-pole approximation and its effect on pairing by pointing out that suppressing the momentum dependence of the form-factors leads to an enhancement of T C ; see curves labeled (ii) and (iv) in Fig. The plasmon-pole approximation captures most of the features we obtain within the full Eliashberg calculation (Fig. Taking all of these observations into account, the peak of the dome at a filling of ν ≈ 2 -3 comes from an interplay of the form-factors along with the dielectric function. This conclusion stems from the analysis leading to Fig. To assess this further, we now focus on the q dependence of the form-factors. To that end we plot in Fig. where q = |k -k | and δ(E ξ,k ), δ(E ξ,k ) constrain the two states to lie on the Fermi-surface (within mesh resolution); θ k denotes angle of k . The decrease in F (q, μ) with q reflects the density dependence of the orbital hybridization of the Bloch wave-functions in the relevant bands. For comparison, F (q, μ) would be momentum independent and equal to unity, when there is no orbital hybridization (i.e. when the band and orbital basis are identical). In contrast, it is known to diminish rapidly with the momentum exchange, q, in a Dirac system Finally, we analyze the cooperative effect of both phonons and plasmons on pairing; the resulting T C vs. ν is shown for the combined (as well as individual) effect of phonons and plasmons in Figs. Our analysis thus far has shed light on the distinct features associated with a purely electronic vs. a purely phonon-based mechanism, as well as their combined effect, on the emergence of SC in MATBG. In light of the recent experiments We begin by studying the effects of a metallic gate, coupled to MATBG via Coulomb interactions, on pairing. The only role played by the gate is in a further renormalization of the Coulomb interaction, Eq. ( where d is the distance between MATBG and the gate. As a result, the dynamically screened interaction (Eq. ( The presence of the metallic gate results in an overall suppression of the Coulomb interaction, that scales exponentially with d. Thus, processes involving q 1/2d are not responsible for mediating SC. The dashed-dotted lines correspond to a purely phonon-driven mechanism, while the dashed lines include the cooperative effects due to both plasmons and phonons (see also Fig. In Fig. In addition to the direct experimental relevance To address the question raised above, we study the effect of varying d over many orders of magnitude in Fig. Interestingly, we also observe that T C depends nonmonotonically on the gate-distance, d, as shown in Fig. As mentioned in the introduction, experimental setups that include a gate to control the strength of the Coulomb repulsion have already been realized in several groups. Namely, Refs. Let us finally discuss an experimental fingerprint associated with the phonon umklapp processes and their role in pairing. In Sec. IV A, we have demonstrated how the scattering of umklapp phonons contributes significantly to pairing. Consequently, we anticipate these modes to appear as resonant features in the single-particle density of states at the energies where the spectral weight of the phonons is pronounced where N SC (ω -μ) is the density of states in the superconducting state and N 0 (ω -μ) is the corresponding density of states in the normal state; the result is shown in Fig. We discuss now the final signature seen in the differential conductance. We observe sharp "dip-hump" resonance-like features at frequencies of the order of 5 meV, which corresponds precisely to the energy where the density of states deduced from α 2 F (ω) for the 2G and 3G umklapp phonon processes is the largest, as seen earlier in Fig. In this work, we have focused on the pairing instabilities in MATBG within the framework of Eliashberg approximation. We have focused on two sources of interaction, mediated by acoustic phonons of the original graphene layers, and the dynamically screened Coulomb repulsion, respectively. Interestingly, we find that both sources contribute to pairing in a cooperative fashion with a relatively similar strength, Fig. It is natural to ask if there are sharp experimental signatures associated with any of the scattering processes considered above in MATBG. We have demonstrated that the electron-phonon interaction leaves behind an imprint in a spectroscopic tunneling experiment. As was predicted by Ref. Whenever possible, we have explicitly pointed out the universal, model-independent aspects of our predictions, in contrast to the features that rely on the non-universal aspects of the model. We stress that the importance of phonon-umklapp processes in enhancing the pairing temperature is a model-independent feature. It relies solely on the geometric properties of the MBZ as well as on the presence of a slowly varying moiré interlayer potential that gives rise to slowly vanishing form-factors (Bloch wavefunction overlaps). As such, we therefore expect to see features in the differential conductance at the phonon resonance frequencies, which may or may not lie inside the bandgap -the latter property being model specific. Likewise, for the plasmon-mediated mechanism for superconductivity, we can identify various universal features. Firstly, plasmons that originate from the flat bands necessary have a characteristic frequency that is of scale similar to the flat-band bandwidth (or, chemical potential). Therefore, the dynamical Coulomb screening is bound to play an important role in describing superconductivity, i.e. the effect of Coulomb interaction cannot be simply reduced to a static repulsion. Secondly, as a result of the microscopic origin of the behavior of the polarization function (i.e. interband transitions between flat-bands at small momenta and between flat/dispersive bands at large momenta), it is evident that the plasmon-mediated mechanism is weakly affected by umklapp processes. The extent to which the plasmon dome however exhibits a narrow peak at high fillings ν ≈ 2 -3 is dependent on the extent to which the continuum model There are a number of interesting directions that remain to be explored, based on the formalism developed here. A natural extension would be to include the fillingdependent bandstructure renormalization arising from the interaction itself Recent theoretical works have indicated the possibility of low-energy goldstone modes associated with spontaneously broken continuous symmetries near some of the correlated insulating phases at commensurate fillings Another interesting question concerns the unavoidable role of disorder, on the superconducting phenomenology in MATBG Within our weak-coupling approach, we have focused on s-wave superconductivity with a uniform phase over the entire Fermi surface. While disorder might prompt such a state, recent experiments suggest that the superconducting state near ν = -2 breaks the rotational symmetry We end by noting that in two spatial dimensions, the true SC transition is described by the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition, with T c = πD - s /2, where D - s is the superfluid stiffness at T → T - c . In this paper, we identify T c with the scale associated with the formation of Cooper pairs, instead of the phase-ordering scale, which serves as an upper bound on the transition temperature. The geometric properties associated with the non-exponentially localizable Wannier functions for nearly flat bands In this appendix we detail the procedure used to obtain the dielectric function ε(q, iω). We also discuss key properties of the dynamical dielectric function and its connection to plasmon properties in TBG. To find the dielectric function, we start from its conventional definition as explained in the main text: ε RP A (q, ω) = κ -2πe 2 Π ee (q, ω)/q (B1) and approximate the polarization function within the random phase approximation Π ee (q, ω) = k,γ,γ (f γ,k+q -f γ ,k )Λ γγ (k + q, k) where k denotes integration over the Brillouin zone and the composite indices γ, γ run over electron bands, valley and spins. Here f γ,k is the Fermi-Dirac distribution for a state with energy E k{γ} , and Λ γγ (p, k) = δ ξξ δ σσ p, {γ} e i(p-k)•r k, {γ } describes the overlap between the Bloch eigenstates as introduced in the main text. A plot of a dielectric function for few fillings is shown in Fig. Here we detail the procedure used to solve the linearized gap equation introduced in the main text. In the second half of this section we extend this calculation to the full non-linear gap problem, which is then employed in the process of analytic continuation, necessary for computation of the tunneling density of states. is zero until gap opens, followed by a peak at the characteristic frequency for 0G processes, as expected from Fig. To determine the tunneling density of states it is necessary to obtain the self-consistent gap as a function of real frequency As an input, we start with the self-consistent gap obtained following the procedure detailed in the previous section. This gap is then approximated with the help of Padé approximant and analytically continued to real frequencies. An example of real frequency dependence of a gap is shown in Fig. and the tunneling density of states N SC (ω -μ), shown in Fig. The devices are nominally at different twist angles and have varying levels of disorder; see Here we use the notation that ρ ξ;i (q) ≡ ρ ξ;i (q, iω = 0) as per the definition in Eq. Note that here we have neglected the extended s-wave of the D 3 symmetry group. We stress that if the resulting T C for a given filling becomes of order of the chemical potential, μ, then it is necessary to determine the chemical potential self-consistently The exact location of the van-Hove singularity at ν ≈ 0.63 is a consequence of the underlying details of the bandstructure in Ref. The bare coupling constants for the Coulomb and electronphonon interactions are chosen to be close to the experimentally reported values relevant for MATBG; we choose N = 20.