High-temperature superconductivity in iron-based layered compounds discovered by Hosono group (Kamihara et al 2006 J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 10012) is fascinating physical phenomenon which still has many unanswered questions. One of these questions is the superconducting gap symmetry in iron-based superconductors (IBS), for which the most agreed concept is multiple-band s-wave symmetry. Recently, an alternative concept of singleband p-wave symmetry has been proposed. To disprove/reaffirm the latter concept, in this paper we analyse temperature dependent in-plane coherence length, ab(T), in FeSe, FeSe1-xTex, Ba(Fe1-x(Co/Ni)x)2As2 and Ca10(Pt4As8)((Fe1-xPtx)2As2)5 in order to extract the gap-to-critical-temperature ratio, 2(0)/kBTc, and the specific-heat-jump ratio, C/C, in these compounds. In the result, we report that deduced ratios are in a good agreement with the concept of single-band p-wave superconductivity in these materials. The discovery of superconductivity in Fe-based compound of LaOFeP with superconducting transition near boiling point of liquid helium by Hosono's group Further studies revealed more than dozen iron-based superconductors (IBS) families including several systems which exhibit transition temperatures well above 21 K (i.e., the boiling point of hydrogen, which can be considered as a natural border from low-and hightemperature superconductors). Superconducting gap symmetry in IBS is one of central question in understanding of the phenomenon in these compounds. Widely accepted view is that IBS exhibits multiple-band swave gap symmetry, in particular s ± -wave In this paper we attempt to reaffirm or disprove single-band p-wave superconductivity model in IBS compounds by the analysis of temperature dependent c-axis upper critical field, Bc2,c(T) (i.e., when external applied magnetic field applied parallel to [001] direction of single crystal). This field is also called in-plane upper critical field and it is defined as where φ 0 = 2.068 • 10 -15 Wb is magnetic flux quantum, and ξ ab (T) is in-plane coherence length. In the result, we conclude that all analysed IBS materials are single-band p-wave superconductors. To analyse Bc2,c(T) data we use an approach which has been proposed in our previous works where κ c (T) is in-plane Ginzburg-Landau parameter It should be stressed, that Eqs. 2-4 are valid when the order parameter phase fluctuations and the order parameter amplitude fluctuations are completely supressed and superconducting condensate is formed over the whole sample. This, in term of experimental measurements, means that Eqs. 2-4 are applicable when sample resistance under applied magnetic field, Bappl, is reached zero. In the literature, the upper critical field, Bc2(T), defined at this strict criterion of R(T,B) = 0  is designated as the irreversibility field, Birr(T), while Bc2(T) is defined at some value: where Rnorm is normal state resistance R norm (T) ≲ 0.1 will be applied to define Bc2(T) from R(T,B) curves as described below. Thus, our approach is based on the assumption that the superfluid density, ρ s (T) ≡ It can be noted that alternative temperature dependences for κ ( ))) proposed by Summers et al proposed by Godeke et al Gor'kov To present more evidences that Eq. 4 is valuable approach to study the upper critical field, Bc2(T), in Fig. La 1.83 Sr 0.17 CuO 4 single crystal, B||c In our previous work where ρ ab,p,⊥ (T) ≡ ) B c2 (0) . In Fig. It can be seen (Fig. While our primarily finding is shown in Fig. where kB is the Boltzmann constant, and the amplitude of temperature dependent superconducting gap, (T), is given by where ΔC/C is the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc, and  = 2/3 for s-wave superconductors. In following sections, where Bc2,c(T) data of IBS is analyzed, we use fitting equation: where subscripts p and ⊥ designate polar perpendicular case of p-wave symmetry for which general gap function is given by where, (T) is the superconducting gap amplitude, k is the wave vector, and l is the gap axis. The function of w ⊥ (x) in Eq. 11 is: The gap amplitude in Eq. 12 is given by Eq. 10, but  in Eq. 10 is given by (x)•dx More details about geometries can be found elsewhere k B T c can be calculated. Foner and McNiff reported Bc2,c(T) data for high-quality V3Si single crystal (which was also studied by Maita and Bucher It is important to note that deduced the gap-to-critical-temperature ratio of k B ⋅T c = 3.7 ± 0.1 within uncertainty range is equal to the value of k B ⋅T c = 3.8 reported by Orlando et al k B ⋅T c = 5.7 ± 0.1 and ΔC C = 1.8 ± 0.2 (Fig. Wang et al FeSe is iron-based superconductor which has the simplest crystalline structure (which whole IBS family) and simultaneously exhibiting the most intriguing property to be thinning down to atomic thickness, its critical temperature shows unprecedented rise in Tc In Fig. Similar result (Fig. Figure To perform fit we fixed Tc to its experimental value of 10.1 K. It can be seen in Fig. In this paper we describe a general approach to deduce primary parameters of superconductors, i.e. ab(0), Δ(0), ΔC/C, Tc, and 2(0)/kBTc by the analysis of experimental We should stress that Bc2(T) data in iron-based superconductors cannot be fitted in the assumption of s-or d-wave symmetry. We demonstrate that all analysed Bc2(T) data in ironbased superconductors can be perfectly fitted to p-wave superconducting gap symmetry.