In density functional-theoretic studies of photoionized water-based systems, the role of charge localization in proton-transfer dynamics is not well understood. This is due to the inherent complexity in extracting the contributions of coupled electron-nuclear non-adiabatic dynamics in the presence of exchange and correlation functional errors. In this work, we address this problem by simulating a model system of ionized linear H-bonded water clusters using real-time Time Dependent Density Functional Theory (rt-TDDFT)-based Ehrenfest dynamics. Our aim is to understand how selfinteraction error in semilocal exchange and correlation functionals affects the probability of proton transfer. In particular, we show that for H-bonded (H2O) + n chains (with n > 3), the proton-transfer probability attains a maximum, becoming comparable to that predicted by hybrid functionals. This is because the formation of hemibonded-type geometries is largely suppressed in extended H-bonded structures. We also show how the degree of localization of the initial photo-hole is connected to the probability of a proton-transfer reaction, as well as to the separation between electronic and nuclear charge. These results are compared to those obtained with adiabatic dynamics where the initial wavefunction is allowed to relax to the ground state of the ion cluster, explaining why different functionals and dynamical approaches lead to quantitatively different results. Understanding charge transfer dynamics in aqueous solvated semiconductor surfaces for enhanced photocatalytic activity is a complex undertaking. Elucidating the structure of these hydrated surfaces has been a subject of extensive research not only because of the ubiquitous nature of water but also to better control and improve the (photo)catalytic property of the adherent semiconductor materials. Experimentally, even the characterization of the structural motifs and physisorbed chemical species on the semiconductor surfaces is both difficult and uncertain; for example, the identification of surface species involved in photocatalysis is often based on indirect evidence From a theoretical viewpoint, ab initio molecular dynamics studies have led to a significant understanding of dynamical processes at the (photo)catalytic interface A principal aim of our work is to develop physical intuition for a more tractable system comprising of water molecules and examine proton-transfer probability (P(PT)) as computed by rt-TDDFT-based We also want to understand the effect of hydrogen bonds and their cooperativity -if any -on hole localization and proton transfer rate, and simultaneously evaluate the reliability of a commonly used semilocal generalized-gradient approximate (GGA) exchange and correlation (XC) density functional, namely PBE Since removing an electron from a system comprising of n H 2 O molecules makes it extremely prone to self-interaction error (SIE) by conventional standards In Sec. IV, we present simulations of the dynamics of (H 2 O) + n systems using (TD)DFT techniques. Our aim is to understand the proton-transfer mechanism and identify the relevant time scales. We present an rt-TDDFT/PBE-based Ehrenfest trajectory statistics of the proton-transfer in H-bonded ionized-water chains of size n = (2 -5). We also compare the non-adiabatic Ehrenfest dynamics with adiabatic Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics, and further refine the analysis by distinguishing between PBE and the hybrid functional PBE0 Finally in Sec. IV B, we explore the dynamical evolution of the photo-hole in the ionized water cluster. The rt-TDDFT/Ehrenfest approach involves a simultaneous real-time evolution of the electronic subsystem in accordance with the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equations and a classical evolution of nuclei. We investigate explicitly the evolution of hole densities and establish a connection between hole-localization and initiation of proton-transfer dynamics in ionized water chains. We also compare the behavior of three density functionals (with increasing fractions of exact exchange) for calculations of the dynamic hole densities on a particular H 2 O unit of the ionized water chain. Our results indicate that for the larger clusters, PBE simulations are not substantially different from those obtained with hybrid functionals. We explain why PBE produces significantly different results in smaller clusters, with our findings supporting this observation as well as the use of other semilocal XC functionals in rt-TDDFT/Ehrenfest simulations of larger, condensed phase systems. Local and semilocal generalized-gradient XC functionals (LDA; GGA) suffer from what is known as selfinteraction error (SIE) In this section, we explore the SIE in different charged water clusters, (H 2 O) + n , (n = 2 -5). Previous investigations of SIE in DFT have focused on how the chargedelocalization (and hence, SIE) is affected by the size of the system In our study of ionized (H 2 O) + n clusters, we also consider the effect of electrostatic interactions among the H 2 O units on the size-dependent charge delocalization or SIE. Here n controls the system size, and Fig The ground-state DFT calculations for all the systems are performed with the 6-311++G** basis set. The binding energy per water monomer (E b ) is evaluated as for all n = (2 -5) ionized water clusters. In Eq. ( A crucial feature of PBE when applied to ionized water clusters is that it favors the H 2 O• • • OH 2 bonding interaction, yielding rather low energies for structures containing H 2 O monomers bonded via the O's. We refer to these as hemibonded-type geometries. The binding energies are shown for the simplest case of a water dimer ion (H 2 O) + 2 in panel (a) of Fig. In contrast, for the proton-transferred [H 3 O + -• OH] structure, all the density functionals provide very similar binding energies, which are fairly consistent with the energies from higher accuracy theories. The energy computed by PBE is 0.09 eV lower than that given by CCSD. Nonetheless, PBE wrongly selects the hemibonded (HB) structure as the ground-state representation of the ionized water dimer due to the underlying SIE. In Table The binding energy differences between PBE and CCSD methods (∆E CCSD→PBE ) are highlighted for (a) Dimer, (b) Trimer, (c) Tetramer, and (d) Pentamer ionized water clusters in Fig. In the following sections, we discuss both adiabatic dynamics (using Born-Oppenheimer approximation) and non-adiabatic dynamics (using mean-field Ehrenfest approach) of the ionized water chains, that is, (H 2 O) + n (for n = 2 -5). Our aim is to capture the ultrafast processes that drive proton-transfer phenomena in ionized water clusters comprising of mostly linear H-bonds. We choose small clusters of (H 2 O) n (n = 2 -5) as our model systems. For the water dimer (H 2 O) 2 , we adopt the optimized (un-ionized) H-bonded geometry as shown in Fig. The geometries extracted from the BOMD trajectory are ionized by removing an electron from the HOMO of the system, i.e. setting the net charge of the sys-tem to +1. We then perform rt-TDDFT-based Ehrenfest dynamics to simulate the excited-state dynamics, in which the electron dynamics is treated quantum mechanically, and the nuclei are classically propagated on a single mean-field surface given by an average over several electronic states. The TDDFT-based Ehrenfest dynamics of electrons and nuclei is formally given by: where R J denotes the nuclear coordinates and φ i are the time-dependent Kohn-Sham orbitals such that the electronic density is given by: ρ(r, t) = i |φ i (r, t)| 2 . V nn and V en are the nuclear and electron-nuclei interaction terms respectively, The time-dependent Kohn-Sham potential v KS (r, t) is written as where |r-r | gives the Hartree potential and v xc [ρ](r, t) is the XC potential (derived from the approximate E XC [ρ]). The non-adiabatic simulations performed for multiple HOMO-ionized (+1) geometries give rise to an ensemble of Ehrenfest trajectories (ETs). We sample these ETs to obtain the relevant time-scales and mechanisms of the proton-transfer reaction occurring in (H 2 O) + n . The rt-TDDFT/Ehrenfest dynamics simulations are performed using the real-space grid code, Octopus-8.2 A. rt-TDDFT diabatic trajectories An extensive study focusing on the dynamics of ionized water monomer and dimer was carried by Chalabala et al. The HOMO of the neutral (H 2 O) 2 system is localized on the H-bond donor molecule in the optimized H-bonded configuration as shown in Fig. 5 Å, (a = acceptor). The second, no proton-transfer channel, results from a molecular rearrangement of the two water units with the net charge (+1) being shared by them. In these trajectories, the two water monomers transition from a short-living proton-transferred geometry to a hemibonded-type configuration. We observe a prevalence of this channel in the trajectory statistics using the semilocal PBE functional. At the end of the simulation period (t = 200 fs), a proton-transferred structure is formed in only 13% of the initiated trajectories. On the other hand, using the BHLYP (hybrid) functional in Ehrenfest dynamics, Chalabala et al. Fig. In some trajectories (20%), a secondary protontransfer from H 3 O + to the nearby H 2 O occurs. The simulations reveal two key factors that influence such a process: the interatomic O• • • O distances, and the time it takes for the initially nonparticipating H 2 O to break away from the two interacting water-monomers compared to the first (primary) proton-transfer time. If the first proton-transfer takes too long to complete due to excessive proton-rattling between the donor and acceptor oxygens, the nonparticipating H 2 O is driven away by the electronic forces acting on the system, and the likelihood of a secondary proton transfer in the trimer chain is severely reduced. Since a secondary proton transfer event eliminates the probability of return of the proton to its original donor ( • OH), the bump seen in the secondary proton transfer curve (Fig. As in the previous cases, in a neutral H-bonded water tetramer linear chain, the HOMO is primarily localized on the first molecule of the chain, which forms only one donor H-bond but no acceptor H-bonds (see Fig. After the primary proton transfer reaction, the H 3 O + cation may lose its proton to the neighboring H 2 O (secondary proton transfer). This phenomenon can continue to propagate down the chain, depending on two factors: the length of H-bonded chain (n), and the time it takes for the linear order of H-bonds to disappear to form a gas phase, which we refer to as the H-bond chain lifetime, 'τ '. For a particular system (and trajectory), τ serves as a cut-off after which the proton ceases to be pushed any further down the "chain" and maintains its position on the latest water unit. In the case of a water dimer ion, frequent proton-hops back and forth (rattling events) between the donor and acceptor units result in a prolonged lifetime τ . At the same time, longer water clusters allow multiple proton transfers from one unit to the next in the chain, thereby also extending the lifetimes. In general, a faster first proton transfer shortens the lifetime. Additionally, the first and secondary proton-transfer events occur earlier with increasing system size n, see Table In the pentamer chain, a fast first proton-transfer step is recorded within an average simulation time of 6.5 fs (for 20 simulated trajectories). This is immediately followed by a secondary proton-transfer seen in most trajectories. 94% of the initiated (20) ETs predict proton-transfer reaction at the end of the simulation time (t = 200 fs) as depicted in Fig. With 94% of the (H 2 O) + 5 ETs exhibiting a protontransfer reaction, we expect the ionized pentamer chain (n = 5) to be the PBE saturation limit as far as enhanced proton-transfer dynamics due to cooperative H-bonding interaction in water is concerned. This implies that for these sizes of chains, PBE and hybrid functionals should yield very similar results. For n > 5, the (H 2 O) + n chains are likely to get divided into smaller sub-chains as the nuclei evolve in time, or they would prefer to exist as bifurcated (branched) structures -both of which can be treated as a composite of the four cases (n = 2 -5) discussed in this work. We have also considered the proton-transfer dynamics in a branched-pentamer chain. In this case, the alignment of H-bonds is no longer unidirectional, as a bifurcation allows one of the water units to form three H-bonds with its neighbors (instead of utmost two H-bonds per water exclusively studied so far), see Fig. Our results indicate that for PBE, the P(PT) in HOMO-ionized H-bonded water chains increases with the length of the chain. We also know 54 that hybrid functionals predict a P(PT) for the dimer similar to what PBE predicts for the pentamer chain. Our study has pointed to the SIE associated with an overestimation for hemibonded-type structures in order to explain the differences between the results for hybrid and non-hybrid functionals. However this is not enough to understand all the results. In particular, the role that the localization of the photoionized hole plays on the P(PT) also needs to be considered. This is also important to understand to what point non-adiabatic simulations are necessary to accurately describe the rate of proton transfer upon single-ionization. In their study of the ionized water dimer, Chalabala et al. The BOMD simulations were performed using the NWChem package 51 with a time-step of 0.25 fs for the propagation of nuclei. BOMD constrains the evolution of the system on a purely adiabatic potential energy surface (PES), and does not time-evolve the electronic states, which therefore, instantaneously adapt to the moving nuclei, with a parametric dependence on the nuclear coordinates. As shown in Fig. In the case of adiabatic BOMD, PBE does not predict any proton-transfer (Fig. On the other hand, when the wavefunction is allowed to relax, the hole-spread increases with increasing chain length (see Fig. We analyze the time-evolution of the hole generated upon removal of an electron from the HOMO of the system at t = 0. The hole-density at any time instant is estimated by computing the difference between electronic densities of the ground and ionized states for the same geometric configuration. We characterize the spatial holeevolution using: ∆ρ(x; t) = dy dz [ρ ground (x, y, z) -ρ ionized (x, y, z, t)] , Here, the x -axis is chosen to lie along the H-bond chain such that ∆ρ(x) measures the variation of the hole density at H 2 O positions along the H-bond axis at any given time. The ionized structures and their corresponding TDDFT densities are selected from a single Ehrenfest trajectory. Additionally, the ground state densities are computed for these structures using static DFT, which are then subtracted from the respective TDDFT densities. We first focus on the hole dynamics in (H 2 O) + 5 since this system exhibits a high probability of proton transfer. Fig. A simple metric for hole delocalization is the hole charge within the photoexcited molecule, obtained by integrating over the water unit at the extreme left of the ionized chain. This is given by The time evolution of Q left (t), for different XC functionals is shown in Fig. We observe that even when there is sufficient delocalization, the electronic charge lags behind the nuclear charge, and its evolution is mediated by the nuclear motion over a prolonged period of time (∼50 fs, which is long when compared to the natural time scale of electronic motion). Fig. We have studied the proton transfer mechanism upon photoionization of H-bonded water molecular chains, as a function of the length of the chain using non-adiabatic rt-TDDFT simulations in the Ehrenfest approximation. The goal of this study was to understand how the self interaction error in semilocal (GGA) density functionals influences the proton transfer probability. We have shown that for PBE, this probability increases from 13% in the dimer trajectories to 94% in the pentamer trajectories. We have also shown that while the probability is largely underestimated in small chains (dimers and trimers) as compared to what hybrid functionals predict, the error is minimal in longer molecular chains. The results indicate that for PBE, the proton transfer is disfavored in cluster sizes of 3 molecules or less, due to the overestimation of the stability of hemibonded geometries over proton transfer geometries, which is in turn due to the self interaction error. In longer chains (n = 4, 5 in (H 2 O) + n ), the increased H-bond cooperativity makes the transition to hemibonded-type geometries less probable. An increasing fraction of the simulated Ehrenfest trajectories exhibit proton-transfer, often along multiple water molecules in the chain. There is also a clear difference in photohole delocalization in adiabatic, Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamic simulations, when comparing PBE to hybrid functionals. However, the charge dynamics in rt-TDDFT simulations is quite comparable for all the functionals studied in this work. This is due to the relaxation of the initial wavefunction of the ionized system. The adiabatic scheme (BOMD/PBE) at comparable time scales fails to describe the evolution of the excited system toward a proton-transfer reaction. The inclusion of nonadiabatic effects is therefore essential for capturing the proton transfer dynamics. The results presented in this paper have important ramifications for photocatalytic water-splitting phenomena occurring on semiconductor surfaces. For example, the presence of H-bonded water chains could improve the photocatalytic activity of the semiconductor. This work shows that in such condensed systems, rt-TDDFT simulations in the Ehrenfest approximation can be carried out using less expensive GGA-type functionals without significantly compromising the accuracy of the results. FIG. 