It has recently been demonstrated that N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) form selfassembled monolayers (SAMs) on metal surfaces. Consequently, it is important to both characterize and understand their binding modes to fully exploit NHCs in functional surface systems. To assist with this effort, we have performed first-principles total energy calculations for NHCs on Au(111) and simulations of X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES). The NHCs we have considered are N,N-dimethyl-, N,N-diethyl-, N,Ndiisopropylbenzimidazolylidene ( B NHC X , with X=Me, Et, and iPr, respectively) and the bis-B NHC X complexes with Au derived from these molecules. We present a comprehensive analysis of the energetic stability of both the B NHC X and the complexes on Au(111) and, for the former, examine the role of the wing group in determining the attachment geometry. Further structural characterization is performed by calculating the nitrogen K-edge X-ray absorption spectra. Our simulated XANES results give insight into (i) the relationship between the B NHC X /Au geometry and the N(1s) → π * /σ * , pre-edge/near-edge, absorption intensities, and (ii) the contributions of the molecular deformation and molecule-surface electronic interaction to the XANES spectrum. Our simulations are compared with recent experimental results. There is currently interest in using Nheterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) to create selfassembled monolayers (SAMs) on metal surfaces A number of experimental studies have been performed with B NHC iPr . For instance, in the B NHC iPr /Au(111) system the B NHC iPr -Au bond strength was estimated, using thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS), to be (158 ± 10) kJ mol Spectroscopy techniques have been used in order to examine the electronic interactions, and structural properties of molecules adsorbed on solid surfaces. For instance, (i) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy experiments addressing the electronic charge transfers and the characterization of molecule-surface chemical bonds of NHCs on metal surfaces The calculations of atomic geometry were performed based on the DFT approach, as implemented in the VASP code where |n and |1s are the final and 1s orbital wavefunction with energies ε n and ε 1s , respectively. Such approaches allow to take into account the core-hole effect of the 1s orbital of the X-ray absorber atom, while to obtain the X-ray absorption spectroscopy intensities unaffected by the presence of the pseudopotential Total Energy Calculations. We have considered four different adsorption geometries of B NHC X on the Au(111) surface ( B NHC X /Au, with X=iPr, Et, and Me), as shown in Figs. In atop and adatom, the molecule is aligned with the surface normal, and bonded to a surface Au atom (atop) or to a surface adatom (adatom), Figs. The binding energy (E b ) is a measure of the stability of the B NHC X /Au adsorption geometry, where, as usual, E b is defined to be the total energy difference between B NHC X /Au and the separated components, (2) Our calculations of the binding energy, summarized in Table It is worth noting that, in addition to the formation of C-Au chemical bonds, the long range vdW interaction between the surface Au atoms and the H atoms, of the CH 3 side groups In Figs. As shown in Figs. Such a dual behavior of B NHC iPr can be examined by considering the schematic scenario presented in Fig. In Fig. As discussed above, the tilted -B NHC X /Au structures are energetically more stable for θ about 27 • with respect to the surface normal direction. As we have done for the free standing molecules, here we evaluate the intensity ratio between the absorption peaks C ′ and A ′ , η ′ = I C ′ /I A ′ . We obtained η ′ = 4.53, 4.50, and 4.11 for X=iPr, Et and Me. Interestingly, based on the η = I C /I A ratio for free-standing molecules, Fig. We can improve the understanding of the ab- Our XANES results in general show good agreement the experimental findings of the nitrogen K-edge spectra obtained by Lovat et al. Based on ab initio DFT total energy calculations, combined with simulation of X-ray absorption spectra, we performed a thorough study of the energetic stability and structural arrangement of N-heterocyclic carbenes derived from benzimidazole on the Au(111) surface, B NHC X /Au (with X=iPr, Et, and Me). We found that B NHC Et and B NHC Me molecules are more stable lying parallel to the surface plane, forming complex structures on the Au(111) surface. Whereas, for B NHC iPr /Au we found that the tilted and complex configurations are somewhat close in energy, where the former configuration is more stable than the latter by about 50 meV/molecule. These results provide a total energy support to the recent experimental findings, (i) the observation of flatlying B NHC Et / and B NHC Me /Au and upstand-ing B NHC iPr /Au 10 , while (ii) in Refs. Further investigation, based on the nitrogen K-edge XANES simulations revealed that the molecular orientation on the Au(111) surface is characterized by distinct X-ray absorption fingerprints. For a polarization vector perpendicular to the Au(111) surface, we found that the near-edge spectra of adatom-B NHC X /Au, upstanding configuration, is given solely by the N(1s) → σ * transition, with no contribution from the π * orbitals. The absorption intensity of N(1s) → σ * transitions reduces upon the vertical tilt of the molecule, tilt-B NHC X /Au; followed by the emergence of an absorption peak at the pre-edge region attributed to the N(1s) → π * transition. Finally, we show that such an emergence and increase of the preedge absorption feature, concomitantly with the suppression of the N(1s) → σ * (near -edge) transitions indicates the formation of B NHC X molecules lying parallel to the Au(111) surface, complex -B NHC X /Au. In order to improve the understanding of X-ray absorption results, not only the ones presented in this work, but also those obtained experimentally for B NHC iPr and other NHC molecules on Au(111) • , and then the molecule and surface atomic coordinates were fully relaxed as B NHC Et /Au System E b d ∆q atop 1.534 2.127 0.285 adatom 2.501 2.055 0.332 tilted 2.499 2.060 0.338 complex (3.92 Å) 2.636 2.059 0.229 B NHC Me /Au System E b d ∆q atop 1.310 2.131 0.331 adatom 2.265 2.051 0.298 tilted 2.282 2.057 0.351 complex (3.65 Å) 2.532 2.062 0.234