While Diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) is in principle an exact stochastic method for ab initio electronic structure calculations, in practice the fermionic sign problem necessitates the use of the fixed-node approximation and trial wavefunctions with approximate nodes (or zeros) must be used. This approximation introduces a variational error in the energy that potentially can be tested and systematically improved. Here, we present a computational method that produces trial wavefunctions with systematically improvable nodes for DMC calculations of periodic solids. These trial wavefunctions are efficiently generated with the configuration interaction using a perturbative selection made iteratively (CIPSI) method. A simple protocol in which both exact and approximate results for finite supercells are used to extrapolate to the thermodynamic limit is introduced. This approach is illustrated on the case of the carbon diamond using Slater-Jastrow trial wavefunctions including up to one million Slater determinants. Fixed-node DMC energies obtained with such large expansions are much improved and the fixed-node error is found to decrease monotonically and smoothly as a function of the number of determinants in the trial wavefunction, a property opening the way to a better control of this error. The cohesive energy extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit is in close agreement with the estimated experimental value. Interestingly, this is also the case at the single-determinant level, thus indicating a very good error cancelation in carbon diamond between the bulk and atomic total fixed-node energies when using single-determinant nodes. A faithful and quantitative first principles (i.e., ab initio) description of the electronic structure of solids is one of the greatest challenges of material science. For weakly correlated materials (most simple metals, semiconductors, and insulators), modern approximations to exact density-functional theory (DFT), Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods have been developed to treat weakly through strongly correlated systems while invoking few approximations. These include variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) in continuous space One advantage of real space QMC methods is their ability to flexibly use different forms of trial wavefunctions. Since only the values and derivatives of the wavefunction are required there is no need in principle to choose forms that are suited for conventional numerical integration. While it is now standard to utilize sophisticated multideterminant trial wavefunctions in molecules, most solid state applications of DMC use a single Slater determinant (SD) trial wavefunction. A Jastrow factor is used to incorporate dynamical correlations and improve the wavefunction overall, but it does not change the nodes. Although SD-DMC calculations have proven valuable in addressing a wide range of problems in chemistry and materials science, for example obtaining near chemical accuracy in van der Waals binding In this work, we present a scheme to perform multideterminant DMC calculations in solids using configuration interaction (CI) based trial functions. We employ a selected CI (SCI) approach in which only the most important Slater determinants from the full CI (FCI) space are identified and selected. Although SCI does not suppress the exponential wall of conventional CI calculations, it may be deferred sufficiently to allow practical calculations. In the case of atomic and molecular systems, several successful applications of SCI trial functions in DMC calculations have been reported. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, the theoretical aspects of the approach are presented. A brief summary of the CIPSI method is given and its extension to the case of periodic systems is described in depth. The computational details are provided in Sec. III. Results for diamond, both at the single-and multideterminant levels, are reported and discussed in Sec. IV. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Sec. V, including areas where further improvements are desired. Unless otherwise stated, atomic units are used throughout this paper. In the present manuscript, the CIPSI algorithm developed for finite-size atomic or molecular systems is generalized to the case of periodic solids. CIPSI is one of the variants of the broad class of methods known as SCI. Selecting determinants in the CI space is a natural idea, and many SCI variants have been developed under various acronyms and implementations over the last five decades. The CIPSI approach was developed in 1973 by Huron, Rancurel, and Malrieu. where |D I is an internal determinant. Starting, for example, with the HF determinant at n = 0, the external determinants are selected using a criterion based on the estimated gain in correlation energy evaluated using second-order perturbation theory that would result from the inclusion of |D α . Denoting the second-order correction as where is the variational energy of the wavefunction at the nth iteration, a number of external determinants associated with the greatest e (n) α are incorporated into the variational space and the Hamiltonian is diagonalized to give |Ψ (n+1) 0 and E (n+1) var . In practice, the size of the variational wavefunction is roughly doubled at each iteration. Next, the second-order Epstein-Nesbet energy correction to the variational energy (denoted as E (n) PT2 ) is computed by summing up the contributions of all external determinants and the total CIPSI energy is given by The algorithm is then iterated until some convergence criterion (for example, |E (n) PT2 | ≤ ) is met. For simplicity, in the following the superscript denoting the largest iteration number attained will be dropped from the various expressions. When the number of determinants in the variational space gets large, computing the second-order correction E PT2 by adding up all contributions e α to the sum becomes computationally unfeasible. To perform this formidable task, a simple and efficient hybrid stochastic-deterministic algorithm has been developed. We now present the extension of CIPSI to periodic solids. As in any CI calculation, we must define (i) the system (number of electrons, charge and positions of the nuclei), (ii) the Hamiltonian, and (iii) the one-electron basis set. The calculation of the one-and two-electron integrals required for the computation of the Hamiltonian matrix elements then needs to be discussed. In practice, an infinite solid is modeled by a finite supercell obtained by replicating a given primitive cell n i times in each Cartesian direction (i.e., i = x, y, z). Accordingly, we will label a supercell as n x × n y × n z . In the present study, we will restrict ourselves to the simplest case of a cubic primitive cell of side L with arbitrary n x , n y , and n z values. The supercell is then a rectangular cuboid of volume Ω = N × L 3 , where N = n x n y n z is the total number of primitive cells replicated to build the supercell. The supercell being defined, we are led back to an ordinary CI calculation consisting of the set of electrons and nuclei present in the supercell and subject to an external periodic electric potential. We denote R I and Z I the position and charge of the of Ith nuclei of the primitive cell (I = 1, . . . , N n ). The actual system is then composed of N×N n nuclei at positions R I +t a a+t b b+t c c, and of N×N e electrons, where N e is the number of electrons of the primitive cell. Here, t = t a a + t b b + t c c = (t a , t b , t c ) is the lattice translation vector, and the triplet of integers (t a , t b , t c ) takes all the values needed to generate the supercell through translations of the primitive cell along its unit vectors (a, b, c). Similarly, the supercell translation vector is defined as We emphasize that, in contrast to effective one-body theories such as HF or DFT, many-body electronic structure calculations explicitly taking into account the electron-electron interaction, such as the ones performed here, cannot be restricted to the primitive cell if accurate properties are to be obtained. The supercell electronic Hamiltonian ĤN = T + Vne + Vee + Vnn (6) has a standard form, except that the electron-electron, electron-nucleus, and nucleus-nucleus Coulombic potentials, Vee , Vne , and Vnn , respectively, are now periodized to model the interaction of the electrons and nuclei belonging to the supercell with the infinite set of replicas associated with their periodic images, i.e., where r i is the position of the ith electron, T ≡ ∞ , and the prime symbol indicates that the self-interaction term i = j or I = J has to be excluded when T = 0 = (0, 0, 0). As is well known, periodic Coulomb potentials are mathematically ill-defined due to the longrange character of the Coulomb interaction. The periodic infinite sums in Eq. ( Applying the Ewald summation technique, for example, to the nucleus-nucleus term Vnn in Eq. ( where erfc(x) is the complementary error function, G refers to the set of quantized reciprocal vectors of the supercell defined by the condition e iG•T = 1, and σ is a small positive parameter chosen to facilitate convergence. Additional details can be found, for example, in Refs. 83 and 84. In this work, the one-electron basis functions are chosen to be crystalline Gaussian-based atomic orbitals i.e., the periodized (or translationally-symmetry-adapted) version of the (localized) Gaussian atomic orbitals χμ (r) from the supercell. In Eq. ( The molecular orbitals of the system are then defined as where N bas is the number of basis functions, and the molecular orbital coefficients C μp (k) are now momentum-dependent due to the translational-symmetry adaptation of the basis functions. Once again, we emphasize that, because of the explicit treatment of the electron-electron interaction, k is no longer a good quantum number and the orbitals defined above do not have the correct translational symmetry of the problem. However, choosing such a representation is particularly convenient in practice since it allows to take full advantage of the techniques and codes developed for the effective one-particle theories, such as HF and DFT. The Hamiltonian and the one-electron basis set having been defined, the next step in a CI calculation is to evaluate the Hamiltonian matrix elements between Slater determinants. This requires evaluation of one-and two-electron integrals. It is easy to see from the expressions of the Hamiltonian [see Eqs. ( Since the one-particle basis functions are invariant with respect to the primitive lattice translation vectors t, the two-electron integrals must conserve crystal momentum, i.e., k p + k q = k r + k s + g, where g is a reciprocal lattice vector of the primitive cell. When real-valued orbitals are used, a given two-electron integral is symmetric with respect to permutations of the orbital indices p and r, or q and s, as well as with the permutation of the electron labels 1 and 2, thus resulting in a 8-fold symmetry of the set of two-electron integrals. Consequently, the N 4 bas four-index integrals can be mapped to a set of approximately N 4 bas /8 unique integral values. In order to implement FCI or any of its lower-cost alternatives, one must be able to evaluate matrix elements of the Hamiltonian in the space of Slater determinants. If the determinants are all built from the same set of orthonormal spin-orbitals (which is the case here), then one can evaluate matrix elements via the usual Slater-Condon rules (see, e.g., Ref. 88 and Ref. 89 for an efficient implementation in a determinant-driven context). In order to reduce finite-size effects and, to accelerate the convergence to the thermodynamic limit (i.e., N → ∞), it is advantageous to exploit the freedom in the type of periodic boundary conditions of the supercell. By judiciously choosing the electron momenta k of the basis functions [see Eq. ( where θ is some arbitrary angle (or twist) between -π and π. These conditions are fulfilled when momenta are chosen uniformly spaced in the first Brillouin zone of the lattice (that is, by using a Monkhorst-Pack grid with i l = 0, . . . , t l (l = a, b, c) is the twist index. In this case, we have |D → e iθ |D , with θ = K • a. Boundary conditions can be varied with θ from -π to +π, θ = 0 and θ = ±π corresponding to periodic and anti-periodic boundary conditions, respectively. For a given system size, a property O can be computed by averaging out its values for different K values (or twists θ). In the limit of an infinite set of sampling values, we have where Ψ θ is the exact wavefunction of the system for the corresponding boundary condition. In practice, the integral is computed as a finite sum over shifted Monkhorst-Pack grids, as expressed by Eqs. (13a), (13b), and (13c). The main effect of twist-averaging is to suppress the major part of the one-body shell effects in the filling of single-particle states. Note that each value of θ requires an independent calculation, the total computational cost is then proportional to the number of twists. The DMC method is employed to compute ground-state energies within the fixed-node approximation. The application of DMC to solids being now well documented, we refer the interested reader to the existing literature for the theoretical background (see, for example, Refs. 16, 28, and 82). Calculations were performed using QMCPACK. To model carbon diamond, we used a primitive cell with two carbon atoms separated by 1.545 Å (approximately, 3.568 Å for the lattice constant). In order to compute the cohesive energy in the thermodynamic limit and to correct energies for finite-size effects, we consider supercells made of 16 (2 × 2 × 2), 54 (3 × 3 × 3) and 128 (4 × 4 × 4) atoms with converged twist-averaged (TA) boundary conditions with a total of 216, 64 and 27 twists respectively. IV. RESULTS To establish a reference for the multideterminant studies we first investigate the dependence of single determinant DMC energies on the initial orbitals and their basis sets. In Fig. In Table Hartree/atom for PBE/PW and -5.42138(2) Hartree/atom for B3LYP/GTO] lead to a difference of only 3.0 ± 0.4 milliHartree once extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit. Adding the zeropoint vibrational energy (ZPE) correction estimated to be 6.0 milliHartree/atom 105 brings the SD-DMC(B3LYP/GTO) cohesive energy to 1.3 ± 0.4 milliHartree of the estimated experimental value 106 of 0.2699 Hartree (see Table In Fig. Independent calculations using both HF and B3LYP orbitals are shown. Despite the large size of the Hilbert space (about ∼ 10 11 determinants), energy convergence is achieved with a reasonable accuracy using less than ∼ 10 7 determinants. In addition, the FCI limit is independent of the orbital set employed in the SCI calculation, as it should be. In the variational calculations, convergence to milliHartree accuracy is achieved at about 3 × 10 6 determinants whether using HF or B3LYP orbitals. When the perturbative corrections to the energy are included, milliHartree accuracy is reached with only ∼ 2 × 10 3 and ∼ 4 × 10 3 determinants determinants for HF and B3LYP orbitals, respectively. Although CIPSI rapidly converges to the FCI limit for the 1 × 1 × 1 supercell (Γ point calculations) the exponential character of the FCI approach is still present and, for larger supercells, the number of determinants required to reach the FCI limit to the required accuracy rapidly becomes computationally intractable. To alleviate this issue and to enable treating larger supercells we limit the SCI calculations to a subset of orbitals belonging to a pre-defined active space, thus performing in practice a CIPSI calculation for a set of N e electrons distributed among N o orbitals, denoted as CIPSI(N e ,N o ), instead of a FCI one. Of course, there are many ways of choosing such an active space (AS). A natural choice is to build the AS using the natural orbitals obtained in a preliminary CIPSI calculation. This is what has been systematically done for molecular systems in a number of works published by some of the authors. Although this choice is rather crude (and certainly not optimal), it is important to emphasize that the choice of the active space for constructing the multideterminant trial wavefunction is expected to be less critical in DMC than when just limiting the calculation to pure CI. High-energy orbitals are indeed expected to have a small impact on the wavefunction and, thus, on the location of the nodes. Convergence of the CIPSI energies with the size of the variational space for the 1 × 1 × 1 diamond primitive cell computed at the Γ point. Both the CIPSI variational energy E var and its second-order corrected value E var + E PT2 (dashed) computed with the BFD-vTZ basis set using HF orbitals (black) and B3LYP orbitals (red) are reported. The raw data can be found in the supplementary material. only the B3LYP results are presented, and the maximum number of orbitals in the CIPSI(16,N o ) corresponds to only half of the total number of orbitals (116). For the 1 × 1 × 1 supercell a well converged SD-DMC energy is achieved when using only 30 of the 58 B3LYP orbitals, but all orbitals must be retained to obtain a well converged result when using HF orbitals. For the larger 2 × 1 × 1 cell for which the CIPSI(16,N o ) is built with B3LYP orbitals, convergence to within 1.0 ± 0.3 milliHartree/atom is reached between 30 and 40 orbitals out of a total of 116. Due to the better convergence of the calculations with truncated orbital spaces when using B3LYP than HF orbitals, B3LYP orbitals are used in all subsequent calculations. Figure (These are the same as the BFD-vTZ results reported in Fig. As seen in Table Note that the number of determinants needed to reach a given threshold is smaller for the FCI space than the CIPSI (8,30) space. This results from the greater flexibility available with the FCI space. The convergence curves of the MD-DMC energy both for the FCI and CIPSI(8,30) spaces are similar and, at near-convergence, the two DMC energies differ by only about 2 ± 1 milliHartree. The DMC intrinsic variance in the energy shows a systematic improvement with the number of determinants in the expansion when using the FCI space. As seen from Fig. However in all applications performed so far -atoms systematic decrease of the fixed-node DMC energy is observed whenever the SCI trial wavefunction is improved variationally, upon increasing the number of determinants, the size of the basis set, or the size of the active space. The DMC total energy (in Hartree/cell) of diamond as a function of 1/N, where N is the size of the system, i.e., the total number of primitive cells replicated to create the supercell (N = 8, 18, 27, and 64 for 2 various methods and approximations is reported in Fig. DMC energies was employed for the 3 × 3 × 3 and 4 × 4 × 4 superlattices. In this procedure we estimate the energy at a given twist (other than Γ) via where w i denotes the ith twist (w 0 being the Γ point) and E B3LYP HF is the energy computed with the HF energy functional and B3LYP orbitals. This approximation relies on the B3LYP band structure being sufficiently accurate, but can be further improved by considering how this data is extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit, as we will detail below. Fig. We can estimate the twist-averaged DMC energy of the 4 × 4 × 4 supercells by combining the extrapolated value of the DMC energy at the Γ point and a twist-averaged contribution from Eq. ( Finally, in the spirit of extracting the maximum of information from our limited set of data, we propose to exploit the fact that both Γ point and twist-averaged energies must converge to the same value in the thermodynamic limit (i.e., N → ∞). This exact property is used as a constraint when fitting simultaneously both sets of energies with quadratic expressions, i.e., The 5 parameters in Eqs. (16a) and (16b), i.e., E N→∞ DMC and the four c i 's, are obtained by minimizing the χ 2 -type function where the δE DMC 's are the corresponding statistical errors, and the sum runs over N i = 8, 18, 27, and 64 for the Γ point energies (centered grid), and N i = 8, 27, and 64 for the twist-averaged (TA) energies. The quantity E N→∞ DMC represents the best estimate of the DMC energy in the thermodynamic limit. Following this extrapolation procedure, the SD-DMC total energy in the thermodynamic limit is found to be E N→∞ SD-DMC = -11.3986(2) Hartree. Combined with the atomic SD-DMC total energy of -5.4214(2) Hartree, it yields a cohesive energy (including the ZPE contribution) of 0.2719 (3) Hartree, an estimate close to the value of 0.2712(4) Hartree obtained by a simple quadratic fit of the DMC energies computed at the Γ point (see Table MD-DMC = -11.4246(4) Hartree, and using the atomic MD-DMC energy computed at -5.4335(1) Hartree obtain a ZPE-corrected cohesive energy of 0.2729(1) Hartree . This value compares quite well with the estimated experimental cohesive energy of 0.2699 Hartree extracted from Ref. It should be emphasized that comparing calculated and experimental cohesive energies is subject to the error made in estimating the ZPE contribution. The value of 6.0 milliHartree/atom employed in this work was obtained by Schimka et al. using a zero-point anharmonic expansion based on DFT energy calculations 105 . For internal consistency and better accuracy, evaluating the ZPE correction using the very same DMC methodology would be desirable. Some caution is then needed with respect to the particularly good agreement between our final cohesive energies and the experimental value found in this work. Some fortuitous cancellation of systematic errors between ZPE, remaining fixed-node, and extrapolation errors could be at work. A number of earlier ab initio calculations of the diamond cohesive energy have been reported in the literature. Values obtained using DMC with a single-determinant Slater-Jastrow trial wavefunction [0.2699(2) Hartree from Hood et al. 109 and 0.2702(4) Hartree from Shin et al. We have demonstrated the feasibility of fixed-node DMC calculations for periodic solids using large multideterminant trial wavefunctions built from SCI expansions. Using as an example carbon diamond, this procedure is shown to be able to improve systematically the nodal surface of the trial wavefunction. In particular, we have found that the fixed-node DMC energy decreases monotonically and smoothly as a function of the number of determinants in the trial wavefunction. Performing DMC calculations using large CI expansions together with large supercells is not feasible without further approximations due to overall cost. Here, this issue was addressed by introducing an approximate, yet well-defined, protocol combining both exact and approximate results for finite supercells and a controlled fitting procedure to reach the thermodynamic limit. Although approximate, our estimate of the diamond cohesive energy is, to the best of our knowledge, the first example of a fully ab initio MD-DMC calculation of a periodic solid. In our protocol, only the Jastrow parameters are optimized in the VMC step, with the linear coefficients of the CIPSI expansions being kept fixed. The main motivation for not optimizing the coefficients is to exploit the property of SCI methods to provide in a simple, well-defined (linear optimization), and systematic way of generating sequences of wavefunctions of increasing quality leading to a systematic reduction of the fixed-node error (see, Figs. However, such optimizations are challenging because the parameters in the Jastrow factors enter non-linearly and the objective function that one must minimize is evaluated stochastically. From a more general perspective, it would also be desirable to investigate the comparative performance a Results from the present work obtained with B3LYP orbitals and the BFD-vTZ GTO basis set. b Results from Ref. 95 obtained with PBE orbitals and a PW basis set. c Extrapolated values obtained using a using a simple quadratic fit of the energies for the three sizes as a function of 1/N. DMC energies computed by Shin et al. in Ref. 95, which were obtained using a PW basis set and a single Slater determinant wavefunction of PBE orbitals and using the same twist values. 104