We study the superconducting proximity effect in inhomogeneous systems in which a disordered or quasicrystalline normal-state wire is connected to a BCS superconductor. We self-consistently compute the local superconducting order parameters in the real space Bogoliubov-de Gennes framework for three cases, namely, when states are i) extended, ii) localized or iii) critical. The results show that the spatial decay of the superconducting order parameter as one moves away from the normal-superconductor interface is power law in cases i) and iii), stretched exponential in case ii). In the quasicrystalline case, we observe self-similarity in the spatial modulation of the proximityinduced superconducting order parameter. To characterize fluctuations, which are large in these systems, we study the distribution functions of the order parameter at the center of the normal region. These are Gaussian functions of the variable (case i) or of its logarithm (cases ii and iii). We give arguments to explain the characteristics of the distributions and their scaling with system size for each of the three cases. In this paper we study the superconducting pairing correlations induced by the proximity effect 1 in inhomogeneous systems. We will consider, specifically, disordered and quasiperiodic chains, whose wave functions are not described by the Bloch theorem. While the subject of bulk disordered superconductors has been addressed by many previous theoretical 2, We recall that the proximity effect provides a useful probe of electronic properties. A number of recent works have considered the superconducting proximity effect in a variety of systems: topological insulators We will consider two archetypal 1D systems: the Anderson model The above statements hold for the mean (or typical) value. To more completely characterize the fluctuations around the mean, we compute the distribution functions of the values of OP for a given position in each of the three cases. These distribution functions reflect the nature of the electronic states in the systems, which are respectively quasi-extended states, strongly localized states, and critical (multi-fractal) states. We show that in the weak-disorder case, the proximity-induced superconducting order parameter is described by a Gaussian distribution, whereas it is described by log-normal distributions in quasiperiodic and strongly disordered systems. We close this introduction by mentioning some works on superconducting order in bulk inhomogeneous systems for closely related models. Ghosal et al The paper is organized as follows: in Section II we present a review of the real-space Bogoliubov-de Gennes mean field approach that is used here in a self-consistent manner. In Section III we discuss the Hamiltonian and the choice of parameters. In Section IV we analyze the results obtained for the Anderson model and in Section V we analyze the results obtained for the Fibonacci model. Section VI summarizes our conclusions. The starting point for our discussion is the attractive Hubbard model Here c iα is the electron annihilation operator at site i (i = 1, ..., L tot , where L tot is the total number of sites) and with spin α. 0 i and μ i are the on-site potential and the chemical potential respectively at site i, t i is the hopping amplitude between sites i and i + 1 and V i > 0 is the strength of the attractive Hubbard interaction between spin-up and spin-down electrons at site i. In the Bogoliubov-de Gennes method, one introduces the mean fields HF i and ∆ i to decouple the quartic interaction term. The resulting mean field Hamiltonian is given by Ĥmf can be diagonalized by introducing the Bogoliubov transformation: One solves the resulting Bogoliubov equations in real space to obtain the eigenstates and their energies. Introducing the L tot -component vectors u n and v n , where u n (resp. v n ) are the the coefficients u in (resp. v in ) with i = 1, .., L tot , the matrix form of these equations reads where E n is the associated eigenvalue. The components of the matrices K and ∆ are given in terms of the Kronecker delta δ ij by Due to the redundancy of this system of equations, it suffices to keep only the positive energy solutions E n > 0. The eigenvectors satisfy normalization condi- The mean-field Hamiltonian (2) contains L tot local superconducting order parameters ∆ i and L tot local effective onsite energies i = 0 i + HF i -μ i . These quantities must satisfy the self-consistency equations, where f (E n , T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at temperature T . In our numerical calculations, we begin with a starting ansatz for the 2L tot mean-field parameters. We then iteratively solve the eigenvalue problem Eq. ( We study hybrid chains, consisting of a normal, i.e. non-interacting, region (N) and a superconducting region (SC). Closed boundary conditions are assumed (see Fig. As our primary goal is to examine the effects of disorder on the proximity effect, we will focus on the ideal case where the interfaces are transparent. We will measure all energies in units of the strength of the nearest neighbor hopping in the superconductor, t. The hopping energy in the superconductor is then t = -1. The hopping amplitudes in the N region will be chosen to be of comparable strength, i.e. of the order of unity. In each of the models, the band fillings are fixed at This amounts to the following set of choices for the parameters: • The normal region corresponds to the first L sites, i = 0, .., L -1. The superconducting region is of length L SC , corresponding to indices i = L, L + 1, ..., L tot -1 where L tot = L + L SC is the total number of sites. L SC = 200 everywhere, L ranges from 90 to 1598. • The hoppings at the two interfaces are taken to be unity, i.e. t L-1 = t Ltot-1 = -1. • There are no interactions in the normal region, i.e. • Within the N region, t i values are either sampled from a random distribution function (see Sec.IV) or taken from a Fibonacci sequence (see Sec.V) • Within the (translationally invariant) superconductor , • Both regions are at half-filling, i.e. the Fermi level is in the middle of the spectrum. In the normal part, this means 0 i -μ i = 0. In the superconducting part, we need to account for the Hartree-Fock shift which implies 0 i - Throughout this study, the central observable of interest is the strength of the superconducting order parameter at the mid-point of the normal region of the ring, ∆ mid . This is given by ∆ L-1 2 for odd chains and for even chains. We compute ∆ mid for an ensemble of rings with a given size and disorder/modulation strength. To obtain the spatial decay of the order parameter as a function of distance from the interface, we fit values of the ensemble average ∆ mid for fixed disorder strength and different chain lengths 32 . We use histograms of ∆ mid for fixed system size and disorder strength to study the distributions of the induced OP. Before moving on to inhomogeneous systems, it is useful to recall results for the periodic case, when the N chain hopping amplitudes are uniform, i.e. t i = -1. The real space profile of the order parameter for the clean N-SC ring is shown in Fig. As discussed, for example, by Pannetier and Courtois In the following we present results corresponding to the two disorder regimes using the self-consistent theory outlined above. We show, firstly, that in the weak disorder case, the proximity induced superconducting order parameter (OP) decays as a power law of the distance from the interface. In contrast, the OP decays exponentially in the strong disorder regime. In addition, we obtain the full probability distributions of the OP and show how they differ in the two regimes. We will consider the off-diagonal disordered Anderson model, in which the on-site terms are uniform and set equal to zero, while the hopping amplitudes t i = t + η i are random. The independent random variables η i are drawn from a uniform (box where W/t < 2 is the disorder strength, and Θ(η) is the Heaviside step function. The width of the distribution is restricted to be less than 2, so that the hopping amplitudes t i are all strictly negative. Although we work with a box distribution, the exact form of the randomness is not expected to matter for our results, which should also hold for more general random distributions 36 . In a weakly disordered finite chain, one can compute the (sample-dependent) corrections to the energies and wavefunctions of the clean system using perturbation theory. In this limit, the semi-classical viewpoint -in which the principal effect of the randomness is to randomize the phase of the wavefunctions -is useful. That wavefunctions in reality remain extended, can be readily seen from the fact that the average probability at each site ψ 2 n (i) tracks the values obtained in the clean system. We therefore use the term quasi-extended to denote this type of wave function. Fig. These observations can be explained by means of perturbation theory in the variables η i . In the clean limit, the eigenfunctions and energies of the hybrid chain system have been analytically studied in where ∆ 0 is the OP in the clean case. The normalization Taken together, Averaging over the disorder then yields where we neglected the contribution of the first term in (11) compared to that of the second term. This follows because the averages of δu n and δv n are very small (the linear corrections in η average to zero, and the second order corrections are small) compared to the average of |δu n | 2 and |δv n | 2 . Note that the correction term due to disorder in (12) is always negative and proportional to W 2 . For a chain of length L, Eq. ( We now discuss the spatial decay of the OP, which we compute from the dependence of the average OP value at the midpoint of the chain, ∆ mid , for different lengths L. As shown in Fig. The strong disorder regime corresponds, in our model, to values of W/t of order 0.1 or larger. In this regime, the wave functions have an exponentially decaying envelope function. The proximity effect is expected to be short-ranged, in contrast to the weak disorder regime. Indeed this is observed in Fig. Fig. where C is a normalization constant. The width of the Gaussian, σ(W, L), is found to grow linearly with W and with the system size L, as shown in Fig. where the random numbers x i are related to the hopping amplitudes by x i = log(t 2i /t 2i-1 ) In the strong disorder regime, we assume that ∆ mid can be approximately written as i.e. that the contributions from finite energy states in the sum (8) can be neglected, so the OP at the midpoint is determined principally by the wave functions u and v at E = 0. This simplification can be justified as a result of two factors: firstly the fact that there is a singularity (in finite systems, a peak) in the density of states at this energy To conclude this section, we have shown that extended states lead to a power law decay of the OP and a Gaussian distribution in the weak disorder regime, whereas localized states lead to a stretched exponential decay and a log-normal distribution in the strong disorder regime. We have checked that these features in the induced order parameter in off-diagonal Anderson model carry over to the the diagonal Anderson model except that for high values of W , the OP decay is fit better by an exponential rather than a stretched exponential. We now consider a quintessential example of a onedimensional quasiperiodic system-the Fibonacci chain. The Fibonacci chain is the most influential and best studied example of a 1D quasicrystal. It exhibits many of the most interesting novel features of quasicrystals including a singular continuous spectrum and so on. These finite sequences obtained after n applications of σ are called approximants of the Fibonacci quasicrystal. The number of hoppings in an approximant is a Fibonacci number F n = 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 . . .. In an approximant of length F n , the ratio of the number of A-bonds to the number of B-bonds is τ n = F n-1 /F n-2 and tends to the golden mean, τ = 1+ √ 5 2 ≈ 1.618 as the chain length tends to infinity. We will see below, when we come to the study of fluctuations that that these are not the only allowed Fibonacci approximant sequences-there are, in fact, F n different approximants corresponding to a given generation n. We will consider henceforth the case where t A ≤ t B . The case t A = t B corresponds to the periodic chain, and the difference W = t B -t A gives a measure of the strength of the quasiperiodic modulations. For a given value of W , we choose t B and t A such that the average of the hoppings over the chain is unity =⇒ 1 Fn (F n-1 t A +F n-2 t B ) = -1. The spectrum and wave functions of this hopping Hamiltonian have been extensively studied, and it is wellknown that all states are multi-fractal and critical Fig. Local environment plays an important role in the value of the OP on a given site. The lowest panel of Fig. This self-similarity and the local environment dependence of the OP have simple explanations in terms of the theoretical description of Fibonacci chain eigenstates in 49 and 48 . We assume, as in (16), that the sum over states can be replaced by the E = 0 contribution. The OP is thus determined by the structure of the E = 0 wavefunctions which is well-known. In the limit of strong quasiperiodic modulation, these wavefunctions tend to have their support concentrated on the sites which are surrounded on either side by t A bonds (and were called "atom" sites in the renormalization group (RG) approach due to Niu and Nori and Kalugin et al where i and i are the site indices of the old and the new (renormalized) chain, and λ is a wavefunction rescaling factor which can be computed as a function of the hopping parameters The chains built by substitution of the previous section are only one of a family of approximants: there are exactly F n Fibonacci approximants of length F n . The local order parameters in the Fibonacci chain fluctuate according to the structure of the chain considered. A systematic way to generate all approximants of length F n uses the characteristic function, χ j gives the jth hopping, where we identify -(+) with t A (t B ), and j = 1, 2, . . . F n . By varying φ throughout the interval [0, 2π), we recover all approximants of the given length. The difference between chains generated by changing φ is small and consists of phason flipsexchanging a pair of bonds t B t A → t A t B . The variation of the induced OP as a function of φ was studied in There it was shown that varying φ leads to complex oscillations of the OP, with periods given by the topological indices of the gaps of the Fibonacci chain spectrum. One can plot the distribution function of the OP, just as we have done for the randomly disordered case. However, there is a significant difference between the models: whereas in the disordered system one can generate as many realizations of the chain as one wishes, for the Fibonacci chain there are only F n realizations of a chain of length F n . It is therefore necessary to go to very large systems to obtain a good fit for the decay law of ∆ mid and to fit the distribution function to a smooth form. In this work, the biggest system that we have studied consists of N = 1, 597 bonds. In this subsection we consider the properties of the typical value of the OP ∆ mid g -after averaging over all values of φ 54 -and focus in particular on its spatial decay away from the N-SC interface. To study the spatial decay of ∆ mid g as one moves away from the interface, we compute this quantity for chains of different lengths L. Plotting it as a function of length L/2, as shown in Fig. The observed power law decay is consistent with the presence of critical states: the effective exponent is nonuniversal and depends on the average values of the density of states and the states close to the Fermi level. An explicit calculation is outside the scope of the present discussion. We remark simply that when the ratio t A → t B , the power α → 1, i.e. approaching the decay law for the simple non-modulated chain (see inset of Fig. The Distribution of the induced order parameters are shown in Fig. where κ = log(t A /t B ). The height function h, which depends solely on the geometry, can be computed for a given sequence of hopping amplitudes using the following relations for the height changes, which can take three values depending on the value of the hopping amplitudes between the two sites, where δh(2m) = h(2m) -h(2m -2). A similar structure holds for the state on the odd sublattice. To proceed, one next uses the renormalization transformation of Fibonacci chains, which relates a given chain to the next generation, to write a recursion relation for the height function. From this relation, one can deduce that for sufficiently long chains the distribution of h-values must tend to a Gaussian of width proportional to ln L. The multi-fractal scaling properties of the E = 0 state can be deduced from the distribution of h. In particular, for this critical state all the generalized exponents describing its spatial characteristics have been computed exactly. The analysis shows that heights follow a gaussian distribution with the variance given by 48 Returning to the proximity effect, the OP at the midpoint is determined by the wave functions u and v at the midpoint of the chain which both have the form given by (19), differing only in the values of the prefactor. The changes of values ∆ mid result from the phason flips that occur when the parameter φ is varied. From ( Although both distributions are log-normal, there is a significant difference between the L dependence of the widths in the Fibonacci chain (FC) as compared to the strongly disordered chain. For the FC, the width of the distribution grows only logarithmically, much much more slowly than in the random case. This is indeed seen numerically as shown in the inset of Fig. Table We have examined the proximity effect in inhomogeneous normal wires coupled to a superconductor at T = 0, focusing on three important situations : I) when the N component is a weakly disordered crystal, in which wave functions are extended and perturbative calculations can be performed, II) when the disorder is strong enough such that the localization lengths are smaller than the sample size, and III) when states are critical, as in the off-diagonal Fibonacci tight-binding model. Our main results are summarized in table I. We find, firstly, that the typical value of the OP has a power law decay as one moves away from the interface when states are extended or critical. On the other hand, for strongly disordered systems, where states are localized, the typical OP decays faster, in the present case as a stretched exponential. For arbitrary positions of the Fermi energy, away from the special point E = 0 we expect that a regular exponential decay should be observed. The OP fluctuations in such systems are large. We have computed the distribution function of OP values and shown that they have gaussian or log-normal shapes. We have presented arguments to explain forms their scaling as a function of sample size and disorder strength for each of the cases considered. In the one-dimensional models we considered there are no mobility edges. However, one can speculate that our results are more generally applicable in other models where there are mobility edges. In that case the typical values and the fluctuations of the OP would depend on the spatial characteristics of the states close to the Fermi level. Lastly, we note that although results reported here were obtained for the 1D case, qualitatively similar re-sults could be expected for models in higher dimensions. is left for future studies.