As the limits of traditional von Neumann computing come into view, the brain's ability to communicate vast quantities of information using low-power spikes has become an increasing source of inspiration for alternative architectures. Key to the success of these largescale neural networks is a power-efficient spiking element that is scalable and easily interfaced with traditional control electronics. In this work, we present a spiking element fabricated from superconducting nanowires that has pulse energies on the order of ~10 aJ. We demonstrate that the device reproduces essential characteristics of biological neurons, such as a refractory period and a firing threshold. Through simulations using experimentally measured device parameters, we show how nanowire-based networks may be used for inference in image recognition, and that the probabilistic nature of nanowire switching may be exploited for modeling biological processes and for applications that rely on stochasticity. Recent years have witnessed the growth of brain-inspired computing architectures in response to the stagnation in performance of traditional systems At the heart of SNNs are devices or simple circuits that serve as a spiking element or "soma", generating electrical spikes with varying degrees of bio-realism while maintaining low power. To-date, spiking behavior has been explored in a variety of hardware platforms, including CMOS, magnetic materials, and Mott insulators, but each of these is accompanied by certain drawbacks. For example, SNNs made from CMOS Figure Figure To gauge the spiking characteristics of the soma, we first measured its frequency response when driven as a single oscillator by overbiasing it from the bias port without applying an input pulse. In this operation, the two oscillators fire simultaneously, since there is no input signal to induce a phase shift between them. Figure Spiking reproducibility was assessed by gathering statistics on the interspike interval Δt. Figure A key feature of biological neurons is the existence of a firing threshold, or a minimum input signal required to initiate spiking for a given resting potential The curves in Fig. While stochasticity like the variable firing threshold observed here is usually avoided in electrical systems, biological neurons have firing probabilities that have inspired many neuromorphic applications that take advantage of probabilistic switching, making nanowires a logical hardware platform for these types of applications. An example of harnessing stochastic firing for a neuromorphic application is demonstrated later in this paper. In addition to a threshold response, biological nanowires display a refractory period Using the LTspice model of the nanowire soma updated with experimentally measured device parameters, we can simulate how a nanowire-based network may be used in an inference chip for applications like image classification. Figure The output of each pixel neuron is fed into the input of each letter neuron using an inductive synapse with inductive coupling. As described in our previous work Figure As mentioned previously, biological neurons also have firing probabilities, which has inspired theories of how stochastic behavior plays a critical role in the brain's operation. One key example of harnessing stochasticity is the winner-takes-all (WTA) theory Figure We can take advantage of the nanowire's intrinsic stochasticity in order to simulate a WTA competition. We amended our soma model to include Gaussian white noise sources, keeping the noise bandwidth constant at 1 GHz and varying the noise amplitude until the firing probability was comparable to what we observed experimentally. Figure Figure Despite the competitions that resulted in no winner, the similar outcomes of the three output neurons illustrate how we can build a network that uses probabilistic firing to produce a meaningful output from a set of inputs, and that superconducting nanowires have enough inherent stochasticity to support this type of competition. In summary, we have presented the first experimental results of a spiking element for neural networks based on coupled relaxation oscillations in superconducting nanowires. The device takes advantage of the low switching energies in nanowires to produce spikes analogous to action potentials, and is able to reproduce critical bio-realistic characteristics such as a firing threshold and refractory period. Simulations using experimentally measured device parameters enabled us to explore how nanowire somas are wellsuited to specific tasks, such as a low-power inference platform, while the WTA competitions showcased how the stochastic dynamics of superconducting nanowires can be harnessed for real applications and for testing theories about behaviors observed in nature. In the future, nanowire-based WTA circuits could be combined with nanowire memory elements Measurement details III. Single oscillator characteristics IV. Output signals of the input and bias ports V. Discussion on flux buildup from uneven oscillators VI. Image recognition details VII. WTA simulation details Before fabricating the soma, we considered several critical aspects of its design. First, each nanowire oscillator must have a sufficiently large series inductance such that the L/R time constant is on the order of nanoseconds, allowing for relaxation oscillations. As a result, long meandered nanowire inductors (∼200 squares) were added between the 60-nm-wide switching elements and the shunt resistor in order to get a series inductance on the order of nanohenries for a typical NbN film with a sheet inductance of 20-50 pH/sq. Additionally, the operation of the soma relies on the bias current splitting evenly between the two branches of the nanowire loop so that both oscillators are biased identically. To ensure that the oscillator biases were equal, COMSOL simulations of both pathways were used to check that the number of squares on either side of the bias port were the same (∼634 squares). Once the design was finalized, the soma was fabricated using a two-step electron-beam lithography process. Metal shunt resistors and alignment marks were patterned in the first process. To begin, the positive-tone resist ZEP520 was spun at 5 krpm for 60 s and baked at 180 °C for 2 min. The pattern was then exposed in a 125 kV Elionix system at a beam current of 5 nA and dose of 500 μC/cm 2 . Following exposure, the resist was developed in o-xylene at 0 °C for 60 s and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) at room temperature for 30 s, then dried with a nitrogen gun. Afterwards, a metal layer of 10 nm Ti and 25 nm Au was evaporated and lifted off in n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) at 60 °C for 1 hr. The second electron-beam lithography process patterned the nanowires. A niobium nitride film with a sheet resistance of 150 Ω/square was deposited 1 on top of the metal structures. Afterwards, the positive tone resist gL2000 was spun on top at 5 krpm for 60 s and baked at 180 °C for 2 min. The nanowire structures were then exposed at a dose of 600 μC/cm 2 , using a beam current of either 500 pA or 5 nA depending on the size of the structure. Following exposure, the patterned resist was developed in oxylene at 5 °C for 30 s and IPA at room temperature for 30 s. After checking for pattern fidelity using a scanning electron microscope, the pattern was transferred to the underlying superconducting film using reactive ion etching in CF4 at a pressure of 10 mTorr and RF power of 50 W. The resist was then stripped in heated NMP for 1 hr and left overnight. For all measurements, the chip was attached to a custom printed circuit board (PCB) and immersed in liquid helium at 4.2 K. Direct electrical connections were formed by wire bonding from the superconducting leads to the gold external pads on the PCB with aluminum wire bonds. Signals were sent between the room temperature electronics and the PCB via coaxial cables with SMP connectors. To measure the oscillation frequency as a function of bias current, a bias current was applied using a battery source (SRS SIM928) in series with a 100 kΩ resistor, and the output voltage was sent through a 50 dB, 1 GHz-bandwidth amplifier (MITEQ AM-1309) and read-out on an oscilloscope (LeCroy WaveRunner 620Zi). A Fast Fourier Transform of the output signal was used to identify the frequency peak. To measure spiking of the soma in response to an input pulse, we applied both a DC bias current and an input current pulse. The bias current was supplied through a DC battery source in series with a 10 kΩ resistor and a bias-tee with the RF port shorted to ground. The pulse was generated using an Agilent waveform generator (Agilent 33600a) in series with a 100 kΩ series resistor, which was sent to both the device and the oscilloscope using a pulse splitter. The voltage output was sent through the RF port of a bias-tee and a 50 dB, 1 GHz-bandwidth amplifier (MITEQ AM-1309) before being read-out by the oscilloscope. To understand the spiking characteristics of the soma, it was first necessary to measure the dynamics of an isolated oscillator. Figure The frequency-versus-bias curve of Fig. The red curve in Fig. To ensure that the spikes are coming from the phase-shifted firing of both oscillators, we examined the voltage signals of the input port and the bias port, and compared them to the simulated responses. The firing probabilities Figure The control oscillator only fires if the sum of the bias, input, and circulating currents passing through it exceeds its critical threshold. This condition may be expressed as: where the fractions indicate the amount of bias and input currents that pass through the control oscillator by inductive splitting, and Icirc is the amount of trapped flux stored in the form of counterclockwise circulating persistent current. As seen by this expression, the control oscillator requires more circulating current to keep firing if the input current is increased. Figure We can simulate the effect of uneven oscillators on the firing probability by incorporating Gaussian noise sources into our model, like those implemented in the WTA simulations. Figure These results indicate that uneven flux contributions from the two oscillators can lead to a nonzero baseline circulating current that eventually turns one of the oscillators off. However, as we observed experimentally, this problem may be mitigated by increasing the bias current until the firing probability curve plateaus at high input currents. Figure In the case presented in the main text, we used all 30 images for both training and testing because the data set is small, leading to 100% classification. However, for larger data sets, we would like to be able to solve for the synaptic weights using only a fraction of the total images as a training set, and then test the resulting network on all of the images. To show how our network would respond in this scenario, we repeated the training process using just 9 images that were randomly chosen from the set of 30, and then modified our circuit with these new synaptic weights. The results shown in Figure Figure As noted in Figure The Gaussian white noise sources at the input and bias ports of the output neurons had a bandwidth of 1 GHz and amplitude of 0.8 μA. To simulate the effects of probability, the noise signal of each output neuron was shifted in time by a different factor, giving them each effectively a different chance of switching (this method was chosen since it was not possible to randomize the seed at the start of successive simulations). For each competition, three unique random numbers were generated in Matlab and used as the time shift factors for each of the three output neurons. The output is split into three connections to excite both inhibitors and the output neuron itself. Gaussian white noise sources at the input and bias ports are used to create firing probabilities that match what is observed experimentally. For all diagrams, excitatory coupling is indicated by blue text, and inhibitory coupling is indicated by red text.