We have employed single gold layer metal and multilayer Ag/Si3N4/Au plasmonic sensors to monitor changes in the refraction index of glucose/water solutions. Our results show that the sensor can resolve glucose refractive index down to 1% concentration. In addition, we have simulated the strength of the surface plasmon resonance evanescent electric fields by using the finite difference method of COMSOL. The electric field strength for the Ag/Si3N4/Au sensor is much stronger than that for single gold layer SPR sensor. Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPPs) are electromagnetic excitations related to surface charge density oscillation propagating along a metal/dielectric interface. Since the discovery of SPPs over seven decades ago, their applications have led to the development of various Surface Plasmonic Resonance (SPR) sensors with applications in bioscience, engineering, chemical, and physical applications. , where nn pp is the index of prism, εε mm is real part of dielectric constant of metal, and nd is the ambient index of refraction. The sensitivity of a SPR sensor is defined as the derivative of the SPR angle with respect to index of refraction of ambient or SS nn = ddθθ ssppss /ddnn dd In this work, we have fabricated two sets of sensors of Au and Ag/Si3N4/Au structures in a class-100 clean room followed by SPR measurements for the performance and sensitivity of these sensors. Single metal Ag SPR sensor acts as the base for comparison due to the fact that it has the highest sensitivity. Prior to device fabrication, each device was simulated with COMSOL software to determine the thickness of each layer for optimum SPR. Optimized structures are 50nm for single metal gold and 40nm/186nm/22nm for the Ag/Nitride/Au sensor. Metal depositions were made in an AJA thermal evaporator at base pressure of 1.2×10 -7 torr. Prior to fabrication, the glass substrates were cleaned in piranha solution followed by DI water rinse and nitrogen gas dry. Substrates were annealed at 700 C for over ten First of all, we evaluate the influence of the refractive index of the dielectric (the analyte, e. g., glucose water solution) on the SPR angle and sensitivity of the sensor. Figure We measured SPR response for distilled water and glucose for glucose concentrations of 1%, 2%, 5%, 10% and 20%. Figure To further investigate these sensors, we simulated the electric fields for both sensors based on results of the layer thicknesses. In case of the first sensor, the figures 8-9 show the strength of the z-component (normal to the plane of the sensor) electric fields for single metal gold and also for Ag/Si3N4/Au sensors. A comparison of the electric fields of the gold and Ag/Nitride/Au sensors shows that electric field for the Ag/Nitride/Au sensor is at least 1.5 times stronger with about 300nm higher decay length. It amounts to detection capability up to much higher range from the surface. In conclusion, we have applied single metal gold and also Ag/Si3N4/Au SPR sensors to determine the glucose refractive index for glucose concentrations, varying from 1% to 40 %. To our knowledge, the sensitivity of the gold sensor to glucose concentration is higher than other known sensors. 