Polar magnetic oxide HoCrWO 6 is synthesized and its crystal structure, magnetic structure, and thermodynamic properties are investigated. HoCrWO 6 forms the polar crystal structure (space group Pna2 1 (#33)) due to the cation ordering of W 6+ and Cr 3+ . There is an antiferromagnetic transition at T N = 24.5 K along with the magnetic entropy change (~5 J.Kg. -1 K -1 at 70 kOe). Neutron diffraction measurement indicates that both Cr and Ho sublattices are ordered with the moment of 2.32(5)μ B and 8.7(4)μ B at 2 K, respectively. While Cr forms A-type collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) structure with magnetic moment along the b axis, Ho sublattice orders in a non-coplanar AFM arrangement. A comparison with isostructural DyFeWO 6 and DyCrWO 6 indicates that the magnetic structure of this family of compounds is controlled by the presence or absence of e g electrons in the transition metal sublattice. Polar (noncentrosymmetric and achiral) magnetic oxides are systems of interest due to their fascinating fundamental properties desirable for applications such as ferroelectricity, piezoelectricity, magnetoelectricity, or multiferroicity Recently, type II magnetoelectric multiferroic properties have been reported in some members of the RFeWO 6 (R=Y or Dy, Tb, Eu) family that are polar even in the paramagnetic state Here, we present the results from neutron diffraction, magnetization and specific heat measurements on HoCrWO 6 . We discuss our results with reference to previous work on DyCrWO 6 , DyFeWO 6 and YCrWO 6 . The results from our work and comparison with previous work indicate that the polar crystal structure is stable in HoCrWO 6 and the absence of e g electrons in Cr sublattice results in the magnetic structure of HoCrWO 6 similar to that of DyCrWO 6 but different to that of DyFeWO 6 . Polycrystalline HoCrWO 6 was synthesized by the solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of Ho 2 O 3 (preheated at 900 °C for 12 h in air), Cr 2 O 3 , and WO 3 were mixed, ground, and heated at 1180 °C for 18 h in air with intermittent grindings. Preliminary phase purity was determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD). XRD patterns were collected on a Rigaku Miniflex XRD instrument (Cu Kα radiation λ= 1.5406 Å, 40 kV, and 20 mA) equipped with D/teX Ultra detector. Magnetization measurements were performed using a SQUID magnetometer (SCM5) in National High Magnetic Field Laboratory Florida, and Dynacool vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) system at SUNY Buffalo State. The specific heat was measured using a Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design). Neutron diffraction measurements were performed using the time of flight (TOF) technique in POWGEN instrument in spallation neutron source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory using the neutron spectrum of central wavelength 1.5 Å. The crystal and magnetic structure were refined using Fullprof 3.a. Crystal structure determination The room temperature (T=300 K) TOF neutron diffraction data was corrected for neutron absorption using Lorentz correction and refined using the Fullprof software. The profile parameters were fixed to the instrument resolution and isotropic thermal factors, the atomic coordinates and the lattice parameters were refined. The crystal structure was determined to be in the polar orthorhombic space group Pna2 1 (#33) with the lattice parameters a = 10.8724(2) Å, b = 5.1661(1) Å, c = 7.3096(1) Å, V = 410.57(1) Å 3 and Z = 4. The observed intensity (I o ), calculated intensity (I C ), the difference (I o -I C ), and the Bragg positions are shown in Figure , where C is the Curie-Weiss constant and θ is the Curie-Weiss temperature. The red line is the fit to data in the temperature range 300 K to 35 K . Figure Since the magnetic state changes with magnetic field at low temperatures, we have also investigated the magnetocaloric property of HoCrWO 6 by calculating the change in magnetic entropy. By measuring magnetization versus temperature at different magnetic fields and rearranging the data, we have estimated the change in the magnetic entropy using relation For the magnetization data taken at discrete magnetic fields and temperatures, the above equation can be integrated numerically as (32) where M i+1 and M i are the measured magnetizations at temperatures T i+1 and T i , respectively. The magnetization and its temperature derivative as a function of temperature are shown in Figures In order to understand the magnetic behavior, we also performed low temperature (T = 2 K and T = 18 K) neutron diffraction study on HoCrWO 6 . The low temperature neutron diffraction data along with the refinement are presented in Fig 6 . The low temperature (T < T N ) diffraction patterns contain extra peaks that were absent at room temperature (T = 300 K, Figure The magnetic structure of HoCrWO 6 is similar to that of DyCrWO 6 with some minor differences. Both HoCrWO 6 and DyCrWO 6 have the same magnetic wavevector k = (0 0 0). In HoCrWO 6 , the magnetic space group Pna2 1 (#33.144) best fits our data whereas in DyCrWO 6 the magnetic space group P112 1 was used. In the Pna2 1 space group there is one Cr and one Ho site whereas in P112 1 both Cr and Ho sites split into two sites. However, in both HoCrWO 6 and DyCrWO 6 , the arrangement of magnetic moments is in the similar manner. In HoCrWO 6 , the closest Cr 3+ -Cr 3+ distance is 4.67 Å, the closest Cr 3+ -Ho 3+ distance is 3.36 Å and the closest Ho 3+ -Ho 3+ distance is 3.79 Å. Given the crystal structure, there cannot be direct exchange interaction between any of these magnetic ions. Since the magnetic structure of HoCrWO 6 is similar to that of DyCrWO 6, the scenario of strongest Cr 3+ -O-O-Cr 3+ antiferromagnetic super-super exchange interaction and weakest Ho 3+ -O-Ho 3+ interaction might also be valid for HoCrWO 6 as presented for DyCrWO 6 through exchange integral calculation The cation ordering of Cr 3+ and W 6+ in connected CrO The space group Pna2 1 with polar point group mm2 allows spontaneous polarization along c-axis even at room temperature. However, no polarization was observed in non-magnetic state in other members of this family due to polycrystalline sample and the requirement of large polling electric field. In the magnetic state, the observation of polarization depends upon the strength of magnetoelectric coupling. The magnetoelectric coupling in turn depends upon the spin arrangement in the transition metal sublattice. Future polarization studies in magnetic fields are desirable in this compound to understand the consequence of collinear spin arrangement in the strength of magnetoelectric coupling. In summary, with the synthesis and characterization new polar compound HoCrWO6, our work allows the comparison of crystal and magnetic structure of different members of RMWO 6 family. Our work also provides future avenue to tune the magnetoelectric coupling strength and the transition temperatures by suitable choice of rare earth and the transition metal ions in RMWO 6 family. The supplementary material contains the structural information such as bond lengths, bond angles, the comparison of magnetic entropy calculation from heat capacity and magnetization data. 