Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a powerful tool to investigate interaction forces at the micro and nanoscale. Cantilever stiffness, dimensions and geometry of the tip can be chosen according to the requirements of the specific application, in terms of spatial resolution and force sensitivity. Colloidal probes (CPs), obtained by attaching a spherical particle to a tipless (TL) cantilever, offer several advantages for accurate force measurements: tunable and well-characterisable radius; higher averaging capabilities (at the expense of spatial resolution) and sensitivity to weak interactions; a well-defined interaction geometry (sphere on flat), which allows accurate and reliable data fitting by means of analytical models. The dynamics of standard AFM probes has been widely investigated, and protocols have been developed for the calibration of the cantilever spring constant. Nevertheless the dynamics of CPs, and in particular of large CPs, with radius well above 10 m and mass comparable, or larger, than the cantilever mass, is at present still poorly characterised. Here we describe the fabrication and calibration of (large) CPs. We describe and discuss the peculiar dynamical behaviour of CPs, and present an alternative protocol for the accurate calibration of the spring constant. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a powerful tool to investigate molecular interactions at bio-interfaces, as well as their mechanical properties, with nanometric spatial resolution and 1-10 pN force resolution The force sensitivity of AFM is provided by the use of probes consisting of an elastic microlever (cantilever) with an interacting tip at his apex. A deflection z of the cantilever as small as 1/10 of a nanometer can be detected by means of an optical beam deflection While sharp AFM tips are mandatory when high spatial resolution is necessary, large spherical probes, also known as colloidal probes (CPs) The obvious price to pay when using CPs is the dramatic reduction of the spatial resolution, although the optimal spatial resolution clearly depends on the typical length scale of the physical phenomena under investigation. For example, as long as one is interested in characterizing the average rigidity of mesoscopic cellular regions (cell body vs periphery), tissues or extracellular matrices, CPs provide enough spatial resolution despite their micrometric radii Large CPs, where the radius R can be far larger than 10 m, are very useful to study extremely weak interaction forces, or the mechanics of samples over a wide range of contact area, averaging nanoscale inhomogeneities and local variations of the sample (e.g. in the case of the mechanical response of tissues). Large CPs allows to better compare the results obtained by AFM to those obtained by other indenters Despite the many advantages of CPs, some issues related to the calibration of these probes must be addressed in order to exploit the full potential of these probes, especially in the case of large CPs The calibration of both k (kapp) and Sz for CPs presents issues, which become more important as the probe radius increases. The issues related to the calibration of CPs arise when the radius and mass of the attached sphere are comparable to the length and mass of the cantilever, respectively. In order to describe the effect of the attached sphere on the cantilever dynamics, two dimensionless parameters can be introduced (see also the Methods section) In this short report we discuss some critical aspects of CP production and calibration, and present methods to minimise their impact on the accuracy of the AFM measurements. We have produced eight monolithic glass probes following an established custom protocol In order to span a wide range of reduced masses and gyration radii we used two different kind of silicon tipless (TL) cantilevers: tapping mode (TM) (TL-NCH-50, Nanosensor) and contact mode (CM) (TL-CONT, Nanosensor). After mounting the cantilever into the AFM (Bioscope Catalyst, Bruker) tip holder, the beads were captured using the XY motorised stage of the AFM. The AFM is integrated in an optical inverted microscope (Olympus X71), which helps locating and capturing the beads. Depending on the size of the spheres, environmental capillary adhesion or Vaseline is exploited to attach the sphere to the TL cantilever. The cantilevers with the attached beads are then transferred into a high-temperature oven (PXZ series, Fuji Electrics) already at the target temperature, and heated for two hours. We used different temperatures for the different materials of the sphere: 780°C for borosilicate and 700°C for soda-lime glass, respectively. These temperatures are slightly below the softening point of the materials, which is qualitatively defined as the temperature at which a solid object begins to collapse under its own weight. After two hours, the microsphere is covalently attached to the cantilever; the glass locally melts at the sphere-cantilever interface, forming a neck, which is more or less extended depending on curing time and temperature. Besides being much smoother and less dispersed in radius, borosilicate glass spheres present typically a lower deformation after the heating procedure (Figure 2) R = 30 μm. CPs with R > 10 μm are too large for the calibration by reverse AFM imaging. The radius of these probes is measured optically, using a calibrated metallographic optical microscope equipped with a calibrated 50X objective (AXIO, Zeiss). The error associated to the optical characterisation of the probe radius is 1 m (standard deviation). Since the nominal radius of the soda-lime spheres attached to the TL cantilevers is R = 30 μm, the relative error of its characterisation is approximately 3%. We calculated the mass of the spheres ms using the nominal densities of borosilicate glass ρBG = 2.23 g/cm The mass of the cantilever mc was evaluated assuming a rectangular section, using the nominal dimensions (length L, width w, thickness t) and the silicon density ρSi = 2.33 g/cm 3 as: m c = ρ Si Lwt. We ignored the fact that some cantilevers have a trapezoidal cross section. The total mass m p of the probe was evaluated by summing the cantilever and the sphere masses: m p = m c + m s . The reduced mass m ̃ and the reduced gyration radius r̃ of the sphere are defined as We evaluated the effective mass m * of the cantilever, before and after the attachment of the sphere, as the effective mass of a SHO, using the standard formula: where k is the spring constant and ω 0 is the angular frequency of the oscillator. The calibration of Sz is performed by engaging the AFM tip on a very rigid surface and collecting a series of raw deflection vs z-piezo displacement curves. Assuming that neither the tip nor the surface are deformed, the deflection sensitivity Sz is calculated as the inverse of the slope of the curves It must be noted that Sz strongly depends on the loading configuration In the case of a standard probe, the force is not applied at the cantilever end, but rather at the tip apex, which is some distance apart, therefore a torque is generated. Moreover, because of the tilt angle , during the standard operation of an AFM the interaction force is perpendicular to the sample surface, instead of the cantilever axis, while during the thermally driven oscillation of the cantilever the effective driving force is always perpendicular to the cantilever axis. The corresponding cantilever displacement is therefore different from that obtained by the application of the same force at the cantilever end. Corrections for the deflection sensitivity Sz are necessary, to account for the differences in the loading configuration of tipless and tipped cantilevers in the different experimental conditions. Correction factors are therefore used to determine both the intrinsic spring constant k using the thermal noise method, and the apparent spring constant kapp used to rescale the raw deflection signal into a force (Eq. 1). While the latter correction factor is discussed in section 2.2.5, the first factor is introduced in the following paragraphs. As mentioned, during the thermal noise calibration, the cantilever is loaded by an effective thermal force located at the cantilever end and acting perpendicularly to the cantilever axis. Assuming that the deflection sensitivity depends on the parameters , R, L introduced in Figure The cos 2 (θ) term in Eq. 3 accounts for the tilt  of the cantilever For standard AFM tips, the radius R of the sphere in Eqs. 3,4 must be replaced by the tip height H 32 . Several approaches has been developed to characterize the spring constant of a cantilever Under the assumption that the mass mt of the tip is negligible with respect to the mass mc of the cantilever, the probe (cantilever + tip) can be modelled as a point body with effective mass m*, bound to an ideal spring with stiffness k, in thermal equilibrium with its environment. Assuming that the tip oscillates only along the direction perpendicular to the cantilever, and being z ⊥ its displacement relative to the equilibrium position, its average potential energy is U = 1⁄2k< , where √< z ⊥ 2 > is the thermally driven root mean square oscillation amplitude of the free end of the cantilever, where the tip is located, ranging from approximately 5 to 500 pm. According to the equipartition theorem, U = 1⁄2kBT, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the local absolute temperature. It then follows: If < z ⊥ 2 > is measured, the cantilever spring constant k is then calculated from Eq. 5 as: When the optical beam deflection method is used to measure the cantilever deflection, with the laser aligned at the end of the cantilever, Eq. 6 is replaced by Eq. 7 In Eq. 7, PV = <V 2 > is the area below the first resonant peak in the power spectral density (PSD) of the raw deflection signal (in units of V 2 /Hz). The factor α ̂ in Eq. 7 takes into account the fraction of the total vibrational energy stored in the first normal mode of the cantilever, when one goes beyond the single harmonic oscillator (SHO) approximation The factor χ The factor ŝ represents the correction to the deflection sensitivity due to the change in the loading condition of the cantilever (Eq. 3,4). In principle, the thermal noise method could be applied to higher normal modes, in which case Eq. 7 should be rewritten in terms of the parameters PV,i, α ̂i, χi, where the index i = 1,2,3,... refers to the i-th normal mode. In practice, due to the finite laser spot size, which causes an averaging of different cantilever inclinations across a finite area, the first normal mode has to be preferred The factors α ̂ and 1/χ 2 can be merged in a single parameter  = α ̂/χ 2 . For the first normal mode of an ideal rectangular cantilevers,  = β0 = 0.817. The implementation of the thermal noise model for AFM cantilevers assumes that the mass of the cantilever is uniformly distributed. For this statement to be valid, the mass of the tip must be negligible compared to the mass of the cantilever. When large spheres are attached at the end of a cantilever, this hypothesis is not always satisfied. Since the mass of the microsphere scales up with the cube of radius R, it can easily reach values comparable to the mass of the cantilever. This typically happens for a radius R > 10m, for a 200 m long, silicon nitride cantilever, and a glass sphere. For TL cantilevers, the loading point is located at the free end of the lever. For sharp tips, the loading point corresponds to the location of the tip apex along the cantilever. For CPs, the loading point is located at the sphere apex, i.e. approximately a distance L from the cantilever end (Figure The attachment of the sphere to the TL cantilever is not expected to change the spring constant of the probe. Since the determination of the deflection sensitivity Sz can be critical for CPs (see discussion in Section 3.6), it can be convenient to calibrate the intrinsic spring constant k TL of the TL cantilever, before the attachment of the sphere, and then correct its value to determine the intrinsic spring constant k TL LP of the TL cantilever at the loading point of the CP; the latter spring constant can be supposed to be equal to the spring constant of the CP at the loading point, i.e. k TL LP = k CP LP . The spring constant k TL LP of the TL cantilever corresponding to the loading point of the CP is calculated as In Eq. 8, L is the distance of the loading point of the CP from the cantilever free end. In the case of rectangular, axisymmetric and relatively long cantilevers, Eq. 8 is valid for arbitrary offset L, not only in the limit ∆L/L ≪ 1 Alternatively, the thermal noise method can be applied directly to the CP, provided the measured spring constant kCP is corrected first by Eq. 8 (to obtain k CP LP ), and then by Eq. 11, to take into account the peculiar dynamics of the CP, as described in the Results. When the optical beam deflection method is used to measure the cantilever deflection, in order to rescale deflections into forces perpendicular to the sample surface, an apparent spring constant kapp must be used, instead of the intrinsic spring constant k where the correction factor accounts for the tilt of the cantilever  and the torque applied on the cantilever because of the finite tip height; it was proposed by Heim et al. Hutter For CPs obtained from TL cantilevers, Eq. 8 and 9 can be combined as: Eq. 10 allows to calculate the apparent spring constant, at the loading point, of the CP from the intrinsic spring constant of the previously calibrated TL cantilever. The intrinsic spring constants are calibrated using the thermal noise method The Laser Doppler Vibrometry (LDV) and in general interferometric techniques Using interferometric approaches it was recently demonstrated that the cantilever oscillation dynamics changes if a mass is attached to the free end Figure Representative curves β ≡ β(m ̃) for different values of r̃ are reported in Figure r ̃ 0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 0,5 0,6 0,7 0,8 0,9 1 m ̃ 0 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,817 0,001 0,818 0,818 0,818 0,819 0,819 0,820 0,821 0,822 0,823 0,824 0,826 0,002 0,819 0,819 0,820 0,820 0,821 0,823 0,825 0,827 0,829 0,832 0,834 0,005 0,821 0,822 0,823 0,825 0,827 0,831 0,835 0,840 0,846 0,852 0,859 0,01 0,825 0,826 0,828 0,832 0,837 0,844 0,852 0,861 0,872 0,884 0,897 0,02 0,832 0,834 0,838 0,845 0,855 0,868 0,883 0,900 0,920 0,941 0,963 0,05 0,851 0,854 0,864 0,879 0,901 0,927 0,957 0,990 1,024 1,059 1,093 0,1 0,875 0,880 0,896 0,921 0,954 0,994 1,036 CPs are fabricated with different cantilever and microsphere relative dimensions and masses. In order to study how m ̃ and r̃ of CPs affect the cantilever dynamics, we fabricated several CPs with different dimensions in order to cover the whole range shown in Figure Figure A sharpening of the peak and an increase of the oscillation amplitude are associated to the shift of the resonant peaks towards lower frequencies. For large CPs (Figure The quality factor Q represents the ratio between the energy stored in the oscillation and the energy dissipated per cycle because of the viscous damping. Q is defined as: In Eq. 12, m* is the (effective) mass of the oscillator,  = 20, and γ is the damping coefficient, i.e. the proportionality factor between the tip velocity and the viscous force. Q is related to the width of the resonant peak: the higher is Q, the narrower is the peak. Figure Eq. 13 represents a simple model for the effective mass m CP * of a CP; the concentrated mass of the sphere, located at the free end of the cantilever, is added to the effective mass of the TL cantilever Eq. 13 clearly highlights that the cantilever and the sphere contribute differently to the inertia of the probe. The cantilever mass, which is uniformly distributed along the cantilever length, is strongly underestimated in the sum, being weighted by a factor of 1⁄4; the mass of the sphere, instead, being truly concentrated at the free end of the cantilever, is fully represented with weight 1. Figure Figure Eventually, Figure In conclusion, Eq. 12,13 and the observed trends of both resonant frequency and quality factor explain the peculiarity of the thermal noise spectra of CPs, in particular the fact that these probes, despite a marked reduction of the resonant frequency, have extremely sharp resonant peaks, with large Q and amplitude. The apparent anomaly of CPs can be attributed to the fact that, in the AFM community, an increase of the effective mass and a drop in the resonant frequency of the cantilever are typically observed when operating a soft cantilever in liquid Figure The small deviations from the k TL LP = k CP LP line reported in Figure When big spheres are attached to the cantilever, the standard approach for the calibration of the deflection sensitivity Sz (described in the Methods) can be inaccurate, due to phenomena occurring during the loading phase of the force curve. In particular, the cantilever tilt angle θ towards the surface may determine a tangential force component, which is due to friction, between the sphere and the substrate. As in the case of normal forces The friction-related effect is stronger in the high-friction limit, when the probe is pinned on the surface instead of sliding Since the AFM optical lever detection scheme is sensitive to the inclination of the cantilever rather than to its deflection, it turns out that the measurement of Sz can be particularly inaccurate for large CPs, especially in conditions of strong adhesion and friction (as in air). In addition, larger adhesion related to the larger radius of CPs in general makes the acquisition of force curves in air, but also in liquid, critical In summary, the thermal noise method can be applied directly to the CP, following the following rule: 1. Sz is measured carefully, neglecting the initial region of the FC after the contact point, and averaging the slopes of the loading and unloading curves to minimise frictionrelated effects. 2. The first resonant peak in the PSD is well sampled when applying the thermal noise method, to accurately estimate the power PV, despite the typical peak sharpness in air. Alternatively, the thermal noise calibration can be carried out in water, in order to obtain a wider resonance peak. In this case, also the deflection sensitivity must be characterised in water. 3. The -factor correction (Eq. 11) must be applied to the intrinsic spring constant calculated by Eq. 7. To this purpose, the sphere radius, the cantilever dimensions, and therefore the reduced mass m ̃ and the reduced gyration radius r, must be accurately determined. 4. The corrected intrinsic spring constant is transformed into the apparent spring constant, including also the effect of the shift of the loading point, using Eq. 10. According to the results reported in the present study, we suggest an alternative accurate and reliable approach for the calibration of CPs, and especially of large CPs. This approach can be applied when the CP is produced in house. In this case, the following procedure can be followed: 1. The intrinsic spring constant k TL of the TL cantilever, before the attachment of the sphere, is calibrated by the thermal noise method, measuring the deflection sensitivity in the standard way, i.e. from a FC acquired on a hard substrate, or using a deflection sensitivity -free approach, like LDV (and thermal noise) 2. Once the sphere is attached, measure the position of the loading point using an optical microscope and correct the intrinsic spring constant k TL into the apparent k CP,app LP , using Eq. 10. It must be considered that, while the interferometric approaches can be used, together with Eq. 11, to calibrate CPs (in fact, LDV is a technique of choice for calibrating the spring constant of AFM probes, but at present it relies on expensive instrumentation), the applicability of the global calibration initiative launched by Sader 40 should be checked. This approach is based indeed on the statistical assessment of the hydrodynamic function for a given cantilever geometry and does not account for the contribution of the large attached sphere. The general Sader method for the calibration of cantilever of arbitrary shape and dimensions Once the spring constant k CP LP of a CP has been accurately calibrated, the deflection sensitivity Sz of the current experiment can be calculated assuming that the thermal noise method, through Eq. 7, must provide the known value of the spring constant (see Ref Colloidal probes are used in a wide range of experimental conditions. Their dynamical behaviour presents peculiar aspects In this work we have demonstrated that the addition of a large mass to a tipless cantilever concentrated at its end, besides significantly decreasing the resonant frequency, boosts the quality factor and the amplitude of the first resonant peak, so that a large CP mimics an SHO better than a standard AFM probe. These findings may have an impact on the application of CPs in spectroscopic dynamical applications. Despite the relevant modifications of the cantilever dynamics of CPs, the accuracy of the calibration of CPs is not severely affected until the added mass of the sphere becomes comparable to that of the cantilever, which typically happens for diameters of the glass sphere of about 10 m. In the case of large CPs, it is possible to accurately calibrate the spring constant by applying a correction factor (Eq. 10) to the value obtained according to the equipartition theorem for an ideal tipless rectangular cantilever. We present two alternative detailed procedures, including one allowing to minimise the impact of the inaccurate determination of the deflection sensitivity. of the correction factor  (Eq. 11) for different values of m ̃ and r.