Anomalous Hall effect (AHE) can be induced by intrinsic mechanism due to the band Berry phase and extrinsic one arising from the impurity scattering. The recently discovered magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2 exhibits a large intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) and a giant anomalous Hall angle (AHA). The predicted energy dependence of the AHC in this material exhibits a plateau at 1000 Ω -1 cm -1 and an energy width of 100 meV just below EF, thereby implying that the large intrinsic AHC will not significantly change against small-scale energy disturbances such as slight p-doping. Here, we successfully trigger the extrinsic contribution from alien-atom scattering in addition to the intrinsic one of the pristine material by introducing a small amount of Fe dopant to substitute Co in Co3Sn2S2. Our experimental results show that the AHC and AHA can be prominently enhanced up to 1850 Ω -1 cm -1 and 33%, respectively, owing to the synergistic contributions from the intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms as distinguished by the TYJ model. In particular, the tuned AHA holds a record value in low fields among known magnetic materials. This study opens up a pathway to engineer giant AHE in magnetic Weyl semimetals, thereby potentially advancing the topological spintronics/Weyltronics. As an important electronic phenomenon, the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) has attracted extensive research attention from the perspectives of fundamental physics and technical applicability. However, the extrinsic contribution to AHE can be remarkable in certain systems. For example, in the topological ferromagnet Fe3Sn2, the extrinsic contribution can be five times larger than the intrinsic one. To obtain enhanced AHE, in this study, we propose a scheme to induce the extrinsic component based on the intrinsic one in the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2. In this system, A series of Co3-xFexSn2S2 (x = 0, 0.025, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20) single-crystals were grown using Sn and Pb mixed flux. Figure x y  at 10 K is obtained at zero field. We plot A  shows an initial increment and then decreases with increase in the Fe doping amount, exhibiting a maximum of 1850 Ω -1 cm -1 at x = 0.05, which is nearly twice as large as that of undoped Co3Sn2S2. In addition, the AHA characterized by A y x  / xx  is also an important measure to describe the transport properties of AHE materials, and it reflects the efficiency of the conversion of longitudinal current into transverse current, e.g., anomalous Hall current. The AHA at 10 K also demonstrates a similar Fe-doping dependence, as shown in Figure Figure Till now, we have obtained higher measured vales of AHC and AHA than those of undoped Co3Sn2S2. To verify that the enhanced AHE in Co3-xFexSn2S2 is caused by the increase in the extrinsic contribution, we require an effective model for separating the intrinsic and extrinsic contributions. It is generally accepted that the total A y x  can be expressed as the sum of three terms: b . This is the so-called TYJ scaling, Meanwhile, the extrinsic A y x  (ext.) rapidly increases from -20 Ω -1 cm -1 at x = 0 to 914 Ω -1 cm - 1 at x = 0.05. It is clear that slight Fe doping can produce a large, positive extrinsic contribution in the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2, while the large intrinsic component remains as the band Berry curvature is not changed by the slight doping. Therefore, giant AHC is obtained for x = 0.05 owing to the dual contribution of the intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms. However, although A y x  (ext.) continues to increase to 1071 Ω -1 cm -1 at x = 0.10, the AHC begins to decrease because of the further increase in Fe content, which results in a significant decrease in EF, which in turn corresponds to a significant decrease in the intrinsic contribution, as depicted by the intrinsic AHC line (green) in Scheme 1. As regards the origin of the extrinsic contribution for x ≤ 0.10, we make a further analysis according to log A , respectively. With increase in Fe doping, α gradually decreases from 2 to 0.7, which indicates that the enhanced extrinsic contribution for x ≤ 0.10 is mainly due to the skew mechanism. In Co3Sn2S2, the conduction electrons mainly originate from the bands of Co in the kagome layer. The small number of doped Fe atoms randomly occupy Co sites in the kagome lattice, which leads to asymmetric scattering of the conduction electrons due to the effective spin-orbit interaction between them. Meanwhile, Wang et al. have reported that the side-jump contribution to AHE in Co3Sn2S2 is negligible. In addition, the temperature dependences of the total A In most materials, the AHC mainly originates from the topologically trivial electronic bands and impurity scattering. A typical feature of these materials is that both A y x  and x x  are either large or small, and therefore, AHC and AHA are not large at the same time. Meanwhile, the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2, owing to the topological-band-structure-induced large Berry curvature and the Weyl semi-metallic character, possesses both large AHC and AHA simultaneously at zero magnetic field. In summary, we proposed a scheme to simultaneously tune the AHC and AHA to large values in the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3-xFexSn2S2 by means of p-doping. Exploiting the fact that the large intrinsic AHC contribution in Co3Sn2S2 is basically unchanged for slight p-doping, we considered that a small amount of Fe (with a lesser number of electrons relative to Co) replacing Co in the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3Sn2S2 can increase the extrinsic contribution via asymmetric impurity scattering. Thus, significantly enhanced AHC (~1850 Ω -1 cm -1 ) and AHA (~33%) values were obtained in the magnetic Weyl semimetal Co3-xFexSn2S2, and these values persisted over a wide temperature range. Here, we note that the AHA value (~33%) at zero field is a new record among known magnetic materials. The obtained large anomalous Hall current over a wide temperature range can be exploited for application in topological spintronics or Weyltronics. Furthermore, our study provides an effective strategy to manipulate the giant AHE via controlling the intrinsic and/or extrinsic contributions in magnetic Weyl materials. Single crystal growth. The single crystals of Co3-xFexSn2S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.20) can be grown using Sn and Pb mixed flux. Co (99.95% Alfa), Fe (99.95% Alfa), Sn (99.999% Alfa), S (99.999% Alfa) and Pb (99.999% Alfa) were mixed in an initial mixture of molar ratios (Co+Fe) : S : Sn : Pb = 12 : 8 : 35 : 45. These mixtures were placed in a Al2O3 crucible. Then, the Al2O3 crucibles are sealed in quartz tubes that were put in an electric furnace. The quartz tubes were slowly heated to 673 K over 6 h and held on for extra 6 h for preventing the loss of sulfur due to the high vapor pressure. Then, the quartz tubes were heated to 1323 K over 6 h and kept there for 6 h. The melt was cooled slowly to 973 K over 70 h. At 973 K, the ampoule was removed from the electric furnace and the flux was removed via rapid decanting and subsequent spinning in a centrifuge. The single crystals of Co3-xFexSn2S2 with typical sizes 2-5 mm and hexagonal shape were obtained. The crystal structure and composition of single crystals were confirmed by X-ray diffraction measurements and the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy EDS. Magnetization and electric transport measurements. Magnetic properties were measured by superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. Electric transport was measured by the physical property measurement system (PPMS). 