A generalization of the de Gennes-Alexander micronetworks theory is presented. In this framework, the phase transition of synthetic networks of superconducting islands is described by means of a Ginzburg-Landau approach adapted to the case of granular systems. The general implications of the theory are carefully explained. As a specific example, we demonstrate that star networks support the exponential localization of the order parameter accompanied by an enhancement of the critical temperature of the system. These findings contribute to clarify the physics of the phase transitions in synthetic networks of Josephsoncoupled superconducting islands. In a pioneering work This suggestion has been taken in a serious account and a relevant literature on this topic has been developed in recent times However, Cooper pairs behaves like bosons only at low density, while deviations coming from the Pauli principle are expected to play a relevant role in the opposite regime. This observation suggests that a one-to-one identification between bosonic atoms on a network and Cooper pairs on a Josephson junctions array is not possible. Interestingly, Josephson junctions arrays with special topology can be seen as coherent micronetworks mimicking the interstitial structure of the superconducting order parameter established at the phase boundary between the superconducting state and an insulating state. The latter situation is well known in oxide superconductors (e.g. La2CuO4), where the superconducting state emerges in close vicinity of a metal-insulator transition The above conclusions seem to be supported by the experimental evindences about the granular aluminium thin films From the theoretical side, the phase boundary between the superconducting and the insulating state has been first considered by P. de Gennes, who applied the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory to filamentary structures made of superconducting materials at micrometric level. The resulting theoretical approach, consisting in a GL theory on a graph, is known as de Gennes-Alexander micronetworks theory In the present work, the de Gennes-Alexander micronetworks theory is adapted to the case of granular systems in which superconducting islands are coupled via the Josephson-type interaction. Using this theory, we demonstrate that a critical temperature enhancement emerges when specific network topologies are considered. The latter phenomenon is accompanied by the exponential localization of the superconducting order parameter. The exponential localization of the order parameter is peculiar to a discrete treatment and it cannot emerge in the context of the usual de Gennes-Alexander theory. These findings suggest a complementary interpretation of the Cooper pairs condensation reported in Josephson junctions arrays. Moreover, it is expected that the order parameter focalization phenomenon, consisting in the exponential localization of the order parameter at the phase transition temperature, is not peculiar to superconducting systems. For this reason, it is argued that the above findings apply to generic phase transitions described by a Landau theory on a discrete lattice. The de Gennes-Alexander micronetworks theory assumes that superconductivity nucleates inside an insulating matrix and thus takes an interstitial nature. In order to emulate this condition, a Ginzburg-Landau theory on a graph is formulated. The graph structure implies that several one-dimensional branches are connected to form a network. Solutions of the branch order parameters are constrained to be continuous and have to ensure the current density conservation at the network vertices. The above conditions provide appropriate boundary conditions to obtain the transition temperature and the order parameter profile at the transition temperature. The free energy of a generic branch is written in the form: where ψ(x) represents the branch order parameter written in terms of the curvilinear coordinate x. As usual within the GL approach, the parameters C and B are positive and temperature independent quantities, while the sign of the coefficient A(T) = α(T -T c ) changes at the transition temperature T c . Here T c represents the bulk critical temperature of the superconducting material used. In order to treat granular systems, we have to rewrite the branch free energy in terms of the order parameter ψ n of a generic island labelled by the discrete index n. Reasoning in the same spirit of the Lawrence-Doniach model, the following substitutions can be made in Equation Observing that one immediately gets the following expression for the branch free energy: Equation ( Once the mathematical structure of the free energy of a single branch has been understood, the free energy of an arbitrary network can be presented in the following form: In writing Equation ( can be considered to determine the phase boundary. Extremal condition for the free energy in Equation ( Previous equations can be presented in matrix form: where ψ = (ψ 1 , ⋯ , ψ N ) t collects all the islands order parameters. Equation ( with ε (n) the corresponding eigenvalues. Comparing Equation ( ). The transition temperature of the network T c is given by the latter condition being realized when the eigenvector φ with the lowest eigenvalue ε 0 = min{ε (n) } is considered. Under this condition, the network critical temperature is given by while the order parameter profile at the transition is proportional to φ. Equation As stated before, the order parameter profile at the phase transition is proportional to φ. Thus, let us denote the order parameter profile as φ = a φ, with a a proportionality factor to be determined. To fix the proportionality factor, we have to minimize F[φ] with respect to a by retaining quartic terms in the free energy. In doing this, it is assumed that φ, which has been obtained by neglecting quartic terms, does not differ too much from the actual order parameter profile at the phase transition. Explicit computation shows that the free energy takes the form F[φ] = u a 2 + v a 4 , where we have introduced the notation: A close inspection of Equations where Δ represents the zero-temperature extrapolation of the bulk superconducting gap. In the previous section, we have provided a concise description of the theoretical formulation of a discretized Ginzburg-Landau theory on a graph. Before discussing specific cases, we provide a perturbative argument showing that highly connected islands tend to develop an enhanced order parameter. Let us write Equation (5) in the following dimensionless form: where the zero-temperature limit is assumed. Dimensionless quantities have been defined according to the following relations: The free energy minimization condition requires that Assuming η ≪ 1 a small parameter of the theory, Equation ( Going back to dimensional variables, we get where we have introduced the quantity N k counting the Josephson couplings of the k-th island. In deriving Equation ( When the network is obtained by joining several branches, Equation ( In the following, relevant applications of the theory will be discussed. Let us consider a linear chain of N islands. The free energy of this system can be written as done in Equation (4). Neglecting quartic terms, the extremal condition for the order parameter can be written in the form: which is a special case of Equation where the boundary condition ψ 0 = ψ N+1 = 0 has been used. Equations ( Figure The latter general observations are confirmed by direct computation whose results are shown in Fig. Interestingly, as noticed in Ref. with β r,l < 1, could also be used. The latter are reminiscent of the de Gennes boundary conditions of a continuous theory, which take the form The boundary conditions choice is not arbitrary and depends on the physical constraints that the environment induces on the system under investigation. A further observation deserving to be discussed is the following. In the thermodynamic limit the system coherence length is a divergent quantity at the phase transition temperature T c . It is now possible to show that the coherence length of the finite size system remains finite at the system transition temperature. Indeed, the dimensionless coherence length ξ(T c ) at the phase transition temperature T c is given by the relation: Equation ( Using the second relation of Equation the latter being a good approximation when N ≥ 3. Equation (20) shows that ξ(T c ) is a finite quantity at the phase transition corresponding to a fraction of the system size. The correct thermodynamic limit is recovered when N → ∞. In view of these equations, the second relation in Equation ( showing that the critical temperature suppression starts to operate when ξ(T c ) is comparable with ξ 0 . So far, we have discussed the phase transition of a linear chain of superconducting islands. We have also noticed that islands showing higher connectivity present an increased order parameter. In order to show this effect, we add to the linear chain discussed before a single extra site. In this way, the system shown in Figure The eigenvector φ and the associated eigenvalue ε 0 can be analytically determined. Following the general theory recalled before, the extremal condition for the order parameter profile can be written in the following form: where f n ∈ {x n , y n }, n ∈ {1, ⋯ , N}, f 0 = φ and f N+1 = 0. First, we observe that the χ variable can be eliminated by using the first relation, which implies: Now, we are searching for a solution whose structure is f n = φρ n with n ∈ {0, ⋯ , N} and ρ < 1. Under the above assumptions, considering that x 1 = y 1 = φρ, we obtain the following relations: with z = ε 0 D -1 -2 ≠ 0 and γ = ΓD -1 . Solving Equation ( Equation ( , which is in agreement with the numerical diagonalization of H. Using Equation ( the latter presenting the important enhancement property given by the relation T c > T c . The above example shows the existence of a conceptual link between the order parameter localization and the critical temperature enhancement. In this subsection, we have presented the simplest case in which an exponential localization takes place. In particular, we have found that the order parameter is peaked on the island with the highest connectivity, which is consistent with our previous observations. This island behaves like a topological defect for the network. The topological defect forms bonding and antibonding states. The bonding state behaves like a potential well. The potential well, on its turn, is able to localize the order parameter following the same phenomenology of defect states of the Schrödinger problem on a lattice. Thus, the network topology can induce effective potentials, which are able to localize the superconducting order parameter. The localization of the order parameter is accompanied by a critical temperature enhancement. The localization degree of the order parameter can be controlled by designing ad hoc network topologies. In particular, networks with highly connected islands can be designed. Star graph networks are a relevant example of this idea, which will be discussed in the following subsection. Let us study the star network depicted in Figure where ν ∈ {1, ⋯ , p} labels the system legs, ψ n (ν) represents the leg order parameter and φ is the order parameter of the island connected to all the system legs. Equations (24) can be solved by using the following ansatz for the order parameter profile the latter being justified by the numerical diagonalization of H. Using Equation (25) in (24), we get the following relations: Equations ( showing that a localized solution exists only when p > 2. The degree of localization increases as the number of legs in the which is enhanced compared to T c . Equation ( We have demonstrated that the phase boundary of a superconducting transition can be determined by neglecting quartic terms of the free energy. The relevance of such terms has been previously discussed. In this section, we provide further evidences of the relevance of these terms by studying the phase transition of the three legs system depicted in Figure We have numerically studied the system depicted in Figure We have formulated a de Gennes-Alexander micronetworks theory adapted to describe granular systems. The theory is well suited to describe arbitrary connections of superconducting islands interacting via the Josephson coupling. These systems can be of natural or synthetic origin and their phase transitions present similarities with the insulator-superconductor phase changes. We have demonstrated that at the transition temperature T c the order parameter profile is exponentially localized on islands with higher connectivity. Exponential localization of the superconducting order parameter implies that the transition temperature of the system is enhanced compared to the one of the superconducting material used to realize the system islands (i.e., T c > c ). This observation suggests an alternative path towards the realization of room temperature superconducting systems, being the latter idea worth to be experimentally tested. As a relevant application of the theory, we have carefully studied star networks, which have been experimentally realized using arrays of Josephson junctions. In recent literature, the superconducting properties of these systems have been considered as a fingerprint of the Bose-Einstein condensation of Cooper pairs. Here we have demonstrated that an alternative theoretical interpretation of the experimental findings seems to be possible. Furthermore, in view of the analogies of the present formulation with the Landau theory of the paramagneticferromagnetic transition, the question arises whether the order parameter focalization phenomenon described in this work is also detectable in magnetic nanostructures.