This study shows that the traditional definition of shear wave breaks the shear stress reciprocity. By analyzing the displacement field for shear wave and the motion equation of material element, it is found that the displacement field is related to local rigid body rotation, and the local rigid body rotation cannot be balanced by the stress state assumed in classical continuum mechanics. It is also found that the displacement field caused by shear deformation, which is neither divergence nor rotation, is replaced with that caused by local rigid body rotation during the derivation of wave equation. This indicates that the definition of shear wave is beyond the basic assumption of continuum mechanics. The study modified the constitutive relation and elastic tensor based on that the traditionally defined shear wave is objective. The motion equation corresponding to shear wave is also derived. It is concluded from the definition of traditional shear wave that the local rigid body rotation should contribute stress and the shear stress reciprocity is not prerequisite for nonpolar continuum. In order to study the forces and movements of materials occupying a certain space, the macroscopic medium is considered to satisfy the continuum hypothesis, in which the structures of real fluid and solid are considered to be perfectly continuous and are paid no attention to their molecular structure The continuum mechanics considers that the dynamics of continuums still satisfy Newton's law, and the element translation only needs to be considered when describing its conservation of moment of momentum Continuum mechanics is widely used to describe macroscopic mechanical properties of macroscopic media, such as elastomers In this study, I will point out what mistakes have been made during the derivation of wave equation under shear stress reciprocity. I will also show that the motion of material element described by the traditionally considered wave equation is different from that described by the traditionally defined shear wave. In order to derive the shear wave equation under the assumption of classical continuum mechanics and give the constitutive relation and elastic tensor based on that the traditionally defined shear wave the displacement equation of motion from the traditional definition of shear wave, the isotropic elastomer is used as an example. Only considering the element translation, for elastomer with small deformation, the equation of motion in differential form is expressed as here, t  is the time derivative, ▽ is the vector operator del, σ is a symmetric secondorder stress tensor, f is body force which is an irrotational field, ρ is the mass density, u is the displacement. Equation ( Since classical continuum mechanics doesn't consider the rotation of element, the shear stress is reciprocal. Therefore, the strain tensor in the theory of elasticity, which describes the deformation of elastomer under force, must also satisfy shear strain reciprocity. In the theory of elasticity, the symmetric part of the displacement gradient is used to express the strain, and the anti-symmetric part of the displacement gradient is treated as the local rigid body rotation without contributing stress here, e is a second-order symmetric strain tensor, and C is a fourth-order elastic tensor. For isotropic elastomers, the stress-strain relationship in component form is expressed as where, λ and μ are Lamé constants, δ is the Kronecker delta symbol. The strain tensor is expressed with displacement as: Here, u T is the transposition of displacement. The relative displacement between two points in the neighborhood can be expressed as Where, δr is displacement vector of two points in the neighborhood, Ω is rotation tensor, which is an anti-symmetric tensor. It can be seen form Equation ( where, ε is the permutation symbol. If it is further assumed that the displacement field is caused by pure shear deformation, the displacement field should be neither rotational nor divergent: This is different from the traditional understanding of displacement field, which is considered to be either divergence field or curl field Substituting Equations ( This equation is also called elastic wave equation or Navier's equation. The stress-strain relationship (Equation ( Then, Equation ( In this case, the displacement field in Equation ( here, u1 and u2 are the displacement components along the direction of x1 and x2, respectively. To some extent, the shear wave can also be regarded as a special longitudinal wave with shear wave velocity and vertical strain not equal to zero. At this time, the vertical strain is constant along the vertical direction of the wave propagation. From the definition of shear wave in Equation Further assuming that the wave propagates along the x1-direction, the shear wave equations should be expressed as: If a shear wave with reciprocal shear stress exists, it should be as expressed with Equations ( In the traditional understanding of displacement field, the displacement field is assumed as a superposition of curl field and divergence field, and the following formula is considered to be always true Substituting Equation ( Equation ( Therefore, Equation (16) shouldn't include the rotational part. on the other hand, it is seen from Equation ( From Equation (18), it is seen that the local rigid body rotation contributes to stress. When the displacement in Equation ( The shear stress reciprocity is obtained from the assumption that the element forming continuum can be considered as a particle whose rotation can be neglected and its motion can be described by Newton's law. The assumption has been widely accepted by researchers The traditional definition of shear wave considers that the displacement field caused by shear wave is perpendicular to its propagation direction. Suppose a plane shear wave propagates along the x1 coordinate and the displacement is along x2, it is obtained that the strain tensor and stress tensor at one point have only one component: By decomposing the stress and strain tensors for the traditionally defined shear wave, it can be easily obtained that the traditionally defined shear wave is a superposition of shear deformation and local rigid body rotation. Therefore, the traditionally defined shear wave in elastomer cannot be explained with Equation In order to balance the moment of momentum caused by the local rigid body rotation, the shear stress reciprocity must be broken, and it should be admitted that the antisymmetric strain originates from local rigid body rotation. It is important to point out that the local rigid-body rotation here should not include the integral rigid-body rotation of the continuum. In the following statement, the continuum is assumed not to rotate as a whole. At this time, the constitutive relation and the elastic tensor which describes resistance to deformation of a material need to be modified appropriately. The study believes that the stress-strain relationship of elastomer should be expressed as follows: That is, the deformation and local rigid body rotation in the theory of elasticity both contribute stress. Here the local rigid body rotation is called as the torsional deformation. The deformation mentioned below will not be limited to the traditional definition of deformation. For isotropic elastomers, the elastic tensor should be as follows It is seen that when the displacement gradient has rotation, which corresponds to the material element rotates, the stress tensor is asymmetric. When the displacement field is irrotational, that is, the material elements do not rotate, the stress tensor is symmetric. This means that Equations ( As the definition of shear wave breaks shear stress reciprocity, Equation (1) will not be able to describe the motion of the material element corresponding to the shear wave. As the shear wave is related to the rotation of material element, the equation of shear wave should be derived from the angular momentum conservation of the material element. The conservation equation of angular momentum of an elastomer should be expressed as: where, R is the radius vector of the origin at the centroid, l is the boundary line vector, S is the surface element vector. With the Stokes' theorem, the conservation of angular momentum of material element can be expressed in differential form as follows:   . For a linear elastic body, the deformation satisfies the superposition principle, and the local rigid body rotation can be regarded as the superposition of two asymmetric deformations. Therefore, the stress tensor σ in Equation ( In summary, this study points out that there are mistakes during the derivation of wave equation and the traditional definition of shear wave breaks the shear stress reciprocity. Under the assumption that the motion of the material element forming continuum can be regarded as the motion of a particle, the shear wave should be defined as a wave propagating at shear wave velocity, in which the displacement field caused by shear deformation is neither rotational nor divergent. The definition is different from the traditionally defined shear wave. To some extent, this study challenges the particle description of the motion of material element in classical continuum mechanics. Future study will systematically discuss the problems existing in continuum mechanics.