We study the density of states (DOS) inside superconducting Josephson SIsFS junctions with complex interlayer consisting of a thin superconducting spacer 's' between insulator I and a ferromagnetic metal F. The consideration is focused on the local density of states in the vicinity of a tunnel barrier, and it permits to estimate the current-voltage characteristics in the resistive state of such junctions. We study the influence of the proximity effect and Zeeman splitting on the properties of the system, and we find significant sub-gap regions with non-vanishing DOS. We also find manifestations of the 0-π transition in the behavior of DOS in a thin slayer. These properties lead to appearance of new characteristic features on I-V curves which provide additional information about electronic states inside the junction. Superconductor-ferromagnetic hybrid structures are very promising as working elements in various electronic devices Theoretical studies of hybrid SIsFS structures in the vicinity of the 0-π junction of its sFS part have already revealed a number of peculiarities such as nontrivial polyharmonicity and hysteresis of their current phase relationship (CPR), modulation of the SIs critical current due to the proximity effect inside the SF electrode Unfortunately, direct measurement of the above features is a technically difficult task In this paper we develop the method to reveal the actual state of the thin s-layer. For this purpose, we calculate the distribution of the density of states (DOS) over the structure for various parameter sets. Knowledge of DOS makes it possible to determine the behavior of the resistive part of the currentvoltage characteristic (CVC) of the hybrid SIsFS structure and to correlate its features with the phase state of the s-layer. Earlier, a similar approach was used to study the properties of hybrid structures that do not contain thin s-layers in the weak link region The sketch of the system under consideration is shown in Fig. Here p and q are subscripts of corresponding layers, is exchange energy of the ferromagnetic layer (H p = 0 in nonferromagnetic materials), T C is critical temperature of superconductor, ξ p = (D p /2πT C ) 1/2 is coherence length, D p is diffusion coefficient, G p , and, Φ p , are normal and anomalous Green's functions, respectively, γ Bpq = R Bpq A Bpq /ρ p ξ p , is suppression parameter, R Bpq and A Bpq are resistance and area of corresponding interface. The sign plus in (3) means that p-th material is located at the side x i -0 from interface position x i , and sign minus corresponds to the case where p-th material is at x i + 0. In order to determine DOS, at the first stage, we have numerically solved the set of equations ( In the limit of small I-layer transparency the knowledge of the local DOS at the free surface of the thin s-layer provides a possibility to calculate the current-voltage characteristic of the tunnel SIsFS junction using the tunnel formula 47 Here V is a voltage drop across the tunnel layer, R N is normal resistance of the tunnel barrier, and f (E) = (1 + exp(E/T )) -1 is equilibrium Fermi distribution function. To get the reference point we have started with investigation of SIsNS structure in which the exchange energy is zero in the non superconducting layer. We calculate local density of states on the free surface of s-layer as a function of its thickness d s (see Fig. Figure The existence of ferromagnetic ordering in the nonsuperconducting region of the SIsFS structure enhances the effect of suppressing superconductivity in the thin s-layer. Below we will restrict ourselves to consideration of two cases. We begin with an analysis of what changes in the shapes of Fig. The structure of the DOS at the free surface of the s-layer contains significantly fewer features than the DOS in the middle of the F layer. At the same value of H the width of the energy gap in DOS on the top of s-layer (see the area colored blue in Fig. The panels c,d in Fig. The main peak disappears around exchange energy H = 0.5T C , while the local minimum on the DOS is growing lin-early with increase of H. The minigap becomes splitted at H = 0.25T C with appearance of the middle peak which transforms into plateau at larger exchange energies. It is interesting, that on the DOS(H) dependence there are two different features with dips on it. The first one appears at E = H due to Zeeman splitting of main peaks of DOS. The second one also has linear dependence versus H with smaller coefficient and correlate with the limits of mini-gap inside the F-layer. Since s-layer is thin, the order parameter and Green's function inside it are nearly constant in a wide interval of energy. For this reason the DOS at the surface of the film doesn't significantly differ from the DOS of the N-layer (see shortdashed blue curve in Fig. At H > 0.5T C the obtained behavior of DOS leads to the resistive branch of CVC similar to that of the NIS junctions presented in Fig. The difference in DOS between the SFs and SNs structures is in the formation of the zero-energy peak inside the gap at the cup base. At H = T C the peak nucleates due to violation of time-reversal symmetry in the F layer. It occurs for all d s in ferromagnetic layer, but disappears in the s-layer at d s > 4ξ , when the intrinsic superconductivity restores in it. At the same time, in the region of parameters, where zero-energy peak exists in the s-layer, the amplitude of the peak inside the F-layer is significantly smaller and the peak becomes wider than at large H values. Such nontrivial DOS behavior is a feature of weak ferromagnets. Even at H = 4T C , the density of states in the F-layer becomes independent versus thickness of the s-layer and has the properties of normal metal DOS (Fig. Regarding the properties of CVC of corresponding SIsFS junction, the change of d s leads to the transition from SNS like IV-curve at large d s to SIN-like dependence for smaller thickness (Figs. To study possible manifestation of penetrating proximity effect between bulk S and thin s-layers in this section we study DOS and CVC of the SIsFS system at d F = 0.5ξ . As above, we have begun with study the DOS and CVC of the referent SIsNS junction by putting H = 0 in the F film. The calculated DOS has the form similar to that presented in Fig. Also stronger proximity effect is leading to appearance of the feature on the main peak of the DOS of the s-layer at H ≈ T C . At that exchange energy, the Zeeman dip feature in the F-layer DOS intersects position of the coherence peak in the superconductor. Zeeman dip feature is induced to the s-layer DOS due to proximity, providing the local splitting of the main coherence peak in the vicinity H ≈ T C in Fig. Also at high exchange energies, the subgap zone also forms in the DOS of the s-layer H > 7T C in Fig. E. Thin F-and s-layers, d F = 0.5ξ , d s = 0.6ξ The DOS properties at the surface of the sFS structure are significantly different when both s-and F-layers are thin (See. Fig. The DOS of the s-layer demonstrates nontrivial properties in the region of small H (Fig. As instance, at H = 5.2T C there is additional peak on IV curve, which appears at eV /T C ≈ 2.3 and corresponds to the presence of subgap plateau which can be clearly seen on panel d) in the same figure. At the same time at the H = 3T C there is a peak at eV /T C ≈ 0.7, which corresponds to the difference between the bulk gap and minigap of the s-layer. This peak is absent in the cases of very small and very large exchange: in the former case the coherence peak is around bulk value due to strong effective proximity with the S-layer, and in the latter case the self-superconductivity is almost suppressed in the s-layer, and position of the peak is determined again by the bulk electrode. To reveal the properties of SIsFS structure at the point of 0-π transition we consider the case with thickness of ferromagnetic layer (d F = ξ ). At this thickness significance of penetrative proximity from the S bulk electrode to the s-layer does not too strong and allows to realize the 0-π transition at H = 11T C . In Fig. We consider the influence of the interface parameter γ B on DOS of SFs structure with d F = ξ and d s = 2ξ (See Fig. In terms of CVC such changes of γ B are mostly defined by the change of the position of the coherence peak, leading to the shift of the current drop (Fig. It also should be noted, that in the case of very thin s-and F-layers, the proximity effect can provide significant increase of the gap in the case of the small γ B value. It can be realized, when the induced minigap in the bi-layer is larger than the self-gap of s-layer in such system. In this paper we have studied the influence of the proximity effect in the SIsFS junctions on the density of states in the vicinity of the tunnel barrier and on the resistive branch of current-voltage characteristics. We have demonstrated that the DOS shape at the Is interface significantly depends on the thickness of the s-and F-layers, exchange energy of ferromagnetic metal, and interface parameters. Generally, all revealed features correspond to the interplay of three phenomena: penetration of superconducting correlations from the bulk S-layer into the Fs-bilayer, mutual interaction between the s-and F-layers and formation of intrinsic superconductivity in the thin s-layer. The most interesting effects occur in the case of small values of the exchange energy, comparable to the superconducting pair potential. This regime provides the formation of the subgap zones, which lead to the appearance of additional peaks on IV-curves. Actually, the measurement of CVC in SIsFS junction may serve as an effective source of information about the electronic structure inside the s-layer. There are two peaks on IV-curves: the first one appears at the smaller voltage and corresponds to the difference between the position of coherence peak inside s-layer and the gap of bulk superconductor. This peak has weak dependence on the parameters like H or γ B , and it should be non sensitive to sample parameters variations. At the same time, the value of ∆ can be also obtained from the value of critical current of the junction, which provides possibility to cross-check the estimation of main peak position in the single experiment. The second peak on IV curve corresponds to the presence of subgap states, induced into the s-layer from a ferromagnetic metal. These subgap states are sensitive to variation of junction parameters, so the that peak position can be shifted in the different samples. This peak usually appears near the current drop on IV-curves. We have also found the influence of the 0-π transition on the DOS of s-layer. While in the 0 or π states there is a significant deep on the DOS, in the vicinity of the transition it becomes almost normal-metal like. Even though it doesn't provide any significant effect on CVC of SIsFS Josephson junction, this dip can be measured in sFS structures with free surface of thin s-layer by scanning tunneling spectroscopy technique 