To understand the coupling factor between Rashba spin-orbital interaction and ferromagnetic proximity effect, we design a Monte Carlo algorithm to simulate the spin and charge distributions for the room-temperature Rashba material, Graphene/Nickel(111) substrate, at finite temperature. We observe that the rate of exchange fluctuation is a key player to produce giant Rashba spin-orbit splitting in graphene. More importantly, we monitor the Rashba spinsplitting phenomenon where the spin-polarized electrons may be escaped from two opposite edges upon heating. However, the escaped electrons show Gaussian-like distribution in interior area that is important for spintronic engineers to optimize the efficiency of spin-state detection. In addition, we investigate if our Monte Carlo model can explain why room-temperature Rashba effect is observed in Graphene/Nickel(111) substrate experimentally. All results are presented in physical units. Spin-orbital coupling is a crucial parameter to control the performance of spintronic devices Ferromagnetic proximity effect is proven to be an effective ingredient to amplify Rashba effect To concern the above issues, we design a new Monte Carlo algorithm which allows researchers to understand the coupling factor between Rashba spin-orbital coupling and ferromagnetic proximity interaction. On the other hand, the size of Rashba-type spintronic devices has been considered in order to meet industrial outcomes The size of square lattice is 64 x 64 where i and j refer to the number of grid. The Hamiltonian The wavevector of electron within XY plane is  . and * m are the Planck constant and the effective mass of electron, respectively.   , R i j is the random number between 0 and 1 so that the effect of quantum fluctuation is included in k-space. 0 J is the exchange energy . The average separation between electron a r is converted from the Fermi energy. The spin-up S  and spin-down S  state of electron are defined as 2 S   where  is Rashba coefficient The role of delta function is to trigger spin & momentum locking so that the spin-up (or spin-down) state of electron prefer to choose +k (or -k) direction, in order to minimize the total energy. While the Rashba field Rashba B behaves as Lorentz-like force   x Rashba q v B  to bend the trajectory of the negatively charged particle q [14], the vertical velocity y v  of electron is required to consider an additional acceleration term . When the scattering time of electron is imported, the vertical displacement of electron is integrated by numerically at equilibrium. To initialize the status of Monte Carlo simulation, the spin and location of electrons are assigned in random manner as shown in Figure ) is greater than 0.5. Otherwise, the spin state of electron retains. After the spin state is registered, the direction of motion along x direction is controlled by another random number R is greater than 0.5, the electron moves towards +x direction When the modified wavevector is multiplied by * m  , the range of movement is attained approximately where  is the average scattering time of electron. H  is less positive  is smaller than the Boltzmann factor   (1) No electron is found in the interior area. (2) Electrons with different spin states occupy in two opposite edges. We name it as Rashba edges. (3) The ratio R s between the spin-up state and spin-down state is within 0.98 < R s < 1.02. In this article, Our Monte Carlo algorithm is applied to investigate the behavior of the Rashba effect of Graphene/Nickel (111) substrate Figure We study the coupling factor between Rashba spin-orbital coupling and ferromagnetic proximity interaction (RF factor) in Figure Our Monte Carlo approach is able to produce an ideal spin-splitting phenomenon of Rashba effect at low temperatures with the evidences of Figure Our Monte Carlo algorithm works reasonably to predict the room-temperature Rashba effect in Graphene / Ni(111) substrate Not all 2D materials emerge room-temperature Rashba effect under ferromagnetic substrates To address why the escape route of electron forms Gaussian-like peak at X(0) at finite temperature in Figure 