For generation of sustainable, clean and highly efficient energy, the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction represents an attractive platform, thus inviting immense research activities in recent years. However, designing the catalyst with enhanced electrocatalytic activity remains one of the major challenges. Here, we examined the oxygen evolution reaction activities of geometrically designed (with and without step-textured morphology) thin films of an electrocatalytically active correlated metallic SrRuO3 perovskite grown on c-and r-plane sapphire substrates. On c-plane sapphire, as compared to the uniform surface, the step-textured films endowed with active Ru-sites show remarkable decrease in the overpotential (∼25 mV). Interestingly, the behavior is opposite for the r-plane case, highlighting the significance of the active sites, in addition with the polar surface termination of selective crystal facets. Density functional theory calculation confirms the favorable energy reaction pathway for the active site dependent enhancement in OER. Our strategy might pave the way towards designing the surfaces of various oxide thin films for high performance energy conversion based devices. The demand for enhanced use of green and sustainable energy is increasing continuously due to the significant negative impact of polluting fuels on the environment. One of the most sought after clean fuel is hydrogen and its efficient and economical production is a major challenge These oxides show promising energy conversion activities along with its ample emergent physical phenomena. However, the origin and enhancement of their electrochemical energy conversion performance remains challenging due to the complex interplay between various parameters that hinders their practical implications. However, in most of these studies including those of other classes of catalysts primarily uniform (flat) surfaces are used. Since non-ideal (e.g. step-textured) surfaces provide a plethora of morpho-chemically rich array of catalytic (kink) sites, it is extremely interesting to harness such a possibility through a simple experimental design that can elucidate the importance of the attendant parameters. This is indeed the objective of the present study. In this report, by geometrically designing a well-known correlated metallic SrRuO3 thin film on c-and r-plane sapphire substrates, we have addressed the significance of the active sites in conjugation with crystal facet, with different atomic configurations. We have found remarkable enhancement in OER with the significant reduction of the overpotential (∼25 mV) only in the case of c-plane sapphire engineered with step-textured geometry, as compared to uniform (flat) film. In contrast, interestingly an opposite trend has been found for film on rplane sapphire, which implies that in addition to the possibility of enhanced binding enabled by higher chemical coordination afforded by active sites at the steps, specific morph-chemical nature of the step edges governs the phenomenon. Density-functional theory calculations are also performed to elucidate the specific role of active sites for the enhancement. Structurally, at ambient conditions SrRuO3 forms a GdFeO3 type distorted orthorhombic structure with lattice constants a∼5.5670 Å, b∼5.5304 Å, and c∼7.8446 Å, thus pseudo-cubic with lattice constant (apc) ∼3.93 Å. It is a correlated ferromagnetic metal with room temperature resistivity ∼200 μΩ•cm and Tc ∼160 K We first grew ∼40 nm SrRuO3 thin films on both c-and r-plane sapphire (Al2O3, hexagonal structure) substrates by pulsed laser deposition and measured their OER activities. Films were grown by pulsed laser depositions (PLD) method on hexagonal c-and r-Al2O3 substrates by using the following growth conditions: growth temperature ∼700 °C, laser fluence ∼3 J/cm 2 , repetition rate of 2 Hz and oxygen pressure (Po2) of 100 mTorr. After the deposition, films were cooled down at the same oxygen pressure to reduce the oxygen vacancies. For achieving the desired step-edge surface geometry, we used two differently shaped masks (flat spade shape; size 4×4 mm 2 and square shape, size 1.5×1.5 mm 2 ), made of high purity stainless steel. Before using, we cleaned these masks ultrasonically in high purity acetone (99.9%) for 30 min. After growing the designed uniform (spade-shaped) film for bottom contact, we kept the square boxshaped mask on the top of it to create the vertical wall of step-edge active sites, defining the measurement area. X-ray diffractions were performed with a Bruker D2 PHASER X-ray Diffractometer. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used for the surface topography analysis and measuring the thickness of the films, using Nanosurf AFM (Switzerland). Electrical measurements were performed in standard AC transport four-probe method by using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), within the temperature range of T = 5-300 K. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) imaging was done using Zeiss Ultra Plus 4095 operating at 20 kV. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was done with a Kα X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (Thermo-fisher Scientific Instrument, UK). It was carried out in an ultra-high vacuum chamber (2×10 -9 mBar) by using an Al Kα x-ray source with 6 mA beam current (beam spot size on the sample was ∼400 μm). All the electrochemical measurements were carried out using CH Instruments Potentiostats with a conventional three-electrode system using platinum wire as a counter electrode, Hg/HgO as the reference electrode, and SrRuO3 thin films (catalysts) as a working electrode, respectively. The electrochemical experiments were performed in 1 M KOH electrolyte solution after the purging N2 gas without iR correction. Afterward, the potentials were converted into reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) by following equation. ERHE = E vs Hg/HgO + 0.059 × pH + E 0 (Hg/HgO), where E 0 (Hg/HgO) = 0.098 V. All the geometry optimization and electronic structure calculations are carried out using Density-functional theory (DFT) based Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The model supercells are periodic along X and Z directions. A vacuum of ~15 Å normal to the surface has been used in order to avoid the interaction between two adjacent images. Throughout the electronic structure calculations, the exchange-correlation functional has been approximated using Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) type generalized gradient approximation (GGA) From crystallographic and lattice symmetry standpoint, in case of a cubic (pseudo-cubic) crystal, the film growth on hexagonal c-Al2O3 substrate should favor (111) orientation growth. In principle, two neighboring (111) planes of a cubic ABO3 oxide forms "buckled' honeycomb lattice with trigonal lattice geometry. The x-ray diffraction (XRD) data for the SrRuO3 films reflect (111) growth direction (on c-Al2O3) and along (110) direction (on r-Al2O3) (Fig. Atomically, SrRuO3 along (111) shows alternate stacking of polar termination layers of Ru 4+ and SrO3 4-(Fig. . Interestingly, both the (111) and (110) directions have polar stacking, but with alternating layers of Ru 4+ -SrO3 4--Ru 4+ and SrRuO 4+ -O2 4--SrRuO 4+ , respectively Having noted that, we set out to examine the OER activities of these two films. Since it is important to normalize the current density with the film surface roughness, we obtained the roughness values for the two cases from the AFM data. Therefore, the current density was normalized for both the films with reference to the surface roughness (henceforth we normalized the current density values duly with their respective film roughness for all the cases) and shown in (Fig. Remarkably, this observation (i. e. enhanced OER activity even for lower morphoroughness case) reveals the significance of exposed facets and related surface terminations, and the difference in sheet resistance, suggesting that a change in the surface oxygen binding strength on these high-energetic (111) and (110) SrRuO3 surfaces influences surface oxygen electro-adsorption and corresponding OER activities. Chang et al., also reported that OER activity of SrRuO3 changes with crystallographic orientations as (111) > (110) > (001) Thus, the combination of lower electrical resistance and higher density of active (Ru) sites and concurrent high surface energy of (111) SrRuO3 film on c-Al2O3 in contrast to (110) SrRuO3 film on r-Al2O3 sapphire are responsible for better catalytic performance. To explore the possible role of active sites, we then grew four 20 nm pillars of the SrRuO3 film on the top of uniform 20 nm SrRuO3 film on the c-Al2O3 and r-Al2O3 films by mechanical masking, as shown in the schematics (Fig. Thus, in addition to the active site effect, the difference in the chemical coordination at the step edges due to change in the local electronic structure is also plays a crucial role in the OER activity. We also grew several films with different pillar thicknesses (on c-Al2O3), and they invariably showed the reduction in the overpotential (Fig. Step edges on such a wall would have high enough step edge density indeed. In order to probe the surface oxygen binding strength, we also performed the XPS. Interestingly, we observed a moderate shift (∼0.5 eV) towards higher energy (reduced electron density) in the XPS for the step-textured film with respect to the uniform film (Fig. We further analyzed the Tafel plots for both the uniform (flat) film and step-textured film (on c-Al2O3) to compare the electrocatalytic activity as well as for elucidating the reaction mechanism of electrocatalysts. The sensitivity of the electric current response to the potential (Tafel slope) provides information associated with the rate determining steps To further gain insight about the origin of the enhancement in OER on step-textured surface, we performed DFT based electronic structure calculations that helps to elucidate the complete reaction pathway. The electronic structure calculations of correlated metallic compounds are not straightforward; however, the results of our calculations, specially the projected density of states and optical absorption spectra, are in agreement with the optical study of SrRuO3 by Ahn et al. In conclusion, we have shown that geometrically designed (111) SrRuO3 thin film on c-Al2O3 substrate shows enhanced OER activity with the incorporation of active sites, in contrast of an opposite effect for the (110) SrRuO3 film on r-Al2O3 substrates, as a consequence of the presence of active sites with higher energetic polar surface termination. Density functional theory confirms the enhancement with favorable energetic reaction pathway. Our study demonstrates that presence of active sites is indeed a vital parameter for the enhancement in OER activity. This geometrical engineering approach might be a useful step towards using perovskite metal oxide thin films as an active electrocatalyst for the production of renewable energy. 