The recently proposed Atomistic Structure Learning Algorithm (ASLA) builds on neural network enabled image recognition and reinforcement learning. It enables fully autonomous structure determination when used in combination with a first-principles total energy calculator, e.g. a density functional theory (DFT) program. To save on the computational requirements, ASLA utilizes the DFT program in a single-point mode, i.e. without allowing for relaxation of the structural candidates according to the force information at the DFT level. In this work, we augment ASLA to establish a surrogate energy model concurrently with its structure search. This enables approximative but computationally cheap relaxation of the structural candidates before the single-point energy evaluation with the computationally expensive DFT program. We demonstrate a significantly increased performance of ASLA for building benzene while utilizing a surrogate energy landscape. Further we apply this model-enhanced ASLA in a thorough investigation of the c(4 × 8) phase of the Ag(111) surface oxide. ASLA successfully identifies a surface reconstruction which has previously only been guessed on the basis of scanning tunnelling microscopy images. Structure determination is a cornerstone in the development of new functional materials for applications as photo-voltaics, thermoelectrics, electrolytes, and heterogeneous catalysts A number of strategies for automated structural search have emerged. These include simulated annealing based on molecular dynamics (MD) Notwithstanding the considerable computational speedups that ML techniques have lead to in structural determination, the underlying search paradigm remains of stochastic nature. This means that as a catalogue of more and more likely structural candidates is constructed, no knowledge or understanding of the bonding mechanism is developed and identifying more candidates still relies on the element of chance. To tackle this issue, we have recently proposed the Atomistic Structure Learning Algorithm (ASLA) In this work, we extend ASLA to include a surrogate energy landscape that is constructed on-the-fly. Whenever ASLA proposes a new structure, the structure is subjected to a computationally inexpensive local relaxation in the model before the computationally expensive first-principles single-point calculation is conducted. The method is shown to dramatically increase the performance of ASLA when applied to solving for the most stable C 6 H 6 -isomer, which is benzene. We further apply ASLA with surrogate model relaxations to the problem of finding the most stable geometry and stoichiometry of the Ag(111) c(4 × 8)-phase surface, which has been experimentally and theoretically investigated in Refs. 47 and 48. Ag(111) oxide surfaces are known to be catalysts for the important ethene epoxidation reaction and have been studied for decades. Yet the structure of such systems continue to surprise The paper is outlined as follows. In the first section, we introduce the details of the model. In the second section, we demonstrate the performance increase for a simple benzene system, where many restarts can be made and good statistics obtained. Lastly, in the the final section, we employ our algorithm to identify the aforementioned Ag(111) oxide surface structure. Doing so, we employ the method for a large number of different silver oxide stoichiometries. The most stable structure is identified and discussed. In the Atomistic Structure Learning Algorithm (ASLA) In the building phase, ASLA commences by constructing a new structural candidate by following the policy as guided by the current state of the agent. It starts from a template structure, s 0 , (possibly an empty computational cell) and proceeds iteratively to a final state, s T , such that a total of N atom atoms have been placed, as further detailed in Fig. After constructing a candidate from the policy we add in the present version of ASLA a new element, namely a structural relaxation. The changes that a structural candidate undergoes during this are illustrated in Fig. The reinforcement learning episode proceeds with the evaluation phase which is a single-point DFT calculation of the total energy, E tot , of structure, sT . This is the presumed computationally most intensive operation of the learning episode. Once finished, a set of state-actionenergy datapoints for each iteration of the candidate-frompolicy construction of this episode may be stored in the memory in the store-in-memory event. Since the candi- date construction was proceeded by some relaxation, the state-action pairs will most likely deviate from the actual states, s t , visited and actual actions, a t , taken during the build action. Assuming, however, that atoms are placed in the same order, the state-action pairs, (s t , ãt ), that would have led directly to the snapped, relaxed structure, sT , can be determined, cf. Fig. The reinforcement learning episode continues with a training phase, where the CNN and surrogate energy model are updated. The CNN is trained by first extracting a batch of state-action-energy pairs from the most recent, most-favorable and random episodes from the memory, such that the batch comprises 5 × N atom state-actionenergy pairs. The energies are transformed to reward values, r ∈ [-1, 1], and the batch is expanded by rotated and mirrored versions of the state-action-energy pairs. The weights of the CNN are updated by a backpropagation step with a learning rate of 10 -3 that decreases the total mean squared error between the predicted value and the reward for state-action-energy pairs in the batch. In the present work, we employ the same architecture for the neural network as in Refs. As a final operation during the learning phase of a reinforcement learning episode, an improved surrogate energy model is prepared for the next episode. This is done in the train-surrogate-model operation, which represents the final new element introduced to ASLA in this work. The surrogate energy model extracts from the memory (s T , E tot ) datapoints and constructs a structureenergy model. The details of the model are given in the next section. Upon starting the reinforcement learning cycle, the neural network representing the agent can be initialized randomly meaning that ASLA learns completely autonomously from its interaction with the DFT program with no other input than the template, s 0 , and the stoichiometry of the final structure, s T . It may, however, benefit largely in a transfer learning setting, where network weights are inherited from a prior ASLA run solving a sim-pler problem. Initially, before sufficient structure-energy datapoints have been collected and stored in memory, a sufficiently reliable surrogate model cannot be established, and the relax operation is simply skipped. For the surrogate model, a Gaussian process (GP) regression model A GP is specified by its prior mean, μ(x), and covariance function (the kernel), k(x, x ), which expresses the beliefs about the system prior to any observations. The training consists of inferring the posterior distribution, which takes into account the observed training data, D = {X, E}. The posterior can be analytically expressed due to the well-behaved marginalization properties of the GP. Namely, the posterior is also a GP with mean function given by where and σ n is a regularization hyperparameter that acts to prevent overfitting (we use σ n = 3.2 • 10 -3 ). The posterior mean is taken as the model prediction of the energy. Computationally, the training is dominated by the inversion of the kernel matrix, which scales with the number of data points as O(n 3 ). To take advantage of the rotational, translational and permutation symmetries of quantum chemistry, structures are represented by feature vectors that exhibit these symmetries. In this work, we choose the fingerprint descriptors of Oganov and Valle The kernel is chosen to be a sum of two Gaussians with different length scales, similar to that proposed in 56 where x are the feature vectors and θ 0 is the maximal covariance. Using two length scales, λ 1 and λ 2 , improves the model by allowing the kernel to capture trends in a large, sparsely sampled configuration space, while maintaining resolution in smaller, more densely sampled regions. The prior mean is chosen to be a short-ranged repulsive potential, which is generally present between atoms. This naturally prohibit atoms to get too close during structure relaxations with the model, which may cause convergence problems when the total energy is evaluated. The feature vector is analytically differentiable with respect to the Cartesian coordinates, which allows us to obtain the predicted force according to the model. The relaxation is performed by iteratively moving the atoms based on the predicted force. In training the model, the hyperparameters, (θ 0 , λ 1 , λ 2 ), are optimized by maximizing the log marginal likelihood The model is not meant to reproduce total energies with high accuracy. Rather, the purpose of the model is to guide ASLA into local minima of the configuration space in order to aid the global search. Therefore, we measure the models performance by the improvement in the number of ASLA episodes needed to solve a global optimization problem, instead of an error with respect to a test set. Having introduced to ASLA that candidates built from the policy may be relaxed in a surrogate energy landscape, we now turn to probe how it affects the overall performance of ASLA. In order to be able to make convincing statistics we choose to have ASLA solve the problem of building the most stable molecule given six carbon atoms and six hydrogen atoms, i.e. C 6 H 6 . The total energy expression is provided by a density functional based tight binding (DFTB) energy expression using the DFTB+ implementation The performance of ASLA is gauged by restarting the structural search a great number of times with no data in the memory and with random initialization of the CNN. By compiling as a function of episode count, the share of search runs that have found the benzene molecule, we arrive at the success curves displayed in Fig. We consequently attribute the stagnation of the modelrelaxed ASLA to errors in the surrogate energy model. Note, however, that the DFTB relaxation scheme uses several order of magnitudes more DFTB energy evaluations per episode, than does the model relaxation scheme, where one episode corresponds to one DFTB single-point energy evaluation. This renders the model relaxation scheme far superior when more refined and computationally expensive DFT or quantum chemistry methods are used as the total energy expression. The model potential quickly learns to locally optimize the structure that ASLA produces. In turn, ASLA learns more quickly to build stable structures (cf. Fig. Possible solutions to the stagnation issue could be the introduction of more advanced model energy expressions than the presently used one, or the development of schemes to reset the surrogate model upon detection of stagnation. Note that a single restart will not know if it has ceased to find better structures because it has identified the global minimum energy structure or because it uses an insufficiently accurate model for the relaxation and finds a higher lying energy structure. In practice, when searching for an unknown global minimum energy structure, all restarts would therefore need to have their model reset once they consistently produce the same best structure over and over again. Having seen that ASLA improves significantly upon adding the presently proposed model-relaxation, it is instructive to inspect the degree of relaxation as a function of reinforcement episodes. Figure We now turn to apply ASLA with model relaxation to an outstanding problem in materials science. Specifically, we will be concerned with the oxidation of the Ag(111)- surface, which has been shown to exhibit a rich variety of stoichiometries and phases during growth of surface oxide layers. Schnadt and co-workers In our search for the Ag(111)-c(4×8) silver oxide phase, ASLA is used to identify the best possible structure of a mono-layer silver oxide on top of a bulk truncated Ag(111) template. For the surface oxide, it is assumed that all Ag atoms occupy positions whose heights coincide with that of an extra unrelaxed Ag(111) layer, z 0 , while all O atoms occupy some of seven different heights evenly distributed around such a Ag(111) layer, i.e. ranging from 1.6 to 3.1 Å above the Ag(111) template. For the in-plane positions of the Ag and O atoms, any values on a 2D grid with grid spacing 0.255 Å are allowed. Figure During the model relaxation the silver atoms are constrained to move in the xy-plane, while the oxygen atoms are constrained to move freely between z = 1.6 Å and z = 3.1 Å, which does not represent any further approximation given that the atomic position are snapped to the grid heights within these bounds at the end of the building phase. The evaluation phase is conducted using DFT. The structures are handled with the atomic simulation environment (ASE) ASLA was used to build Ag X O Y structures on top of Ag(111)-c(4 × 8) for 3 ≤ X ≤ 7 and 2 ≤ Y ≤ 6. For each combination of (X, Y ) ASLA was restarted at least 10 times until the best structure found agreed in at least 5 of the restarts, except for some of the Ag 7 O Y runs, where only a few restarts agreed on the best structure before the allocated resources were spent. Once identified by ASLA, the best surface oxide structure ever found for each restart was transferred to 5 layered Ag(111) slabs and relaxed unconstrained. The structure and stability of these surface oxide models are discussed in the following. We compare the different stoichiometries by their Gibbs free energy according to where E DFT is the DFT energy of the full structure, E DFT slab is the DFT energy of the Ag(111)-c(4 × 8) five layer slab without the surface oxide, and where μ Ag and μ O are the chemical potentials of silver and oxygen, respectively. Note, that we neglect the small vibrational and configurational contributions to the Gibbs free energy of the surface structures. The silver chemical potential, μ Ag , is taken to be the chemical potential of a silver atom situated in the bulk position, calculated as the difference per Ag atom of 6 and 5 layer thick Ag(111) slabs. The oxygen chemical potential is a function of the di-oxygen pressure, p, and the temperature, T 61 : is the DFT total energy of the di-oxygen molecule, μO2 (T, p 0 ) is the translational, rotational, and vibrational contributions to the free energy of an O 2 gas at a reference pressure, p 0 , and k B is Boltzmanns constant. It is seen that the absolute value of μ O (T, p) depends on the specific computational settings through E DFT O2 . To circumvent that, it is convenient to quote only the (T, p)-dependent part of the chemical potential: whenever a chemical potential is specified. With the thermodynamic considerations in place, it is now possible to compare the stability of the most stable structures found by ASLA. Figure In The structures leading to the free energy diagram in Fig. We have augmented ASLA with relaxations in a model potential, dramatically increasing the performance. The improvements come with no need for extra electronicstructure energy evaluations, and little overhead due to training the model and the relaxation procedure itself. We applied the improved ASLA to a Ag(111) oxide surface, where a proposed structure was confirmed by a thorough search.