We report magnetoresistance and Hall Effect results for electron-doped films of the high-temperature superconductor La 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (LCCO) for temperatures from 0.7 to 45 K and magnetic fields up to 65 T. For x = 0.12 and 0.13, just below the Fermi surface reconstruction (FSR), the normal state in-plane resistivity exhibits a well-known upturn at low temperature. Our new results show that this resistivity upturn is eliminated at high magnetic field and the resistivity becomes linear-in-temperature from ~40 K down to 0.7 K. The magnitude of the linear coefficient scales with T c and doping, as found previously [1,2] for dopings above the FSR. In addition, the normal state Hall coefficient has an unconventional field dependence for temperatures below 50K. This anomalous transport data presents a new challenge to theory and suggests that the strange metal normal state is also present in the antiferromagnetic regime. An understanding of the copper oxide (cuprate) superconductors remains one of the major unsolved problems of condensed matter physics. It is generally agreed that to understand the origin of the high-Tc superconductivity one has to understand the nature of the low temperature normal state from which the superconductivity emerges. A key unexplained feature of the cuprates is the upturn in the normal state CuO 2 plane resistivity, (T) for H H , seen at low temperature for doping below the Fermi surface reconstruction (FSR) in electron-doped (n-doped) In electron-doped cuprates doped just below the FSR --the subject of this paper --the ab-plane resistivity upturn has been shown experimentally to be linked to spin scattering At high doping (beyond the dome of superconductivity) the n-doped cuprates have a T resistivity at low temperatures An important unexplained issue is the nature of the low temperature normal state (H H ) in the absence of the upturn. Recent work on n-doped cuprates has claimed that the ground state in the upturn region is a Fermi liquid Here, we study the magnetic field dependence of the ab-plane resistivity as a function of temperature in the upturn region of the n-doped cuprates LCCO and PCCO, an experiment that has not previously been performed for any cuprate, to our knowledge. For dopings just below the FSR doping, we find new and unexpected behaviors of the electrical transport (namely, the resistivity and Hall Effect). The resistivity upturn can be completely suppressed above a certain magnetic field (H * ) and above H * the resistivity exhibits a strange metallic linear-in-T dependence from 0.7K to ~40K and an anomalous linear-in-H magnetoresistance for H H * in the same temperature range. Further, the Hall coefficient has an unconventional field dependence for T < ~50K. Our conclusion is that the strange metal behavior of the normal state at low temperature persists at doping both above and below the FSR in n-doped cuprates, i.e., for all doping where superconductivity exists in zero field. We will give a few qualitative comments about these results and their implications, but it is unambiguous that our new data represents another challenge for the theory of the cuprates. The high field magnetic measurements were performed on La 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (LCCO) films for two dopings (x=0.13, 0.12) just below the Fermi surface reconstruction doping (x = 0.14). The films, of thickness about 150 nm, were grown using the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique on SrTiO 3 [100] substrates (5 × 5mm 2 ) at a temperature of 750 • C utilizing a KrF excimer laser. The films were post-annealed at 600 • C in an oxygen partial pressure of about 1×10 -5 torr for 30 minutes to remove the apical oxygen and induce superconductivity. The full width at half maximum of the peak in dρ /dT of the films is within the range of 0.5 K, demonstrating the high quality of the samples. The LCCO targets have been prepared by the solid state reaction method using 99.99% pure La 2 O 3 , CeO 2 , and CuO powders. The Bruker x-ray diffraction (XRD) of the films shows the c-axis-oriented epitaxial LCCO tetragonal phase. The thickness of the films has been determined by using cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The high-field 65 T measurement was performed by standard four-probe ac lock-in method at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) Pulsed Field Facility, Los Alamos National Laboratory and the 35 T dc field measurements were performed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Tallahassee DC field lab, Florida. Figures The temperature dependence of the resistivity above H*, in particular whether it remains linear or crosses over to another power law, cannot be ascertained for LCCO from our current data since H* 65 T was the maximum field available for the measurement. However, by re-analyzing our previous measurements of another electron-doped cuprate, Pr 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (PCCO), we can address this issue. Fig. In Fig. The fitted slopes of the T-linear resistivity for the x = 0.13 and x=0.12 are plotted as a function of doping in Fig. In addition to our magnetoresistivity measurements, we report the high-field Hall coefficient as a function of temperature and magnetic field for LCCO, x = 0.12 and x = 0.13. It is known from our prior work on under doped samples The temperature dependence of the high field resistivity and Hall coefficient (normal state) reported here for x x LCCO is qualitatively similar to that of the x x LCCO. Therefore, it seems reasonable to speculate that the effect of strong magnetic fields is to move the location of the Fermi Surface Reconstruction (putative QCP) to lower Ce doping. This idea was proposed to explain some magnetic field effects in holedoped cuprates Next, we comment on the linear temperature dependence of the resistivity in LCCO and PCCO for x x that emerges at high fields. This low-temperature linear-in-T behavior is the hallmark of the strange metal state observed in both electron-and hole-doped cuprates Our conclusions are in stark contrast to some prior work, which argued the normal ground state of electrondoped cuprates was best described as a Fermi liquid Our results indicate that a strange metallic ground state is present in the electron-doped cuprates for all dopings within the superconducting dome and is thus a universal feature of the electron-doped cuprates. Such a strange metal state is observed in hole doped LSCO The Hall effect is another unexplained anomalous property of the cuprates. Many proposals have been made [for example see 18, 32-35 and references therein] but there is no consensus yet. Here, we discuss the Hall coefficient in our two underdoped LCCO films and show that the field and temperature dependence is inconsistent with conventional Boltzmann theory. From the known fermiology where n μ and n μ are the carrier density (mobility) of electrons and holes respectively. To reduce the number of free parameters we estimate the carrier densities from the area of each pocket, as determined from the ARPES measurements of x = .15 NCCO We estimate the hole mobility from quantum oscillations (QO) measurements. The low-frequency oscillations corresponding to the hole-pocket onset at 40 T, so assuming that ω τ~1 at this field we estimate the hole mobility from ω τ μ B μ 40~ 1, which gives μ 0.025 T . To estimate the electron mobility, we note that the Hall resistivity changes sign (see Fig. We now use these four parameters n , μ , n , μ to fit the measured Hall coefficient (Fig. A simulated behavior of the normal state Hall coefficient as a function of field at 2K is shown in Fig. This equation suggests R should be negative since we estimated n n . In contrast, we find that, at low temperatures (<10 K) and high field, R is positive (see Fig- A prior study on PCCO films also reported that the high field Hall coefficient does not fit with conventional two carrier Boltzmann transport for dopings just below the FSR A modified model with consideration of field dependent spin scattering might explain our data; however, the development of such a theoretical model is outside the scope of the present experimental work. We have performed low-temperature, ab-plane resistivity and Hall-effect measurements of the electron-doped cuprate La2-xCexCuO4 for dopings x=0.12 and 0.13 and Pr2-xCexCuO4 for doping x=0.15 (just below Fermi Surface Reconstruction) at high magnetic fields. These strong fields suppress the low-temperature resistivity upturn to reveal a linear-in-T resistivity whose magnitude scales with that of the low-temperature linear-in-T resistivity of LCCO for doping above the FSR. This result implies that the normal metal state hidden beneath the resistivity upturn is the same strange metallic state observed in overdoped samples. Consequently, these results suggest that the starnge metal normal state is a universal feature of electron-doped cuprates for dopings within the SC dome. Further, the Hall Effect cannot be explained by conventional Boltzmann transport theory and it appears to be another unexplained aspect of strange metal behavior. We hope that these results and the insights derived from them stimulate further theoretical work to identify the origin of this strange metallic state. 