present in InSe, due to the passivation of selenium vacancies by atmospheric oxygen species. This passivation is accompanied by a downward shift of the InSe Fermi level and by a decrease of the Fermi level pinning, which leads to an increase of the Schottky barrier between Au and InSe. Our study reveals the important role of traps induced by defects in tailoring the properties of devices based on 2D materials and offers a controllable route to design and functionalize thin InSe photodetectors to realize devices with either ultrahigh photoresposivity or fast operation speed. Abstract: Due to the excellent electrical transport properties and optoelectronic performance, thin indium selenide (InSe) has recently attracted attention in the field of 2D semiconducting materials. However, the mechanism behind the photocurrent generation in thin InSe photodetectors remains elusive. Here, we present a set of experiments aimed at explaining the strong scattering in the photoresponsivity values reported in the literature for thin InSe photodetectors. By performing optoelectronic measurements on thin InSe-based photodetectors operated under different environmental conditions we find that the photoresponsivity, the response time and the photocurrent power dependency are strongly correlated in this material. This observation indicates that the photogating effect plays an imporant role for thin InSe flakes, and it is the dominant mechanism in the ultra-high photoresponsivity of pristine InSe devices. In addition, when exposing the pristine InSe photodetectors to the ambient environment we observe a fast and irreversible change in the photoresponse, with a decrease in the photoresponsivity accompanied by an increase of the operating speed. We attribute this photodetector performance change (upon atmospheric exposure) to the decrease in the density of the traps The isolation of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) semiconducting materials, such as single-layer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and few-layer black phosphorous (bP), has attracted large attention due to their potential applications in next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices. Indium selenide (InSe), an n-type semiconductor which belongs to the III-VIA family, has recently attracted large attention because of its extraordinary charge transport properties, superior mechanical flexibility and strong lightmatter interaction. In this work, by comparing optoelectronic measurements obtained in InSe photodetectors operated under various environmental conditions, we propose a model to explain the photocurrent generation mechanism in InSe devices and how it is influenced by the environment. According to our observations, the optoelectronic properties of thin InSe photodetectors are stable over a long time of more than a few weeks when the devices are stored in vacuum condition. When exposing the devices to ambient conditions, we observe a fast decrease of the responsivity accompanied by an increase in the operation speed (reduction of the response time) of the device. The high photoresponsivity observed in pristine thin InSe photodetector can be attributed to a strong photogating effect, which mainly originates from traps for the minority carriers (holes). After exposing the device to the air, the passivation of the chalcogen vacancies VSe by oxygen induces a decrease in photocurrent, which can be explained by a decrease in the number of traps and a quenching of photogain and photogating in the system. Decreasing the density of traps in the 2D material has also a secondary effect on the devices, by reducing the Fermi level pinning we observe an increase of the Schottky barrier at the metal-semiconductor (M-S) interface consistent with the Schottky-Mott rule, as confirmed by scanning photocurrent measurements. Our results provide a further understanding of photocurrent generation mechanism in photodetectors based on thin InSe and can pave the way in utilizing this novel material in high-performance electronics and optoelectronics. Thin InSe photodetectors are fabricated by deterministic placement of InSe flakes (thicknesses going from ~5 nm to ~20 nm) mechanically exfoliated from an InSe bulk crystal grown by Bridgman method. where L = 10 μm and W = 24 μm are the channel length and width of the InSe photodetector, COX = 115 μF m -2 is the capacitance per unit area of 280 nm thick SiO2 and dIDS/dVG is the transconductance. Using the transconductance extracted from the linear regime of the transfer curve, we find a calculated mobility of ~0.06 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at a bias voltage VDS of 1 V. Compared with the reported results based on the InSe transistors fabricated by lithography method, this smaller value may be caused by a larger contact resistance in our case that does not involve the thermal evaporation of the electrodes onto the InSe flake. . ( From the data of Figure After the characterization of the InSe photodetector in dark conditions, we test its optoelectronic properties and response to external illumination. The blue curve in Figure and where Iph is the photocurrent calculated as (Ilight -Idark), P is the external illumination density, A is the active area of the photodetector (that we assume equal to the InSe channel area) and e is the elementary charge. Note that the formula to calculate the detectivity of Eq. 4 assumes that the photodetector is limited by shot noise. The responsivity follows the same behavior of the photocurrent, reaching its maximum at positive gate voltages in the on state and decreasing when the transistor is in the off state. On the other hand, the detectivity is not monotonous and it reaches its maximum at a gate voltage of approximately -20 V and decreases for both large positive voltages and negative voltages. The values of R and D* reported here are comparable to the highest values reported in literature for thin InSe photodetectors, confirming the excellent performances of InSe as an active material in the fabrication of photodetectors. In the following, we focus on the influence of air on the performances of InSe photodetectors. Just after the device fabrication, a pristine InSe photodetector (sample #2 in Figure and the optoelectronic performance was measured. To characterize the device in this case we studied its response in time to external square-wave modulated illumination. The red curve in Figure time traces (I-t) at 450 mW μm -2 we estimate a rising time τon = 77 s and a decay time τoff = 3.2 s. Figure In a photodetector, important information about the mechanism behind the photocurrent generation can be extracted from the power dependency of the photocurrent. where α is the dimensionless exponent of the power law and b is a parameter related to the photodetector responsivity. The value of the exponent α provides the information of traps present in the photodetecting system. In fact, in an ideal trap-free photodetector, the exponent α is equal to 1 meaning that the photocurrent scales linearly with the illumination power and the responsivity is constant as a function of power. When trap states (for minority carriers) are present in the system α becomes smaller than 1 and the responsivity depends sub-linearly on the illumination power (as for high powers most of the traps are already filled in and further illumination power cannot effectively increase the photogain), effectively decreasing for higher illumination powers. As can be seen from Figure (1) is characterized by α = 0.77. This value increases to 0.94 after that 20 hours of exposure of the device to air (2). The final measurements performed on the device in vacuum after being exposed to air (3) show a value for α of 1.0. The observed evolution of α indicates that in pristine InSe photodetectors trap states play a role in the photocurrent generation process and that these trap states can be modified and eventually irreversibly removed after exposing the InSe photodetector to air. The increase of α in InSe photodetectors exposed to air, discussed above for a single device, has been observed in all the five investigated Au-InSe-Au devices (see Figure Importantly, this common behavior is independent on the initial parameters of the measured devices such as responsivity, α or response time. This fact has been illustrated in Figure In this log-log plot, the decay time of the five different InSe photodetectors is plotted versus the photoresponsivity extracted for each device. In this case, we measured responsivity values going from 10 -3 A W -1 to 10 2 A W -1 corresponding to decay times going from less than 0.1 s to more than 1000 s. The graph shows a correlation between the two with the data-points following approximately a straight line, which indicates that the two variables are connected by a power law. The black dashed line represents a power law with an exponent equal to 1, corresponding to a linear relationship between the responsivity and the response time. As can be seen from the plot, for large values of both R and τoff, the data-points follow perfectly the linear relation, suggesting that the photogating effect is the dominant mechanism for InSe photodetectors with large responsivities. In fact, in photogating dominated devices the minority carriers get trapped in long-lived charge traps which limits in an effective way the response time of the device (they are typically slower than photoconductive devices) but provides an external source of photogain (when the channel drift time of the charge carriers is much shorter than the charge trapping time the device presents a photogain proportional to τoff/τdrift). After exploring the correlation between α, R and τoff we discuss a last set of experiments that highlight the change in the electronic structure of InSe after the exposure to air. After the initial optoelectronic characterization of device #1 in vacuum (transfer curves and photocurrent power dependency at 405 nm, see Figure Briefly, in this technique we focus a 650 nm laser in a ∼1 um 2 circular spot onto the surface of the InSe photodetector and move it across the sample while recording for each position the source-drain current and the intensity of the reflected light (see Figure V shows a broad and high photocurrent intensity region over the entire InSe channel area. On the contrary, the aged device presents a strong and sharp photocurrent peak located near the source contact at the end of the device channel, which is consistent with the presence of Schottky barriers at the InSe/gold contacts. Before discussing a model that can explain the photocurrent generation mechanism in thin InSe photodetectors it is instructive to summarize the experimental observations presented above. In summary, we studied five different InSe photodetectors in their freshly fabricated pristine state, and after the exposure to ambient conditions. 1. From electrical measurements in a field effect transistor configuration, we find that pristine InSe photodetectors are n-type doped (Figure 2. The optoelectronic figures-of-merit of pristine InSe photodetectors are excellent, with responsivities of the order of 10 3 A W -1 and detectivities of ~10 3. From time-resolved measurements we find that the time response in pristine InSe photodetectors is slow and can be on the order of thousands of seconds (Figure 4. After exposing the InSe photodetectors to the air we observe a decrease of both the dark current and the current under illumination, accompanied by a decrease in response time (Figure 5. The exposure to the air also affects the way in which the photocurrent depends on the illumination power density. While pristine InSe photodetectors show a sublinear dependency of Iph on P, with the power law exponent α taking a value lower than 1, the exposure to air increase the linearity of this relation, with the power law exponent α increasing toward 1 (Figure 6. Scanning photocurrent measurements (Figure The n-type doping observed in the transfer curves of pristine thin InSe photodetectors measured in dark and in vacuum conditions has been observed in different experiments apart from the ones presented in this article. On the other hand, the minority carriers traps with density Pt are expected to play a dominant role in the photocurrent generation process since they can generate photogain. The band diagram of Figure In conclusion, by investigating the photocurrent generation process in InSe and its evolution in air/vacuum we find that traps levels can induce a strong photogain effect in pristine InSe photodetectors. The healing of these traps This work illustrates the strong effect of intrinsic defects, present in pristine 2D semiconductors, on their optoelectronic properties and how a controlled healing of these defects can be a powerful route to continuously tune the performance of these devices in a broad range of operational conditions. Sample fabrication. Thin InSe flakes were fabricated with mechanical exfoliation method with scotch tape and Nitto tape (Nitto Denko® SPV 224) and then onto a polydimethylsiloxane substrate (PDMS). After inspection with optical microscopy transmission mode (Motic® BA310 MET-T), the selected flakes were transferred from the PDMS to the pre-patterned Au (50nm)/SiO2 (280nm)/Si substrates (Osilla®) to fabricate the photodetector devices. 