The ability to produce nanowires through vapor-and solution-based processes has propelled nanowire material systems toward a wide range of technological applications. Conventional, vapor-based nanowire syntheses have enabled precise control over nanowire composition and phase. However, vapor-based nanowire growth employs batch processes with specialized pressure management systems designed to operate at high temperatures, limiting throughput. More recently developed solution-based nanowire growth processes have improved scalability but can require even more extensive pressure and temperature management systems. Here, we demonstrate a continuous-flow, solution-based nanowire growth process that utilizes the large Young-Laplace interfacial surface pressures and collective heating effects of colloidal metal nanocrystals under irradiation to drive semiconductor nanowire growth photothermally without the need for highpressure or high-temperature equipment. In this process, a laser irradiates a solution containing metal nanocrystals and semiconductor precursors. Upon light absorption, the metal nanocrystals heat rapidly, inducing semiconductor precursor decomposition and nanowire growth. This process is performed on a benchtop in simple glassware under standard conditions. To demonstrate the generality of this technique, we synthesized three distinct semiconductor nanowire material systems: bismuth-seeded germanium nanowires, bismuth-seeded cadmium selenide nanowires, and indium-seeded germanium nanowires. The simplicity and versatility of this process opens the door to a range of experiments and technologies including in-line combinatorial identification of optimized reaction parameters, in situ spectroscopic measurements to study solution-based nanowire growth, and the potential production of nanowires with complex compositions or rationally incorporated dopants. The absorption of light in tandem with subsequent energy transfer processes provides a unique handle to initiate chemical reactions in a wide range of materials, enabling key processes with diverse applications. For example, light absorption by photosensitive molecules has been used to engineer advanced biomaterials 2γ r ⁄ for a sphere)can lead to a much wider range of accessible temperatures to drive liquidphase chemistry at nanoscale interfaces. While conventional reactor systems are typically heated via conduction across the interface between the reactor sidewall and the fluid, when the heat source is decoupled from the reactor sidewalls, bubble nucleation can be avoided, thereby increasing the accessible temperature range at standard pressures. Taking advantage of the nanoscale Young-Laplace effect, the irradiation of metal nanocrystals has been used to induce high-temperature reaction conditions at nanocrystal surfaces in a low-cost manner, fabricate crystalline inorganic nanomaterials, and weld heterojunctions between nanowires Importantly, metal nanocrystals are also essential for the growth of anisotropic semiconductor nanowires To date, photothermally-driven nanowire growth has largely been studied in substrate-based systems, yet the growth of semiconductor nanowires in dispersion through direct laser irradiation of colloidal metal nanocrystals remains largely unexplored. A handful of reports have utilized substrate-bound metal nanocrystals to transduce incident irradiation into thermal energy to decompose semiconductor precursors for nanowire growth using a solution-based carrier phase(55-58); however, for both vapor-and solution-based nanowire growth, past work has focused primarily on irradiating a substrate decorated with metal nanocrystals Actualizing light-driven, substrate-free, solution-based nanowire growth would enable continuous flow-based nanowire growth on the benchtop as well as broader access to nanowire growth chemistries that require high temperatures without the need for expensive or niche equipment. Here, we capitalize on the unique properties of metallic colloidal nanoparticles under laser irradiation to act as sources of photothermal energy transduction as well as growth-directing seeds for the synthesis of anisotropic semiconductor nanostructures through a one-step, bottom-up, colloidal, solution-based process. By using colloidal metal nanocrystals to convert incident photons into thermal energy, as opposed to relying on global heating of the entire reactor system, we relax reactor design constraints to enable the continuous growth of semiconductor nanowires on the benchtop, eliminating the need for specialized, high-temperature or high-pressure equipment. By using a dispersion of nanocrystals, rather than a metal nanocrystal-decorated substrate, we demonstrate a system in which colloidal nanocrystals irradiated with a collimated infrared laser can reach the high temperatures (>200°C) required for solution-phase nanowire synthesis due to a combination of the nanoscale Young-Laplace effect and the collective heating effects of colloidal metallic nanoparticles. This demonstrates a generalizable process for semiconductor nanowire growth that can be performed on a benchtop in either batch or continuous operation, for potential rapid, high-throughput screening and parameter optimization of semiconductor nanowire growth. This contact-free, laser-driven, solution-based nanowire growth process is detailed in Fig. suspended in an infinite bath of the growth solution. In this formalism, isolated bismuth and indium nanocrystals heat very little relative to the overall growth solution. Computations predict that at these experimental laser irradiances, a single bismuth or indium nanocrystal cannot heat sufficiently to decompose molecular precursors and drive nanowire growth (SI Appendix Fig. Critically, this observation implies that the nanocrystals heat via the collective scattering and absorption of photons. This is in agreement with previous work performed with gold nanoparticles in an aqueous solution under irradiation We next incorporated II-VI molecular precursors into the colloidal nanocrystal solution in an attempt to drive solution-liquid-solid (SLS) nanowire growth via photothermal heating. In a typical laser-driven synthesis, a solution of colloidal nanocrystals and molecular precursors in a cuvette were irradiated with a collimated laser. The optical density of the dispersion was observed to increase dramatically within the first 30 seconds of irradiation. When the laser was blocked, the reaction product rapidly flocculated, indicating a substantial change in morphology relative to the starting nanocrystals. Bright-field transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging (Fig. clearly demonstrates that laser heating did not result in homogeneously nucleated CdSe byproducts upon precursor decomposition. Rather, the bismuth nanocrystal seeds act as growth-directing agents to produce CdSe nanowires via a photothermally driven SLS growth mechanism. Compared to previous two-step, optically driven II-IV nanowire growth processes(57), the CdSe nanowire synthesis performed here was carried out in a single step. TEM images (Fig. reflections for wurtzite and zinc-blende, respectively, which is consistent with previously reported growth directions associated with each phase of the anisotropic nanowire (Fig. While this represents a successful demonstration of solution-based, photothermally driven seeded nanowire growth, CdSe has a large degree of ionic character, and material systems that are more covalent (such as Si and Ge) typically have much higher crystallization barriers, and, therefore, require significantly higher temperatures (>300°C) for nanowire growth Consequently, in order to investigate the versatility and potential scope of the photothermally driven nanowire growth process, we also targeted the production of group-IV semiconductor nanowires, using the same bismuth nanocrystal seeds to drive the reaction. In this scenario, colloidal bismuth nanocrystals under near-infrared irradiation once again act both as heat sources and as seeds for nanowire growth, driving the decomposition of diphenylgermane precursor to facilitate the optically driven SLS-growth of Ge nanowires (Fig. In order to demonstrate the generality of this approach, we next investigated whether indium nanocrystals could be used for laser-driven nanowire growth. While indium has been used to grow germanium nanowires via vapor-liquid-solid growth All of these processes generated SLS-grown nanowires at ambient temperatures via photothermal heating without the use of a Schlenk line, pressure vessel, insulation, or resistive heating. Specifically, the high temperatures generated by contact-free, optical heating of the metal nanocrystals rapidly drive nanowire growth without the use of any high-temperature equipment. In comparison, global resistive heating during a conventional SLS nanowire growth reaction involves an isothermal process in which the reaction vessel and chemical components are at thermal equilibrium. The versatility of this growth strategy naturally lends itself toward the integration of spectroscopic methods that could be used to study in situ nanowire growth dynamics and to rapidly tune reaction conditions. However, in all of the above nanowire growth demonstrations-using both quartz cuvettes and NMR tubes as reaction vessels-the nanowire growth solution inevitably developed convection currents due to the volume of the photothermal heating zone and variations in intensity across the Gaussian laser source relative to the solution volume. To realize the potential of this contact-free, colloidal nanocrystal-based semiconductor nanowire growth process, as a proof of principle, we demonstrated the photothermally driven growth of semiconductor nanowires using a continuous-flow reactor to circumvent problems associated with free convection and to validate laser-driven nanowire growth for future rapid screening of synthesis parameters (Fig. We first constructed an optically accessible reaction zone (Fig. where ρ s , C s , and v z are the density, heat capacity, and velocity of the solution in the flow reactor, T, z, and r are the temperature and axial and radial coordinates, and S is the source term. We solve the equation for three different regions: upstream of the irradiated region (S = 0), the region under laser irradiation (S > 0), and downstream of the laser irradiation (S = 0). At axial interfaces between these three regions, we match the temperatures and flux; at axial interfaces with inflow and outflow, we ensure the temperature is bounded as z → ±∞; for radial interfaces, we use a Robin's boundary condition based on correlations for natural conduction from a horizontal cylinder At low flow rates, that is for small Peclet numbers (Pe < 10), heat transport via both thermal conduction and thermal convection are important and cannot be neglected. The Peclet number is defined by Pe = R 1 〈v z 〉 α s ⁄ in which R 1 is the inner radius of the tube, and α s is the thermal diffusivity of the fluid (α s = k s ρ s C s ⁄ ). Thermal camera images (Fig. The analytically calculated temperature distributions for the flow reactor best match the measured temperature when the absorption efficiency and solution thermal conductivity increase over time, which would occur if either the growth of nanowires increases the absorption coefficient of the solution(73, 74)-simultaneously increasing the thermal conductivity-and/or if the reaction is exothermic, supporting the above hypotheses (SI Appendix Table We have demonstrated that photothermal heating of colloidal metal nanocrystals via laser irradiation is a versatile approach to drive the solution-based synthesis of semiconductor nanowires with both ionic and covalent character, demonstrating the versatility of this method. In these syntheses, Bi and In metal nanocrystals were used as contact-free photothermal transducers that facilitate the rapid SLS growth of semiconductor nanowires. Because these nanocrystals are dispersed in solution, rather than pinned to a substrate, they have the potential to locally superheat the solvent due to the large Young-Laplace interfacial surface pressure required to nucleate a bubble. Consequently, both temperature and gas handling constraints of the reactor are relaxed, enabling the use of low-cost quartz cuvettes or NMR tubes as benchtop reactors for nanowire synthesis. These results enable the translation from a batch process to a scalable, continuous-flow process. With further optimization, this optically driven synthesis could enable the solution-based growth of nanowires that currently cannot be synthesized in solution due to solvent boiling point limitations. In addition, photothermal heating makes rapid changes in temperature possible, which could facilitate the production of complex, heterostructured nanowires or rational dopant incorporation via solution-based methods. The ability to quickly reach high temperatures near the metal nanocrystal seed could potentially enable the nonequilibrium incorporation of atomically precise semiconductor dopants during the nanowire growth process, rather than during an additional post-synthetic doping step. Moreover, because this process can be performed on a benchtop in virtually any chemically inert, optically accessible reaction vessel, it could enable the direct integration of in situ scattering and spectroscopic techniques to study solution-based nanowire growth dynamics, rapid combinatorial scanning of new nanowire chemistries, and optimize nanowire growth conditions with real-time feedback. This laser-driven nanowire growth strategy may also enable the study of single-particle nanowire growth dynamics through scattering measurements or the combination of in situ optical spectroscopy with single-beam laser tweezers Bismuth nanocrystals were synthesized based on the protocol outlined by Wang, et al. 1 A 25 wt.% solution of PHD-co-PVP in 1-octadecene was dried over molecular sieves for one week. BiCl3 (2.6×10 -2 mmol) was mixed at 800 RPM with THF (570 μL) under nitrogen for thirty minutes. The solution of PHD-co-PVP in octadecene (6.1 mL) was added to the flask under continuous mixing at 900 RPM. The flask was cycled between nitrogen and vacuum three times. A solution of 1.0 M sodium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide in THF (825 μL) was injected, and the flask was stirred until a dark orange-brown color was observed (~10 minutes, 1100 RPM). The solution was then heated to 200°C for 17 hours, cooled, and then transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for storage. Bismuth nanocrystals were handled under nitrogen for cleaning. Nanocrystals were washed five times using a 1:4 ratio of anhydrous hexanes:ethanol and centrifugation (6800 RCF for 10 minutes) to remove excess PHD-co-PVP prior to use for nanowire growth. The average diameter of the bismuth nanocrystal seeds was 52 ± 8 nm. Indium nanocrystals were synthesized using the protocol outlined by He, et al. 2 InCl3 (1.4×10 -1 mmol) was measured in the glove box, transferred into a three-neck flask, and attached to a Schlenk line. The flask was purged with nitrogen and then transitioned between vacuum and nitrogen atmosphere three times. Oleylamine (13 mL) was added to the flask, which was heated to 100°C while mixing (1000 RPM) and then placed under vacuum for an additional 45 minutes. The mixture was blanketed with nitrogen and further heated to 160°C. A solution of 1.3 M nbutyllithium in n-heptane (1.3 mL) was injected into the flask, followed by an injection of 1.0 M Super-Hydride® solution (300 μL). The reaction was allowed to run for ten seconds, whereupon 12 mL of anhydrous toluene was injected to cool the solution and quench the reaction. At 50°C, oleic acid (400 μL) was added to stabilize the nanocrystals. Nanocrystals were then transferred into a glove box and handled under nitrogen for cleaning. Anhydrous ethanol (12 mL) was added to the dispersion, which was centrifuged at 4180 RCF for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the nanocrystals were washed with a 2:1 ratio of anhydrous hexanes:ethanol three more times. The average diameter of the indium nanocrystal seeds was 16 ± 2 nm. Laser-Driven Nanowire Growth Nanowire precursor growth solutions consisting of metal nanocrystals, molecular semiconductor precursors, and degassed solvents (squalane or ODE), were loaded into a screw-top quartz cuvette in the glove box, where the top of the cuvette was lined with Teflon and then wrapped with Parafilm to prevent oxidation of nanocrystals. Nanowire precursor growth solutions for each material system are described in the SI Appendix. The cuvette with the growth solution was transferred out of the glove box and subsequently irradiated with a polarized near-infrared fiber laser (λ=1070 nm) at a range of powers (15-70 W) and times (5-20 minutes). The resulting product was washed with a 2:1 ratio of toluene and ethanol, collected by centrifugation at 19,000 RCF, dispersed in toluene, and washed two more times. For details of photothermal nanowire growth under continuous flow, see the SI Appendix. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were acquired with a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 Supertwin TEM operating with a 200-kV accelerating voltage and were analyzed using ImageJ Software. X-ray diffraction (XRD) scans were collected using a Bruker D8 Discover equipped with an IμS 2-D XRD detector system and were analyzed using EVA software. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was performed with a Perkin Elmer Optima 8300 spectrophotometer. UV-vis extinction spectra were collected using an Agilent Cary 60 UV-vis spectrophotometer. Time-dependent infrared thermal imaging was performed with a FLIR A325sc camera using the 0-350°C temperature range setting, and the resulting videos were analyzed using ResearchIR software. The SI Appendix contains additional information regarding experimental methods, analytical heat transport models of nanocrystals and nanowires, finite-element heat transport solutions, and the analytical heat transport derivation of the continuous flow reactor. A 1.0 M stock solution of TOP:Se was prepared in a nitrogen-filled glove box by stirring 238 mg of Se in 5 mL of TOP overnight, until dissolved. Nanowire Precursor Solutions for Photothermal Nanowire Growth All nanowire precursor growth solutions were prepared and mixed under a nitrogen atmosphere in a quartz cuvette, which was lined with a thin layer of Teflon tape prior to sealing with a screw cap. The cap was then wrapped with Parafilm to avoid inadvertent nanocrystal oxidation. The Bi-seeded CdSe nanowire precursor growth solution was prepared under a nitrogen atmosphere in a quartz cuvette. 50 μL of a Bi nanocrystal dispersion (1.34 mg elemental Bi/L) in hexane, 125 μL of Cd-oleate (0.15 M in 1-ODE), and 213 μL of TOP:Se (1.0 M in 1-ODE)were combined and mixed in a screw-top quartz cuvette. The Bi-seeded Ge nanowire precursor growth solution was prepared under a nitrogen atmosphere in a quartz cuvette. 50 μL of a Bi nanocrystal dispersion (1.34 mg elemental Bi/L) in hexane, 100 μL of diphenylgermane (DPG), and 150 μL of squalane were combined and mixed in a screw-top quartz cuvette. The Bi-seeded Ge nanowire precursor growth solution was prepared under a nitrogen atmosphere in a quartz cuvette. 50 μL of an In nanocrystal dispersion in hexane, 100 μL of diphenylgermane (DPG), and 150 μL of squalane were combined and mixed in a screw-top quartz cuvette. For a typical continuous flow-based, photothermally driven nanowire growth synthesis, a glass tube with an inner diameter, outer diameter, and length of 4 mm, 5 mm, and 95 mm, respectively, was sealed under a nitrogen atmosphere with two small rubber septa. The reaction vessel was prefilled with degassed 1-octadecene to displace all nitrogen prior to injection of the nanowire growth solution. The nanowire precursor growth solution, consisting of 60 μL of a Bi nanocrystal dispersion (1.34 mmol/L), 750 μL of Cd-oleate (0.15 M), 1.3 mL of TOP:Se (1.0 M), and 240 μL of degassed 1-ODE, was prepared in a nitrogen-filled glove box and loaded into a syringe. The needle of the precursor syringe was inserted through a rubber septum leading into the reaction vessel and the syringe was fixed onto a syringe pump in order to control the flow rate (5 mL/hr). A second needle was inserted into the other rubber septum on the exit side of the reaction vessel, leading to a glass vial used to collect the nanowire product. Prior to injecting the nanowire precursor growth solution, the laser was aligned to irradiate the center of the reaction vessel. After injecting the glass reactor vessel with the nanowire precursor solution, the reactor was irradiated with a polarized, near-infrared fiber laser (λ=1070 nm) at 5 W. The product was washed with a 2:1:1 ratio of toluene:chloroform:ethanol, collected by centrifugation at 19,000 RCF, dispersed into toluene, and washed two more times prior to sample characterization. To analyze heating of an isolated nanocrystal and metal-tipped nanowire under irradiation, we employed the analytical solutions outlined in previous publications. in which ρ s , C s , and k s are the density, specific heat, and the thermal conductivity of the fluid, respectively, v z is the velocity of the fluid, r is the radial position, and R 1 is the inner radius of the tube (R 1 = 1.615 mm). The heat source function, S, is the rate of heat generation per unit volume due to the laser illumination over the region z 1 ≤ z ≤ z 2 . The dominant resistance to heat transfer to the surroundings is that between the outer surface (at r = R 2 = 2 mm) and the surrounding air at temperature T ∞ , so the boundary condition at the surface is given by where the heat transfer coefficient is given by(4), 2 R 2 h k air = 0.32. There is a very extensive literature related to this type of problem since Graetz in which the dimensionless heat source function is The wall boundary condition becomes ∂θ ∂ξ (1, ζ) = -Bi θ(1, ζ), where the Biot number is For the geometry and properties of our capillary system we obtain Pe = 1.81. This low Peclet number indicates that there is significant axial conduction. Jerri and Davis(8) solved Eq. ( The heated region here extended from approximately z 1 = 10. In addition, we have the conditions θ -(ξ, ζ → -∞) = bounded, and θ + (ξ, ζ → -∞) = bounded. We look for solutions of the form θ(ξ, ζ) = X(ξ)e (rζ) , This yields the following solutions with and θ + = ∑ A l + e r n ζ X n (λ n ξ) ∞ n=1 and I m is the integral