The electronic structure in unconventional superconductors holds a key to understand the momentum-dependent pairing interactions and the resulting superconducting gap function. In superconducting Fe-based chalcogenides, there have been controversial results regarding the importance of the kz dependence of the electronic dispersion, the gap structure and the pairing mechanisms of iron-based superconductivity. Here, we present a detailed investigation of the van der Waals interaction in FeSe and its interplay with magnetic disorder and real space structural properties. Using density functional theory we show that they need to be taken into account upon investigation of the 3-dimensional effects, including non-trivial topology, of FeSe1-xTex and FeSe1-xSx systems. In addition, the impact of paramagnetic (PM) disorder is considered within the spin-space average approach. Our calculations show that the PM relaxed structure supports the picture of different competing ordered magnetic states in the nematic regime, yielding magnetic frustration. Among the several types of Fe-based superconductors (FeSC) discovered so far, FeSe has the simplest crystal structure consisting only of superconducting layers. This system turns out to be unique not only due to its structural properties but also due to the lack of any magnetic transition at ambient pressure Although electronic correlations are relatively strong in Fe-based superconductors, the application of density functional theory (DFT) has proven to reliably provide insights into their physical properties. The band structure calculations correctly predict the main electronic properties for most of the Fe-based superconductors including their Fermi surface topology, structural and magnetic transitions and the possible strength of electronphonon interactions In most of the Fe-based superconductors the magnetic ground state is in DFT and experiment given by the Ctype anti-ferromagnetic order (often dubbed as stripetype anti-ferromagnetic (sAFM) order) Especially the complex pressure dependent phase diagram of FeSe is highly debated As we know from previous works, superconductivity in FeSe is quite sensitive to structural changes, in particular to the height of the Se-atoms above the iron layer, z Se The paper is organized as follows. In section II we describe the PM and vdW extensions to standard DFT calculations. In section III the implementation of paramagnetic DFT is discussed. In section IV we compare two different vdW-correction schemes in application to FeSe for the sAFM and the PM state. Finally, we summarize our results in Section V. In contrast to experiment, standard DFT predicts the sAFM state to be stable in FeSe and is commonly used although other magnetic stats are close in energy. Due to this degeneracy the competition of several magnetic configurations may yield frustration and prevent the stability of long-rang magnetic order in FeSe. It is well known that the presence of magnetic order and disorder has a strong effect on the structural properties of Fe-based materials Due to convergence issues with automatized relaxation algorithms for the ionic positions and the magnetic moments, the height of Se-atoms with respect to the iron layer (z Se ), the volume and c/a ratio were relaxed sequentially. Moreover constrained magnetic moments are used, where both direction and magnitude are constrained, to avoid non-magnetic (NM) final structures. To calculate the local magnetic moments an integral over a sphere Ω I , which depends on a radius given by the chosen structure and the volume of the unit cell (UC) in particular, is taken. This system specific radius is chosen in such a way, that 98% of the UC is used for evaluating the magnetic moment, what also leads to an overlap of some of those spheres within the UC. To get the magnetic moment m opt that is energetically preferred by the system, we fit the total energy to a polynomial function which is the simplest form of the Landau free energy expansion. FeSe is a compound with strongly different polarizabilities, thus the distribution of Fe and Se atoms yields different interlayer and intralayer vdW contributions. Therefore we have carefully investigated the interdependence of vdW interactions and modifications of all lattice parameters. In order to resolve this interdependence, we have chosen two different vdW approaches. On the one hand, the DFT-D2 approach of Grimme In general the vdW interactions are introduced by adding a semi-phenomenological correction E vdW to the standard DFT energy given by where s is a global scaling factor depending on the chosen exchange-correlation functional and usually obtained by least-square fits for the total energy deviations of different test samples (see The main difference between those two approaches is the choice of the C 6,AB parameters. For DFT-D2 least square fits of experimentally found atomic C 6 parameters given by the dipole oscillation strength distribution method (DOSD) are taken to generate the C 6 parameters for the calculations For the DFT-TS method the C 6,AA parameters are derived from the parameters for one free standing atom of the same species given by where the index "at" marks properties of the free standing atom. All quantities without the index refer to the effective parameters of the full system. The C at 6,AA are taken from Ref. with where the sum over n at B (r) is the so called promolecule electronic density. As a combination rule for C 6 parameters DFT-TS uses the expression The calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab-Initio Simulation Package (VASP) To investigate the disordered magnetic phase, we constrain the magnetic moments of the Fe-atoms as described in the previous section. To compare the influence of disorder to the structural properties, we also calculate the equilibrium state structural parameters for the sAFM state for comparison. As explained later in the section, the cell shape is in the PM calculations not fully converged. Since the differences in structure and energy for each calculation step are small, we took a snapshot after 9 complete minimization steps for the following analysis. The exemplary results for one used SQS spin setup are illustrated in Fig. Here the transition from the NM state at V = 75 Å 3 to the PM state at V = 95 Å 3 can be clearly seen. Only by constraining the magnetic moments, the smooth phase transition can be investigated. Extracting the minimal energy values and corresponding magnetic moments, we calculate the equilibrium volume for each SQS. Since several SQS's are required to get sufficient statistics for the PM average, the energy-volumes curves for the mean of three SQS's are shown for one exemplary relaxations step in Fig. Moreover, the obtained fit to the Rose-Vinet equation of states It should also be noticed, that the total energy per atom at the equilibrium for the PM state is about 30 meV larger than that one for the sAFM state. It indicates that the PM state is not predicted as the ground state in the present DFT approach, but would only become stabilized by magnetic entropy. However, the PM calculations include constrained magnetic moments, thus the total energy includes a penalty which is also in the order of 10 meV. Since a competition of several short range magnetic orders is also considered to drive the PM state in the nematic region Although the equilibrium volume changes only by less than 1% for the PM state compared to the that of the sAFM one later discussed for Fig. As an interim summary we see that the magnetic moment gives a smooth transition from the NM to the PM state, without any convergence issues for the magnetic moments. By introducing the PM state, the interlayer interactions are reduced compared to the sAFM state and not able to glue both FeSe-layers together, resulting in a quasi-free behavior of those layers. It also explains that the cell shape in our calculations never converges. We observe both layers drifting apart for each minimization step with no significant change in total energy, caused by missing interlayer attraction. This indicates that magnetic interactions are not able to explain the interlayer coupling in this compound for a disordered magnetic state. Since the magnetic moment of the Featoms in the PM state is comparable to that of the sAFM calculations, the covalent bonds are considered to not explain the interlayer attraction, however, a minimum in the total energy is observed for the sAFM state. To account for the interlayer attraction mentioned in the previous section, we include vdW forces for the PM state. In order to decouple it from magnetic disorder and due to numerical efficiency, however, we start the analysis of vdW corrections for the sAFM state. For that part we investigate the structural response for the DFT-D2 and the DFT-TS approach, where we analyse the performance of these methods by analyzing the response to volume and shape changes for FeSe. The sAFM ordered magnetic configuration is known to be the magnetic ground state of many other FeSC's In DFT and ab initio thermodynamics it is required to analyze the energetics of materials as a function of volume. Here, we particularly use this dependence to investigate the origin of the electronic interlayer and intralayer interactions. If both interactions are of the same origin and magnitude, the ratio between the lattice constants a and c is expected to change only weakly after a cell-shape relaxation. Moreover, z Se should be proportional to changes in the volume. For the volume dependent calculations we relax the cell shape as well as the ionic positions simultaneously. Although the full relaxation may lead in special cases to slightly different positions and energy values due to changing numbers of plane waves in the calculation, we do not find any significant changes of the structure compared to relaxing one quantity after another. The total energy behavior in Fig. We will discuss below to what degree the nearly similar optimal volume for DFT-D2 and DFT-TS is coincidence or indicating the similarity of the implemented physical concepts. For non-vdW calculations the deviation of the lattice constant a from the experimental value is only about 1%, yet the lattice parameter c is ∼ 13% too large. This indicates that the failure of the uncorrected DFT Hamiltonian primarily affects the interlayer interactions. As discussed below the smaller vdW corrected volume can be explained by an overestimation of intralayer interactions. The missing interlayer interaction for non-vdW calculations is also reflected in the bulk modulus B non-vdW 0 = 3.86 GPa, which is approximately an order of magnitude smaller than the vdW values of B DFT-D2 0 = 30.12 GPa and B DFT-TS 0 = 33.12 GPa. The later are in the same region as the experimental values A minor effect is the volume expansion due to temperature. Since the experimental values are measured at room temperature, the volume at T = 0 K will be reduced. Indeed other works on 11-compounds show that the volume decreases with decreasing temperature Comparing the lattice parameters for non-vdW, the DFT-D2 and DFT-TS corrections in Fig. However, the lattice parameters of the vdW corrected calculations in a-direction are ≈ 3% smaller than the experimental ones. This has also consequences for the c/a ratio. Compared to non-vdW calculations it is reduced, due to the interlayer layer effect of vdW interactions. Since at the same time the intralayer interactins are overestimated, the c/a ratio is still larger than the experimental value. To investigate the intralayer interactions in detail, we additionally calculate an isolated FeSe layer in vacuum, i. e., a case where by construction no interlayer interactions occur. In Fig. While the intralayer lattice constant a is almost identical for the bulk and the isolated layer, the two systems show a pronounced difference on the internal structure parameter z Se . Switching the interlayer interaction off, systematicall increases this parameter compared to the bulk compound (see Fig. Next we systematically analyze the structural impact of the volume reduction from the non-vdW optimized volume at V non-vdW min = 86.931 Å 3 to the corrected volume (compare Fig. In the first place, the reduction in volume is connected with a reduction in the c/a ratio to match the experimental values. As can be seen in Fig. For even larger volumes, the lattice parameter a and z Se are nearly constant for the non-vdW curve, what is caused by vanishing interlayer bonds. As the lattice parameter in c-direction steadily increases for increasing volume, the Fe-layers drift apart. This behavior corresponds to the well known exfoliation of graphene When approaching the experimental volume at V exp min = 78.679 Å 3 the slopes of the c/a ratios for the vdW approaches are reduced compared to the region of higher volumes. This effect is strongest for the DFT-TS method. As the cell is compressed, the overestimation of the intralayer vdW attraction causes now a stronger decrease of the lattice parameter a, whereas the value in c-direction is less influenced. The same effect is also reflected in the steep slope of z Se in Fig. In the volume region around V ≈ 70 Å 3 , which is close to the vdW optimized volumes of DFT-D2 and DFT-TS, the structural parameters for the DFT-D2 and DFT-TS method and in particular the c/a ratio are similar. Therefore, the effects of interlayer and intralayer vdW corrections are comparable for both approaches. The difference in the total energy, however, is still large (see. Fig. By looking at the complete volume region, the DFT-D2 and DFT-TS approaches, i.e., their different treatment of the Hirschfeld partitioning and geometrical composition, imply significantly different behaviors. While the lattice parameters for the DFT-D2 agree for some volumes even less with experiment than the non-vdW ones, the values of the DFT-TS approach are overall closer to the experiment. The z Se parameter is within DFT-D2 for large volumes close to the experimental value, but the largely reduced gradient of z Se with respect to volume as compared to DFT-TS indicates a cancellation of interactions. Similar to the assessment of exchange correlation functionals in DFT The PM vdW corrected calculations are similar to those from Sec. III. In contrast to the non-vdW calculations, the minimization of the total energy is resulting into a well defined equilibrium volume, due to the correct description of the interlayer binding. The converged optimal structural parameters are illustrated in Fig. To investigate the electronic band dispersion we take the NM calculations with structural parameters obtained by experiments For the vdW corrected calculations the changes in the real space structure are also reflected in the electronic dispersion. Comparing the band dispersion with and without vdW corrections, the sizable k z -dependence of the Fe 3d-orbitals is indeed found, consistent with previous works Comparing both vdW approaches for FeSe (presumptive for all 11-based FeSC), the electronic band dispersion turns out to be very similar. Most important is that the enhancement of the interlayer interaction, which is in agreement with considerations of other works claiming vdW interactions to be important for FS reconstructions Based on a systematic DFT study, we show that the delicate interplay between the real space structure of FeSe and the resulting electronic dispersion requires the inclusion of vdW interactions and spin-disorder (PM). The introduced interlayer attraction makes FeSe a much more 3-dimensional material in ab initio calculations and agrees with recent ARPES experiments Moreover, the fact that those magnetic structures lead to the very same structural properties substantiate the presence of competing magnetic orders in the nematic phase 