Despite many advances towards improving the stability of organic photovoltaic devices, environmental degradation under ambient conditions remains a challenging obstacle for future application. Particularly conventional systems employing fullerene derivatives are prone to oxidise under illumination, limiting their applicability. Herein, we report on the environmental stability of the small molecule donor DRCN5T together with the fullerene acceptor PC70BM. We find that this system exhibits exceptional device stability, mainly due to almost constant short-circuit current. By employing ultrafast femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy we attribute this remarkable stability to two separate mechanisms: 1) DRCN5T exhibits high intrinsic resistance towards external factors, showing no signs of deterioration. 2) The highly sensitive PC70BM is stabilised against degradation by the presence of DRCN5T through ultrafast long-range energy transfer to the donor, rapidly quenching the fullerene excited states which are otherwise precursors for chemical oxidation. We propose that this photoprotective mechanism be utilised to improve the device stability of other systems, including non-fullerene acceptors and ternary blends. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) have seen rapid performance improvements in the last five years, now achieving power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 16%. In this work, we demonstrate that the representative SM system DRCN5T:PC70BM exhibits superior stability relative to many other polymer:PC70BM OPV systems. We show that this is due to a photoprotective mechanism effected by the donor molecule that suppresses the degradation of the fullerene acceptor. This photoprotective effect is enabled by two factors: (1) the intrinsically high photostability of the donor molecule, even in the presence of oxygen and (2) efficient and ultrafast energy transfer from the PC70BM acceptor to the donor SM, which effectively quenches the high energy excited state on the fullerene, preventing its photooxidation. It is noteworthy that recent reports have identified fullerene degradation as a major limitation to the stability of OPV devices, The chemical structures of DRCN5T and PC70BM, along with the inverted architecture structure of the investigated solar cells are illustrated in Figure Figure Having investigated the stability of the constituent materials, we turn our attention to the degradation of the OPV blend system. Figure We note that the acceptor is not exclusively excited at this wavelength, but the absorption of the donor is minimal in comparison. The three components resulting from spectral reconstruction with GA are shown in Figure Excitation of PC70BM gives rise to an ultrafast and long-range energy transfer to DRCN5T, enabled by spectral overlap of PC70BM emission and DRCN5T absorption (Figure The observations show that exciton formation and diffusion, electron transfer at the interfaces, and charge separation in DRCN5T:PC70BM devices is unaffected by the presence of oxygen or light. However, the observation of a stable short-circuit current suggests that also the transport of charges to the electrodes remains largely unaffected, suggesting no significant changes to the active layer microstructure. To confirm this, we employed 2D-XRD measurements to determine the microstructure and crystallinity of the blend before and after degradation (see Figure The presence of an efficient, ultrafast energy transfer has fascinating implications for the photophysics of this material system. In this case, the excitation of fullerene molecules does not result in a hole transfer to the donor, since charge transfer occurs on a timescale of ~10 ps, while energy transfer is far faster, on a sub-ps timescale. It is important to note that this does not prevent the absorption by the acceptor from contributing to photocurrent. Instead photocurrent is generated through electron transfer from the donor that follows the energy transfer process. By designing novel photovoltaic systems with complementary absorption to facilitate such energy transfer, one can maintain the contributions of both active layer components, while eliminating the limitations originating from the instability of fullerene or other wide-bandgap acceptors. Energy transfer also makes material insensitive to the rate of hole transfer and allows to focus the material design exclusively on the optimization of electron transfer. Additionally, long-range energy transfer can assist in current generation by directed exciton transport to a donor:acceptor interface in contrast to range-limited, random exciton diffusion. In this work, we conclude that the SM:fullerene system DRCN5T:PC70BM is remarkably stable under continuous illumination in ambient conditions, evidenced by an unprecedentedly consistent JSC. We rationalise this observation with two arguments: 1) DRCN5T itself is photophysically very stable and shows no signs of degradation aside from a minor photobleaching effect. 2) The inherent instability of PC70BM is overcome by ultrafast energy transfer from the fullerene to the small molecule preventing the otherwise detrimental effect of high energy excitations on the acceptor. These results highlight the superior stability of small molecule OPV materials, which should influence future strategy in the pursuit of efficient and stable material systems. Furthermore, consideration of complementary donor and acceptor molecules for design of blends that are specifically capable of ultrafast, long-range energy transfer can greatly improve the stability of the entire system. Finally, incorporation of DRCN5T into a ternary blend consisting of high-bandgap materials could lead much more stable device performance. DRCN5T and PC70BM were purchased from Ossila and Solenne. Zinc acetate dihydrate as a precursor to ZnO was bought from Sigma Aldrich. All the materials were used as received without further purification. The investigated organic solar cells were fabricated on pre-cut glass substrates, patterned with ITO as bottom electrode (PsiOTec Ltd., UK). After cleaning by subsequent sonication in acetone and isopropanol the substrates were transferred to a plasma cleaner for oxygen treatment. For inverted architecture devices, a thin ZnO layer (~50 nm) was spin-coated from solution and annealed for 30 minutes at 200 °C based on previously reported procedures. The active layer with a thickness of 100 nm was spin-coated from a chloroform solution of mixed DRCN5T:PC70BM in a weight ratio of 15 mg ml -1 :12.5 mg ml -1 . After thermal annealing for 10 mins at 120 °C on a hotplate and subsequent solvent vapour annealing for 60 s in a Petri dish with saturated chloroform atmosphere, the substrates were transferred into a thermal evaporator (10 -7 mbar) for deposition of 10 nm MoO3 and 80 nm Ag. For all oxygen degradation studies, the OSCs were prepared the same way as mentioned above, stored in a nitrogen filled glovebox, and transferred to a sealed environmental box without exposure to ambient air. A constant flow of nitrogen was connected to the environmental box. The oxygen percentage was controlled by adjusting the relative flow rate of O2 to N2, and was continuously monitored by a zirconia sensor (Cambridge Sensotet, Rapidox 2100). All the samples were aged under simulated AM 1.5 sunlight at 100 mW cm -2 irradiance (ABET Sunlite Current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of the photovoltaic devices were measured using a Keithley 2450 Source Measure Unit. J-V curves of the photovoltaics were recorded under an AM 1.5 G light illumination (100 mW cm -2 ) using an ABET Sunlite 11002 solar simulator, which was adjusted in intensity to compensate for the spectral mismatch between the spectral output and the spectral response of both the DRCN5T:PC71BM device and the reference Si cell (NIST traceable, VLSI). The EQE was measured with the monochromatic light of a halogen lamp from 350 to 800 nm, which was calibrated with a NIST-traceable Si diode (Thorlabs). Films of DRCN5T and PC70BM (15 mg mL -1 and 12.5 mg mL -1 respectively) were spin-coated on glass substrates in a N2-filled glovebox and measured at room temperature with a JASCO UV-Vis V670 spectrometer. Samples for TA measurements were prepared identically to the active layers of solar cells. Since this system does not exhibit electric-field induced charge generation Films of DRCN5T and PC70BM (15 mg mL -1 and 12.5 mg mL -1 , respectively) were spin-coated on glass/ITO/ZnO substrates in a N2-filled glovebox. UPS measurements were performed using a double-differentially pumped He discharge lamp (hν = 21.22 eV) with a pass energy of 2 eV. During data collection the samples were biased at -5 V in order to measure the onset of the secondary electrons. For transient photocurrent measurements, the light of an inorganic LED (Thorlabs TO-1 3/4, λ = 465 nm) was pulsed by a function generator (Agilent/Keysight 33510B) and focused on the solar cell. An oscilloscope (Picoscope 5443A) with a 50 Ω terminator placed across the oscilloscope input was used to measure the transient photocurrent. XRD measurements of the films on glass/ITO substrates were conducted on a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer with a 9 kW rotating copper anode, equipped with a 0.5mmf collimator. The 2D diffraction pattern was collected with a HyPix3000 detector at a sample-detector distance of 110mm in a coupled Q/2Q scan from 0°-15°. Diffraction patterns were background corrected by substracting a measurement of the bare substrate.