Magnetoresistive (xMR) sensors find extensive application in science and industry, replacing Hall sensors in various low field environments. While there have been some efforts in increasing the dynamic field range of xMR sensors, Hall sensors remain to dominate high field applications due to their wide linear range. Using a perpendicular magnetized reference system and an in-plane free layer allows us to overcome this disadvantage of xMR sensors, and, furthermore, investigate spin-canting effects in interlayer exchange coupled perpendicular synthetic antiferromagnets (p-SAF). We created p-SAFs with exchange coupling fields of up to 10 kOe, based on magnetic Co/Pt multilayer systems. The p-SAFs are either designed as "single" p-SAFs, where two Co/Pt multilayers are interlayer exchange coupled via a 4 Å thick Ru spacer, or as "double" p-SAFs, where an additional Co layer is interlayer exchange coupled to the top multilayer. These p-SAFs are used for giant magnetoresistance (GMR) sensors with wide dynamic field range. By using a p-SAF as the reference system and employing an in-plane magnetic layer as the GMR's free layer, the linear range can be effectively increased limited only by the p-SAF's switching fields. Additionally, the magnetic anisotropy of the in-plane free layer is fully controlled, which allows saturation fields by design. With this, the entire spectrum from parallel to antiparallel alignment of free and reference layer is exploited, which yields the full GMR signal potential. Different configurations were investigated, ranging from free layer magnetic saturation at lower to far higher fields than the p-SAF's switching fields. We can show through micromagnetic simulations that certain GMR transfer curves are dominated by spin-canting effects in the interlayer exchange coupled reference system. Finally, our simulation results lay out the correlation of the p-SAF's design parameters and its magnetization reversal behavior. Magnetoresistive (xMR) effects, such as the giant (GMR) Films were deposited onto thermally oxidized silicon (100) substrates in a BESTEC magnetron-sputtering chamber with a base pressure of 1×10 -8 mbar. Argon was used as a sputter gas during the deposition process with a pressure of 5×10 -3 mbar at room temperature. For this work, two different types of p-SAF reference systems were fabricated, which differ in their number of interlayer exchange coupling spacer layers Figure shows abrupt changes at the fields of p-SAF layer switching. The FL is designed to magnetically saturate around 9 kOe, which can be seen in the magnetization curves (Fig. Using the structures mentioned above, we systematically changed H k of the FL for single and double p-SAF GMR systems, as shown in Fig. Depending on the magnetic moments within the double p-SAF structures, either L mid or the outer layers, L bot and L top , switch first. The difference is shown in Fig. In Fig. To understand the experimentally obtained magnetization reversal processes and the corresponding GMR of Fig. In the micromagnetic simulations single ferromagnetic layers with the properties of the p-SAF multilayers are computed. The modeling is started with a positive external saturation field of 30 kOe with all layers pointing in the +z direction. The field is applied with an angle of 5 • with respect to the easy axis to avoid metastable states. Then, the magnetic field magnitude is decreased stepwise in -0.5 kOe increments to -30 kOe and back to +30 kOe. After each field-step the micromagnetic state of the system is relaxed for single p-SAF double p-SAF -10 0 10 100 ns. Note, that the variation of the applied field in the modeling work is performed much faster than that used during the acquisition of the measurement data. However, because a high damping constant (α = 1.0) is used in the modeling work, a stationary state is obtained within 100 ns, such that the modeled loops are representative for the experimental loops. To qualitatively model the GMR Note, that for simplicity the free layer magnetization is not simulated. Instead it is modeled with a generic tanh function, where the thickness, the saturation field and the saturation magnetization of the free layer are chosen according to the measured sensor stacks (see Fig. With the spin-chain model and the material parameters of Tab. I we obtain an excellent qualitative agreement with the measurements in both the magnetization data as well as in the GMR, as illustrated in Fig. In the following we will make a more systematic anal- ysis of the influences of the most important parameters for the double p-SAF structures. Based on the reference parameters of Tab. I (underlined values if more than one is given) we start with the saturation magnetization of the layers and vary that of L top in the range of 1.19 kemu/cm 3 to 1.95 kemu/cm 3 and that of L mid in the range of 0.88 kemu/cm 3 to 1.39 kemu/cm 3 , while keeping the properties of L bot constant. In both cases a step size of ∆M S = 0.02 kemu/cm 3 is used. -20 0 20 -20 0 20 FIG. (see Fig. Obviously, the two regions show either the middle p-SAF layer or the outer two ones being aligned with the external field. In contrast to Figs. To gain deeper insights into the magnetization dynamics, we investigate three phase points of Fig. This reduction implicitly assumes a parallel alignment of L top and L bot , which is not strictly true at least during the reversal. But this simplified picture is much more instructive and most importantly it is sufficient to characterize the magnetization dynamics correctly. In the middle column of Fig. A typical hysteresis loop for region I in Fig. For even lower M S,mid we see an abrupt increase of ∆H C in Fig. But not only the saturation magnetization has an influence on the hysteresis of the double p-SAF. However, since a systematic analysis of all possible influences goes beyond the scope of this work, we will exemplarily discuss the variation of the effective magnetic anisotropies of the bottom and the middle layer with constant K eff,top = -0.01 Merg/cm 3 in the following. Figure In conclusion, we have developed p-SAFs with up to 10 kOe exchange fields based on Co/Pt multilayers, using both single and double structures for interlayer exchange coupling. These p-SAFs were implemented in GMR sensors with perpendicular reference layer and in-plane free layer, yielding up to 8 kOe dynamic field range. We designed different free layer systems, further utilizing Co/Pt multilayers, which yield varied magnetic anisotropies in out-of-plane fields. In combination with our p-SAF structures, the magnetic anisotropy variation revealed spin-canting effects in the interlayer exchange coupled reference system, predominantly in the double p-SAF GMR sensors. Micromagnetic simulations based on finite-element spin-chain models further investigated spin-canting effects and p-SAF switching behavior in respect to individual layer saturation magnetization and magnetic anisotropy. Experimental data and simulation results highly agree with one another. The results provide a better understanding of magnetoresistive sensor design and design potentials. However, while double p-SAFs offer a very large design flexibility, one needs to be very careful that uncontrollable variations in the material properties due to the growth of the structure, do not lead to undesired effects. This study has been supported by the Austrian Science Fund under Grant I2214-N20, and is gratefully acknowledged. The support of the CD-Labor AMSEN (financed by the Federal Ministry of Economics, Family and Youth, the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development) is acknowledged. of-plane magnetization of all samples was measured in a SQUID-VSM magnetometer and a polar MOKE setup at room temperature.