We have studied a nearly stoichiometric insulating Y 0.97(2) Cr 0.98(2) O 3.00(2) single crystal by performing measurements of magnetization, heat capacity, and neutron diffraction. Albeit that the YCrO3 compound behaves like a soft ferromagnet with a coersive force of ∼0.05 T, there exist strong antiferromagnetic (AFM) interactions between Cr 3+ spins due to a strongly negative paramagnetic Curie-Weiss temperature, i.e., -433.2(6) K. The coexistence of ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism may indicate a canted AFM structure. The AFM phase transition occurs at TN = 141.5(1) K, which increases to TN(5T) = 144.5(1) K at 5 T. Within the accuracy of the present neutrondiffraction studies, we determined a G-type AFM structure with a propagation vector k = (1 1 0) and Cr 3+ spin directions along the crystallographic c axis of the orthorhombic structure with space group Pnma below TN. At 12 K, the refined moment size is 2.45(6) μB, ∼82% of the theoretical saturation value 3 μB. The Cr 3+ spin interactions are probably two-dimensional Ising like within the reciprocal (1 1 0) scattering plane. Below TN, the lattice configuration (a, b, c, and V ) deviates largely downward from the Grüneisen law, displaying an anisotropic magnetostriction effect and a magnetoelastic effect. Especially, the sample contraction upon cooling is enhanced below the AFM transition temperature. There is evidence to suggest that the actual crystalline symmetry of YCrO3 compound is probably lower than the currently assumed one. Additionally, we compared the t2g YCrO3 and the eg La 7/8 Sr 1/8 MnO3 single crystals for a further understanding of the reason for the possible symmetry lowering. Magnetic materials with ferroelectricity are very interesting because a spontaneous electric polarization exists within them to give the substance extraordinary physical and electronic properties and a wide variety of applications such as data storage, catalysts, fuel cells, and sensors Most ferroelectric materials are perovskite-based oxides. In 1954, Looby and Katz replaced lanthanum in LaCrO 3 compound with yttrium during searching for new perovskite-type families and synthesized the YCrO 3 compound with an impurity of ∼2.5% Cr 2 O 3 using NaCl as the flux under a hydrogen atmosphere In this paper, we have synthesized a centimeter-sized YCrO 3 single crystal with a laser diode floating-zone (FZ) furnace The preparation of polycrystalline samples of YCrO 3 compound has been described previously in detail We measured resistivity, magnetization, and heat capacity of the YCrO 3 samples with a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS Dyna- Cool instrument). Resistivity measurements were carried out with the standard four-probe method at zero field from 2 to 300 K. The dc magnetization measurements at an applied-magnetic field of 0.01 T were carried out with two modes from 5 to 295 K: One was after cooling with zero magnetic field (ZFC), and the other was under the applied-magnetic field (FC). Magnetic hysteresis loop from 7 to -7 T and then back to 7 T was measured at 2 K. Heat capacities were measured at 0 (2-273 K) and 5 T (2-205 K). We pulverized one grown YCrO 3 single crystal (∼4 g) with a Vibratory Micro Mill (FRITSCH PUL-VERISETTE 0) and performed a time-of-flight neutron-TABLE I. Theoretical quantum numbers of YCrO3 compound: spin S, orbital L, total angular momentum J, as well as the ground-state term 2S+1 LJ . Due to a quenching by the hosted crystal field, the actual orbital angular momentum L = 0 for the 3d ions in most cases, leading to the Landé factor gJ = 2. We also summarized the theoretical (theo.) and measured (meas.) [Fig. By quantitative ICP-OES measurements, we determined the chemical compositions of the studied single crystal as Y 0.97(2) Cr 0.98(2) O 3.00 We tried to measure possible resistivity in the YCrO 3 single crystals with a multimeter at room temperature. Unfortunately, it was beyond the maximum range (10 6 ohm) of the ohmmeter. In addition, our attempt to measure it by the standard four-probe method with our PPMS DynaCool system from 2 to 300 K was fruitless. Therefore, we conclude that the YCrO 3 compound is a robust insulator in our studied temperature range. A deeper understanding of the electronic states of conducting VO Fig. We calculated the inverse magnetic susceptibility χ -1 = μ 0 H/M as shown in Fig. where C is the Curie constant, θ CW is the PM Curie temperature, N A = 6.022 × 10 23 mol -1 is the Avogadro's number, μ eff = gμ B J(J + 1) is the effective PM moment, and k B = 1.38062 × 10 -23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant. The fit by Eq. ( Figure Figure Albeit that the magnetization and heat capacity measurements show FM behaviors below T N , the net magnetic interaction strength inside YCrO 3 compound is of strongly AFM because θ CW = -433.2(6) K, indicating a complex low-temperature magnetic structure. To make the nature of the observed weak ferromagnetism clear and explore possible structural phase transitions in the YCrO 3 single crystal, we performed a timeof-flight neutron-powder diffraction study. The results were shown in Fig. Within the present experimental accuracy, we can only determine a G-type AFM structure as shown in Fig. Figure An orientated YCrO 3 single crystal with the (H K 0) reciprocal-lattice vector in the scattering plane was used to perform a single-crystal neutron diffraction study on the D23 single-crystal diffractometer (ILL, France). Figure At 195 and 300 K, the observed Bragg (1 1 0) reflection forbidden structurally by the Pnma symmetry was treated to be from a pure nuclear contribution. The temperature variation of this contribution depends mainly on the thermal dynamic vibrations of related atoms, i.e., Debye-Waller (DW) factors. The falloff of the temperature-weakened intensity at a certain scattering vector Q almost decays exponentially and can be estimated by where the exponential part is the DW factor, and where = 1.054589 × 10 -34 J.s is the Planck constant divided by 2π, M is the atomic mass, and Z(ω) is the phonon density of states where Θ W is the effective Debye temperature where T N is the value of the Néel temperature, and β is the critical exponent. Our fit with Eq. ( ences exist in the values of the refined T N and β, which validates our choice of the temperature range of 125-140 K for the final fitting. As shown in Fig. The refined lattice parameters a, b, and c, as well as the unit-cell volume V, from our time-of-flight neutronpowder diffraction studies were shown in Fig. As in the foregoing discussions, the YCrO 3 compound is an insulator. We thus neglected the electronic contribution to the thermal expansion of its lattice configuration (ε). The temperature variation of the nonmagnetic contribution component is then mainly from phonons. This can approximately be estimated according to the Grüneisen rules at zero pressure with a second-order fashion where ε 0 is the lattice parameter at zero Kelvin, and the internal energy U can be calculated with the Debye approximations where N = 5 is the number of atoms per formula unit, and Θ D is the Debye temperature. With Eqs. ( I. Comparison between t2g YCrO3 and eg La 7/8 Sr 1/8 MnO3 compounds As shown in Fig. As shown in Figs. In summary, we have grown a nearly stoichiometric Y 0.97(2) Cr 0.98(2) O 3.00(2) single crystal by a laser diode FZ furnace. There are three electrons locating on the 3d t 2g orbitals of Cr 3+ ions, therefore, the YCrO 3 compound is a robust insulator. Although the measurements of the applied-magnetic-field dependent heat capacity as well as the magnetization versus temperature and appliedmagnetic field show the character of a very soft ferromagnet with a coersive force of ∼0.05 T, the extracted PM CW temperature, θ CW = -433.2(6) K, by the fit with a CW law is strongly negative with the frustrating parameter f =| θ CW | /T N = 3.061 With our neutron-powder diffraction study, we have established an AFM structure with the propagation vector at k = (1 1 0) and the same unit cell as that of the crystalline structure (with space group P nma). The direction of the Cr 3+ spin moments is along the crystallographic c axis. The refined moment size is 2.45(6) μ B at 12 K, ∼82% of the theoretical saturation value 3 μ B . This is consistent with the fact that a magnetic frustration exists in YCrO 3 compound. By fitting integrated intensities of the magnetic Bragg (1 1 0) reflection extracted from the pure magnetic contribution with a power law, we found that the Cr 3+ spin interactions were probably two-dimensional Ising like within the reciprocal (1 1 0) scattering plane. Above T N = 141.5(1) K, the refined lattice constants a, b, and c, as well as the unit-cell volume V, agree well with the Grüneisen rules at zero pressure with a second-order fashion. By com-parison, below T N , the lattice configuration (a, b, c, and V ) deviates largely downward from the Grüneisen law, displaying an anisotropic magnetostriction effect along the crystallographic a, b, and c axes and a magnetoelastic effect with the unit-cell volume V. Especially, upon cooling, the sample contraction is enhanced below T N . In the whole studied temperature range of 12-302 K, we did not find any crystalline structural phase transition with the neutron-powder diffraction study, whereas by our single-crystal neutron diffraction study, we observed clearly the existence of the Bragg (1 1 0) peak above the magnetic phase transition temperature 141.5(1) K. This peak persists up to 300 K and is forbidden by the crystalline orthorhombic structure (with space group P nma). This implies that the actual crystalline structure of YCrO 3 compound is probably lower than the present one. To figure out the reasons for a possible lowering of the structural symmetry in the YCrO 3 single crystal, we compared the t 2g YCrO 3 and the e g La 7/8 Sr 1/8 MnO 3 single crystals. It is pointed out that with a limited number of the observed magnetic Bragg peaks, it is hard to determine the canting degree of the AFM Cr 3+ spins. This can be addressed by a further time-of-flight single-crystal neutron-diffraction study. To determine the actual crystalline structure is not an easy job, but it would shed light on the dielectric anomaly of YCrO 3 compound. ing the ideal one (i.e., 1:1:3).