The spin-orbit torque induced by a topological insulator (TI) is theoretically examined for spin wave generation in a neighboring antiferromagnetic thin film. The investigation is based on the micromagnetic simulation of Néel vector dynamics and the analysis of transport properties in the TI. The results clearly illustrate that propagating spin waves can be achieved in the antiferromagnetic thin-film strip through localized excitation, traveling over a long distance. The oscillation amplitude gradually decays due to the non-zero damping as the Néel vector precesses around the magnetic easy axis with a fixed frequency. The frequency is also found to be tunable via the strength of the driving electrical current density. While both the bulk and the surface states of the TI contribute to induce the effective torque, the calculation indicates that the surface current plays a dominant role over the bulk counterpart except in the heavily degenerate cases. Compared to the more commonly applied heavy metals, the use of a TI can substantially reduce the threshold current density to overcome the magnetic anisotropy, making it an efficient choice for spin wave generation. The Néel vector dynamics in the nano-oscillator geometry are examined as well. Spin waves have recently attracted much attention as a potential carrier of information with low energy dissipation. They can transport a pure spin current without involving the charge flow along with the possibility to manipulate the amplitude and phase. Heavy metals such as Pt and W are the commonly used SOC materials with the spin-Hall angle θ SH typically in the range of 0.012 ∼ 0.12, 10 requiring a relatively high driving current density (∼ 10 7 A/cm 2 ) to overcome the magnetic anisotropy. In comparison, recent investigations have indicated that a topological insulator (TI) can induce the SOT with a higher efficiency than the heavy metals -an order of magnitude higher or even more at room temperature. In this work, we theoretically explore the generation of traveling spin waves in a magnetic strip by exploiting the localized excitation through a TI layer in place of a heavy metal. Both the bulk and surface states are examined as the source of the SOT for a range of parameters such as the damping constant and the Fermi level position. The thin-film waveguide structure based on an A-type antiferromanget (AFM) with uniaxial easy-axis anisotropy is considered as the primary example, while the analysis can be readily extended to the ferromangets (FMs). Compare to the FM counterparts, the AFMs are associated with higher resonance frequencies up to THz, faster switching speeds, and higher energy efficiencies. The dynamics of magnetization can be described by using the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation as: Here, m denotes the reduced or normalized local magnetization vector, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α refers to the Gilbert damping constant, and the macroscopic effective field H eff ∝ ∂H ∂m is obtained from the Hamiltonian H of the considered system that accounts for the exchange interaction and the anisotropy energy. In the case of an AFM, sublattices A and B are antiferromagnetically coupled to each other via the exchange interaction, giving the normalized Néel vector n as m A -m B . The last term T SOC in Eq. (1) corresponds to the SOT induced by an SOC material (in this case, a TI) that can be further separated into the anti-damping torque T ad and the field-like torque T fl depending on the actual physical processes (i.e., T SOC = T ad + T fl ). A schematic of the AFM/TI heterostructure under consideration is shown in Fig. in comparison to the approach with a radio frequency source explored in the recent studies. Subsequent injection into the adjacent magnetic layer leads to the Néel vector dynamics by exerting an anti-damping torque in the following form 24 where q (> 0) is the electron charge, μ 0 the vacuum permeability, M s the sublattice magnetization, d the thickness of the AFM layer, J B the bulk current density, and σ the unit vector of the spin current polarization ( ± ŷ when the electrons flow along the ∓x direction). The product of spin-Hall angle θ SH and J B gives the spin current density. The field-like torque that can also arise from the TI bulk current is neglected for its relatively minor contribution to the desired magnetization rotation or oscillation. The spin-Hall angle θ SH of 0.15 is chosen in Eq. (2) at room temperature, which is comparable to an upper-end value for the heavy metals. Concerning the effect of the TI surface, it is likely that multiple mechanisms of differing microscopic origins While the anomalous Hall effect is deemed absent in a collinear AFM due to the symmetry, the A-type AFMs with ferromagnetic intra-plane coupling can actually have the magnetization on a surface essentially analogous to the FMs (i.e., non-zero). Accordingly, the proximity interaction at the interface in the present case can be described as in the FM/TI bilayer structure studied earlier. where G is the TI/magnet exchange coupling energy and v F the Fermi velocity of the TI surface states. The angular dependence in the anti-damping term is apparent from the expression, where the effective torque (i.e., T S ad ) becomes zero when m z = 0. A similar dependence was reported in the literature. As for the TI, a relatively thick film of 10 nm (= δt) is considered to ensure decoupling between top and bottom surfaces. The Fermi velocity v F is set at 4.5 × 10 7 cm/s for the surface states and the separation between the bulk conduction-band minimum ε C and the Dirac point ε D at 0.2 eV, both of which are typical for well-known TIs such as Bi 2 Se 3 . A parabolic energy dispersion is used for the bulk conduction band with an effective mass m * = 0.15m e , where m e denotes the electron rest mass. Details of the excited spin wave dynamics and properties are illustrated in Fig. Figures The 3D illustrations of the Néel vector trajectories in the excitation region are plotted in Figs. When ∆ε is negative (thus, ε F in the bulk bandgap), J B becomes very small and is thus not considered. As ε F moves above ε C , the current flow in the bulk goes up faster than the surface counterpart resulting in the gradual increase of the ratio J B /J S (line 3). Since the Fermi level in a TI is typically chosen to be not far from the Dirac point ε D , the surface current density is expected to be generally more pronounced than the bulk contribution in a sufficiently thin structure. Note that this observation is based on the assumption of ε C -ε D = 0.2 eV. A smaller separation between the bulk and surface bands can enhance the significance of J B . Nevertheless, the addition of even a relatively small bulk current may considerably alter the effectiveness of a TI as a SOC material. For a more definitive understanding, a comparative analysis of the SOTs generated by the two mechanisms (i.e., the spin-Hall and anomalous Hall effects) is desired. However, a direct term-by-term comparison is challenging due to the differences in the functional dependence. When such details are ignored, Eqs. ( The prefactor in front of J B /J S is estimated to be around 1 with the numerical values discussed earlier. Accordingly, the Fermi level position [via Fig. For a quantitative evaluation of the macroscopic response, the frequencies of the excited spin waves are compared as a function of the Fermi level position ∆ε by using the micromagnetic simulations. Figure The corresponding threshold current density (∼ 10 7 A/cm 2 ) is associated with the surface induced SOT via the anomalous Hall effect. Along with electrical generation of traveling spin waves, spin torque nano-oscillators are another spintronic application that can take advantage of the AFM/TI system. In this case, the AFM does not take a long strip form; rather the entire magnetic material is interfaced with and thus subject to excitation by the TI. Unlike the structure described in Fig. The feasibility of spin wave generation via the SOT induced in an adjacent TI is theoretically demonstrated in an easy-axis AFM. The results from the numerical simulations clearly show that the spin auto-oscillations can be achieved in the thin-film AFM strip through localized excitation, traveling over a long distance as the angle of precession gradually collapses due to the non-zero damping. The calculations also elucidate the dependence of the Néel vector dynamics on the relevant physical parameters including the TI electronic properties, highlighting the potential significance of the bulk states as the source of the SOT in the heavily degenerate conditions. Along with the propagating spin waves, the application of the AFM/TI bilayer structure as a spin torque nano-oscillator is also illustrated. With the contributions from both the strongly spin-orbit coupled surface and bulk states, the TIs offer a highly efficient alternative to the conventional heavy metals for the SOT. (c) Excited spin wave frequency in the AFM as functions of the Fermi level position ∆ε with and without the SOT contributed by the bulk current (lines 1 and 2, respectively). For convenience, the current density value corresponding to each ∆ε is also provided for both J S (blue) and J B (red). The upper and lower panels correspond to the cases of σ = +ŷ and -ŷ, respectively. 