Avalanche phenomena leverage steeply nonlinear dynamics to generate disproportionately high responses from small perturbations and are found in a multitude of events and materials 1 , enabling technologies including optical phase-conjugate imaging, 2 infrared quantum counting, 3 and efficient upconverted lasing 4-6 . However, the photon avalanching (PA) mechanism underlying these optical innovations has been observed only in bulk materials and aggregates 6,7 , and typically at cryogenic temperatures 5-8 , limiting its utility and impact in many applications. Here, we report the realization of PA at room temperature in single nanostructures -small, Tm 3+ -doped upconverting nanocrystals -and demonstrate their use in superresolution imaging at wavelengths that fall within near-infrared (NIR) spectral windows of maximal biological transparency. Avalanching nanoparticles (ANPs) can be pumped by either continuous-wave or pulsed lasers and exhibit all of the defining features of PA. These hallmarks include clear excitation power thresholds, exceptionally long rise time at threshold, and a dominant excited-state absorption that is >13,000 times larger than ground-state absorption. Beyond the avalanching threshold, ANP emission scales nonlinearly with the 26 th power of pump intensity, resulting from induced positive optical feedback in each nanocrystal. This enables the experimental realization of photon-avalanche single-beam superresolution imaging (PASSI) 7 , achieving sub-70 nm spatial resolution using only simple scanning confocal microscopy and before any computational analysis. Pairing their steep nonlinearity with existing superresolution techniques and computational methods 9-11 , ANPs allow for imaging with higher resolution and at ca. 100-fold lower excitation intensities than is possible with other probes. The low PA threshold and exceptional photostability of ANPs also suggest their utility in a diverse array of applications 7 including subwavelength bioimaging 7,12,13 , IR detection, temperature 14-16 and pressure 17 transduction, neuromorphic computing 18 , and quantum optics 19, The primary advantage of PA is its combination of extreme nonlinearity and efficiency, achieved without any periodic structuring or interference effects. PA was first observed in Pr 3+ -doped bulk crystals, which exhibited a sudden increase in upconverted luminescence when excited beyond a critical pump laser intensity (I P ) PA is a positive feedback system To design nanocrystals that may be capable of PA, we combined four key innovations. The first is the recent design paradigm for Ln 3+ -based upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs), in which high Ln 3+ content, engineered energy confinement, and reduced surface losses result in exceptional efficiencies and brightness To determine if these design criteria enable nanocrystals to host PA, we synthesized Tm 3+ -doped β-NaYF 4 core/shell structures 16-33 nm in total diameter Plots of 800 nm Tm 3+ emission versus 1064 nm pump intensity measured on nanoparticle ensembles drop-casted onto glass substrates (Methods) show that as Tm 3+ content is increased from 1% to 4%, the degree of nonlinearity s also increases, but still resides firmly in the energy looping regime, with s ≤ 7 (Fig. showing no significant contribution from excitationinduced thermal avalanching (Fig. Tm 3+ ANPs (Fig. To understand why 8% Tm 3+ doping gives rise to such non-linear emission, we modeled the PA process in ANPs using coupled nonlinear differential rate equations Fitting the model to the experimental data for 8% Tm 3+ ANPs (Fig. To observe the signature slow-down in excited-state population rise-times expected for PA Our modeling of Tm 3+ -based ANPs also predicts PA for even longer-wavelength excitation near 1450 nm, resonant with ESA between 3 F 4 and 3 H 4 but not with GSA (Fig. (Fig. Recent theoretical treatments show that achieving PA with a large nonlinearity involves a complex balance between several coexisting phenomena within the material . In ANPs, s 31 is controlled by Ln 3+ concentration, while the nonradiative decay component of W 2 is dominated by losses at surfaces and interfaces We further hypothesized that increasing the Tm 3+ content should change s 31 and W 2 , and therefore the PA excitation threshold intensity. To study this effect, core/shell ANPs with 20% and 100% Tm 3+ were synthesized, and threshold intensity is found to increase with increasing Tm 3+ content (Fig. Models predict a linear dependence between PA threshold intensity and W 2 , with a slope that is determined by s 31 , W 3 (the excited-state decay rate; see Fig. These dependencies are shown in Fig. To evaluate the efficiency and relative brightness of ANPs, both of which are key considerations for future applications, we used a kinetic computational model of ET within Ln 3+ -doped nanoparticles, similar to those used to reproduce the experimental upconverting quantum yields (QYs) of Er 3+ /Yb 3+ -doped UCNPs This is because brightness is a function of QY, but also the total number of emitters within the particle (brightness is defined as the product of the wavelength-dependent Tm 3+ ion absorption cross-section, the Tm 3+ concentration, and QY). Note that the emission intensity shows a more nonlinear dependence on pump fluence than does QY, since the extreme nonlinearity of PA emission is a function of both intensitydependent QY and excited-state populations. A particularly compelling application for ANPs is single-particle superresolution imaging, as elucidated by the recently proposed photon-avalanche single-beam superresolution imaging (PASSI) concept that exploits the extreme nonlinear response of PA ANPs during standard SCM. The imaging requires no complex instrumentation, excitation beam shaping or patterning, image post-processing, or alignment procedures We performed single-ANP imaging, measuring a PASSI image spot of ≤75 nm average full width at half maximum (FWHM) when excited at 1064 nm near the PA threshold intensity (see Methods for imaging details). More specifically, the image of the 8% Tm 3+ ANP, from the batch with s = 26 (Fig. Finally, we note that in characterizing this PA system, we measure ~500-10,000-fold increases in emission intensity when pump intensity is increased from threshold to twice the threshold value, which takes us beyond the steep-slope region of the ANP response curve (Figs. refs. 12,30) and suggests a simpler empirical method of identifying PA using a single measurable ratio. ∆ av captures the complex balance between R 2 /R 1 , cross-relaxation, and radiative vs non-radiative relaxation We find that all nanoparticles with ≥ 8% Tm 3+ content reported here meet this criteria (Table In conclusion, we report a new class of steeply nonlinear nanomaterials, realizing PA in engineered nanocrystals at room temperature with continuous wave pumping. We observe that core-shell architectures doped with only Tm 3+ ions exhibit avalanching behavior for concentrations ≥8%, and that the PA excitation threshold intensity is fully determined by the 3 F 4 intermediate state lifetime at higher concentrations. Further, we show that PA is achieved for excitation in the 1400 -1470 nm regime in addition to 1064 nm. Along with emission intensities that scale nonlinearly with pump intensity up to the 26 th power, (versus maximum nonlinearities of order 7 in current Ln 3+ -based nanosystems 