We examine the far-field optical response, under-plane wave excitation in the presence of a static magnetic field, of core-shell nanoparticles involving a gyroelectric component, either as the inner or the outer layer, through analytic calculations based on appropriately extended Mie theory. We focus on absorption and scattering of light by bismuth-substituted yttrium iron garnet (Bi:YIG) nanospheres and nanoshells, combined with excitonic materials such as organic-molecule aggregates or two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides, and discuss the hybrid character of the modes emerging from the coupling of the two constituents. We observe the excitation of strong magnetooptic phenomena and explore, in particular, the response and tunability of a magneto-transverse light current, indicative of the photonic Hall effect. We show how interaction between the Bi:YIG and excitonic layers leads to a pair of narrow bands of highly directional scattering, emerging from the aforementioned hybridization, which can be tuned at will by adjusting the geometrical or optical parameters of the system. Our theoretical study introduces optically anisotropic media as promising templates for strong coupling in nanophotonics, offering a means to combine tunable magnetic and optical properties, with potential implications both in the design of all-dielectric photonic devices but also in novel clinical applications. Scattering and absorption by composite multilayered nanoparticles (NPs) have long been at the forefront of interest in nanophotonics, with plasmonic structures providing so far the most prominent and fertile template Of particular interest is the case of composite NPs consisting of a dielectric component and an excitonic layer sustained by J -aggregates of organic molecules or two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), operating at or close to the strong coupling regime. Such architectures offer even broader functionality and flexibility in applications, while also providing crucial new insight into the nature and mechanisms governing light-matter interactions. Recently, silicon-Jaggregate heterostructures were explored, from both a theoretical and an experimental aspect, as an alternative to plasmon-exciton hybrids termed plexcitons At the same time, composite magnetic NPs with core-shell morphology-usually a magnetic core coated with a biocompatible organic dye-are proposed as suitable building blocks for novel clinical applications in nanomedicine, for a diversity of purposes including imaging, drug delivery and photothermal therapy The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II we summarize and extend Mie theory for scattering and absorption by coated gyroelectric NPs and nanoshells, and present the scattering cross section formula for the Hall photon current. In Sec. III we present our theoretical results regarding two specific examples, i.e., a bismuthsubstituted yttrium iron garnet (Bi:YIG) nanosphere with an excitonic coating, and an excitonic core coated with a Bi:YIG nanoshell. Our main findings are summarized in the last section of the article. Let us assume a time-harmonic, monochromatic plane EM wave of angular frequency ω, incident on a gyroelectric sphere of radius R embedded in an infinite homogeneous host medium that is characterized by scalar permittivity and permeability ǫ 2 and μ 2 , in the presence of a static magnetic field. The presence of the magnetic field induces a Lorentz force, which needs to be added in the equations of motion of electrons in the sphere, leading to an anisotropic permittivity tensor while the permeability μ 1 is scalar, practically equal to unity in the optical regime The fields inside and outside the sphere can be expressed in the basis of vector spherical harmonics. Given the electric field component E 0 of the incoming plane wave, the incident electric field can be written as where P = H, E refers to the transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) polarization, l and m are the angular-momentum indices, F Hlm , F Elm are the TM and TE wave functions respectively, explicitly given later on, is the amplitude of the incident wave (see the Appendix) and a + = Ta 0 is the amplitude of the scattered spherical wave, where T is the scattering matrix. The infinite expansion series describing the fields inside and outside the particle can be truncated in practice at a certain value l max and in this case the amplitudes are (n d × 1) column vectors, where n d = l max (l max + 2). In our calculations l max = 5 is adequate to provide converged spectra. It can be shown that T takes the form with where the matrices Λ, Λ ′ , V, U are provided in the Appendix. Having calculated the scattering matrix T, the extinction, scattering and absorption cross sections, normalized to the geometric cross section πR 2 , are obtained by + Re where k 2 is the wavenumber in the host environment. We now consider the above gyroelectric sphere of radius R 1 , coated with a concentric spherical shell of radius R 2 and optical parameters ǫ 2 and μ 2 -index 3 now refers to parameters of the host medium, as shown in the schematics of Fig. where Equations ( with We will now derive the scattering matrix of the inverse core-shell configuration, that is, a gyroelectric shell with a homogeneous medium both inside the cavity and as the host environment, as shown in Fig. with k 2 = ω c √ ǫ z μ 2 being the wave number in medium 2 and c the the speed of light in vacuum. Similarly to the procedure followed in representing transverse magnetic, transverse electric and longitudinal wave functions respectively, while f l = j l , h + l corresponds to either the spherical Bessel or Hankel function of the first kind, X lm are the vector spherical harmonics, Y lm are the ordinary spherical harmonics, and r represents the dependence on the polar and azimuthal angle collectively where The matrices entering the above formulas can be found in the Appendix. An incident EM wave with linear polarization causes displacement of charge carriers along the direction of the electric field oscillation. The Lorentz force that acts on this movement in the presence of the magnetic field is perpendicular to both the magnetic field and the electricfield polarization (F L ∝ v×B), where v is the velocity of the carriers. In our case, if a y-polarized wave propagates along the x axis and the magnetic field is along the z axis, the Lorentz force induces a polarization of charges along the ŷ × ẑ=x axis, corresponding to the photonic Hall effect. As a result, there is a component of light scattered along the ŷ direction. It has been shown by Varytis et al. where the amplitudes a + P lm compose the column vector of the scattered wave, with and To design a Mie-excitonic system with strong photonic Hall effect, comparable to that emerging in plasmonicgyroelectric structures As shown in Fig. In the present work we shall only be concerned with the photonic Hall effect, but similar conclusions should, in principle, apply to any other manifestations of magnetooptics, such as the Faraday, Kerr, or magnetochiral effects Let us now consider a composite particle consisting of a spherical Bi:YIG core and a concentric excitonic shell of thickness R 2 -R 1 = 10 nm. Such a design can be synthesized relatively easily in the laboratory and constitutes a flexible platform for engineering the hybrid Mieexcitons where ω exc is the excitonic transition frequency, γ exc the corresponding damping rate, f the oscillator strength and ǫ ∞ the background permittivity. For our calculation we choose ω exc = 2.12 eV, γ exc = 0.1 eV, f = 0.65 and ǫ ∞ = 3, values which correspond to an absorption spectrum similar to that of 1,1'-diethyl-2,2'-cyanine iodide (PIC) J -aggregates A clear picture of the avoided crossing is provided in Fig. In what follows, we invert the arrangement of the two layers and study the photonic Hall effect of an excitonic core-gyroelectric shell configuration of inner and outer radius R 1 = 60 nm and R 2 = 110 nm, respectively. Recently, NPs comprising of gyroelectric shells encapsulating non-gyroelectric cores have been proposed as promising templates for hyperthermia applications The excitonic material is described by the dielectric function of Eq. ( Tunability of these modes is a major advantage. An increase or a decrease in the radius of the composite particle results in redshifting or blueshifting of the Mie modes respectively. It is therefore straightforward that the maximum of the magneto-transverse scattered light shifts accordingly. A rather interesting aspect of the flexibility of such assemblies, especially in strong lightmatter interaction studies, is the fact that wider splits of the hybrid modes can be achieved by increasing the oscillator strength of the excitonic dielectric function, as displayed in Fig. In summary, an analytic method, based on an extended Mie scattering theory, to calculate the Hall photon current for core-shell NPs comprising a gyroelectric layer is provided. Previous work on the photonic Hall effect has been limited to single gyrotropic spheres and metal-coated gyrotropic nanospheres characterized by plasmonic-driven magneto-optical phenomena. Here, strong magnetically induced optic phenomena in dielectrics coupled to excitons are reported by studying the photonic Hall effect in two-layered Bi:YIG-excitonic nanospheres. We show that these composite particles exhibit a rich optical response and a prominent photon Hall current, opening new opportunities for multifunctional dielectric-based photonic platforms, tunable by their geometrical and optical parameters, capable to respond to various external stimuli. Rigorous investigation of the Hall activity is important for clinical applications, especially for techniques in which directionality is a key issue.