Recently, low-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid halide compounds have aroused great attention in the optoelectronic field, due to the unique topology and optical properties. Herein, we report an Mn 4+ doped [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 zero-dimensional organic-inorganic hybrid phosphor, which could not only exhibit very narrow and pure red emission, but also maintain efficient emission intensity at room temperature. The crystal structure, photoluminescence properties and temperature sensing application are discussed. The excellent temperature dependent luminescent properties are attributed to the rigid structure and isolated MnF 6 2-octahedra in the total crystal framework. These results will help design suitable materials and devices in both warm white light emitting diodes and optical sensors. Solid-state white light-emitting diodes (w-LED) have a significant position in the lighting and display markets. clusters. A facile wet chemical method was adopted to synthesize [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 : Mn 4+ [tetramethylammonium hexafluorotitanium, (TMA) 2 TiF 6 :Mn 4+ ] red phosphor. K 2 MnF 6 powders were selected as the Mn 4+ source and synthesized according to the literatures published elsewhere. were completely mixed by grinding in an agate mortar. The mixture was transferred to a home-made Teflon container and heated in the vacuum oven at 100 o C for 3 h. The crystalline information of the powder samples was obtained by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advanced, Bruker Co, Germany) using Cu Kα-radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), temperature dependent photoluminescence excitation, emission spectra (PLE/PL) and decay curves were measured by utilizing an Edinburgh Instruments FLS1000 spectrometer equipped with a 450W Xe discharge lamp, a 60W μs Xe flash lamp and a closed-cycle Helium cryostat. Fourier transformed infrared (FTIR) spectrum was recorded by a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer with the sample dispersed in a KBr pellet. The Raman spectrum of Mn 4+ doped sample was measured by the Raman microscope system (Horiba, LabRAM HR). The structure information of Mn 4+ doped (TMA) 2 TiF 6 was collected by powder X-ray diffraction and corrected by using Rietveld refinement on the GSAS program. Two peaks located at 946 and 1018 cm -1 were assigned as the C-N stretching vibrations. The C-H asymmetric vibrations in the CH 3 group were observed in the region ca. 1452-1512 cm -1 . In the Raman spectra, the vibration peak observed at 603 cm -1 has been assigned as the Ti-F vibration mode, which is in agreement with the result exhibited in the FTIR spectra. Two skeletal modes located at 760 and 958 cm (6460nm, 598nm), respectively. It has been reported in literatures that there is strong correlation between the ZPL emission intensity and the crystal symmetry of the host materials. S. Adachi has summarized that negligibly small ZPL of Mn 4+ could be found in the cubic, tetragonal and trigonal structure with high crystal symmetry. When the temperature increases, electrons have more chances of thermal occupancy to populate at higher vibrational state. As a result, the anti-Stokes sidebands were gradually rising on the high energy side of the ZPL. On the contrary with the temperature dependent PL behaviors of Mn 4+ doped (TMA) 2 TiF 6 , the decay lifetimes of the Mn 4+ doped phosphor shows significant luminescent quenching. As shown in Fig. The total average decay time can be calculated as: where I is the intensity at time t, t is the time, and τ is the average decay time. The calculated values of the lifetimes at various temperatures have been labeled in Fig. Stokes sidebands and total Mn 4+ emission as functions of temperature in the temperature range of 50 to 300 K. The intensity of all the components of the emission increased with increasing temperature from 50 to 300 K. As ascribed above, the anti-Stokes vibrational state and Stokes vibrational state could be simply regarded as two coupled vibronic levels, which can borrow the energy from ZPL. The temperature dependent fluorescence intensity ratio (FIR) from the thermal coupling levels (TCL) of active Mn 4+ ions can be modified as: where A is constant, E is the energy difference between two coupled levels, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. Fig. The sharp increase in I anti-S / I S with increasing temperature indicates that the Mn 4+ doped organic-inorganic phosphor has a potential application in temperature sensors. We delete the baseless description here The temperature dependent PL spectroscopy data represented here is quite different with the that of Mn 4+ doped [C(NH 2 ) 3 ] 2 GeF 6 (CGF) phosphors reported by T. Jüstel et al. the energy of C-H stretching vibration in the [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 host is about 3000 cm -1 , comparable with the energy of the N-H stretching vibration in CGF. If this assumption is correct, the Mn 4+ doped [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 should exhibit similar luminescent properties as Mn 4+ doped CGF phosphor. In this work, the Mn 4+ doped [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 exhibits no luminescence quenching when it is heated from low temperature to the room temperature as shown in Fig. Furthermore, we also synthesized the Mn 4+ doped (4,4'-bpyH 2 )TiF 6 powders, in which the isolated TiF 6 octahedra are localized in the hydrogen bond framework created by the bipyridinium cations. A new red Mn 4+ doped [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 phosphor has successfully synthesized by a mild solvothermal method for the first time. The as-prepared Mn 4+ doped phosphor presented sharp red line emission of Mn 4+ at around 630 nm under excitation in the near UV to blue region at room temperature. The temperature dependent PL and decay of Mn 4+ were performed to investigate the origin of the efficient red emission at room temperature. Spectroscopy analyses demonstrated that enhanced phonon-assistant emission and elevated non-radiative transition are two competitive processes during the temperature rising process, which are responsible for the higher PL intensity and shorter decay time at elevated temperature. Comparative study of structure and bonding interaction on [N(CH 3 ) 4 ] 2 TiF 6 and [C(NH 2 ) 3 ] 2 TiF 6 also indicated that the Mn 4+ doped organic-inorganic hybrid materials with rigid structure and strong ionic bond were necessary for efficient red emission. Our findings highlight the importance of judiciously choosing organic cations in the Mn 4+ doped materials for the emission at room temperature, which has guiding significance for the design of narrow red organic-inorganic hybrid luminescent materials.. 