We present high-accuracy correlated calculations of small SixHy molecular systems both in the ground and excited states. We employ quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) together with a variety of many-body wave function approaches based on basis set expansions. The calculations are carried out in a valence-only framework using recently derived correlation consistent effective core potentials. Our primary goal is to understand the fixed-node diffusion QMC errors in both the ground and excited states with single-reference trial wave functions. Using a combination of methods, we demonstrate the very high accuracy of the QMC atomization energies being within ≈ 0.07 eV or better when compared with essentially exact results. By employing proper choices for trial wave functions, we have found that the fixed-node QMC biases for total energies are remarkably uniform ranging between 1-3.5 % with absolute values at most ≈ 0.2 eV across the systems and several types of excitations such as singlets and triplets as well as low-lying and Rydberg-like states. Our results further corroborate that Si systems, and presumably also related main group IV and V elements of the periodic table (Ge, Sn, etc), exhibit some of the lowest fixed-node biases found in valence-only electronic structure QMC calculations. Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods belong to a rapidly developing family of many-body approaches that address the central challenge of accurate electronic structure calculations posed by electron-electron correlations. Several flavors of QMC with different sampling strategies are being developed to achieve a better accuracy and use in a wider variety of applications, including model Hamiltonians as well as real molecules and solids. Beyond perhaps the most established QMC in real space of particle coordinates One of our goals is to test and benchmark these recently established ccECPs Considering these aims, we have opted for a few molecular Si x H y systems where extensive basis sets and alternative many-body wave function expansion methods can be used to the full extent. The reason for choosing the particular element of Si was motivated by the fact that its valence electronic structure exhibits some of the smallest fixed-node errors in QMC calculations of the atom, molecule, and also solid systems We employ our recently generated ccECPs for Si Several quantum chemical methods such as Coupled arXiv:2007.11139v2 [physics.chem-ph] 20 Oct 2020 Cluster with double excitations and perturbative triples (CCSD(T)), as well as triples with perturbative quadruples (CCSDT(Q)), Configuration Interaction with double excitations (CISD), and also triple excitations (CISDT), and finally, Configuration Interaction using a perturbative selection made iteratively (CIPSI) have been used. We use aug-cc-pVnZ basis sets throughout the work since we observed that the augmentations have been important in the description of molecular bonds and some of the excitations. The basis sets are TZ -6Z quality for CCSD(T) and DZ -5Z quality for CI/CIPSI calculations. Using these sets enabled us to recover the total energies and differences within about half of the chemical accuracy threshold (1 kcal/mol ≈ 0.0434 eV). Whenever possible, Hartree-Fock (HF) and correlation energies are extrapolated to complete basis set (CBS) limit as where n is the basis set cardinal number. CI/CIPSI energies with multiple roots were also extrapolated with Eqn. 1. In some cases, CIPSI energies were extrapolated also in regards to PT2 corrections (using the last 2 data points), shown as exFCI. CCSDT(Q) calculations were only feasible for small basis sets such as DZ or TZ, therefore, we estimated the CCSDT(Q) CBS limit value by evaluating the energy decrease from CCSD(T) to CCSDT(Q) at a specific basis set and adding that to the CCSD(T) CBS value: This estimation was observed to be reasonable on Si pseudo-atom where CCSDT(Q) was carried out for DZ-6Z basis sets On the QMC side, we have carried out FN-DMC calculations for each system using single-reference and in some cases CI wave functions with an increasing number of determinants (N det ). Unless otherwise specified, we used orbitals from density functional theory (DFT) that are obtained at augmented QZ basis set level. We have tested how the ground and excited states depend on the basis set for DZ-6Z levels and we have found that both states were essentially converged at the QZ basis set level. We have also tried a doubly-augmented basis set for SiH 4 and we did not observe noticeable DMC energy gain for the ground state and for the Rydberg-like singlet excitation. In all DMC calculations, we use timestep τ = 0.001 Ha -1 with T-moves algorithm For each system, we evaluated the ground state, and the first singlet and triplet excited state energies. Ground and triplet states can be expressed with a single determinant wavefunction making it suitable to calculate in CC, CI, and QMC methods. However, for singlet excited states, the correct space-spin symmetry typically leads to a multi-determinant description that is generally challenging for CC methods available in quantum chemistry packages. Therefore, for these cases, we have not attempted to calculate the single-reference CC data. In QMC, it is straightforward to build such wave functions, in the simplest cases as a linear combination of two spin-up×spin-down determinantal products with a single promoted orbital in one or the other spin channel. Clearly, it is also straightforward to employ CIS, CISD, or higher-order excitation wave functions in QMC. In all cases, we have probed for relaxation effects in excited state orbitals when constructing the mentioned two-determinant wave functions. To do so, we employed PBE/PBE0 functionals in GS SCF calculation or even used orbitals from different spin symmetry. The most optimal orbitals obtained are indicated where necessary and we also include corresponding HF reference DMC values for comparison. For the fixednode DMC and other many-body calculations that use a given set of self-consistent orbitals, we employ notation "Method/Orbitals" throughout the paper. Note that the DMC method can access the excited states of the given Hamiltonian because the constructed nodal surface constrains it to converge to the ground state of that symmetry. This setting corresponds to all the excitations considered here so that the DMC method provides variational results All molecular geometries in this work are obtained from experimental values In this subsection, we provide the ground state (GS) and excited state (EX) total energies and excitation gaps using various methods as specified above. The results for the Si atom are taken from Our calculations show solid consistency throughout various methods. For each of the molecules, singlereference DMC calculations provide remarkably good accuracy for both the total energies and excitation gaps Inspection of the experiments Table V presents the Si x H y computational and experimental atomization energies. Included are values from extensive CCSD(T) calculations with large basis sets up to 6Z and limited CCSDT(Q) calculations to probe for convergence due to higher-order excitations. This enabled us to check the extrapolation results more carefully and provided what we believe are very accurate, nearly exact estimations of the corresponding energy differences. Included also are results from published high accuracy studies We believe that our results provide a strong argument in favor of the accuracy of the employed ccECPs. Below we further analyze the excitations; however, we expect them to be less sensitive to ccECP's quality due to their more delocalized nature and decreased electron density in the core regions. Therefore, the main source of errors in excitations is expected to be due to the fixed-node bias. C. Fixed-node errors. Fixed-node biases for single-reference trial wave functions. In order to simplify the analysis of nodal biases, we probed for the impact of basis set sizes using silane as an example (Table Let us now analyze the obtained fixed-node errors in more detail (Table c) The largest percentage of errors do vary across the systems. For example, the two largest errors are found in the vertical excited singlet state of SiH 2 and the vertical excited triplet state of silane. Overall, however, it is quite remarkable that in all these systems and states the fixed-node errors are between 1% and 3.6%, especially when we consider that single-reference wave functions have been used to approximate the nodal hypersurfaces. Impact of nodal domain topologies vs nodal shapes. It has been conjectured and can be proved in a few cases that the correct number of nodal domains for fermionic ground states is two Interestingly, the following few cases happen to have the correct nodal topologies: a) ground state of the Si atom, that has only two nodal domains since there is only one minority spin electron, i.e., the exchange in that channel is absent. b) SiH 2 and SiH 4 open-shell singlet excitations that are given as a linear combination of two determinantal products. This form breaks the spin-up and spin-down artificial separation of spatial variables and leads to the fusion of the nodal domains into the minimal two, as it is illustrated in Fig. It is rather unexpected that there is no obvious significant difference between the fixed-node biases for correct (2 domains) vs. incorrect (4 domains) topologies. Based on these observations, we suppose that in our systems, the spin-up and -down coordinate subspaces are energetically marginal and the nodal shape in other locations is more important. Obviously, with enough variational freedom, the corresponding correct topologies will ultimately emerge as a result of appropriate optimizations. Unfortunately, our knowledge about the convergence of variational expansions in this respect is rather limited although some promising progress has been achieved very recently with CIPSI methods Fixed-node biases in excitations. One of our goals was to shed light on how the fixed-node errors impact the TABLE V: Si x H y atomization energies [eV] using various methods calculated using RCCSD(T), CCSDT(Q), and DMC/DFT methods compared with previous correlated calculations ( e Experimental values summarized in Ref. Multi-reference trial wave functions. We emphasize that it is straightforward to eliminate the fixednode errors in the studied systems by employing multireference trial wave functions. With appropriate effort, significant decrease of the biases can be achieved using CIPSI expansions further boosted through trial wave function re-optimizations. However, our primary goal was to understand the behavior of single-reference fixed- node errors due to our interest in large systems where conclusive, high-accuracy multi-reference study might not be feasible. We have presented high accuracy study of Si x H y systems using both QMC and many-body wave function methods based on expansions in basis sets. We have probed mainly for the level of fixed-node errors in ground states and especially in excited states. We have found that the single-reference trial wave functions in FN-DMC provide excellent descriptions of these systems with 1-3.5% correlation variation in fixed-node biases. In general, for excitations these errors were on the larger side, but not always and variations in fixed-node biases within the mentioned small range did not show any clear regular or discernible pattern. We have found excellent agreement with previous independent all-electron state-of-theart studies thus providing a clear support for the accuracy of ccECPs used in this study. In silane, the vertical singlet excitation appears to be larger in our calculations than in some experiments; however, we believe that new experiments with a more clear distinction between vertical and adiabatic excitations would be very useful. Overall, we demonstrate remarkably small fixed-node biases that further confirm our previous finding. The small fixed-node errors are related to particular properties of s and p states in the main group elements of the 2nd row. Similar results can be expected for the same group, such as Ge, Sn, Pb as well as P, As, Sb and Bi especially in molecules and solids with similar single-bond patterns and closed shell states. The obtained data will be useful also for estimations of systematic errors of QMC results in similar systems with comparable chemical bonding and electronic state calculations. and Novel Computational Impact on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research also used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. The project used also NERSC computational time allocations and resources. The authors would like to thank Anouar Benali and Anthony Scemama for their kind help with Quantum Package, comments and discussions. Data Availability. The input/output files and supporting data generated in this work are published in Materials Data Facility of singlet and triplet states. In SiH 2 and Si 2 H 6 , singlereference DMC excitation gaps also agree very well with experimental values that are known reliably. We list CCSD(T) and CCSDT(Q) calculations to illustrate the exact or nearly exact energies obtained by the CBS extrapolations. The general agreement between the values from DMC/DFT and CC extrapolations is in the range of or less than ≈ 0.1 eV. For the singlet excitations, DM-C/DFT gaps are compared with the CI method with the caveat of less accurate total energies but reasonably good estimations of the gaps. In SiH 2 , we also provide CIPSI+PT2/NatOrb CBS energies with large number of determinants showing that single-reference DMC gaps are accurate to almost the chemical accuracy level. In SiH 4 , we observe higher DMC/PBE excitation gap discrepancies with some experiments for the vertical states. a CBS values using TZ-5Z extrapolation. b CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. c d CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. e Estimated from energy decrease compared to RCCSD(T) at TZ basis set level. f The lowest GS energy corresponds to DMC/PBE0. g CBS values using DZ-5Z extrapolation with SHCI method from Ref. a CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. b CBS values using TZ-5Z extrapolation. c CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. d Estimated from energy decrease compared to RCCSD(T) at DZ basis set level. e The EX( 1 T 2 ) state uses EX( 3 T 2 ) UKS/PBE orbitals which resulted in lower energy than using GS orbitals. Spin contamination in UKS was observed to be negligible (< 2S + 1 >= 3.0020831). f Natural orbitals (NatOrb) are obtained from a run with N det ≈ 350 K. g AE CC2 calculation from Ref. a CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. b CBS values using DZ-QZ extrapolation. c CBS values using TZ-6Z extrapolation. d f AE CC2 values from a DMC/DFT corresponds to the lowest single-reference DMC energies obtained in this work (2-reference for EX singlet). b SiH 2 vertical and adiabatic singlet SCF/RHF energies correspond to CASSCF(2e -, 2o) energy with TZ-6Z extrapolations. c Assumed experimental cohesion of 4.68(1) eV/at. and extrapolated DMC/PBE0 value for the Si crystal ground state.