We present the experimental evidence for the existence of two exciting wavelengths, termed critical and crossover wavelength in the transmission spectrum of fiber-optic directional coupler, whose properties are conjugate to each other. The spectral shift associated with the transmission maxima/minima suddenly flip around these wavelengths and the spectrum shows largest (nil) spectral shift for the transmission maxima/minima closest to the critical ( at the crossover) wavelength, corresponding to the same perturbation parameter. A theoretical explanation of the observed experimental behavior has also been presented, highlighting that the underlying mechanisms for the existence of these wavelengths are entirely different. The knowledge of the precise spectral location of these wavelengths is necessary to avoid false alarms. Spectral and power interrogation techniques are among the most widely used interrogation techniques employed in photonic systems using modal coupling in optical waveguides. In the spectral interrogation technique, the wavelength shift associated with the transmission (reflection) reference maxima/minima are measured with respect to the changes in the external perturbation parameters. In contrast, in the power interrogation technique, the changes in the external perturbation parameters are quantified in terms of the changes in the power level recorded at the fixed reference maxima/minima. Both of these techniques have their inherent advantages and drawbacks. Spectral interrogation technique, for example, is immensely accurate and is immune to input power fluctuations and/or connector losses to which the power interrogation technique suffers badly. The power interrogation technique, on the other hand, is a much cheaper alternative and does not require expensive optical spectrum analyzer and broadband sources. It is the accuracy of the detection system, and absence of false alarms, which dictates the choice of the detection technique, and therefore, spectral interrogation technique is almost always preferred over the power interrogation technique. A number of highly sensitive sensors for detection of a variety of bio In this letter, we explain this ambiguity by demonstrating the existence of two unique wavelengths in the transmission spectrum of a DC, whose properties are conjugate to each other. These wavelengths are termed as critical and crossover wavelengths. The spectral shift in the transmission spectrum suddenly flip around these wavelengths and the spectrum shows largest (nil) spectral shift for the transmission maxima/minima closest to the critical (at the crossover) wavelength, corresponding to the same perturbation parameter. A theoretical explanation of the observed experimental behavior has also been presented, along with an explanation of the origin of these unique wavelengths. In our experiments, we fabricated several DCs using the heat and fuse method The temperature response of the fabricated DCs was studied by heating the DC through a heating plate. To maintain a uniform temperature throughout the coupling region and stabilize its transmission response, the couplers were kept at fixed temperatures for ∼20 min before making observations. Similar to the fabrication process, bends across the coupling region were avoided by maintaining constant tension throughout the experiments by fixing the fibers to a stationary stage near launching end and applying a fixed force near the other end. The transmission spectra were recorded at various temperatures starting from room temperature (RT) i.e., 25 • C till 60 • C with an interval of 5 • C, for a DC fabricated using two identical single-mode optical fibers (Corning SMF-28, New York, 14831, USA). To clearly depict the spectral shifts in Fig. In order to get direct evidence of the critical wavelength, which corresponds to maximum sensitivity, we fabricated several DCs with different interaction lengths using identical fibers: Corning SMF-28 or Fibercore T M PS1250/1500 photosensitive fiber, and a combination of these. Using identical fibers we observed a similar behavior of the exponential dependence of spectral shift on the spectral location of various maxima/minima in the transmission spectrum. Interestingly, however, using DCs fabricated with non-identical fibers (Fig. To understand the origin of crossover & critical wavelengths and their conjugate properties theoretically, we consider a DC consisting of two optical fibers (core radii being 1.75 μm over the coupler region) kept very close to each other (center to center separation of 4.2 μm), such that the evanescent fields of their propagating modes overlap, causing a periodic energy exchange between the fibers. Since the exact dopant and their concentrations in the core region of the optical fibers used in our experiments were not disclosed by the manufacturers, in our simulations we consider the cladding region of fibers to be made of fused SiO 2 , and the core region of Corning SMF-28 made of 3.1 mole% GeO 2 in SiO 2 (henceforth Fiber-1) and that of photosensitive Fibercore T M 1250/1500 made of 4.03 mole% GeO 2 and 9.7 mole% B 2 O 3 in SiO 2 host (henceforth Fiber-2). To check the proximity of the opto-geometric parameters used in our simulations with the experimental fibers we simulated the mode field diameter (MFD) at 1550 nm using the aforementioned doping concentrations and found an excellent agreement with the MFD of experimental fibers. We further, found that the effective indices of the fundamental mode (HE 11 ) for both the fibers are very close to each other, matching till the fourth decimal place, as has been shown in Fig. Here λ 0 is the free space wavelength, n 1 is the core refractive index, a is the core radius, d is the separation between fiber axes, and K ν (x) represents the modified Bessel function of order | a(L) In our study, Sellmeier relation In our simulations, we have fixed the interaction length equal to the tenth coupling length i.e., 140 μm at λ = 1.55 μm; and studied the transmission spectra at various temperature differences. The transmission spectra at four different temperature variations i.e. ∆T = 0 • C, 100 • C, 200 • C and 230 • C are shown in Fig. The overall transmission of the sensor depends upon the phase, φ = κL supported by the coupler. To explain these peculiar behaviors, we first note that the variation in the phase, φ obtained through the Taylor series expansion, which, retaining the first-order terms only, gives Unlike L, κ is a function of both the operating wavelength (λ ) as well as the perturbation parameter (here temperature T ). For constant phase points ( i.e. ∆φ = 0) we get Since the thermal expansion coefficient (α) and the coupling coefficient (κ) are essentially positive quantities, the nature of the spectral shift of the transmission spectrum will be governed μm whereas it is negative for λ > 0.879 μm. Therefore, as per equation ( We would like to mention here that while the flip of the spectral shift is common for both; the critical as well as crossover wavelength, the physical mechanism responsible for the flip is entirely different for both the cases. It is also interesting to note that one wavelength corresponds to ultra-high sensitivity (critical wavelength) whereas the other with ultra-low sensitivity (crossover wavelength) towards temperature. In conclusion, we have demonstrated and explained the existence of two unique wavelengths -the critical and the crossover wavelengths in the transmission spectrum of a DC, whose properties are conjugate to each other. The critical wavelength has largest and opposite spectral shifts for the transmission maxima/minima closest to and on either side of it, whereas the crossover wavelength corresponds to zero spectral shift. We have also shown that the physical mechanisms responsible for the existence of these wavelengths are completely different. Knowledge of the precise spectral location of both the wavelengths are necessary to avoid false positives/negatives in the measurand quantity and to maximize the spectral sensitivity. The work was financially supported by Science and Engineering Research Board, Government of India through projects PDF/2017/002679 and EMR/2016/007936.