Beyond the scope of space-coding metasurfaces, space-time digital metasurfaces can substantially expand the application scope of digital metamaterials in which simultaneous manipulation of electromagnetic waves in both space and frequency domains would be feasible. In this paper, by adopting a superposition operation of terms with unequal coefficient, Huygens principle, and a proper time-varying biasing mechanism, some useful closed-form formulas in the class of large digital metasurfaces were presented for predicting the absolute directivity of scatted beams. Moreover, in the harmonic beam steering scheme, by applying several suitable assumptions, we have derived two separate expressions for calculating the exact total radiated power at harmonic frequencies and total radiated power for scattered beams located at the end-fire direction. Despite the simplifying assumptions we have applied, we have proved that the provided formulas can still be a good and fast estimate for developing a large digital metasurface 1 Artificial metamaterials and their 2D counterpart, called metasurfaces, have attracted widespread consideration due to their capabilities to tailor the permittivity and permeability to reach values beyond material composites found in nature. To expand the application scope of digital metamaterials, the concept of space-time digital metasurface Accordingly, in this paper, by adopting superposition operation of terms with unequal coefficients on the electric field distribution and the Huygens principle, some convenient closed-form formulation to predict the absolute directivity values for each radiated multibeam is derived without any optimization procedure. Modulating both amplitude and phase of the meta-atoms is inevitable to fully manipulate the power intensity pattern of a metasurface. Besides, to control the power distribution in a reprogrammable manner, we have benefited from the concept of space-time digital metasurface where a set of coding sequences are switched cyclically in a predesigned time period. In the first section, the goal is to arbitrary manipulate the power distribution of large space-time metasurfaces which aimed to generate two beams in the desired directions with predetermined directivity values at the central frequency. In this section, we introduced a time-varying biasing mechanism in which the summation of the total radiated power of all harmonics can be approximated as half of the total radiated power at the central frequency. In the second section, by considering a harmonic beam steering scheme in a large space-time digital metasurface, we have presented a set of closed-form formula to predict the exact value of directivity at any harmonic frequencies which shows amazing concordance with simulation results. This general concept can be implemented in any desired frequency just by employing phase-only meta-particles as physical coding elements. As a proof of concept, several illustrative examples numerically demonstrated through MATLAB software. Eventually, the simulated results have a very good agreement with our theoretical prediction. By designing phase-only meta-particles as a physical coding element and by encoding proper time-varying spatial codes, based on the presented formalism, our proposed structure can be implemented in space-time digital metasurface based systems. where d x and d y are the elements period along the x and y directions, respectively and monic frequency where the modulation frequency, f 0 , is much smaller than the incident wave frequency, f c . 24 a m pq is the Fourier series coefficients of time-modulated reflection coefficient of the (p, q)th element and after some Fourier-based mathematical manipulations, one can deduce that: where Γ n pq = A n pq exp(jφ n pq ) is the reflection coefficient of the (p, q)th coding element during the nth interval , i.e., (n -1)T 0 /L < t < nT 0 /L. Theoretically speaking, a m pq specifies the equivalent amplitude and phase excitations of all elements at a specific harmonic frequency. As investigated in the previous work, 20 fully control the power ratio levels necessitates implementing high quantization levels (≥3-bit) for both amplitude and phase responses in which the building units of metasurface are characterized by 64 distinct phase/amplitude responses for eight-level quantization. Benefited from time modulated metasurface, independently modulate the amplitude and phase profiles of a metasurface by adopting a phase-only meta-atoms has been realized as depicted in Fig. Overall, a m pq can be arbitrary tuned between 64 distinct phase/amplitude states. Each meta-atom has its own independent time-coding sequence, yielding various equivalent amplitudes and phases at the separate harmonic frequencies. In the proposed time-varying biasing mechanism, the number of intervals should be considered in which, M is the number of quantization bits. Accordingly, we set L=16 for eight level quantization (3-bit) in the first section of the paper (see Fig. Based on the superposition of the aperture fields, the additive combination of two distinct phase-amplitude patterns yields a mixed phase-amplitude distribution, whereby both individual functionalities will appear at the same time in the superimposed metasurface cause to reach a metasurface with several missions. We will demonstrate that by adding real-valued multiplicative constants, p 1 and p 2 into the conventional superposition operation, one can arbitrarily control the absolute value of directivity for each multibeam independently through a closed form formula which is obtained by large metasurface assumption. In line with our outlined purpose, we employ the superposition operation with unequal coefficients at the central frequency as follows: Here, e jφ T and b carries the phase and amplitude information of a superimposed metasurface respectively. To realize a multibeam metasurface at the central frequency, e jφ i contains the pattern information of a single beam pointing at (θ i , φ i ) direction with uniform amplitude ( e jφ i = 1) and gradient phase distribution. After applying 3-bit quantization (64 distinct phase/amplitude responses) to e jφ T and b, the time-coding sequences of each individual coding elements will be obtained. Once the time coding sequences is determined according to time-varying biasing scheme presented in Fig. Thanks to the fact that the coding pattern and scattering pattern are a Fourier transform pair, wherein F i 0 (θ, φ) represents the array factor of primary metasurfaces and F T 0 (θ, φ) stands for the superimposed array factor of the final two-beam metasurface at the central frequency. To calculate the directivity of the space-time metasurface, the total radiated power contains all the Fourier components. Eventually, the peak directivity of the superimposed two-beam space-time metasurface can be computed by: 25 Then, the peak directivity of the radiated beam toward (θ 1 , φ 1 ) can be calculated: Q 2 represents the summation of the total radiated power of all harmonics and may not admit a general closed-form analytical solution. But fortunately, according to the proposed biasing scheme, for different values of elevation angles and multiplicative constants in a twobeam space-time metasurface, Q 2 can be approximated as Q 2 0.5 Q 1 (See section 1 in the supporting information). Since the superposition operation is adopted at the central frequency, for the sake of simplicity, we have defined F i 0 (θ, φ) = F i (θ, φ) throughout this paper. By substituting Eq. 4 into Eq. 6 and applying above assumption, D(θ 1 , φ 1 ) becomes: In the above equation p 1 and p 2 are real-valued coefficients. For a large metasurface with negligible sidelobes, we suppose that the angular position of the maximum in the array factor for the first beam is located in the vicinity of the null of the second beam, that is, 0 and we can estimate the total radiated power as E2 presented in section 2 of the supporting information. It is worth noting that we can only employ the assumption of (E2) when we use an additive combination of distinct constant amplitude-gradient phase excitations to generate multibeam and the other methods to generate multibeam will encounter major errors. Although we apply these simplifying assumptions which will lead to closed-form formalism, we will show that they are valid with a very good approximation in an almost large digital metasurface. Furthermore, the limitation of the above assumptions has been addressed in section investigations (1)-( Numerical simulations are carried out for calculating the approximate and exact value of total radiated power at the central frequency (Q 1 ). The results can be found in section 2 of the supporting information. Applying above assumptions, Eq. 7 is simplified as: In the above equation p 1 and p 2 are real-valued coefficients. F 1 and F 1 represent the array factor of the first and second scattered beams at the center frequency. We use Jacobian for applying a variable change from dθdφ to dψ x dψ y , (F (θ, φ) → F (ψ x , ψ y )), in which, ) and ψ y = 2π d λ (sin θ sin φ -sin θ max sin φ max ). θ and φ are the elevation and azimuth observation angles, respectively, d indicates the periodicity of meta-atoms along both vertical and horizontal directions and λ is the working wavelength at the central frequency. θ max and φ max represent the angles of maximum radiation with reference to broadside direction. Since the metasurface is large and the beamwidth of each independent scattered beam is narrow, then, the major contributions to the integral of total radiated power for the first and second beam will be in the neighborhood of θ 1 and θ 2 respectively. Therefore, the expression of cos θ which has appeared in the integral of total radiated power of the first and second beam can be approximated by cos θ 1 and cos θ 2 respectively. To verify the above equation, we have calculated the P radiation for a scanned single beam metasurface for different values of scanning angles and metasurface length (See section 3 in the supporting information). As can be observed from Table In the above equation, F (ψ x , ψ y ) stands for the array factor in a broadside direction and has a uniform excitation amplitude ( e jφ i = 1) and would be as the product of those two linear arrays, By applying Eq. 12 which is known as separable or multiplication method, the rest of calculation can be found as follows: It should be noted that, in deducing Eq. 14, D x and D y represent the peak directivity of linear arrays along x and y directions and equal to 2A/λ in which A denotes the length of the array. Following the same steps, the peak directivity of a two-beam space-time metasurface with proposed time-varying biasing mechanism toward (θ 2 , φ 2 ) can be immediately obtained from Eq. 16. Overall, the absolute value of directivity along (θ 1 , φ 1 ) and (θ 2 , φ 2 ) direction can be immediately obtained from Eq. 15 and Eq. 16 respectively where D max represents the maximum directivity of a metasurface and equals to 4πA 2 /λ 2 (A = N d). The variable N denotes the number of meta-atoms in a proposed space-time metasurface and can be selected differently for desired value of directivities as below: It should be noted that for a space-time metasurface generating a single beam at desired direction (p 2 = 0), it is required that all the meta-atoms have the phase gradient distribution with uniform reflection amplitude. In this case, the time-coding sequences will be obtained in such a way that the reflection phase of each individual coding elements are constant during each 16 intervals which is marked with stars in Fig. X is constant for each coding elements in a modulation period and can take any arbitrary value from 0 to 7π/4 . Therefore, the total radiated power at harmonics will be equal to zero (Q 2 = 0). Following the previous steps (Eq. 6-15), the peak directivity of a single beam metasurface along (θ 1 , φ 1 ) direction is equal to D = πD x D y cos θ 1 . This is the well-known Elliott's expression for directivity of large scanning planar array. The real-valued multiplicative constants can be immediately obtained by dividing Eq. 15 into Eq. 16 and will be equal to p 1 = 0.9 and p 2 = 1 respectively (p 1 /p 2 = 0.9). After calculating the amplitude and phase pattern of the superimposed metasurface (b and e jφ T ) from Eq. 3 and applying eight-level quantization, the time coding sequences of each coding element will be obtained according to proposed time-varying biasing scheme. Eventually, by performing numerical simulations, such an encoded metasurface plays the role of a large space-time digital metasurface architecture that elaborately splits the normal incident wave into two asymmetric beams with the directivity values of D 1 = 24.98 (0.02 dB difference) and D 2 = 26 dBi (0.09 dB difference). As can be observed in Fig. To further verify the concept and dive into the performance of proposed method, our final example is devoted to a two-beam generating space-time digital metasurface with desired tilt angles pointing at (15 respectively. Referring to the directivity intensity pattern presented in Fig. Overall, the presented approach founded on closed-form formulation successfully performs its missions, that is, predicting the absolute directivities of multiple beams which also fur-nish an inspiring platform for realizing a space-time digital metasurface with predetermined directivities pointing at desired directions without resorting to any brute-force optimization schemes. As can be deduced from the above examples, despite the simplifying assumptions we have applied, the provided formula can still be a good and quick estimate for designing a large digital metasurface. Exploring the limit of the metasurface dimensions for the accuracy of the above formulas is also discussed in section investigation (2). In this section, we intend to present a closed-form formula to estimate the exact value of absolute directivity at any harmonic frequencies based on the proposed PM harmonic beam steering scheme which is presented in Ref 12. The required number of coding elements to reach the predetermined directivity is also discussed. Unlike the previous section where we applied the assumption of orthogonality, in harmonic beam steering scheme each scattered beam is orthogonal to each other and the closed-form formulas obtained in this section are more rigorous. PM harmonic beam steering can be realized by using time-gradient sequences as illustrated in Fig. In L intervals, for each coding element, Y consists of one "1" digits and L -1 "0" digits. In the harmonic beam steering scheme, the beampattern at the fundamental frequency (f c ) always has a maximum response at the boresight direction (θ = 0). The phase difference (∆ψ m ) between neighboring coding elements at the mth harmonic frequency can be written as: Under normal illumination, the scattered beam at the mth harmonic frequency obeys the generalized snell's law and the beam steering angle θ m can be written as: In the above equation d λ = d y /λ, in which d y is the inter-element spacing between metaatoms in the phase progressive direction ( in this paper along y-direction). From the knowledge gained in the previous section (Eq. 10) and Eq .21-22 in this section, one can deduce that: In which P 0 and P m are the total radiated power at the fundamental and harmonic frequencies respectively in a large space-time digital metasurface. As θ m → 90 o , this expression is no longer valid due to the nature of the approximation in Eq. 10. According to Eq. 24, the beampatterns at the harmonic frequencies of m = (2n -1)Ld λ , n = 1, 2, ..., have a maximum response at endfire direction. Referring to the method adopted by King and Thomas, 30 at endfire, the total radiated power can be written as: where A is the length of the metasurface and equals to A = N d. It should be noted that, since the phase difference between adjacent coding elements at m = (2n -1)Ld λ is 180 • , then the metasurface divides the incident energy into two symmetrically oriented scattered beams. Therefore, for a large space-time digital metasurface, the total radiated power at the endfire direction is twice the value obtained in the above equation and it can be written with respect to total radiated power at the central frequency as follows: Using Eq .25 and Eq. 27, one can estimate the exact total radiated power at all harmonic frequencies. Eventually, since the beampatterns at different harmonic frequencies are orthogonal to each other, the total radiated power in the harmonic beam steering scheme can be readily obtained: To survey the validation of Eq. 25, 27, 28, numerical simulations are carried out employing the well-known antenna array theory. The coding metasurface composed of 40×40 elements with 20-interval periodic time modulation (L = 20) and d x = d y = λ/2. The total radiated power at the central frequency is equal to P 0 = 5256.2. Quantitative comparison between the numerical simulations and theoretical prediction from 1st to 50th positive harmonic frequencies is illustrated in Fig. The absolute directivity of space-time metasurface in the harmonic beam steering scheme at the central and harmonic frequencies can be readily obtained respectively: In the above equations, R 1 and R 2 are introduced in Eq. 28 and D max represents the maximum directivity of the metasurface and is equal to 4πA 2 /λ 2 . Despite the number of harmonics is unlimited, but for higher harmonics, the equivalent amplitude and corresponding total radiated power drop sharply. Therefore, the numerical simulations are carried out to calculate the peak directivity of each scattered beams in which the total radiated power of the space-time metasurface is calculated by considering -50th to +50th harmonic frequencies. Fig. This is a good approximation in a large space-time metasurface which significantly boosts the speed of designing the harmonic beam steering scheme without resorting to any brute-force optimization. Approximation provided in Eq. 10 and Eq. 25 is not valid for large scan angles. Therefore, Eq. 25 is valid for the harmonics with scan angle lower than that given by the limiting case as expressed by Eq. 32. In the presented example, the scan angle of the harmonic m = Ld λ -1 is equal to 64.1 • (see Fig. In this investigation, we will survey the impact of the metasurface dimensions in validation of Eq. 10. As mentioned before, if the beamwidth of scattered beams is narrow, the major contributions to the integral of the total radiated power will be in the neighborhood of the maximum scan angle. To further clarify, several numerical simulations are performed which are depicted in Fig. In the first section, we applied 3-bit quantization to the superimposed phase-amplitude pattern and we claimed that fully manipulate the power intensity pattern necessitates implementing at least 3-bit quantization level. In investigation (3), we will demonstrate how aggressive quantization deteriorates the performance of the closed-form formula presented in section 1. To investigate the quantization impact, the numerical simulations have been accomplished where the phase-amplitude profiles describing the superimposed metasurfaces are quantized into two or three levels. A fair comparison between the power intensity patterns generated by the continuous and quantized phase-amplitude profiles have been performed in Fig. In summary, in the first section, benefited from superposition operation with unequal coefficient, Huygens principle and proposed time-varying biasing mechanism, some useful closed-form formulas were presented to manipulate the power intensity pattern in a large space-time digital metasurface utilizing a simple phase-only meta-particle. We applied some simplifying assumptions to reach these convenient formulas and we have demonstrated that these assumptions are valid with a very good approximation in an almost large digital metasurface. Besides, the impact of the metasurface dimensions in the validation of these equations has been addressed. Moreover, the impact of quantization level on the performance of power manipulating has been discussed. The numerical results are in good accordance with analytical predictions and the disorders generated from approximations are very negligible even for scattered beams with large scan angle. In the second section, in the harmonic beam steering scheme, we have presented closed-form formulas to estimate the exact value of absolute directivity at any harmonic frequencies. Utilizing several suitable assumptions, we have derived two separate expressions for calculating the exact total radiated power at harmonic frequencies and total radiated power for scattered beams located at the end-fire direction. The quantitative comparison between simulation results and theoretical predictions have revealed amazing agreement. By observing the introduced limits in the manuscript, the proposed straightforward approach in both sections is expected to broaden the applications of digital space-time metasurfaces significantly and exposes a new opportunity for various applications such as multiple-target radar systems and NOMA communication. .....