We present a theoretical study of the structure and functionality of ferroelastic domain walls in tungsten trioxide, WO3. WO3 has a rich structural phase diagram, with the stability and properties of the various structural phases strongly affected both by temperature and by electron doping. The existence of superconductivity is of particular interest, with the underlying mechanism as of now not well understood. In addition, reports of enhanced superconductivity at structural domain walls are particularly intriguing. Focusing specifically on the orthorhombic β phase, we calculate the structure and properties of the domain walls both with and without electron doping. We use two theoretical approaches: Landau-Ginzburg theory, with free energies constructed from symmetry considerations and parameters extracted from our first-principles density functional calculations, and direct calculation using large-scale, GPU-enabled density functional theory. We find that the structure of the β-phase domain walls resembles that of the bulk tetragonal α1 phase, and that the electronic charge tends to accumulate at the walls. Motivated by this finding, we perform ab initio computations of electron-phonon coupling in the bulk α1 structure and extract the superconducting critical temperatures , Tc, within Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory. Our results provide insight into the experimentally observed unusual trend of decreasing Tc with increasing electronic charge carrier concentration. A. Introduction Tungsten trioxide, WO 3 , is a functionally versatile material with possible applications based on electrochromism (smart windows), gasochromism (gas sensors) and photocatalysis At room temperature, WO 3 shows two types of ferroelastic domain walls which correspond to two successive ferroelastic transitions at higher temperatures. Fig. Upon further reduction of temperature, the second ferroelastic transition corresponds to the transformation from the orthorhombic β phase to the monoclinic γ phase (P 2 1 /n). In addition to the monoclinic distortion of the lattice, this transition introduces additional directional components to the already present cubic X + 5 and R - 5 modes, however the additional amplitude of the X + 5 is very small. These changes require no further doubling of the unit cell, so the order parameter of this second transition is an orthorhombic Γ mode: Γ + 2 (0, 0, 0). We refer to the domain walls that form between different orientations of the γ phase at this transition as γ domain walls. In experiments, the two types of domain walls create a pattern in which the γ domain walls (blue in Fig. Symmetries of, and transitions between, the structural phases of WO 3 as a function of decreasing temperature T or increasing amount of electron doping ρ. The arrows indicate the transition modes using the notation of the structure at the arrow origin. That is blue modes denote modes of the cubic, green of the α 1 , red of the α 2 and black of the β structures. Listed in blue on the right are all modes of the cubic structure present in the respective lower-symmetry structures. The Q and R labels at the transitions represented by red arrows denote parameters of the energy expansions that will be introduced later. tion) correspond to (110) planes and a transition of type mmF2/m (which the β -γ transition corresponds to) has (100) vanishing strain planes. In this work, we investigate theoretically the structure and properties of the β domain walls in WO 3 . We start by constructing the Landau-Ginzburg free energy densities using parameters obtained from electronic structure calculations based on density functional theory (DFT), and use these Landau-Ginzburg expressions to calculate the structure and properties of the walls with and without doping. We benchmark our model calculations by also calculating the structure of the β domain wall directly from first-principles using a large supercell. Our calculations allow us to extract both the structural and electrostatic changes associated with domain wall formation. We find that the structure at the β domain wall resembles that of the bulk tetragonal α 1 phase, and that the electrostatic changes cause a local accumulation of electronic charge at the wall. Motivated by these results, we calculate the doping dependence of the critical temperature for electron-phonon mediated superconductivity in the bulk tetragonal α 1 structure, and find that We begin our treatment of the β ferroelastic domain walls in WO 3 by constructing the equations describing their free energy density according to the Landau-Ginzburg theory of the α 2 -β transition. We then determine the lowest energy domain wall profiles by numerical minimization, and partly by analytical solution, of the free energy density. The detailed analytical solution is presented in appendix section VII A. As outlined above, the tetragonal α 2 to orthorhombic β transition, which occurs at around 1000 K, is driven by the condensation of a single mode with M 1 symmetry of the tetragonal phase (see Fig. 2 )e as + λ 3 (q 2 1 + q 2 2 )e 3 + s[(∇q 1 ) 2 + (∇q 2 ) 2 ] + C ij e i e j , (1) where we use Voigt and Einstein notations Parameters a Q , b Q and c Q correspond to terms that are non-vanishing even when Q has only one component (i.e. q 2 = 0) and parameters a 2Q and b 2Q describe the bidirectional coupling between the order parameter components that only occur when both q 1 and q 2 are non-zero. A. Extension of the Landau-Ginzburg free energy density to include the effect of additional charge Next we extend the Landau-Ginzburg free energy density to study the effect of additional charge, ρ(z), introduced by reduction or doping. a. Effect of charge on the order parameter, Q. We begin by analyzing the effect of additional charge density on the Q order parameter describing the α 2 to β transition by extending the free energy density expression as follows. Here, the direct effect of the charge on the free energy density in the α 2 reference structure appears explicitly as the chemical potential term μ(ρ). All additional effects of the change in chemical potential are incorporated in the ρ dependence of the Landau parameters, a Q (ρ) etc. Note that we also account for the effect of charge on the gradient parameter s(ρ). b. Effect of charge doping on the amplitude of the cubic R - 5 mode. In addition to affecting the Q order parameter responsible for the α 2 to β transition, the addition of charge has the effect of reducing the amplitude of the cubic R - 5 mode which is present in both the α 2 and β phases Including this degree of freedom in the Landau potential with this definition of R leads to the free energy density: Thus the additional energy, F R = F QR -F Q , is 0 in the α 2 phase where R is 0. Note that we included R2Q terms, in which R is present in a single and Q in two directions, up to eighth order. The properties of WO 3 are unusually sensitive to the choice of exchange-correlation functional, with many studies in the literature suggesting different choices. Consistently good matches of relaxed structures to experimental structures have been reported using the B1-WC hybrid functional by Hamdi et al. In this work we use the local-density approximation (LDA) description of the exchange-correlation functional. Our motivation is its good description of the amplitude of the tetragonal M 1 mode, which is the order parameter Q of the α 2 -β transition that we study in detail here. The lattice constants and phonon mode amplitudes of WO 3 bulk structures that we calculate within the LDA in this work are listed in TABLES I and II. We note, however, that our chosen LDA implementation is not suitable for describing the γ domain walls because it does not yield a pronounced and necessary decrease in energy from the β to the γ phase as for instance reported by Hamdi et al The calculations to obtain the parameters of the Landau-Ginzburg free energies in Eqns. ( The Landau parameters were determined by calculating the energies of structures with different amplitudes of the Q (q 1 and/or q 2 ) and/or R distortions frozen into the reference α 2 structure in the range from 0 to 1.2 Å per unit cell. We calculated the energies of a total of 360 distinct (R, q 1 , q 2 ) points, with the size of the unit cells allowed to relax in each case to satisfy the condition of energy-minimizing strain. Parameters to sixth order (eighth order for the R2Q) were calculated for all described terms, with higher-order terms, constrained to be small and positive, included in the fit in each case to prevent unphysical negative divergence. To calculate the change of the parameters on charge doping, we repeated the set of calculations for a total of four different amounts of additional electrons up to 0.25 electrons per f.u. The cell parameters were set to those obtained from relaxations that did not contain additional charge and they were not allowed to relax further. The changes in the parameters were then fitted up to quadratic order of the charge density ρ (see TABLE We fitted the chemical potential μ(ρ) of the α 2 reference structure with a quadratic dependence on the charge density ρ in the free energy density (see TABLE Finally, the gradient parameters s and t were obtained with the procedure described in the appendix section VII B. The inter-atomic force constants of the α 2 phase in real space were calculated by interpolating the dynamical matrices on a q-grid. Force constant matrices were then interpolated for q-points on the q-paths (1/2, 1/2, 0) → (1/2 + δ, 1/2 + δ, 0) for the M 1 and (0, 0, 0) → (δ, δ, 0) for the Γ + 2 mode (the corresponding α 2 -β domain walls correspond to the (110) crystallographic plane). The path length δ was set to 0.04. The branches belonging to the transition modes M 1 and Γ + 2 in the force constant matrix dispersion were determined by symmetry combined with visual analysis of the respective displacements η. The corresponding gradient parameters s and t were finally obtained by performing a quadratic fit to the determined force constant branch as shown in equation (18). To describe the change of the gradient parameters with charge, calculations of s(ρ) and t(ρ) were performed in the α 2 cell with three values of ρ, and then fitted to fourth order in ρ with the third order term omitted (see TABLE In addition to our Landau-Ginzburg calculations of the β domain wall, we also performed direct calculations by explicitly relaxing the domain wall structure using DFT. We constructed a supercell containing two β domain walls corresponding to (110) crystallographic planes for subsequent relaxation (see Fig. We then relaxed the supercell structure with some atoms fixed to the bulk structure (see Fig. All calculations for the large domain wall supercells were performed with the GPU-accelerated VASP (version 5.4.4) DFT implementation The core electrons were treated with projector-augmented waves, allowing for a lower planewave cutoff energy compared to the norm-conserving pseudopotentials employed for the rest of this work First-principles calculations of electron-phonon coupling were performed for electron-doped 8-atom α 1 and 16-atom α 2 cells. Electron doping was achieved by adding electrons with a compensating background charge rather than explicit inclusion of point defects; this method has been shown to describe well the chargeinduced structural distortions in WO 3 We used the EPW package in conjunction with Quantum Espresso As the calculated stresses in charged unit cells with a constant background charge are not well-defined in DFT implementations, we did not relax the volumes of our unit cells and supercells in the calculations for which we include additional electronic charge To determine the validity of keeping the lattice parameters fixed in our Landau model, we compared our Landau parameters calculated using the relaxed lattice parameters of the undoped cells with calculations in which the cell parameters of the α 2 cells were interpolated to those of the cubic NaWO 3 cell. We found that the changes in the Landau curves caused by the volume change were negligible compared to those caused by the introduction of charge into the uncharged cells. Thus, the change in volume caused by doping within the doping range used here can be safely disregarded. In the case of the electron-phonon calculations for the α 1 phase, the change in cell size on doping could not be disregarded, as the phonon dispersions depend strongly on the cell volume. For example rotational modes are artifically stabilized if the cell volume is not allowed to increase, whereas antipolar modes are artifically destabilized. Thus, we opted for the compromise of linearly interpolating the lattice parameters between those calculated for the tetragonal WO 3 and for the cubic NaWO 3 unit cells. We found this approximation to be sufficient to describe the correct general trends of the modes upon doping in the α 1 phase. In particular, the rotational R - 5 mode became softer with decreasing charge x so that the α 2 -α 1 transition occurred at a doping value close to the experimentally observed transition value of x = 0.2 in Na x WO 3 -x 9 . Also, the amplitude of the antipolar cubic M - 2 mode decreased with increasing x consistent with the literature Using the Landau-Ginzburg parameters obtained as described in Section III B, we calculated the profiles of the order parameters across the domain walls by numerically minimizing the total free energy density functional given in equation ( The calculated evolution of the order parameters across the energetically minimized β domain walls for various doping levels is shown in Fig. A distinct change in behavior is seen on introduction of electrons. At the most strongly doped example studied, 0.24 electrons per formula unit (yellow line), the wall is strongly Ising like, with the amplitude of Q suppressed to zero in the wall region. At this highest doping level, the domain wall width is widened by a factor of around 3.6 relative to the width in the undoped wall as measured by the fitting of the φ curves to | arctan(exp(z/ξ))| curves. The crossover from undoped behavior to doped behavior, as well as the wall broadening, are gradual, with intermediate dopings (purple, red and orange colors) having intermediate behavior. The origin of the evolution with doping is clear in Fig. As discussed earlier, electron doping causes a reduction in the amplitude of the Q order parameter, moving the structure towards the α 2 phase. In addition, it causes a decrease of the Z + 3 mode, parametrized by |R - 5 | as shown in Fig. Motivated by our estimation of the domain wall widths of ∼14 Å from our Landau-Ginzburg model, we next performed a full density functional calculation of the domain wall structure shown in Fig. Our calculated layer-resolved order parameter angle φ and its amplitude |Q| are shown in Fig. A clear difference compared to the Landau-Ginzburg model can be found in the amplitude of the Q (M 1 ) mode in the domain walls. In the DFT-calculated walls we observe a slight increase in Q, whereas it decreased in the walls obtained from Landau-Ginzburg theory. The reason for this is the limitation of the phase space used in the Landau-Ginzburg model. When comparing fully relaxed structures of the P bcn (β) (with order parameter direction Q(a, 0)) and the P 42 der parameter direction Q(a, a)) phases we observe that the latter has a lower energy and a higher total Q amplitude than the former. Thus, we expect that including additional order parameters in the Landau-Ginzburg model would also lead to an increase in Q in the center of the domain wall. However, this would lead to a highly increased dimension of the phase space, making the Landau-Ginzburg parameterization unfeasible. Due to the small amplitude of these additional distortions, it is reasonable to assume that the difference in domain wall width would be minor if they were included. Furthermore, we expect the inaccuracy in the Q displacement to be less relevant in the charged domain walls, as the charge reduces the amplitude of both Q and R - 5 at the domain wall. In summary, we investigated the structure of the βtype domain walls that form during the phase transition from the tetragonal α 2 phase to the orthorhombic β phase in WO 3 in the framework of Landau-Ginzburg and density functional theories. Our Landau-Ginzburg calculations showed that the ferroelastic walls in the undoped case are mostly Néel-like, with the amplitude of the order parameter Q retaining ∼80% of its bulk value. We found the domain wall width 2ξ to be around 14 Å in the undoped case. Electronic doping increased our calculated domain wall width and led to an accumulation of the additional charge in the domain wall. The domain wall width of WO 3 β domain walls at very low temperatures has been reported to be around 2w = 1.2 nm in experiments Motivated by our finding that the charge accumulates at the domain walls and causes a local α 1 -like structure, we next study the superconducting properties of this phase. Experimentally, the α 1 phase of Na x WO 3 -x , which also has P 4/nmm symmetry Our approach is to calculate and analyze T c as a function of doping within standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory We calculate the electron-phonon coupling matrix, using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) Here, ∆ ν q V KS is the phonon perturbation to the Kohn-Sham potential, and the matrix elements are the transition probability amplitudes for an electron in initial state φ nk with wave vector k and band n, scattering to final state φ mk+q of band m, via a phonon of wave vector q and branch ν. We then evaluate the superconducting critical temperature using the semi-empirical Allen-Dynes equation 81 with the coupling strength, λ, and the weighted phonon frequency ω , extracted from the electron-phonon matrix as described in the appendix section VII D and an empirical value of 0.1 taken for the effective Coulomb repulsion μ. A. BCS theory applied to the bulk α1 phase We begin by calculating the superconducting T c for the α 1 phase, to see whether the measured decrease in T c with increasing doping is correctly captured within BCS theory. The α 1 structure is stable for calculated electron concentrations larger than x ≈ 0.125 (for lower concentrations, it has an unstable Z + 3 mode, indicating the transition to the lower-energy α 2 structure), which is therefore the lowest doping concentration that we consider. Our calculated electron bands, phonon bands, phonon linewidths, phonon density of states and Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F for x = 0.125 are shown in Fig. 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 x [e/f. u. ] T c , however, is robust to these parameters. Therefore we conclude from our calculations that conventional BCS theory captures the observed evolution of T c with doping in the α 1 phase of WO 3 . 83 Given the good agreement of our computational BCS theory results with experiments, we next analyze them to rationalize the behavior. In particular, the decreasing T c with x was unexpected within a simple BCS picture, since the electron density of states at the Fermi level, n(E F ), has been reported from photoemission measurements to increase with increasing x in tetragonal Na x WO 3 -x In Fig. Finally, to understand the change in superconductivity across the α 1 -α 2 transition, we performed a calculation of T c in the α 2 phase where experimentally superconductivity has not been measured. We chose a value of x = 0.125 for the T c calculation in the α 2 phase, and adjusted the lattice constants as outlined in section III E for the α 1 phase, so that the resulting system in the α 2 phase was quite far from the α 1 -α 2 transition. (The amplitude of the transition mode Z + 3 was 0.51 Å, compared with the amplitude of 0.76 Å in the undoped α 2 phase). As expected, our calculated T c dropped sharply from the calculated α 1 value, to 0.018 K, consistent with a sharp drop in the calculated λ value to 0.25. The bands and linewidths for the α 2 case are shown in appendix Fig. While our calculations indicate that the superconducting behavior of WO 3 can be reproduced within standard BCS theory, this is of course not definitive evidence that WO 3 is a BCS superconductor. In this section we discuss two other models for superconductivity -based on soft modes and bipolarons respectively -that have been discussed in the literature. We begin with a discussion of the importance of the soft mode, whose strong change in frequency with doping was originally proposed to account for the apparently paradoxical behaviour of T c upon doping 9 , in spite of its absence in inelastic neutron scattering experiments 12: Calculated T c as a function of the upper integration frequency limit, ω max , in equations ( and doping dependence of α 2 F point to a small, if any, role of the soft mode at the BCS level; here we quantify its contribution. In Fig. Second, we note that electronic carriers in doped WO 3 have been shown, using optical absorption, conductivity and electron spin-resonance data, to form both polarons -in some cases in combination with free carriers To link our bulk WO 3 results to the sheet superconductivity reported at the WO 3 β domain walls Many of the samples in which domain wall superconductivity was measured showed a stripe pattern of parallel ferroelastic domain walls of only one type (see for example Ref. 22). Since similar samples were characterized in detail and shown to consist of β domain walls In this work, we calculated the structure and properties of the ferroelastic domain walls within the β phase of WO 3 , using a combination of first-principles density functional calculations and Landau-Ginzburg theory. We showed that the ferroelastic β domain walls have mixed Néel and Ising character, and found that free electronic charge preferentially accumulates at the domain walls. We showed that this accumulation of charge leads to a broadening of the walls and an increase in their Ising character, as well as a change in the atomic structure within the domain wall structure to the α 1 (P 4/nmm) phase. This latter phase is known to be the superconducting phase in doped WO 3 , suggesting that the domain wall superconductivity is a consequence of the combined electron accumulation and local structural change at the walls. To investigate further this possible link between domain wall and bulk superconductivity, we performed electron-phonon calculations based DFT to calculate the T c as a function of doping in the bulk α 1 phase at the BCS-theory level. Our calculated values were comparable in magnitude to the measured values ( < ∼ 2 K) and showed the same trend of decrease in T c with increasing doping. The evolution of T c with doping correlated with a reduction in the electron-phonon coupling, with the largest contribution coming from high frequency phonons above approximately 600 cm -1 . Our calculations suggest that the superconductivity at the domain walls in WO 3 results from the combined accumulation of charge at the walls and the structural changes at the domain walls that are induced by the presence of the carriers. Using the Landau-Ginzburg free energy density expression, one can calculate domain wall profiles by minimizing the free energy density with appropriate boundary conditions. For a 2D order parameter, in general, we can have two types of domain walls, Néel-type (order parameter rotates along the wall) and Ising-type (order parameter vanishes on the domain wall). These two limiting cases can be calculated analytically for a simple Landau theory of the form: 1. Néel wall For ease of calculation, we parametrize q 1 and q 2 with polar coordinates {Q, φ}. For a fixed amplitude Q 0 , we construct the Euler-Lagrange equation ( Using the boundary conditions Q(-∞) = -Q 0 and Q(∞) = Q 0 , equation ( with ξ considered to be half the domain wall width. The other possible domain wall for a 2D order parameter is the Ising-type wall, in which the order parameter amplitude vanishes in the middle of the wall. (Note that for 1D irreps, this is the only possibility.) For such a wall, the Euler-Lagrange equation has the form where the 6th-order Landau term has been omitted, so that we can exploit the known solutions of the 4rd-order equation. These solutions are In reality, a structural domain wall with 2D order parameter will be a mixture of Néel-and Ising types, and its profile can be obtained by solving both ( To calculate the gradient parameters we followed the procedure outlined by Artyukhin et al in Ref. 99. Consider any order parameter Q described by the eigendisplacement η Q (q) of a force constant mode corresponding to a wave vector q. Q is then given by an eigenvector of the force constant matrix The gradient energy term in q-space associated with the parameter s Q can then be written as which equals 0 if q = 0. Therefore it is possible to determine s Q for some direction of q by calculating the energies of supercells with distortions described by Eqn. 15 with various magnitudes of qs frozen in along this direction. A more feasible approach is to determine s Q from the force constant dispersion. The Hessian of the gradient energy for all modes η q of q is equal to the force constant matrix in q-space C (q) within the harmonic approximation: Consequently, the eigenvalues of the Hessian in expression (17) are the eigenvalues of the force constant matrix and we can determine all gradient parameters of modes with wave vector q by expanding the Hessian in (17) around q = 0: The gradient parameter corresponding to the mode η Q is then given by the eigenvalue of expression (18) corresponding to the mode η Q : C. Exchange-correlation-functional suitability for the description of the β to γ transition As mentioned in the main text, both LDA and GGA (PBEsol) exchange-correlation functionals yielded almost identical energies for the β and γ phases, even though the structural relaxations yielded distinct structures. This was the case for both Quantum Espresso and VASP calculations. Consequences of the small energy difference between the two phases were a negligible Landau parameter a, which (consistent with Eqn. 14) led to unreasonably large widths for the γ domain walls, and erratic behavior in the DFT structural relaxations. A crude estimate for the Landau parameters can be made by using the β -γ transition energy obtained with B1-WC calculations as reported by Hamdi et al. to approximate the Landau parameters a and b 39 . The condition that the mode amplitude Q 0 in (13) equals the bulk amplitude of the orthorhombic Γ + 2 mode in the γ phase (experimentally 0.531 Å) and that the Landau potential in eq. ( Once the electron-phonon matrix in equation ( nk -mk+q -ω ν q + iη dk, (20) where w k denotes the weights for the k-points, nk is the band energy, f ( ) is the associated Fermi occupancy, ω ν q is the phonon frequency and η is a smearing parameter for allowed transitions. In principle, the latter can be neglected in calculations where the k-and q-grids are dense enough. In such a limit of vanishing smearing, and additionally vanishing phonon frequencies, lim η,ωqν →0 γ qν , one arrives at the so-called double-delta approximation of the phonon linewidth where a smearing may be reintroduced in the the two delta functions. A similar expression as the one for the double-delta approximation (21) gives the electronphonon coupling strength λ ν q for the phonon dk|g ν nm (k, q)| 2 δ( nk )δ( mk+q ), (22) where n(E F ) is the DOS at the Fermi energy. Consequently, the coupling strength in the double-delta approximation is given as Calculating the Brillouin-zone average of the coupling strength yields the first parameter in the McMillan formula which is the total coupling strength λ λ = ν 1 Ω BZ BZ dqw q λ ν q , where w q now denotes the weights for the q points. In the Allen-Dynes formula, λ is evaluated as where α 2 F (ω) is the isotropic Eliashberg spectral function, which in turn is given as dqw q ω ν q λ ν q δ(ω -ω ν q ). ( The delta function may again be subject to a smearing for numerical calculations. The remaining characteristic phonon frequency ω , according to Allen and Dynes, is then given as ω = exp 2 λ dω ω α 2 F (ω)log(ω) . E. Calculated Landau-Ginzburg parameters 