In this paper, the electrical behavior of tungsten carbide (WC) Schottky barrier on 4H-SiC was investigated. First, a statistical current-voltage (I-V) analysis in forward bias, performed on a set of equivalent diodes, showed a symmetric Gaussian-like distribution of the barrier heights after annealing at 700°C, where a low Schottky barrier height (ΦB=1.05 eV) and an ideality factor n=1.06 were measured. The low value of the barrier height makes such a WC contact an interesting candidate to reduce the conduction losses in 4H-SiC Schottky diodes. A deeper characterization has been carried out, by monitoring the temperature dependence of the I-V characteristics and the behavior of the relevant parameters ΦB and n. The increase of the barrier height and decrease of the ideality factor with increasing temperature indicated a lateral inhomogeneity of the WC/4H-SiC Schottky contact, which was described by invoking the Tung's model. Interestingly, the temperature dependence of the leakage current under reverse bias could be described by considering in the thermionic field emission model the temperature dependent barrier height related to the inhomogeneity. These results can be useful to predict the behavior of WC/4H-SiC Schottky diodes under operative conditions. Today, hexagonal silicon carbide (4H-SiC) is recognized as material of choice to overcome the limits of conventional silicon technology, in terms of power losses reduction and energy efficiency improvement Among the 4H-SiC devices, Schottky barrier diodes (SBDs) have reached a mature technological level with a variety of products commercially available by several companies, providing low on-state voltage drop, high breakdown voltage, high switching speed, combined with possibility to operate at high temperature Since the core of a SBD is the metal/semiconductor interface, in the last two decades several studies have investigated the electrical properties of various metallization schemes for Schottky contacts to 4H-SiC and the current transport through these interfaces In literature, metallization schemes based on low-work-function metals with high melting point (W, Mo, ...) The electrical characterization of a contact relies on the study of the Schottky barrier height ΦB, which governs the forward voltage drop, and the reverse leakage current. Peculiarity of an ideal contact is featuring a barrier height independent of temperature, voltage and measurement method, with the ΦB value close to that predicted by the Schottky-Mott rule Several studies have discussed the inhomogeneity of Schottky contacts on 4H-SiC based on different metals (Ti, Ni, Ni2Si, W, ....) This study reports on the electrical behavior of WC/4H-SiC Schottky contacts. In particular, a temperature dependent current-voltage characterization (I-V-T) enabled to get insights on the inhomogeneous nature of the barrier and to explain the forward and reverse conduction mechanisms through the inhomogeneous WC/4H-SiC interface. Commercial n-type 4H-SiC wafer, with a 9.5 μm thick epitaxial layer having a nominal doping concentration ND=8×10 15 cm - 3 , was used as starting material in our study. On this sample, Schottky diodes with an active contact area A=4.53×10 -2 cm 2 have been fabricated, using tungsten carbide (WC) as barrier metal. Before the front-side processing of the wafer, a large-area backside contact has been fabricated by Ni deposition followed by rapid thermal annealing (RTA) at 950 °C in N2 Firstly, in order to evaluate the uniformity of the WC/4H-SiC Schottky barrier formation, the distribution of the ideality factor n and barrier height ΦB was derived from forward I-V characteristics acquired on a set of equivalent diodes fabricated on the wafer, in the as-deposited and annealed samples. Fig. By applying the thermionic emission (TE) model where A is the diode area, A * is the theoretical Richardson constant of 4H-SiC (146 , kB is the Boltzmann constant, q is the electron charge, VF is the voltage applied across the metal/semiconductor interface and T is the absolute temperature. Fig. For a deeper investigation of the Schottky contact behavior, a temperature-dependent current-voltage characterization (I-V-T) was carried on this system. Such a characterization gives information on the local degree of homogeneity of the barrier and enables to elucidate the current transport mechanisms through the metal/4H-SiC interface. These measurements were performed on one of the contacts annealed at 700 °C. The forward J-V characteristics (with J the current density) are displayed in Fig. allows to extrapolate the "effective" values of the barrier height and of the Richardson's constant as slope and y-intercept of a conventional "Richardson's plot" ln # $ % vs . Such a plot, reported in Fig. According to Tung's approach, the effective barrier ΦBi eff of a single low-barrier patch is related to the surrounding uniform high barrier ΦB 0 background by: where Vbb is the band bending and η ε qN ; ⁄ . The parameter γ takes into account the patch characteristics through the relation γ (3ΔR -4 ⁄ ) 6/7 , where ∆ is the local deviation from the ideal barrier ΦB 0 and R0 is the patch radius (assuming a circular geometry) Hence, considering the value T0= 34 K obtained in our case (Fig. In order to get additional insights on the barrier height and current conduction mechanism, the WC/4H-SiC contact was studied also under reverse bias, monitoring the temperature-dependence of the reverse I-V characteristics of the diodes. It is known that the presence of interface inhomogeneities, whose presence was previously observed under forward bias for the WC/4H-SiC interface, can enhance the tunneling contribution to the reverse leakage current In particular, taking into account the doping level and the reverse bias range of our case, the TFE (without force lowering effect) should be the most appropriate model to describe the reverse characteristics. According to the TFE model, the current density J can be expressed as: where and with h the Planck constant, m* the effective mass of electron and εSiC the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. Firstly, a barrier height value of 1.11 eV was considered in Eq. ( As can be seen in Fig. In this work, the electrical properties of the tungsten carbide (WC) Schottky barrier on 4H-SiC have been studied. In particular, based on a set of measurements on several diodes, the contacts showed a nearly ideal behavior (n=1.06) and a narrow distribution of the barrier height values upon annealing at 700°C. The temperature dependent I-V characterization of the annealed contact revealed an increase of the barrier height and a decrease of the ideality factor with increasing measurement temperature, thus indicating a lateral inhomogeneity of the WC/4H-SiC Schottky contact. This behavior was described with the Tung's model on inhomogeneous barriers. Noteworthy, the temperature dependence of the reverse leakage current could be well described by including the temperature dependent barrier height, measured in forward bias, in the classic thermionic field emission formalism. The low value of the barrier height (1.05eV) makes such a WC contact an interesting candidate to reduce the conduction losses in 4H-SiC Schottky diodes. Moreover, the results are useful to predict the behavior of WC/4H-SiC Schottky diodes under operative conditions.