Externally controllable band gap properties of a material is crucial in designing optoelectronic devices with desirable properties on-demand. Here, a possibility of single parameter tuning of trivial to non-trivial topological band gap by the introduction of linear gain in an otherwise trivial insulator is investigated. Gain is selectively injected into a one dimensional lattice of dimers such that the resulting non-Hermitian Hamiltonian is symmetric under space-inversion but not under time-reversal. Inversion-symmetry of the lattice renders to probe the bulk-boundary correspondence and topological invariance by the bi-orthogonal Zak phase associated with a bulk Hamiltonian. Topological trivial to nontrivial phase transition and emergence of protected edge states are analytically shown to occur when the gain parameter is tuned across a non-Hermitian degeneracy. Tuneability of edge state location both at the boundary and inside the bulk by altering the gain distribution is discussed. Confirmation of gain-controlled topological edge state is reported in a realistic design of InGaAsP semiconductor cavity array. Topological materials, characterized by insulating bulk but unidirectionally conducting edge states appearing inside a topologically protected band gap, hold great promise for future technological applications ranging from dissipationless electronics and photonics to quantum computers Recent search for topological states of matter in non-Hermitian systems has revealed fundamentally novel effects . In particular, selective enhancement of topological interface state To this aim, here a possibility of topological band gap control by the introduction of non-Hermitian gain is investigated in an otherwise Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) lattice We consider a semi-analytically solvable model of four band non-Hermitian Hamiltonian in momentum (k-space) representation (corresponding real space realization is discussed later) such that corresponds to the four-band generalization of Hermitian SSH model with real valued staggered coupling parameters β and α. When β > α, the central two bands of H 0 are trivially gapped with no edge state [Fig. Here, σ ± = σ x ± iσ y , σ x,y,z are Pauli matrices, k ∈ [-π/a, π/a] is the Bloch momentum, and a is the lattice constant. Inclusion of non-Hermiticity, in Eq. (1), does not violate the inversion symmetry of the system i.e. the Hamiltonian satisfies ΠH (k, γ)Π -1 = H (-k, γ) with respect to the inversion operator Π = σ x ⊗ σ x , but breaks time-reversal symmetry i.e. H * (-k, γ) H (k, γ). In the absence of combined symmetry under parity and time-reversal, the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian H features complex spectrum in general which are shown in Fig. at k = 0. This shows that for fixed values of β and α, the band gap is a function of the gain parameter γ, and hence can be tuned by changing γ. Indeed, as shown in Fig. The band gap given in Eq. ( This effective representation resembles the well know band gap relation in a conventional two-band Hermitian SSH model These results are in stark contrast to the parity-time (PT) symmetric generalized two-band SSH model The PT-symmetric system usually becomes gapless, when gain/loss parameter exceeds the PT-breaking threshold; closing of bandgap, however, does not destroy the existing edge state. Contrary, in the four-band generalized non-hermitian SSH model, studied here, the energy gap of the system closes and reopens by non-Hermitian symmetry breaking at an exceptional point, which not only allows one to alters the topology of the system but also enables to create new edge states not existing in the Hermitian limit. This hallmark feature is used below to control the non-Hermiticity induced edge states. Above mentioned non-Hermiticity enabled band-gap closing and re-opening phenomena is one of the signature of topological phase transition. In order to probe such phase transition, here we quantify the topological invariance of the center band gap by the Zak phases (mod 2π) summed over for all occupied bands below the gap where bi-orthogonal scalar product A specific realization of the above mentioned Bloch Hamiltonian H and the corresponding topology can be achieved by the real space Hamiltonian H = H 0 + i H NH [shown in Fig. Few remarks on the gain-induced edge states are in order here. First remark is concerned with the robustness of the edge states against certain disorder. For fixed values of coupling constants β and α, the edge states created here are robust against random onsite gain disorders of strength ∆γ n,m = γγ n,m satisfying ∆γ n,m ≤ ∆ε, for m = 1, 4 and n = 1, • • • , N. An example of such robustness against onsite non-Hermitian disorder is given in Fig. A fascinating feature of our model is that the edge state properties can flexibly be controlled solely by the gain parameter. By altering the gain distribution appropriately it is possible to induce an edge state at an arbitrary location in the lattice. To illustrate this possibility we consider a lattice of 4N + 1 sites, so that the lattice starts with a strong bond at the left and terminates with a weak bond at the right. In this case a single topological zero-energy state appears at the right edge even in the absence of gain [as shown in the Fig. Above mentioned theoretical prediction of tunable edge states have been confirmed by simulation in an array of 21 InGaAsP semiconductor microring cavities placed in alternating distances on a SiO 2 (refractive index = 1.44) substrate. The simulation were performed in COMSOL multi-physics using the full-wave finite element method. Geometry of each ring have inner and outer radii of 2.5 μm and 3 μm, respectively, and a height of 220 nm. Imaginary part of the complex refractive index n = n + in of InGaAsP was tuned for controlling gain in the system. While the real part n = 3.4 is fixed around the wavelength 1508 nm (which is equal to the resonant wavelength of an isolated cavity), the parameter n can be activated and changed flexibly in experiments by pumping the cavities either optically or electrically To conclude, in this paper a possibility of topological band gap tuning by the introduction of optical gain into a trivially gapped insulator is discussed. Trivial to non-trivial topological phase transition and emergence of topologically protected edge states are shown to occur when the gain parameter exceeds a threshold value at which central two bulk bands coalesce due to a non-Hermitian degeneracy. A notable feature of the model is that by simply changing the gain distribution it is possible to arbitrarily alter the spatial location of the edge state. Theoretical predictions is also confirmed here in a realistic design of InGaAsP microcavity array. The theory of gain-tailored edge state is thus promising for future experiments on active semiconductor materials where gain can be injected by optical illumination or electrical pumping, and offers novel possibilities for functional topological devices, particularly in tunable laser applications where signal can be amplified in desired channels. As a final remark, the theory is equally valid if one replaces gain by dissipation which can be tuned in other physical settings e.g. in acoustics or cold atoms in optical lattice.