Lanthanum hydride LaH 10 with a sodalitelike clathrate structure was experimentally realized to exhibit a room-temperature superconductivity under megabar pressures. Based on first-principles calculations, we reveal that the metal framework of La atoms has the excess electrons at interstitial regions. Such anionic electrons are easily captured to form a stable clathrate structure of H cages. We thus propose that the charge transfer from La to H atoms is mostly driven by the electride property of the La framework. Further, the interaction between La atoms and H cages induces a delocalization of La-5p semicore states to hybridize with H-1s state. Consequently, the bonding nature between La atoms and H cages is characterized as a mixture of ionic and covalent. Our findings demonstrate that anionic and semicore electrons play important roles in stabilizing clathrate H cages in LaH 10 , which can be broadly applicable to other high-pressure rare-earth hydrides with clathrate structures. Metal hydrides have attracted much attention theoretically The superhydride LaH 10 has a hydrogen sodalitelike clathrate structure with the high crystalline symmetry of space group Fm3m (No. 225). As shown in Fig. We first present the total charge density of LaH 0 , obtained using the DFT calculation (see the section of Methods). Here, the structure of LaH 0 (see Fig. To explore the peculiar feature of valence electronic states with anionic electrons, we present the band structure of LaH 0 in Fig. Finally, we analyze the Bader charges Here, the amount of anionic electrons is larger than that of [La] 1.83+ :1.83e -estimated using the muffin-tin sphere around La atom (see Fig. Our first-principles DFT calculations for a roomtemperature superconductor LaH 10 have shown that the bonding between La atoms and H 32 cages is characterized as a mixture of ionic and covalent. We revealed that the La framework has the anionic electrons at interstitial regions, which are easily captured to form the stable clathrate H 32 cages consisting of the nonpolar H 1 -H 1 and polar H 1 -H 2 covalent bonds. Specifically, the interaction between La atoms and H 32 cages involves a strong hybridization of the La 5p semicore and H 1 1s states. It is thus demonstrated that anionic and semicore electrons are of vital importance to yield the intricate bonding nature in LaH 10 . Our findings are rather generic and hence, they are anticipated to be more broadly applicable for understanding the bonding and electronic properties of other rare-earth hydrides with sodalitelike cage structures LaH 0 La 0 H 10 LaH 10 Q -2.59 1.37 -1.04 TABLE I: Summed charge (Q) of Bader charge and nuclei charges outside the La basin in LaH 0 , La 0 H 10 , and LaH 10 The La basin (see Fig. Our DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package with the projector-augmented wave method 3. Band projections onto the La, A 1 , and A 2 (pseudo)atoms in LaH 0 