Many positive electrode materials in lithium ion batteries include transition metals which are difficult to describe by electronic structure methods like density functional theory (DFT) due to the presence of multiple oxidation states. A prominent example is the lithium manganese oxide spinel LixMn2O4 with 0 ≤ x ≤ 2. While DFT, employing the local hybrid functional PBE0r, provides a reliable description, the need for extended computer simulations of large structural models remains a significant challenge. Here, we close this gap by constructing a DFT-based high-dimensional neural network potential (HDNNP) providing accurate energies and forces at a fraction of the computational costs. As different oxidation states and the resulting Jahn-Teller distortions represent a new level of complexity for HDNNPs, the potential is carefully validated by performing X-ray diffraction experiments. We demonstrate that the HDNNP provides atomic level details and is able to predict a series of properties like the lattice parameters and expansion with increasing Li content or temperature, the orthorhombic to cubic transition, the lithium diffusion barrier, and the phonon frequencies. We show that for understanding these properties access to large time and length scales as enabled by the HDNNP is essential to close the gap between theory and experiment. Advances in battery technology are more important than ever to provide a reliable energy supply for countless applications, from portable electronic devices to electric vehicles, and in particular lithium ion batteries have gained a central role The crystal structure of Li x Mn 2 O 4 is a cubic spinel with space group Fd3m in the range from 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and above ∼ 290 K (Figures example, Li can be inserted in tetrahedral sites Variations in the Li content change the oxidation states of the Mn ions An accurate description of the narrow, partially filled Mn d bands in Li x Mn 2 O 4 is challenging for electronic structure methods like density functional theory (DFT), and both the local density approximation as well as the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) are not able to provide the correct electronic structure of Li x Mn 2 O 4 Machine learning has been demonstrated to be a promising tool to develop highly accurate and efficient atomistic potentials In this work we develop and validate a highdimensional neural network potential (HDNNP), a type of machine learning potential suitable for very large systems that has been suggested by Since Li x Mn 2 O 4 is used as positive electrode material, Li diffusion barriers as well as structural deformations during charging and discharging are important physical properties. These are studied as well as structural changes depending on composition and temperature, most prominently the transition from the orthorhombic to the cubic structure occurring near room temperature. In order to validate the HDNNP, we compare to DFT data as well as to in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments where we investigate the evolution of the crystal structure of Li x Mn 2 O 4 nanoparticles while varying the Li content and the temperature. This paper is organized as follows: Firstly, we outline the key concepts of the PBE0r functional and the HDNNP method and present a modified initialization algorithm for the weights in the atomic neural networks of the HDNNP. After a summary of the computational and experimental details, which includes a description how we obtained a reliable and consistent reference data set for a material with a complex electronic structure, we discuss the accuracy of our HDNNP. The validation is carried out using DFT and experimental data including diffusion barriers, electrochemical potentials, and vibrational fingerprints. Subsequently, the HDNNP is applied to study the influence of Li content and temperature variations on the structure of Li x Mn 2 O 4 . We reveal the required simulation time and lengths scales to match experimental measurements in the investigation of the orthorhombic to cubic transition. We find that ab initio molecular dynamics would not be applicable to study the transition due to the large computational effort, but that the HDNNP is sufficiently efficient and accurate to yield excellent agreement with experimental data. Employing the HDNNP we are able to characterize the underlying atomistic processes, which give rise to the macroscopic phenomena observed in experiment. DFT is in principle exact for the energetics of the electronic ground state The PBE0r exchange-correlation functional E PBE0r xc Here, on-site exchange refers to those contributions, which describe the interaction between orbitals centered on the same atom. Moreover, the Hartree-Fock mixing factors a n of the N atoms can be element-specific. We employ 0.07 for Li, 0.05 for O, and 0.09 for Mn While the calculation of the Hartree-Fock exchange terms dominates the computational costs of hybrid functionals, in the PBE0r approach the effort is drastically reduced to a level comparable to conventional GGA functionals. However, in contrast to GGA functionals, which yield a poor description of transition metal oxides with narrow, partially filled d bands, the exact on-site exchange of PBE0r correctly splits the otherwise degenerate d band into multiplets of filled and empty orbitals leading to a more accurate description, which is also the case for Li x Mn 2 O 4 studied in this work. Like all machine learning potentials, HDNNPs The local chemical environment of each atom including all neighboring atoms inside a cutoff sphere of radius R c is described by a vector of atom-centered symmetry function values G. The cutoff radius has to be sufficiently large to include all energetically relevant interactions, and typically 6 to 10 Å are used. This study employs two different types of symmetry functions, namely radial symmetry functions and angular symmetry functions, whose functional forms are given in the Supplemental Material Except for the specification of the chemical elements of the atoms no further information such as atom types, oxidation states, or predefined bonds are required making HDNNPs reactive, i.e., they are able to describe the making and breaking of bonds with the accuracy of the underlying electronic structure method. Because the dimension of the symmetry function vectors is given by the selected symmetry functions and does not dependent on the chemical environments, the symmetry function vectors are suitable as input for neural networks with fixed architecture. Individual atomic neural networks are then constructed for each chemical element α, which process the structural information of the geometric environment of each atom n yielding its atomic energy contribution E α n . The sum of all atomic energy contributions is the potential energy E of the many-atom system containing N elements elements and N α atoms atoms of element α, The atomic energy contributions are calculated using atomic neural networks which are standard feed-forward neural networks The architecture, which consists of n G input neurons for the symmetry function values G, n 1 , n 2 , and n 3 neurons in the respective hidden layers, and the output layer with one neuron, is the same for all atoms of the same element. The weight parameters a ρσ μν , which connect neuron μ in layer ρ to neuron ν in layer σ, and bias weights b σ ν , which are added to the input values of neuron ν in layer σ, are identical for all atoms of the same element. For clarity, the superscript α is not shown for the number of neurons per layer and for the weights in Equation 3 although these quantities can be different for each element. In conclusion, for each atom in the system the individual values of the symmetry function vectors are calculated and processed in the atomic neural network of the respective element. The resulting atomic energy contributions are then added yielding the potential energy of the system. The weight parameters of all atomic neural networks are obtained simultaneously in an iterative gradientbased optimization process, in which the errors of known potential energies and atomic force components for a set of training structures are minimized applying an adaptive, global, extended Kalman filter The construction of the HDNNP requires a random initialization of the weights in the atomic neural networks as starting point for the iterative optimization. Here, we develop and implement a modification of the method proposed by Xavier The bias weight b of the output neuron is set to E mean . This enables an efficient training of the HDNNP, especially for atomic neural networks with more than two hidden layers making use of a funnel-like architecture. The DFT reference calculations were performed using the Car-Parrinello Projector Augmented-Wave (CP-PAW) code (version from September 28, 2016) The atomic spins were calculated by a mapping the spin density onto the one-center expansions of the partial waves. For each atom the contributions inside a cutoff sphere were added. The cutoff radii were set to 1.2 times the covalent radii of the corresponding atoms which are given in our previous study The D3 dispersion corrections using Becke-Johnson damping were calculated by the DFT-D3 software (version from June 14, 2016) The nudged elastic band calculations While the functional form of the HDNNP is very flexible, which allows to represent the reference DFT data very accurately, it does not have a physical foundation. Thus, the correct topology of the potential energy surface has to be "learned" exclusively from the information provided in the reference data set. Therefore, the quality of the reference data set, which has to cover the configuration space relevant for the intended simulations, is essential for the reliability of the HDNNP. Three important points have to be considered for the reference data set. First, the reference method has in itself to be accurate enough to describe the material of interest. In the present case, we confirmed that the PBE0r-D3 DFT functional provides a reliable description of Li x Mn 2 O 4 as reported in our previous benchmark Second, the amount and diversity of information in the reference data set has to be sufficient to represent the relevant part of the configuration space reliably. In the past, we have developed a detailed protocol based on active learning to systematically identify and add important configurations to the reference data set in a self-consistent process Third, the reference data set has to consistently represent one potential energy surface determined employing one reference method. One electronic state -typically the ground state -of the system can be considered as otherwise the potential energy would not be a well-defined function of the atomic structure. Therefore, we only consider ground state spin configurations and one consistent arrangement of spin directions. As many arrangements in Li x Mn 2 O 4 are almost degenerate within the accuracy of the DFT reference calculations For an initial set of configurations, experimentally determined structures can be used. In order to include information about thermal distortions, the atomic positions and lattice vectors can be modified randomly within a reasonable range. In this study we displaced the atomic positions inside spheres with radii of up to 0.2 Å and changed the lattice vectors within a range of at most ±3%. The energy and force components of each system have then been determined in electronic structure calculations. With this initial data, a preliminary HDNNP can be constructed that allows to perform MD simulations to further explore the configuration space guided by the atomic forces. By using two different HDNNPs or even a larger ensemble, obtained for example using different initial weights and neural network architectures but trained on the same reference data set, missing configurations can be identified based on the deviations in their predicted energies and forces. Deviations above a predefined threshold indicate structures being too distant from the available training data, which should then be recomputed by DFT and added to the reference set to improve the HDNNP. The HDNNP autonomously explores and learns the configuration space of the investigated system by iteratively repeating this process. However, in particular in the early stages of this process, unphysical trajectories can emerge if configurations are visited in the simulations, which are too different from the training set of the HDNNP. Removing structures with unphysically short nearest-neighbour distances or too high energies and forces, which do not occur at the temperatures and pressures of interest, is advisable to restrict the reference data set to include only reasonable structures. Moreover for unphysically close atoms, electronic structure calculations can fail to converge to the correct ground-state energy. Even if electronic structure calculations are carefully checked for a good convergence behavior, they still can get stuck in metastable electronic states, which is difficult to detect. In particular for Li x Mn 2 O 4 we observed this phenomenon due to its complex electronic structure and variety of electronic states that are energetically close to the ground state. Therefore, we followed two strategies to clean the reference data set from incorrect electronic structure data: 1. In Li x Mn 2 O 4 the number of Mn III ions is equal to the number of Li ions. If the result of an electronic structure calculation differs from this relation, it does not provide the correct electronic ground state. In order to check this relation we calculated the absolute values of the atomic spins using DFT. hs-Mn III ions have an absolute atomic spin of 2 h, while the spin of Mn IV ions is 3 2 h. This allows us to count the number of Mn III and Mn IV ions to identify calculations that did not yield the right electronic ground state. However, due to thermal fluctuations, intermediate structures exists where the Jahn-Teller distortion of an octahedron of an initial hs-Mn III ion decreases while that of an adjacent close-to-ideal octahedron increases. As a consequence, a transition exists in which the e g electron of a Mn III O 6 octahedron can hop to an adjacent Mn IV O 6 octahedron. In the transition state the e g electron is shared between both sites as in Zener polarons. This information is important for the potential energy surface and must not be removed from the reference data set. However, structures including Mn ions with atomic spins outside the interval between 3 2 and 2 h, structures with too few or too many Mn III ions considering the transition states, or structures including Mn III ions in octahedra corresponding to a Mn IV O 6 geometry and vice versa, are not suitable for the reference data set because they do not describe the electronic ground state. 2. Instead of using physical properties to identify incorrect data points, the second method is based on the predictive power of HDNNPs. If the electronic structure of a system is not properly converged, the energy will be different from the correct ground state energy. Unfortunately, in most cases these energies cannot be identified as outliers in the data set because thermal distortions or different stoichiometries lead to larger energy variations. Still, the training process of the HDNNP reveals these suspicious energies because they do not fit to the general trend. The goal of the fitting process of the weight parameters is to minimize the root mean squared error of the energies. Since most of the structures of the training set are correct, these data points dominate the fitting process, and the minority of problematic structures, which has energies and forces being incompatible with the majority of the data, is less well described. In order to distinguish between less accurately fitted but correct data points and structures with a problematic electronic structure, we can plot the differences between predicted energies and reference energies of one HDNNP against the differences of another HDNNP, both fitted on the same complete reference data set, but using different initial weights and neural network architectures. If data points show the same large error, irrespective of the specific HDNNP, it is very likely that the electronic structure did not converge correctly and the data point should be removed. On the other hand, energies which are not well represented in just one of the two HDNNPs are just poorly fitted. Such deviations reveal that the general quality of the HDNNP has to be improved, but the corresponding data should be kept in the data set. Further details about the construction of the reference data set can be found in various reviews The construction of the HDNNP was carried out using the RuNNer code (version from August 22, 2019) The MD simulations were performed using the Largescale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) (version from August 7, 2019) The basin-hopping Monte Carlo To experimentally resolve the effects of changing the Li content and temperature on the LiMn 2 O 4 crystal structure and lattice constants, in situ XRD techniques have been applied to nanoparticle powder specimens (Sigma-Aldrich, single synthesis charge, purity > 99%), where the measured XRD signals represent the volume average over many particles. The mean particle diameter was identified to be (44 ± 14) nm using transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy In situ XRD diffractograms were recorded during (de)lithiation in the range of 0.48 ≤ x ≤ 2 with a specifically designed battery cell at CIC energiGune in Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. The cell consists of a Be window, which is coated with a thin Al foil on the inner surface, followed by the positive electrode material consisting of 85 wt% LiMn 2 O 4 and 15 wt% carbon black, and then by a separator and a metallic Li negative electrode. 1 mol l -1 LiPF 6 in EC/DMC was used as electrolyte. The cell was assembled in a glove box and then cycled from 3.0 V to 4.5 V and back again before it was held for 20 h at open circuit voltage. This was followed by (de)lithiation of Li x Mn 2 O 4 from x = 1 to x = 0.48 and back to x = 1 with a set rate of C/30. A series of XRD measurement scans were performed during voltage cycling, each with step sizes of ∆2θ = 0.02 • in the range 40 • ≤ 2θ ≤ 55 • , and were synchronized with the electrochemical measurements of transferred charge and cell potential. The values of 2θ were corrected for the offset of the electrode away from the goniometer axis. The positions of the most intense peaks (311) and (400) were fitted with pseudo Voigt functions, from which the lattice constant a has been calculated using Bragg's law and The displayed data were collected during the discharge (Li intercalation) to x = 1 because of overpotential and current loss during charging. Temperature dependent X-ray diffractograms were taken between T = 100 K and 305 K with a step size of ∆T = 30 K using a Bruker Smart APEX II Goniometer with an area detector covering an angular range of 0 • < 2θ < 35 • , ∆2θ = 0.095 • . Close to the phase transition temperature, from 260 K to 295 K, a step size of ∆T = 5 K was used. The LiMn 2 O 4 powder specimen was compacted into a glass capillary, which was placed in a nitrogen gas flow cryostat with a temperature sensor. The specimen was held for 30 min after reaching the initial nitrogen gas setpoint of 100 K to allow for thermal equilibration prior to taking the first diffractogram. Thermal equilibration times of 10 min were allowed for each subsequent temperature step. The recorded polycrystalline diffracted ring pattern was then azimuthally integrated. Although the small peak splitting due to the cubic to orthorhombic transition has been observed using high resolution synchrotron and neutron diffraction experiments in powder samples The reference data set of the HDNNP contains 15228 Li x Mn 2 O 4 bulk structures, with 0 ≤ x ≤ 2. These structures sample the configuration space of Li x Mn 2 O 4 up to a temperature of about 500 K. 13669 reference structures have been used for training, the remaining 1559 structures form the test set. In total, 682431 atomic environments and 2047293 force components are thus available for training and 77911 atomic environments and 233733 force components for testing. More detailed information about the number of structures for each composition are given in the Supplemental Material The formation energies cover a range from -2.15 to -1.61 eV atom -1 . The root mean squared error (RMSE) of the energies is 1.8 meV atom -1 for the training set and 2.2 meV atom -1 for the test set. The maximal error of the energies is 9.9 meV atom -1 for the training set and 10.9 meV atom -1 for the test set. In order to assess the quality of the HDNNP for Li x Mn 2 O 4 we will first compare several physical properties determined using the HDNNP with results that are accessible by PBE0r-D3 DFT calculations. The PBE0r-D3 DFT functional was also used for the energy and force calculations of the reference data set. Therefore, the HDNNP results should match the PBE0r-D3 DFT data. Li x Mn 2 O 4 is used as positive electrode material in batteries, and Li intercalation and deintercalation are crucial processes. Consequently, the Li diffusion barrier is an important property of this material. The barrier can be calculated using the nudged elastic band method. PBE0r-D3 DFT provides a barrier of 0.52 eV in the Li 0.875 Mn 2 O 4 unit cell, which is in very good agreement with previous experimental NMR data yielding (0.5 ± 0.1) eV Apart from Li diffusion, the electrochemical potential is very important for battery applications and degradation of Li x Mn 2 O 4 during electrocatalysis of oxygen For dynamical studies it is important that the HDNNP correctly represents the vibrational motions of the system. To validate the vibrational fingerprint of the simulations the calculated phonon density of states Li intercalation and deintercalation during discharge and charge of a battery includes structural expansion and contraction of Li x Mn 2 O 4 . This behaviour can be studied in theory as well as in experiment. XRD experiments yield reliable and precise values for the lattice constants. However, the data are averaged over time and space hiding information about individual atomic environments. On the other hand, simulations rely on appropriate structural models, but they reveal the underlying processes on an atomic scale with femtosecond resolution. Therefore, we will combine the advantages of both approaches by validating the HDNNP predictions first on experimental and DFT data and then obtaining a detailed atomic scale understanding from our simulations. We start the investigation at 0 K to confirm the HDNNP results for the optimized structures using PBE0r-D3 DFT reference data. The conventional Li x Mn 2 O 4 unit cells are still accessible by DFT. In order to find the global minimum Li distributions, with 4 , we performed GBHMC simulations using the HDNNP. The low-energy structures were then reoptimized by DFT. The PBE0r-D3 results indicate that there is an effective repulsion between the Li ions on neighboring tetrahedral sites, leading to only every other tetrahedral site being populated for 0 < x ≤ 1 2 in the most stable structures. Neighboring tetrahedral sites only become occupied by Li for x > 1 2 . This change in occupation is presumably the reason for the plateaus of the electrochemical potentials in the region 0 < x < 1 2 and 1 2 < x < 1 as reported previously The minimum structures predicted by the HDNNP are given in the Supplemental Material [67] along with the bulk moduli, which have also been determined and compared to DFT and experiment The HDNNP lattice constants match the PBE0r-D3 DFT data very well. The cubic lattice constants agree within 0.5% for x = 0, 0.5, and 1. The PBE0r-D3 results show that the lattice expands by 0.102 Å in the range from x = 0 to 0.5 and by 0.055 Å from x = 0.5 to 1. The HDNNP predicts similar expansions of 0.105 Å and 0.075 Å, respectively. The same trend is present in published XRD data of λ-Mn 2 O 4 (at room temperature) For a realistic comparison with experiment, simulations at finite temperatures must be carried out. Therefore, 40 ns N pT MD simulations of Li x Mn 2 O 4 unit cells at 300 K were performed using the HDNNP. The resulting a cub (x) graph in the range from 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 is shifted to larger lattice constant values and is generally smoother than the HDNNP results at 0 K (Figure Using the HDNNP we can investigate the system also at lower temperatures. Figure In order to investigate why the time average leads to a cubic structure at lower Li contents, we plotted the lattice constants a x , a y , a z and a cub as well as the potential energy E as a function of the time t for the Li 0.875 Mn 2 O 4 unit cell at 150 K in Figures Figure In order to investigate the transition from an orthorhombic to a cubic structure, we performed 40 ns N pT MD simulations of the LiMn 2 O 4 unit cell in the range from 10 to 500 K. These were compared with experimental measurements on LiMn 2 O 4 which yield an orthorhombic crystal structure with lattice constants 24.750, 24.801, and 8.190 Å at 130 K and a cubic crystal structure with a lattice constant of 8.246 Å at 330 K We start with a discussion of the spatially averaged cubic lattice constants a cub in Figure Looking at the individual lattice constants a x , a y , and a z calculated by a time average over 40 ns N pT simulations using the HDNNP, we observe an orthorhombic structure at low temperatures whose lattice constants are similar to the optimized result at 0 K. As the temperature is increased above about 200 K the individual lattice constants become more and more similar. Between about 260 and 330 K the structure finally converts to a cubic cell. Above 330 K the time averaged lattice constants are virtually equal. In experiment the transition from the orthorhombic to the cubic structure occurs between 280 and 320 K (yellow region in Figure To investigate the transition in more detail, the lattice constants a x , a y , a z , and a cub as well as the potential energy E as a function of the time t are given in Figures The mean energy difference between the most stable structure and the other two structures, which have similar energies, is about 0.02 eV per formula unit at 300 K, i.e., 3 meV atom -1 . These small energy differences are similar to the RMSE of the HDNNP, and also in the order of the accuracy of the underlying DFT calculations. Therefore, these different structure are effectively almost degenerate in energy. However, the structure effects the dynamics of the lattice constant swaps. Direct swaps of the orientation of the cell elongation of the most stable structure did not happen during the entire time of the 40 ns simulation. Instead, the system has first to undergo a transformation to one of the two other less stable orthorhombic structures with a smaller splitting before it can change its orientation. Overall, the E(t) curve of LiMn 2 O 4 at 300 K exhibits higher fluctuations than the one of Li 0.875 Mn 2 O 4 at 150 K in Figure In general at temperatures below 150 K, orientational fluctuations do not occur on nanosecond time scales. Therefore, the different crystal orientations do not average with time to a cubic cell. At higher temperatures, swaps become possible and the number of swaps per unit time increases with increasing temperature. Averaged over time this results in more and more similar lattice constants. However, the Mn III O 6 octahedra are still Jahn-Teller distorted and the individual structures of the system remain orthorhombic. We note that in our simulations the transitions occur very rapidly, but a comparison with experimental time scales has to be made with care. The reason is that the number of atoms in these simulations is much smaller than in macroscopic materials studied in experiment. Figure At first glance, the predicted transition temperature for LiMn 2 O 4 in Figure Furthermore, the splitting of the orthorhombic lattice constants is considerably smaller in experiment than in theory (see Figure We have seen in the discussion of Figure Starting our analysis with the simulation time, we observe that averaging over longer times shifts the transi- Lattice constants ax,y,z and a cub as a function of the temperature T obtained from 20 ns N pT simulations of LiMn2O4 cells of different size using the HDNNP. For facilitating the comparison the lattice constants of the larger supercells have been normalized to the size of a single unit cell. tion of the unit cell to lower temperatures (Figure Figure To understand this finding we have to look in more detail at the underlying atomic motions. Therefore, we plotted the distances of opposite O ions d x , d y , and d z in a typical MnO 6 octahedron of a LiMn 2 O 4 3 × 3 × 3 supercell at 300 K as a function of the time. The lattice constants of a LiMn 2 O 4 3 × 3 × 3 supercell at 300 K do not swap their orientation in contrast to a single unit cell. However, Figure At low temperatures, no electron hopping and no dynamic Jahn-Teller effect are found, and the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra are aligned in the simulations. On the other hand, at high temperatures the electron hopping and dynamic Jahn-Teller effect are very fast. This leads to disorder in the Mn III /Mn IV distribution and in the orientation of the Jahn-Teller distortions resulting in an on average cubic structure. Metastable structures exist in 3 × 3 × 3 supercells in which the JT distortions are not fully aligned. This is caused by the increased configuration space of the 3 × 3 × 3 supercell compared to the single unit cell. Using this information about the underlying atomic processes we will now develop a simple stochastic model to describe the temperature dependence of the lattice constants swaps as a function of the simulation cell size. In our model we only consider the Jahn-Teller distorted Mn III O 6 octahedra. These are elongated in x, y, or z directions. In the initial state, all octahedra are aligned in the same global direction, for example, the z direction. During a time step in the model, every octahedron can change its orientation to the x or y direction or stay in the z direction with given probabilities. After this distortion step, the x or y direction is considered as candidate for the new global orientation of the system depending on in which direction more changes occurred, for example, the x direction. In case of a tie, the direction is selected randomly. The probability that a Jahn-Teller distorted octahedron changes its orientation to the candidate direction for the new global orientation at the given time step in the model is p(T ). This probability per time step, i.e., the rate constant, is the same for each octahedron and only a function of the temperature T . At higher temperatures the frequency of swaps is larger because the energy barrier can be overcome more easily, and consequently also the frequency of swaps to a new specific direction is higher. If a critical fraction of the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra changes the orientations to the candidate for the new global orientation in the same time step in the model, the orientation of the entire structure changes, i.e., also the orientations of the other octahedra are reorientated. Here, we set this critical fraction to 3 8 = 37.5% of the n sites, i.e., three out of eight Mn III O 6 sites in case of a single LiMn 2 O 4 unit cell. We chose this threshold be-cause during the MD trajectories of a single LiMn 2 O 4 unit cell analyzed after each picosecond, we only observed structures with at most one or two Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra that do not align in the majority direction. Structures with three or four octahedra differing in their alignment from the majority direction are only present on a femtosecond time scale. A similar maximum fraction has also been found in larger supercells. If the critical fraction of Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra changes orientation, all other octahedra align into this new direction as well because this is the closest minimum configuration. We tested the model also with different critical fractions, which led to the same conclusions, i.e., the threshold dependence is weak. If the new orientations of the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra do not lead to a change of the global orientation of the system, the initial state is restored with every octahedron aligned in the original direction. For initial structures with a high degree of alignment of the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra as in our simulations, the system will usually be driven back to the aligned minimum configuration unless the temperature is much higher than the transition temperature. The time step in the model is completed after this relaxation and the next time step follows. The approximations of this model lead to a simple binomial distribution because the Jahn-Teller distorted octahedra can either change to a new global orientation or stay in the old orientation. The probability for a swap of the global orientation is then given by where k equals the number of orientations changed in the candidate direction for the new global orientation at the given time step in the model. For a swap of the global orientation, k has to be larger than or equal to the threshold. Figure The results of the model are all in agreement with the outcome of the simulations shown in Figure To investigate the phase transition in more detail and reveal reasons for the overestimation of the transition temperature, we can use the molar heat capacity C p at constant pressure as a function of temperature, which reveals transitions as peaks for systems of finite size. The heat capacity can be obtained from total energy fluctuations in a N pT MD simulation, with the Avogadro constant N A , the number of atoms in the simulation cell N atoms , the Boltzmann constant k B , and the mean temperature of the N pT MD simulation T . The fluctuations of the total energy E tot are calculated by the variance of the data from all MD time steps, i.e., from t = 0 to t N at step N . E tot is the mean of the total energy during a simulation. For the heat capacity calculations we used the time evolution of the total energy from 20 ns HDNNP N pT MD simulations at different temperatures of the single 12. Molar heat capacity at constant pressure Cp as a function of the temperature T calculated from 20 ns HDNNP N pT simulations of an 1 × 1 × 1 unit cell and 2 × 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 × 3 LiMn2O4 supercells at different temperatures. The experimentally determined temperature interval of the orthorhombic to cubic transition using differential scanning calorimetry and single-crystal XRD is highlighted in yellow unit cell, the 2×2×2 supercell, and the 3×3×3 supercell. We observed a first peak at 220, 210, and 205 K respectively -with increasing system size the transition temperature decreases as expected The heat capacity graph in Figure For the 3 × 3 × 3 supercell, an additional peak in the heat capacity at 290 K is observed in Figure The increase of the configuration space becomes obvious if we compare the time evolution of the lattice constants at the phase transition of the 3 × 3 × 3 supercell in Figure The sampling of the 3 × 3 × 3 supercell at the phase transition temperature also leads to an answer to the remaining question why our simulations predict a lowtemperature orthorhombic structure with larger lattice constant splittings than measured in experiment. For the single unit cell, only configurations with fully aligned Jahn-Teller distortions are metastable. But we observe in Figure The outcome of previously published high-resolution diffraction experiments of LiMn 2 O 4 The experimental crystal structure cannot be directly recalculated because it includes too many Jahn-Teller distorted MnO 6 octahedra, since the averaged bond distances hide the Mn IV ions on Mn III sites. Instead, we investigated an ensemble of partially ordered configurations. We performed 10 ns N pT simulations at 150 K using initial structures obtained from a N pT simulation of the 3×3×3 supercell at 400 K. These systems are usually trapped in different local minima and cannot relax to a fully aligned minimum structure in contrast to similar simulations employing a single unit cell. The corresponding structures are less orthorhombic because the Jahn-Teller distortions are not fully aligned. We minimized the lowest local minimum structure found in these simulations at 150 K. We note that there might also be different configurations with an even lower mean potential energy, but due to the large configuration space compared to the minimum structures of the unit cell at low temperatures, the search for the global minimum becomes a very complex task. Therefore, the following results refer to a calculation of a specific configuration. The minimization yields lattice constants of 24.751, 24.806, and 24.345 Å. These are in good agreement with the experimental 3 × 3 × 3 supercell of LiMn 2 O 4 at 130 K with lattice constants of 24.750, 24.801, and 24.570 Å In this first application of a HDNNP to a system containing a transition metal in multiple oxidation states accompanied by Jahn-Teller distortions, we demonstrate that this method is able to significantly narrow the gap between DFT and experimental observations. The HDNNP method captures the complex potential energy surface of Li x Mn 2 O 4 , enabling simulations with an accurate description of the Jahn-Teller dynamics. The experimentally measured orthorhombic to cubic transition is reproduced by the HDNNP simulations revealing information about the underlying atomistic dynamics. Studying this transition by electronic structure methods like DFT directly would be prohibitively expensive, while the HDNNP allows to bridge this gap by increasing the time and length scales of molecular dynamics. In this way, the transition can now be observed in the simulations, although the studied atomistic processes are rare close to the transition temperature. Excellent agreement between theory and experiment is found for further properties, such as the lattice constants of both crystal structures which deviate by less than 1% from experiment, and for lattice expansion with increasing Li content as well as temperature. Moreover, a series of other properties such as the lithium diffusion barrier, differences of the electrochemical potential, and phonon frequencies is very similar in experiment and theory. This work proves that the HDNNP method is able to represent a system with multiple oxidation states retaining the accuracy of the underlying first principles method and enabling insights into the atomic dynamics from femtoto nanosecond resolution.