Interfacial ice on graphene has attracted much attention because it is a model system to study two-dimensional (2D) ice structures on chemically inert substrates. While water-graphene interaction was usually assumed to be negligible, the structures of the 2D ice are believed to be not appreciably perturbed by the graphene substrate. Here we report atomic-resolved characterizations of an exotic 2D ice structure on graphene built from water molecular chains with finite lengths. Our experiments demonstrated that the water molecular chains are exactly orientated along zigzag directions of the graphene substrate, which evidences an anomalously strong interlayer interaction between the 2D ice and the graphene substrate. Moreover, the length of the water molecular chains closely links to the number of graphene layers, indicating layer-number-dependent water-graphene interfacial interactions. Our work highlights the important role of the 2D ice structures on the water-graphene interfacial interactions. Graphene provides an excellent platform to realize precise formation of molecular assemblies and to explore underlying growth mechanism and molecular dynamics because of its homogeneity, flatness and weak screening effect Unlike those 2D ice structures on metals Our experiments demonstrate that these water molecular chains are always oriented along the zigzag directions of graphene and the chain length depends on the number of graphene layers underneath, indicating strong interlayer coupling between the 2D ice and graphene. These results suggest that the water-graphene interactions are much beyond current understandings. In our experiment, the water-graphene interfaces are obtained in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber in our STM systems, as schematically shown in Fig. From the morphologies shown in the Fig. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to further explore atomic details of the 2D ice. Three adsorbed structures were considered based on their fully relaxed monolayer geometries (see Supplementary Figs. Among them, the structure shown in Fig. Our theoretical calculation also reveals that the adsorbed water chains energetically prefer to align with the zigzag direction rather than the armchair direction (see Supplementary Fig. The emergence of the strain-induced ripples in the 2D ice also demonstrates the existence of an appreciable interlayer coupling between the 2D ice and graphene. Previously, it has been demonstrated explicitly that the water-graphene interaction is negligible when the water molecules are in the hexagonal monolayer ice Although all the studied 2D ice structures in our experiment have the same lattice period and chain spacing, the lengths of the water chains L are different in these samples, as shown in Fig. Besides the monolayer puckered triangular ice on top of graphene, we can also observe bundles of the water chains on the surface of the 2D ice. Figure In summary, we report a novel 2D ice, which prefers layer-by-layer growth, built from water molecular chains with finite lengths on graphene. Our experiment demonstrates that the water molecular chains are always along the zigzag directions of graphene and the graphene can introduce strains in the 2D ice, indicating that the interlayer coupling between the 2D ice and graphene is quite strong. Moreover, it is interesting to note that the lengths of the water molecular chains depend on the layer number of graphene. These results suggest that the phenomena of 2D ice on graphene are quite rich and deserve further studies both in experiment and theory, especially with considering the water-graphene interactions. Our experiments mainly focus on six different substrates: few-layer graphene grown on Ni foils; HOPG; Monolayer graphene transferred on Ag/mica; Monolayer or bilayer graphene grown on Cu foils; Bilayer graphene transferred on SiO2/Si substrate; Trilayer graphene transferred on Nb-doped SrTiO3. The layer number of the graphene is determined by both Raman measurements and STM characterizations. Few-layer graphene was grown on Ni foils by traditional ambient pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) method with Ar: H2:CH4=10:5:2 at the growth temperature of 1030°C for 20min. The highly oriented pyrolytic graphite samples were of ZYA grade (from NT-MDT) and were surface cleaved immediately by the adhesive tape method before experiments without any further processing (e.g., annealing). Monolayer or bilayer graphene was grown on Cu foils by traditional low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method with Ar: H2:CH4=20:10:1 at the growth temperature of 1035°C for 30min. Monolayer graphene grown on Cu foil was transferred on Ag/mica substrates via wellestablished PMMA-assisted wet etching techniques. In short, PMMA is evenly coated onto the graphene surface on the copper substrate by a Spin Coater, and then heated and dried. After treatment, the sample is put into saturated ammonium persulfate until the copper was completely corroded, leaving only free-floating graphene with PMMA. The samples are removed to dilute hydrochloric acid for washing for about 2 hours to ensure that ammonium persulfate is completely reacted, followed by multiple washing with deionized water. Graphene suspending in deionized water is then collected on target substrate and dried on a heating plate. Transferred samples are annealed at around 500°C for 12 hours in a low-pressure (~ 10 -3 Torr) tube furnace to remove PMMA and other organic residues and then quickly transferred into UHV chamber for further annealing. Monolayer graphene grown on copper foil was transferred on the SiO2/Si substrate via well-established PMMA-assisted wet etching techniques for twice, and the impurities were removed by tube-furnace annealing. Monolayer graphene grown on copper foil was transferred to the Nb-doped SrTiO3 substrate via well-established PMMA-assisted wet etching techniques for three times, and the impurities were removed by tube-furnace annealing. Ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling microscope (STM) systems (USM-1300, USM-1400 and USM-1500) from UNISOKO was utilized for UHV annealing and STM measurements. The specimens were quickly transferred into the UHV chamber of STM system after tube-furnace annealing process. The UHV annealing was performed at chamber pressure within (2 ~ 6)×10 -9 Torr and T within 300 ~ 400°C for ~ 10 mins. When the base pressure of the chamber reenters ~ 1.0×10 The STM tips were obtained by chemical etching from a wire of Pt(80%) Ir(20%) alloys. STM measurement was performed in the ultrahigh vacuum chamber (~10 -11 Torr) with constant-current scanning mode mainly at ~ 77 K or ~ 4.2 K. Lateral dimensions observed in the STM images were calibrated using a standard graphene lattice as well as a Si(111)-(7×7)lattice and Ag(111) surface. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation and the projector augmented wave method 