Porous graphene (PG) is a graphene derivative endowed of nanoporous architectures. This material possesses a particular structure with interconnected networks of high pore volume, producing membranes with a large surface area. Experiments revealed that PG combines remarkable properties such as high mechanical strength and good thermal stability. In this work, we have carried out fully-atomistic reactive (ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulations to perform a comprehensive study on the elastic properties, fracture mechanism, and thermal stability of 2D porous -Benzo-CMPs (CMP and refer, respectively, to -conjugated microporous polymers and the pore diameter) membranes with distinct nanoporous architectures. For comparison purposes, the results were also contrasted with the ones for graphene sheets of similar dimensions. We adopted three different nanoporous diameters: small (3.45 Å), medium (8.07 Å), and large (11.93 Å). Results showed that PG is thermally stable up to 4660K, about 1000K smaller than the graphene melting point (5643K). During the PG heating, linear atomic chains are formed combining carbon and hydrogen atoms. The fracture strains range between 15%-34% by applying a uniaxial loading in both plane directions for temperatures up to 1200K. The fracture strain increases proportionally with the nanoporous size. Remarkably, the critical tensile strength for the PG complete fracture is temperature independent. Instead, it depends only on the nanoporous diameter. All the PG membranes go abruptly from elastic to completely fractured regimes after a critical strain threshold. Porous Graphene (PG) membranes are graphene-related materials composed of a large surface area containing nanopores with different shapes and sizes PG membranes present a random or high regularity distribution of nanoporous Importantly, their synthesis has revealed novel functions for potential applications as super-capacitor in the energy storage or electric power supply Recently, several theoretical studies were performed inspired by the successful synthesis of 2D porous CMPs Nevertheless, some intrinsic thermomechanical properties of these materials, that may impact their performance in these applications, remain not described and further investigations are needed to fill this gap. In the present work, the mechanical and thermal stability of microporous 2D -Benzo-CMPs membranes were systematically investigated in the scope of fully-atomistic reactive (ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulations. We have considered three different H-passivated nanoporous diameters: small (3.45 Å), medium (8.07 Å), and large (11.93 Å). A heating ramp protocol was applied to obtain the melting point for the PG membranes. Their mechanical behavior was studied using the stress-strain relationship and fracture toughness. The mechanical and thermal properties of microporous 2D -Benzo-CMPs membranes were studied through MD simulations using the reactive force field ReaxFF potential The equations of motion were numerically integrated using the velocity-Verlet integrator with a time-step of 0.05 fs. We increased the tensile stress in the system by applying a uniaxial strain along the periodic and directions, for an engineering strain rate of 10 -6 fs -1 . The PG membranes were stressed up to their complete rupture, which is identified by the fractured and irreversible patterns presented by the systems when separated into two moieties. To eliminate any initial stress within the membranes, before the stretching procedure they were equilibrated/thermalized within an NPT/NVT ensembles at constant temperatures (300K, 600K, 900K, and 1200K) and null pressures using the Nosé-Hoover thermostat To better analyze the outcomes from the stretching dynamics, we calculated the von Mises stress (VM) per-atom values where , , and are the components of the normal stress and , , and are the components of the shear stress. The MD snapshots and trajectories were obtained by using free visualization and analysis software VMD System -S System -M System -L -Carbon -Hydrogen We begin our discussions by analyzing the thermal stability of the microporous 2D -Benzo-CMPs systems studied here. Figure Figure This figure helps to realize that the critical temperature for a particular PG membrane (System-L) is about 1000K smaller than the graphene melting temperature Finally, we present in Figure -direction there are much more carbon-carbon parallel bonds to the applied strain, that share the accumulated stress than in -direction. For the strain in the -direction, the stress is stored in fewer carbon-carbon bonds, causing the membrane fracture for smaller values. In Figure In summary, we have performed fully-atomistic reactive (ReaxFF) molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the elastic properties, fracture mechanism, and thermal stability of 2D porous -Benzo-CMPs membranes with distinct nanopore architectures. For the sake of comparison, the results were contrasted with the ones for graphene sheets of similar dimensions. We have considered three different H-passivated nanoporous diameters: small (3.45 Å), medium (8.07 Å), and large The PG membranes under uniaxial tensile loading have presented similar elastic behavior and fracture pattern.