Computer simulations can provide mechanistic insight into ionic liquids (ILs) and predict the properties of experimentally unrealized ion combinations. However, ILs suffer from a particularly large disparity in the time scales of atomistic and ensemble motion. Coarse-grained models are therefore used in place of costly all-atom simulations, accessing longer time scales and larger systems. Nevertheless, constructing the many-body potential of mean force that defines the structure and dynamics of a coarse-grained system can be complicated and computationally intensive. Machine learning shows great promise for the linked challenges of dimensionality reduction and learning the potential of mean force. To improve the coarse-graining of ILs, we present a neural network model trained on all-atom classical molecular dynamics simulations. The potential of mean force is expressed as two jointly-trained neural network interatomic potentials that learn the coupled short-range and many-body long range molecular interactions. These interatomic potentials treat temperature as an explicit input variable to capture its influence on the potential of mean force. The model reproduces structural quantities with high fidelity, outperforms the temperature-independent baseline at capturing dynamics, generalizes to unseen temperatures, and incurs low simulation cost. Ionic liquids (ILs) are room temperature liquids composed of a molecular cation and anion. ILs have a wide variety of applications, including ion transport in batteries and catalysis Coarse-graining (CG) can increase accessible simulation sizes by reducing the dimensionality of the full atomistic model to a pseudoparticle representation. Each of the methods above achieved success in many, but not all, aspects of coarse graining. Moreover, each method required user expertise to create CG models that were not transferable to other ionic liquids. An alternative approach is to use machine learning (ML). ML approaches can achieve dimensionality reduction in a variety of domains The general schematic of auto-encoder coarse graining is shown in Fig. The first term in Eq. 1 is a reconstruction loss, where D is the decoder mapping operator from the coarse-grained variables to the all atom representation, E is the encoder mapping operator from the all atom representation to the coarse-grained beads, x is the observed atomistic samples from all-atom MD snapshots (atomic number and cartesian coordinates of every atom in the all-atom MD snapshot). N is the number of coarse grained beads. g is sampled from a Gumbel distribution and is used for learning the categorical, discrete coarse-grained weights for each atom using Gumbel-softmax reparametrization. Once a mapping E was chosen, a matching PMF was fitted through a graph convolutional neural network based on the SchNet model. The initial feature vector h 0 is generated from a learnable embedding of atomic numbers. By performing the convolution operations several times, a many body correlation function can be parametrized to represent the many body potential of mean force of the coarse-grained ionic liquid complex. In the case of SchNet, the update function is simply a sum over the atomic embeddings. The message function is parameterized by where MLP denotes a multi-layer perceptron and • is the concatenation operation. The readout consists of a sum over MLPs acting on each of the N atomic embedding at the final (T th ) convolution: Further details of the original model can be found in Ref. Figure A classical bond prior with fixed bond lengths between the cation pseudoparticles to achieve better learning of the intramolecular interactions, where k is a spring constant hyperparameter, and r i , r j are the positions of neighboring particles. Furthermore, an excluded volume prior was added to obtain better intermolecular interactions: with σ ex and n ex hyperparameters related to the excluded volume. We further included temperature as a neural network input to parameterize a temperature-dependent potential of mean force. We considered that temperature induces fluctuations and biases in the mean forces and thereby affects structural correlation. To this end, we transformed the inverted temperature T into an embedding to be combined with the convolution operations, thereby modifying the structural representation. In particular, we generated a thermodynamic embedding γ according to where M is a linear matrix of size 1 × N basis that maps the temperature dependence into the same size as the atomic embed-ding and T is the thermostat temperature of the all-atom NPT simulation. After the convolution layers, the intramolecular embedding was summed with the intermolecular embedding; the dot product of the atomic and thermodynamic embeddings was taken. A shallow, 2-layer MLP was used as readout layer to map individual embeddings into atomic energies as in Eq. ( C. Stochastic force matching The force-matching approach for parameterizing force fields was proposed in Ref. The distribution function of coarse-grained variables P CG (z) and the corresponding many-body potential of mean force A(z) is the log-likelihood of the distribution of coarse-grained variables. It is a free energy obtained from marginalizing over micro-states that are mapped to the coarse-grained coordinates, The mean force of the coarse-grained variables is the average of instantaneous forces conditioned on the mapping bx = z 31,32 : - where b corresponds to the mapping assignment from the allatom to the coarse-grained representation. Force matching requires the minimization of the loss function: where θ are the parameters in V CG and ∇V CG represents the "coarse-grained forces" which can be obtained from automatic differentiation. As proposed in Zhang is assumed, the loss function can be reformulated as the following minimization target: This minimization target has also been used in several works with stochastic gradient descent. This target provides a data-driven target for optimizing coarsegrained force fields. The model was trained on molecular dynamics simulations performed with the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) engine In keeping with the convention in the field, we utilized 1 bead to represent the anion. The choice of number and mapping of beads to represent the cation is less settled. Here, we tested two representations of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium through either 2 or 4 pseudoparticles (CG3 and CG5 respectively, when counting anion bead). Figure Figure The RDF at 400 K shown in Fig. Transport properties such as self-diffusivity are very relevant to the use of ILs as ionic conductors, and effective CG simulations should ideally recover dynamic properties to the best degree possible. Experiments have shown that the self-diffusivity of the 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid exhibits Arrhenius behavior The evolution of CG T-NFF displacement is about an order of magnitude faster than the ground truth all-atom system. This is because in the CG model, the small, fast movements of hydrogen atoms are averaged out, thus reducing the overall friction of the system and speeding up the dynamics, more discussion change of dynamics in the supplementary information. Fig. Figure Figure Figure We have introduced a novel extension of graph convolutional neural networks to learn many body PMFs by separating short-range intramolecular and longer-range many-body intermolecular terms, and incorporated a temperature transferable embedding to learn the temperature dependence of a manybody PMF. The model has been trained on all-atom simulations of a ionic liquid system, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, whose PMF is known to be difficult to construct. The reconstruction of the structural properties has been achieved to a high degree. Furthermore, the Arrhenius relation for self-diffusivity has been obtained with the neural force field, but with faster dynamics. The fast dynamics arise due to the averaging of fast motions in the system, which in turn decrease the overall friction of the system. If dynamics cannot be reconstructed exactly, it is preferable that the activation energy for diffusion remain constant between all-atom to CG simulations, and a simple scaling of the dynamics is observed. Other strategies based on spectral matching Results from a single graph convolutional neural network with a single interaction block for both inter-and intramolecular interaction have not been included in this work for comparison with the novel dual graph convolutional neural network. This is because no stable simulations could be performed with the simpler model. No choice of hyperparameters led to a model that could run coarse-grained IL molecular dynamics simulations without the system collapsing on itself. This is likely because in a coarse-grained model the distances between the beads of a single molecule are on a much larger scale than those of atoms in the same molecule. These intramolecular distances are then closer to intermolecular distances, and as such it becomes harder for a single interaction layer to separate them and learn the structural and dynamics properties of the system. This highlights the key contribution of the dual graph convolutions introduced in this work. A comparison in performance was made between the temperature dependent neural force field (T-NFF) and the neural force field without the temperature learning embedding layer (NFF) (see Fig. Different cation representations were also compared. Both 3-and 5-bead models recovered the structural properties to a similar degree, but the 5 bead model led to better learning of the dynamic temperature relation, despite the overestimation of the rate of the self-diffusion in both cases. The model described in this work can accurately learn the many-body PMF of a CG model for a complicated system, is accurate and transferable over a range of temperatures, requires little user input and can to be applied to other condensed-phase systems, leading to easier, more accurate, and more generalizable CG simulations of complex condensed-phase systems. The selection of the weight parameter ρ from equation 1 (main text), is based on the reconstruction loss and the performance of the CG model according to structural metrics. Generally, low ρ implies high importance given to atomistic reconstruction, which will favor high-resolution CG models with many beads so loss of structural information is minimized. High ρ implies high importance given to minimizing instantaneous fluctuations in the CG forces and will favor low resolution models with few CG beads which lose more structural information but result in a smoother PMF. In the case of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, at high ρ values, the coarse-grained mapping converges to a mapping with 2 beads, even if the model was created with 4 beads (Figure Figure Figure On the other hand, previous ionic liquid research mention the time-scale shift in the coarse-grained models as a temperature shift 