Plasmonic nanolasers have received a substantial interest for their promising applications in integrated photonics, optical sensing, and biomedical imaging. To date, a room-temperature plasmonic nanolaser, submicron in all dimensions, remains elusive in the visible regime due to high metallic losses. Here, we demonstrate single-particle lasing around 2.3 eV with full-submicron, cesium lead bromide perovskite (CsPbBr3) crystals atop polymer-coated gold substrates at room temperature. With a large number (~100) of devices in total, we systematically study the lasing action of plasmonic test and photonic control groups. The achieved smallest plasmonic laser was 0.56 μm × 0.58 μm × 0.32 μm in size, ten-fold smaller than that of our smallest photonic laser. Key elements to efficient plasmonic lasing are identified as enhanced optical gain by the Purcell effect, long carrier diffusivity, a large spontaneous emission factor, and a high group index. Our results shed light on three-dimensional miniaturization of plasmonic lasers. Nanoscale lasers have received a growing interest for scientific and practical applications Incorporating metals, which support highly-confined surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs), has become a promising route to reduce device sizes beyond what is possible with only semiconductors and dielectrics. One class of metal-based lasers, known as spaser, relies on localized surface plasmon resonances. Since its inception Lead halide perovskite (LHP) with the form of APbX 3 (A=Cs + , CH3NH3 + , X=Cl -, Br -, I -) have emerged as solution-processable semiconductor materials for high-performance optoelectronic applications Here, we demonstrate full-submicron perovskite plasmonic nanolasers in the visible regime with nanosecond optical pumping at room temperature. Our laser devices, solely fabricated with solution-based chemistry, harness CsPbBr3 submicron nanocubes atop a polymer-coated gold substrate. We achieve stable single-and multi-mode lasing around 2.3 eV (=540 nm) with a narrow laser linewidth of 1 meV (=0.2 nm) under a threshold fluence around 0.3 mJ/cm 2 . By measuring a number of laser parameters, including the Purcell factor, the spontaneous emission factor (β), and the quantum yield (η), with spectroscopic tools, we systematically study the lasing action of both plasmonic lasers (test) and their photonic counterparts (control). Such a comparison enables us to identify and explain a condition where efficient plasmonic lasing becomes possible. We synthesized CsPbBr3 micron-and submicron-sized crystals using a sonochemistry method We pumped every single device with nanosecond optical pulses at 480 nm (duration 4 ns, repetition rate 20 Hz). For each device, we recorded output emission spectra at various pump levels (Fig. A large number of plasmonic lasers achieved lasing with submicron sizes. Ten smallest plasmonic lasers are denoted by i to x in Fig. The smallest plasmonic laser (Fig. Besides, the second smallest device (ii; 0.75 μm × 0.49 μm × 0.3 μm; L=0.61 μm) showed single-mode lasing (Fig. From hyperspectral images (Fig. Conceptually, these resonances can be understood as the surface plasmons of a planar multilayer metal-dielectric closed system restricted to specific quantized wavevectors determined by the device sizes We studied the laser dynamics with a three-level rate equation model We used both laser experiment data and transient spectroscopic tools to analyze a few important laser parameters of our devices, including β 0 , η, and Purcell factor. First, we extracted β 0 of the lasing mode of the plasmonic devices at a fixed, low pump fluence at 0.2 mJ/cm 2 (Fig. Next, we probed the spontaneous emission enhancement with two approaches, the laser experiments (Fig. Compared to this benchmark, spontaneous emission at the same effective pump fluence (~0.2 mJ/cm 2 ) was substantially enhanced in the plasmonic devices compared to that in the photonic ones, as shown in our laser experiments (Fig. In our second approach, we verified such emission enhancement using time-resolved spectroscopy. We show representative fluorescence decays of CsPbBr3 crystals of three different sizes on pNE coated Au substrates (Fig. The light-in-light-out (L-L) curve is another crucial indicator of laser performance. Specifically, the nonlinear kink in the L-L curves is determined by the parameter x ≡ β 0 η (35) (Fig. Our systematic study of the lasing actions in plasmonic and photonic devices enables us to identify a regime where efficient plasmonic lasing becomes possible. As shown in Fig. To achieve efficient plasmonic lasing, CsPbBr3 has two unique advantages, high carrier density and long carrier diffusion length (> 9 μm). From a material perspective, the maximal attainable ρ (proportional to optical gain) is limited by various loss mechanisms, such as Auger recombination and heatinduced material damage, even under strong pumping. In CsPbBr3 near the lasing threshold, carrier density ρ exceeds the Mott transition density ρ IH$$ (dashed green line in Fig. or inorganic III/V semiconductor (e.g. InGaN quantum wells, 1500 cm -1 (37)). Another advantage is that the diffusion length of charge carriers in CsPbBr3 exceeds 9 μm We have demonstrated CsPbBr3-on-gold nanolasers operated in the efficient plasmonic lasing regime. Compared to previous works (Table Besides, lasing thresholds could be further reduced with Fano resonances in optimized structures These combinatory efforts may further miniaturize plasmonic nanolasers towards the deep sub-diffraction limit. Fabrication of laser devices. For producing CsPbBr3, CsBr and PbBr2 were dispersed at an equal saturating concentration (typically 75 mM each) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) in a vial. The vial was then sonicated at 20-80 kHz in a bath-type ultrasonicator or a tip ultrasonicator in room temperature. After 2-3 min of ultrasonication, single-phase CsPbBr3 micron-and submicron-sized crystals are spontaneously formed. For polynorepinephrine (pNE) coating, 2 mg of (±)-norepinephrine (+)-bitartrate salt were mixed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer, and pH was adjusted to 8.5. A polycrystalline Au film-coated substrate (Playtypus) was placed in this solution at room temperature. An incubation time of 2.5 hr produces a 5 nm-thick pNE layer on the gold. The coated film was cleaned and dried under a stream of N2 flow. Finally, the prepared CsPbBr3 crystals were drop-casted on pNE-coated Au substrates. For photonic devices, pNE-coated Si substrates or uncoated SiO2 substrates were used. Laser characterization. Lasing is observed in ambient air. The samples are placed in a home-built epi-fluorescence microscopy setup (Fig. FDTD simulations. The eigenmodes and field profiles of the submicron lasers were numerically simulated with a commercial finite-element solver COMSOL Multiphysics with geometries as close to the shapes found by scanning electron microscopy as possible. The Purcell factors were obtained by calculating the spontaneous emission rates of vertical-oriented dipoles inside the gap region. Methods: The complex refractive index was measured from variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry data measured over 55 ̊ to 75 ̊ in steps of 5 ̊ (J. A. Woollam V-VASE32). The spectral range was from 300 nm to 620 nm. The optical constants fitting was initiated with the Cauchy model at the transparent region and completed by the Gaussian oscillator model. For PXRD, data over 2θ angles from 10° to 60° were collected using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO high-resolution X-ray diffraction system with a CuKα irradiation source. For SEM and EDX, samples were transferred onto a chipped Si wafer by drop casting and imaged using a Zeiss Merlin high-resolution SEM equipped with an EDX detector operated at 15 kV. For TEM, samples were drop casted onto a grid (Ted Pella), and images were acquired using a FEI Tecnai Multipurpose TEM at 120 kV. Illumination beam was expanded to avoid sample damage. AFM images were acquired using a Nanoscope IV Scanning Probe Microscope (Veeco Metrology Group) in a tapping mode. Spectroscopic ellipsometry was demonstrated at the Harvard Center for Nanoscale Systems. All other measurements were performed at the MIT Center for Material Science and Engineering. Group index substrates, respectively. The ray-optic analysis is good approximation when the size of the gain medium is > 0.5 μm, in which case the gain medium can be considered a multimode waveguide for the pump light. B, Absorption spectra of CsPbBr3 microcrystals. Circles, experimental data. Dashed curves: theoretical fits based on Elliot's theory (1) and Saha-Langmuir equation (2) for excitons with binding energy of 25 meV (magenta), electron-hole pairs (cyan), free electrons and holes (green), and a sum of these three components (Black) using Elliott's theory. The band gap energy is 2.38 eV. C, Threshold pump absorption for the three types of lasers, computed from the experimentally measured threshold pump fluence (E $% ) (Fig. Methods: The density of absorbed pump photons, ρ M , at threshold can be expressed as: ρ M = ζE $% /(L P ħω M ), where L P is the height of the gain medium, ħω M (= 4 × 10 -19 J) is the energy of single pump photon, and ζ is a conversion factor related to the reflection and absorption of the pump light. The conversion factor is shown to be (3 , where R U and R W are reflectivity, k is the absorption coefficient of CsPbBr3 for the pump wavelength (10 4 cm -1 at 293 K) (4). For a CsPbBr3 cube with a height of 1 μm, a total of 52% and 55% of the pump light is absorbed in plasmonic and photonic devices, respectively. The total absorbed pump photons can be converted to the rate of absorption of photon pumps per volume, P $% . In our experiments, the pump light is nanosecond pulses with a pulse duration of τ M . Then, the time-averaged absorption rate is given by: P $% = ρ M /τ M . For example, for a 1 μm-high plasmonic laser device that reaches its lasing threshold at E $% = 0.46 mJ/cm 2 , we get ρ M = 6 × 10 18 cm -3 and P $% = 1.2 × 10 18 cm -3 ns -1 . The following rate equations can be written for a semiconductor laser (Fig. where ρ U (t) and ρ W (t) denote the carrier density in the first and second excited states, respectively, P(t) is the pump rate, and τ $% is the rate of non-radiative thermal decay from the first to the second excited levels, ρ $k is the number of carriers needed to reach transparency, q(t) is the photon number density in the cavity, F $H$ is the total enhancement factor of emission contributed by all cavity modes including non-lasing modes as well as background modes uncoupled to a cavity: i.e. F $H$ =∑ F ? + F q , where F ? is the enhancement factors of individual cavity modes and F q is the enhancement factor for modes uncoupled to the cavity (F q = 1 when carriers are in free space, and F q > 1 when the emitters are interacting with plasmonic waves that have high-density of states and are non-resonant in the cavity), β 0 is the spontaneous emission factor denoting the fraction of spontaneous emission into a cavity mode of interest and is related to the Purcell factor F 0 of the mode (F 0 = β 0 F $H$ ), τ $% is the thermalization lifetime, τ F is the radiative lifetime, τ @k is the non-radiative lifetime, τ r is the photon lifetime inside the cavity. Quantum yield η is defined as the fraction of radiative emission rate over a total decay rate: For pumping with a duration τ M longer than τ r , τ $% , and τ F /F $H$ (this condition is satisfied in our plasmonic lasers), we can set `$ = 0 to obtain quasi-steady state solutions.: q as a function of P has a nonlinear kink at p = 1, so this point defines a lasing threshold, and P $% is the pump rate at threshold. The second term in Neglecting the second term and using the quality factor of the cavity mode, Q 0 = ω 3 τ r , we derive: Plotting One of the reasonable definitions of lasing threshold is the point when a stimulated emission rate ( ρ $% From ( As another definition of lasing threshold, it is the point when net stimulated emission rate, (β 0 F €•. V(ρ W -ρ $k )/τ F ), is equal to the cavity loss rate (1/τ r ). At this condition, we get: Since ρ W -ρ $k ≈ ρ W in most cases, we find , which is consistent with Consider fluorescence measurement using ultrashort pump pulses with a duration of τ M . At low pump fluence below lasing threshold, the stimulated emission term in (2) is neglible. Following the absorption of a single pump pulse at t=0, the carrier density and magnitude of fluorescence decay over time: From For given pump pulses and intrinsic radiative time constant, the initial fluorescence peak is proportional to F $H$ . Methods: The resonance condition for cavity modes is given by OEm where m Ž and m • are integers, N = m Ž + m • , n is the effective refractive index of the modes in the crystal, and θ is a beam angle to the surface normal within a range between θ r and π/2 -θ r , where θ r = sin YU (1/n) is critical angle for total internal reflection where n . is group refractive index, and v and δv are the center frequency and full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the optical gain spectrum, respectively. This formula was used to plot the dashed curve in A and C, with reasonably good correspondence to the simulation and experimental results. ) YU , and F 0 = §Ÿ ẅ© v ~f g f where Q 0 was calculated for WGM in spherical cavities with a diameter L, and V 0 = f g V is mode volume. Volumetric factor f g was the fitting parameter. For plasmonic devices (assuming F q = 5), we found f g ≈ 0.006, corresponds to a modal height of 3-10 nm. For photonic devices (F q = 1), f g = 0.9 produced the best fit. The overall quality of fitting for β 0 , η, and F 0 achieves descent agreement with the experimental data considering the simple assumptions (e.g. same V 0 and Q 0 for all modes.) submicron crystals on pNE-Si substrates (magenta circles) and a plasmonic crystal on pNE-gold (dashed line, Fig. *