Color centers in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) have emerged as promising candidates for single-photon emitters (SPEs) due to their bright emission characteristics at room temperature. In contrast to mono-and few-layered hBN, color centers in multi-layered flakes show superior emission characteristics such as higher saturation counts and spectral stability. Here, we report a method for determining both the axial position and threedimensional dipole orientation of SPEs in thick hBN flakes by tuning the photonic local density of states using vanadium dioxide (VO2), a phase change material. Emitters under study exhibit a strong surface-normal dipole orientation, providing some insight on the atomic structure of hBN SPEs, deeply embedded in thick crystals. We have optimized a hot pickup technique to reproducibly transfer flakes of hBN from VO2 onto SiO2/Si substrate and relocated the same emitters. Our approach serves as a practical method to systematically characterize SPEs in hBN prior to integration in quantum photonics systems. Over the past few decades, point defects (1) that introduce electronic states with optical transitions, also known as color centers, have garnered great interest for quantum photonics applications, such as quantum computation and quantum information Recent discoveries of quantum light emission from two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) layered materials In contrast to bulk materials, vdW materials offer easier integration with photonic structures and minimal loss due to refractive index mismatch Quantum emitters in multi-layered flakes, in contrast to mono-and few-layered flakes, show superior emission characteristics such as higher saturation counts and spectral stability due to reduced environmental screening effects In this Letter, we demonstrate nanometer-scale axial location of hBN quantum emitters in a multi-layered flake by leveraging highly sensitive, distance-dependent modulation of the spontaneous emission lifetime of these quantum emitters when in close proximity to a tunable phase-change material, vanadium dioxide (VO2). Specifically, we modify the local density of optical states (LDOS) by inducing an insulator-to-metal transition in VO2 which in turn modulates the emission rate of quantum emitters near the hBN/VO2 interface. This method, taken together with emission polarimetry to determine the three-dimensional (3D) orientation of the quantum emitter, give comprehensive information about emitters axial position and orientation, which could be used to distinguish possible candidates based on atomic structure of the emitter. Furthermore, we have optimized a polymer-assisted hot pickup and transfer process to reliably transfer hBN flakes from VO2 substrate onto any arbitrary substrate (here, we use SiO2/Si substrate as target), following which, the emitters under investigation were relocated. Measurement of hBN emitter location and 3D orientation with nanometer-scale resolution in multi-layered flakes together with advances in precise transfer and stacking of 2D materials The experimental configuration is shown in Figure Figure In general, the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of hBN quantum emitters varies in the range 0.6-1.0 Figure To locate the quantum emitters precisely, we performed confocal photoluminescence (PL) mapping in mode by which the sample was scanned point by point. Figure To investigate the single-photon emission characteristics and decay lifetime of the quantum emitters, we measured their second-order intensity correlation functions g @ (τ) in both insulating and metallic phases of VO2. In order to reduce the influence of background signal and noise, we corrected the raw g E1F @ (τ) using the function g @ (τ) = [g E1F @ (τ) -(1 -ρ @ )]/ρ @ , where ρ = S/(S + B) where S and B refer to the signal and the background counts, respectively. This background corrected g @ (τ) was fitted with double exponential of the form (20) where, ζ, ρ, γ Y,@ are laser power-dependent parameters To model the distance-dependence of the quantum emitter lifetime on VO2 phase, we define the ratio of their decay rates in the insulating and metallic phases as β. Next, we focus on emission polarimetry of the quantum emitters. Previous studies where I f3-, f1g and φ are the fitting parameters. From the fit, we obtained for emitter 'A': I f3-= 0.356 ± 0.013, I f1g = 0.966 ± 0.024 and φ = 175.7 c ± 1.0 c . Similarly, for emitter 'B': I f3-= 0.318 ± 0.034, I f1g = 0.888 ± 0.066 and φ = 109. 9 c ± 2.9 c . In emission polarimetry, the polar angle θ can be extracted from the degree of polarization of the emission defined as From the fitting parameters (I f1g , I f3-), we obtained δ = 0.461 ± 0.023 and δ = 0.473 ± 0.070 for emitter 'A' and 'B' respectively. Figures 4c, 4d Next, we investigated the feasibility of transferring the hBN flake from the VO2 measurement substrate to a device substrate, which is a necessary capability for integration of quantum emitters with chip-based photonic components and waveguide circuits. In contrast to wet chemical transfer method To summarize, we have demonstrated an experimental technique by which the axial position of quantum emitters in a multi-layered hBN flake can be extracted with nanometer-scale accuracy by exploiting the modification of photonic density of states using a phase change optical material, VO2. Here, we tailor the optical environment of an emitter in the vicinity of VO2/Sapphire substrate which generates a sharply distance-dependent PL response. By performing time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy, supplemented with emission polarimetry, several specific quantum emitters were identified at an axial distance of ~ 21 nm from the hBN/VO2 interface while also determining their full dipolar orientation (θ, φ). Furthermore, we utilized a polymer-assisted hot pickup technique to transfer the identified hBN emitters from a VO2 measurement substrate to a SiO2/Si device substrate, which opens the door to coupling of fully characterized emitters, where each emitter has undergone precise measurement of axial position and orientation. It is worth noting that any phase-change material which experiences a sharp change in optical properties would be suitable for this purpose. However, VO2 is particularly interesting because its insulatorto-metal transition happens near room temperature and is thus well suited to dynamically control emission rates of quantum emitters (49,50) near room temperature. Owing to the broadband nature of change in the dielectric function of VO2 when switched from the insulating to metallic phase, our technique could also be extended to locating other visible or infrared quantum emitters ). The refractive indices of the upper medium, hBN, and that of sapphire were set to 1, 1.82, and 1.77 respectively. The refractive index of VO2 at 600 nm was set to 3.05 + 0.42i (insulating state) and 2.57 + 0.64i (metallic state) from our ellipsometric data (Supplementary Fig. We performed visible ellipsometry measurement to extract real and imaginary parts of refractive index of VO2 at 30°C and 100°C. We clearly observe the switching of the optical constants of the VO2 film when reaching the temperature triggered phase transition. It is worth noting that, n decreases in the wavelength range, while k increases as VO2 undergoes an insulator-to-metal transition. To date, quantum emitters in hBN exhibit ZPL emission in the range 550-800 nm; thus, VO2 is well-suited to modify the optical environment of hBN-based quantum emitters. We also measured the response of the Peltier element to measure how long it takes to reach the stabilized temperature (Fig. In order to characterize the optical properties of the VO2 film grown on a sapphire substrate, we measured reflectance spectra in the visible range. The temperature-dependent reflectance curves were measured by using a microscope spectrometer with an external heating stage. Figure Fig. Numerical simulations were performed using the commercial finite element software COMSOL Multiphysics for frequency domain electromagnetic full-field calculations. The simulation domain was truncated using perfectly matched layers. We modelled a quantum emitter as an electric point dipole source and calculated the spontaneous emission rate by probing the field at the location of the dipole. The non-radiative contribution to the decay rate was calculated by probing the heat generated in the lossy material (VO2). The complex refractive index of VO2 at the ZPL of emitters A, B, and C were taken from our ellipsometric data (Supplementary Fig. We performed full-wave electromagnetic simulations using finite difference time domain methods to estimate the optimal thickness for a VO2 film in order provide the largest optical contrast in the photoluminescence wavelength range. We used a commercial Lumerical finite-difference timedomain software package to obtain the reflectance spectra of the VO2 film on a sapphire substrate. The reflectance maps of the thin film structure were monitored by varying the thickness of the VO2 film for both insulating and metallic phases. Here, RMetallic: metallic phase reflectance and RInsulating: insulating phase reflectance. A 40-nm thick vanadium dioxide (VO2) film was formed on a cleaned c-plane single side polished sapphire substrate by pulsed laser deposition. A high-power pulsed laser beam vaporizes a vanadium target which deposits a thin film on the sapphire substrates in the presence of 5 m-Torr oxygen gas at an elevated temperature (650°C). First, we confirmed that the surface of the VO2 film grown on the sapphire substrate was uniform and continuous with root mean square roughness of around 1.5 nm that were measured by atomic force microscopy (Figure Fig. Figure Figure Annealing in an inert environment is routinely used to create or activate quantum emitters in diamond as well as hBN. For the hBN samples described here, we annealed a bulk crystal of hBN at 950 °C in a 1 bar pressure argon gas for 30 minutes before exfoliation. We mounted our sample consisting of hBN/VO2/sapphire on a Peltier heating stage. To perform background subtraction for g (2) measurements we scanned a small PL map (5umX5um) around each emitter in the same optical condition as the g (2) measurement was performed (i.e. using bandpass filter to only pass through the zero phonon line). Then by fitting a gaussian profile to the spatial photoluminescence we extract the value of background (B) and signal(S) , then we define parameter ρ as ρ = S/(S + B). If the raw (i.e. background is not corrected) g (2) function is g E1F (@) then the background corrected intensity autocorrelation g ~48 (@) is calculated as: A similar method is used for background subtraction of polarization measurement. We subtracted 1⁄2 of the background value extracted from the fit mentioned above from the angle dependent polarization. Microsecond scale autocorrelation function of three emitters at both 30 o C and 100 o C is plotted in figure Fig. Internal quantum yield in an important parameter for a quantum emitter which can be estimated from the value of rate coefficients and the maximum single photon rates i.e. the saturation count rate I ̈ as ( Here, η 8 is the collection efficiency of the experimental set up, η a is the quantum efficiency, γ ~, γ 1 , γ 8 c , u are rate coefficients which can be obtained from power dependent de-shelving model. We fitted the power-dependent PL intensity and fitted with the function I = I .12 ¬ ¤ ¤"¤ -"® ̄ and obtained I .12 = 0.025 MHz and P .12 = 104 μW. From the rate coefficients, we obtain η 8 η a = 5.63 x 10 -4 . Taking into account the collection, transmission, and coupling efficiency of the optical element of the experimental set up, the collection efficiency η 8 = 8.87 x 10 -4 which gives η a = 0. 634. The quantum efficiency η a has contribution from the internal quantum yield, radiative Purcell enhancement, and the non-radiative loss due to ohmic loss in VO2. Using simple algebra, we obtain The PC/PDMS block was slowly brought in contact with the hBN flake of interest using a micromanipulator and the system was heated slowly up to 140 o C to ensure that the PC film uniformly touches the entire hBN flake. At this temperature, the PC is stickier than the VO2 and attracts the hBN. Then the system is slowly retracted without lowering the temperature. As the PC film detaches from the VO2 substrate, it lifts the hBN flake of interest along with it. It should be noted that while conventionally this is achieved by lowering the temperature rather than the substrate, we found that this reduced the yield in our case because then the VO2 is stickier than the PC at lower temperatures (<130 o C) and the flake does not pick up reliably. Once the hBN is on PC/PDMS it can be arbitrarily placed on any substrate with a spatial accuracy of 1um, limited by our transfer setup. In order to "drop" it on to the desired substrate, we bring the hBN flake and substrate in contact at 140 o C. As soon as the PC makes full contact with the substrate, the temperature is taken up to 200 o C and the PC melts and "drops" on the substrate. The PC film can be removed by gentle chloroform and isopropanol treatment sequentially, for 5 minutes. Our transfer process does not involve etching or usage of any harsh chemicals thus preserving the quality of the flakes and also the emitters. Also, our choice of a hemispherical handle allows us greater flexibility in deterministically picking and placing hBN flakes, which greatly increases the versatility of this process over other existing methods where the entire substrate is usually etched, and all flakes are transferred to the next substrate. After successful transfer of our flake onto SiO2/Si substrate we performed a confocal PL map of the region containing emitters A and B, to relocate the quantum emitters. We could match spectral and spatial signatures of both emitters (Fig. 