This work reports on the production of Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) in water solution based upon two-phase pulsed laser procedure for ophthalmological therapeutic approaches. In this case, the AgNPs should be ≤ 10 nm and have a narrow size distribution. Nanoparticles of this sized-scale are capable to penetrate the complex ocular barriers, ensuring effective non-invasive drug delivery to retina. Moreover, the ocular irritation, which is currently associated to the conventional ocular drug administration routes, would be avoided. In the first phase, AgNPs larger than 20 nm were fabricated via laser ablation of a Ag target under water by irradiation with a fundamental wavelength (λ = 1064 nm) generated by a Nd:YAG laser. During the second phase, to reduce the mean size of the as-obtained nanoparticles and properly adjust the size distribution, the water colloids were additionally irradiated by ultraviolet harmonics (355 nm and 266 nm) from the same laser source. The effect of the key laser parameterswavelength, fluence and laser exposure time -upon the nanoparticles morphology was studied. The most suitable post-ablation treatment of initial colloids was obtained by consecutive irradiation with the third (λ = 355 nm) and the fourth (λ = 266 nm) harmonics of the fundamental laser wavelength. By using this approach synergistic effect between two mechanisms of light absorption by AgNPs was induced. As a result contaminant-free colloids of AgNPs with a size inferior to 10 nm and a quite narrow size distribution with a standard deviation of 1.6 nm were fabricated. The toxic effect of the as-produced AgNPs on Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and Candida albicans was explored. The most efficient action was reached against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli. Potential application of the synthesized AgNPs colloidal aqueous solutions with antimicrobial action as a non-invasive method for ocular infections prevention and treatment was proposed. The unique electronic In what concerns silver particles of nanometer size (AgNPs), besides being nontoxic, they are known to suppress or destroy various types of bacteria This list of applications of silver nanoparticles, emphasizing their use in medicine, is relevant to the thematic orientation of the article. Their application in other areas is much wider, e.g.: a) detection by surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) of ultra-low concentration of some molecules attached to AgNPs Тhe object of this study is fabrication of Ag nanocolloids for drug delivery in ophthalmology. As known, the passage of drugs in the form of eye drops to the posterior segment of the eye is severely restricted by eye barriers. Several ways of delivering drugs to the eye were currently being used: topical infusion and sub-conjunctival injection, trans-scleral drug delivery, intra-vitreal injection, sub-retinal injection We report on a simple approach for fragmentation of silver NPs by post-laser ablation treatment of water Ag nanocolloids via consecutive laser irradiation with 355 nm and 266 nm nanosecond pulses generated by the Nd:YAG laser source. Using this approach, for the first time, to the best of our knowledge, contaminant-free AgNPs with size below 10 nm and very narrow size distribution, namely, with mean diameter of 5.4 nm and a standard deviation of 1.6 nm, were fabricated. The AgNPs produced completely conform to the ophthalmology demands for bloodretinal barrier transporters in eye drug delivery. Our investigation by microbiological assay established strong antibacterial and antifungal activity of the newly fabricated Ag nanoparticle colloids. The potential application of the synthesized AgNPs colloidal aqueous solutions with antimicrobial action was proposed as a non-invasive method for ocular infections prevention and treatment. Our studies were organized in two steps: i) synthesis of AgNPs in water solution by multiple laser ablation of a silver target under water with the fundamental wavelength of a Nd:YAG source to produce the initial colloids; ii) induce controlled modifications of AgNPs by next irradiation with 355 and 266 nm harmonics from the same laser source. The experiments were conducted as follows: A pure silver target was submitted to multiple Nd:YAG laser irradiation at λ = 1064 nm with 15 ns laser pulses at a frequency repetition rate of 10 Hz. The target was placed on the bottom of a plastic beaker and immersed in double-distilled water (0.8 μS m -1 ) at 6 mm below surface. 1800 subsequent laser pulses were applied for synthesis of AgNPs in solution. The total ablation time was three minutes at a fluence of 24.7 J cm -2 , Tab. 1. The laser beam was focused through a lens (f = 22 cm) perpendicularly to a disc-shaped silver target. A separation distance of 18 cm was chosen. The experimental setup employed to fabricate the initial AgNPs colloids is presented schematically in Fig. These two wavelengths were selected since they are located close to the plasmon and to the interband absorption Combined irradiation was therefore applied in the third mode, by using sequentially the wavelengths of 355 nm and 266 nm, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this procedure was for the first time applied to reach the main goal of the treatment -fabricating the colloid suitable for use in ophthalmology (Patent application) The optical transmission spectra of AgNPs water colloids in the UV/Vis range (300-900 nm) were recorded by an Ocean Optics HR 4000 spectrometer. The size and the morphology of AgNPs were visualized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The images were acquired with a JEOL JEM 2100 at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were used to characterize the nanoparticles microstructure and their phase composition. The antibacterial and antifungal activity of the newly fabricated Ag nanoparticle colloids were assessed by using Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, and Candida albicans. The following strains were used: Staphylococcus aureus strain 29213 and Escherichia coli strain 35218 from an American Collection of Cell Cultures (ATCC); Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain 1390 and Candida albicans strain 74 from the collection of the Stefan Angeloff Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. Suspensions of the respective microorganisms with a concentration of 1×10 6 CFU mL -1 were prepared. The experiments were conducted with an incubation mixture containing equal volumes of suspensions of microorganisms and AgNPs. The mixture was poured in 12-well polystyrene plates, continuously shaken, and sampled at pre-defined intervals (0, 2, 5 and 24 hours) in order to count the number of viable microorganisms. Ten-fold diluted solutions of the incubation mixtures in a nutrient medium (Tryptic soy agar, Oxoid) were seeded and the colonies-forming units (CFUs) were counted after culturing for 24 hours at 37 o C. Тo confirm the results, the experiments were repeated three times, with numerical values presented As an average value +/-mean standard deviation (SD). The difference between two means was determined by a two-tailed unpaired Student's test. In Fig. The optical transmission of the colloidal solutions produced under different irradiation conditions was investigated. The results are displayed in Fig. One can see in Fig. From the examination of Fig. i) The transmission was the lowest in case of the initial colloid produced in the first phase. ii) It gradually increased with the number of subsequent laser pulses (total time duration) applied under the second phase. iii) Saturation appeared when duration exceeded 85 min, even when laser fluence was increased to 0.068 J cm -2 (Fig. This behavior was caused by size-redistribution in nanoparticles ensemble, which might be due to relatively low values of laser fluence used in our experiments, in accordance with "particle heatingmelting-evaporation" model, proposed by Takami et al. Laser treatment of colloids initiate two concurrent processes: fragmentation of big nanoparticles, and concomitant with aggregation and fusion of small ones. The energy of the electrons excited by SPR is transmitted by electron-phonon coupling to lattice. When temperature reached the melting point, latent heath should be further delivered to get NPs complete melting. The temperature excursion continued to evaporation and boiling point, which also needed latent heat compensation and resulted in reduction of AgNPs mean size, by selective fragmentation of the biggest ones. On the other hand, fusion of NPs could proceed by aggregation and melting. The equilibrium between these two processes, fragmentation and fusion, depends on the laser pulses energy and duration of irradiation and is reflected in NPs mean size and size distribution. The reduction trend of these characteristics of the ensemble of the NPs continued therefore up to 85-min irradiation duration, as evidenced by the optical transmission spectra in Fig. The application of the second mode of illumination was therefore extended in order to preserve the photo-fragmentation predominance. It was conducted in analogous way of the previous one (λ = 355 nm), except the use of more energetic photons coming with the fourth harmonic (λ = 266 nm -4.66 eV, as against 3.49 eV for 355 nm). Very important, SPR absorption was replaced in this case by an absorption process due to an inter-band transition The results obtained by optical transmission spectroscopy after the two steps of laser irradiation process, i.e. initial colloids generation by 1064 nm, followed by supplementary fragmentation of AgNPs under 266 nm irradiation for different irradiation times are displayed in Fig. Another feature that should be mentioned when comparing ТЕМ images obtained in both measurement modes was the appearance of two populations of nanoparticles -bigger and smaller. This process was barely noticeable in the first irradiation mode (Fig. One may conclude, that the first two modes of laser irradiation reduced AgNPs mean size and narrowed their size distribution in a different way, without being able however to fully meet the specific requirements for medical use in ophthalmologic therapy. That is why we used a combined treatment by the third (λ = 355 nm) and the fourth (λ = 266 nm) harmonics, successively applied for irradiation of the initial colloid in the third mode of the second phase of the experimental procedure. It was organized in analogy with the first two modes. The initial colloid was irradiated during the first 85 minutes with λ = 355 nm at the same laser energy as in Fig. The maximum effect was reached after 15 min laser irradiation (Fig. The further irradiation prolongation caused the reversal trend, as evidenced by the optical transmission spectrum after 20 min (Fig. This proved that a synergistic effect was reached with the third mode of irradiation between the sequential actions of the two above mentioned mechanisms of absorption, in respect with the average size and size distribution of AgNPs. Very important, TEM examination showed that generated nanoparticles preserved the spherical shape in this case too (Fig. In conclusion, the third mode completely meets the aim of the treatment, i.e. in preparation of silver nanocolloids suitable for use in ophthalmology. Thus, the fabrication of nearly monodisperse Ag nanoparticles with an average size of 5.4 nm allow the drugs in the form of eye drops to pass through most of eye barriers, such as scleral water channels/pores, and can penetrate the corneal endothelium The results reported in this Section were obtained with AgNPs of ~ 5.4 nm mean size, produced with the third irradiation mode, under optimum conditions. Our studies showed that the AgNPs were the most effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. They reduced the number of the bacteria by four logs (10 000 times, i.e lower than the minimum level of viable microorganisms, (Fig. Then the number of viable bacteria dropped fast and after five hours they were completely inactivated. A very effective action was obtained against Escherichia coli for which full inactivation was also observed after five hours. The process of inactivation ran rapidly between the second and the fifth hour (Fig. Ag nanocolloids reduced the number of Staphylococcus aureus by two logs (100 times) after five hours and completely inactivated the bacteria after 24 hours (Fig. The antifungal action against Candida albicans actively started after five hours. The number of fungi was reduced by 1.5 logs. The process continued for 24 hours, when fungi were completely inactivated (fig. Pulsed laser ablation under different irradiation regimes was applied to photofabricate Ag nanocolloids with controlled mean size and distribution, suitable for potential ophthalmological applications. To the best of our knowledge, a consecutive application of the third and the fourth harmonics after the fundamental wavelength of a Nd:YAG laser source was for the first time investigated to this purpose. It proved efficient to initiate synergistic effects between consecutive application of the fundamental and the harmonics (third and fourth ones) to the same Ag nanocolloidal population. Chemical-free AgNPs with a mean size of 5.4 nm and a very narrow size distribution (standard deviation of ~ 1.6 nm) was fabricated under the optimal experimental conditions -consecutive laser irradiation of the water colloids of silver nanoparticles with 355 nm and 266 nm. Antibacterial action of AgNPs was explored with good results against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. Ag nanocolloids proved most efficient against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli bacteria, for which full apoptosis was reached after five hours. The small size of the AgNPs allows for an expected efficient cure of intraocular infections. One should emphasize upon the key role of laser pulse energy for narrowing AgNPs size distribution as a result of laser multiple irradiation. Our results support the efficient green photofabrication of ultrafine monodisperse Ag nanoclusters by a multistep laser procedure for applying them as non-invasive method of prevention and cure of intraocular infections of any sort. One should mention that all irradiations -i.e. for both initial generation of Ag nanocolloids but also for the next adjustment of their size and size distribution (1064 vs. 355 and 266 nm) -were generated by the same Nd:YAG laser source. This means a procedure easy to informatize and automize for low cost exploitation.