Quantum localization via atomic point defects in semiconductors is of significant fundamental and technological importance. Quantum defects in monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide semiconductors have been proposed as stable and scalable optically-addressable spin qubits. Yet, the impact of strong spin-orbit coupling on their dynamical response, for example under optical excitation, has remained elusive. In this context, we study the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the electron-phonon interaction in a single chalcogen vacancy defect in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) and tungsten disulfide (WS 2 ). From ab initio electronic structure theory calculations, we find that spin-orbit interactions tune the magnitude of the electronphonon coupling in both optical and charge-state transitions of the defect, modulating their respective efficiencies. This observation opens up a promising scheme of dynamically modulating material properties to tune the local behavior of a quantum defect. Defects are ubiquitous in materials. At low enough densities, point defects within a lattice can be treated as effectively isolated from each other. These defects create broken bonds which can lead to localized electronic orbitals, with behavior similar to trapped atoms or molecules, and can therefore be used as qubits, building blocks for various applications in the field of quantum information science, ranging from quantum computing, communications to nanoscale sensing. Rational design of quantum defects requires careful consideration of both the defect and host material, which jointly determine the behavior and properties. Requirements of the host material include important descriptors such as the band-gap size, concentration of the nuclear spin bath, potential for high quality material growth, and spin-orbit interactions, are at least partially determined by the host material. This has most notably been successful in the emergence of defects in silicon carbide. Figure We study the phonon coupling parameters for two types of excited states as described in Fig. where m α is the mass of atom α, R is the corresponding relaxed position for the ground (g) and excited (e) electronic configurations, with i indexing the Cartesian direction. Returning to Fig. To study the vibrational effects of the transitions described in Fig. We next calculate the partial Huang-Rhys factor S k , which is the average number of phonons of a particular mode k with energy E k emitted during the transition from ground to excited state. The total HR factor S (= k S k ) is the total number of phonons that on average are emitted during the transition. Figure We perform the same calculations for the optical transition depicted in the inset of Fig. To understand the influence of the spin-orbit splitting on the transition properties of the defect, we compared the differences in geometry shift due to electron occupation in the lower versus the upper SO-split defect orbitals. The shift in the relaxed defect cells for excitation to either of the two split levels are presented in Fig. In conclusion, we predict a strong spin-orbit splitting in the localized mid-gap orbitals of the V S defect in TMDC monolayers. This SO splitting alters the relaxed excited-state geometry which influences the contribution of vibrational modes to the transitions studied. Specifically, the modulation of the Huang-Rhys factor as the excitation is switched from lower to upper split state is strongly dependent on the spin-orbit splitting of a given TMDC. In future, such geometry shifts and therefore defect-phonon coupling can provide an additional fingerprint that can be used to identify defect candidates seen in scanning probe experiments. Looking ahead, this also provides an opportunity for dynamic modulation of the phonon sideband of the defect level excitations via strain. Mechanical strain can be seamlessly applied to TMDC monolayers P. Narang, C. J. Ciccarino, J. Flick, and D. Englund, Advanced Functional Materials 29, 1904557 (2019).