InGaAs/InP single-photon detectors (SPDs) are widely used for near-infrared photon counting in practical applications. Photon detection efficiency (PDE) is one of the most important parameters for SPD characterization, and therefore increasing PDE consistently plays a central role in both industrial development and academic research. Here we present the implementation of high-frequency gating InGaAs/InP SPD with a PDE as high as 60% at 1550 nm. On one hand, we optimize the structure design and device fabrication of InGaAs/InP single-photon avalanche diode with an additional dielectric-metal reflection layer to relatively increase the absorption efficiency of incident photons by ∼ 20%. On the other hand, we develop a monolithic readout circuit of weak avalanche extraction to minimize the parasitic capacitance for the suppression of the afterpulsing effect. With 1.25 GHz sine wave gating and optimized gate amplitude and operation temperature, the SPD is characterized to reach a PDE of 60% with a dark count rate (DCR) of 340 kcps. For practical use, given 3 kcps DCR as a reference the PDE reaches ∼ 40% PDE with an afterpulse probability of 5.5%, which can significantly improve the performance for the near-infrared SPD based applications. Single-photon detectors (SPDs) are the most sensitive tools for weak light detection In this paper, we present the implementation of 1.25 GHz sine wave gating InGaAs/InP SPDs with a PDE up to 60% at 1550 nm. We perform the structure design op-arXiv:2007.06792v1 [physics.app-ph] 14 Jul 2020 timization of InGaAs/InP SPADs by adding a dielectricmetal reflection layer, and calibrated results on the fabricated sample SPAD devices show that the reflectivity of dielectric-metal reflection layer to the incident photons at 1550 nm reaches ∼ 80%. Further, we design and fabricate a monolithically integrated readout circuit (MIRC) dedicated to extracting weak avalanches for the scheme of 1.25 GHz sine wave gating. By optimizing the gate amplitude and operation temperature, the InGaAs/InP SPDs are characterized to achieve PDE of 60.1% at 300 K with a DCR of 340 kcps and a P ap of 14.8% . For practical use, the SPD exhibits significantly better performance than commercial products, e.g., ∼ 40% PDE with 3 kcps DCR and 5.5% P ap at 253 K. Following the approach The dielectric-metal reflection layer, consisting of a dielectric layer and a metal layer, is located on the top of the photosensitive region. The dielectric layer lies between the metal layer and the InP multiplication region. The material of dielectric layer is SiO 2 , and the thickness of the dielectric layer is 220 ∼ 230 nm. The reflectivity is enhanced due to the interference of reflected light between the semiconductor-dielectric interface and the dielectric-metal interface. We calculate the relationship between the reflectivity of the reflection layer and the angle of incident light at 1550 nm, and further optimize the thickness of the dielectric layer film. Fig. Apart from the reflection layer, the parameters of other layers are also optimized. The electric field distributions in the absorption and multiplication layers are regulated by tuning the doping concentration in the grading and charge layers. The electric field strength in the absorp- tion layer is regulated in the range of 1 ∼ 1.4×10 5 V/cm to guarantee the saturation drift rate of the photogenerated carriers while avoiding avalanche breakdown. The thickness of the multiplication layer is regulated in the range of 1 ∼ 1.5 μm to guarantee enough electric field strength for avalanche breakdown while reducing the carrier transit time and thus the timing jitter. The total thickness of the depletion region is ∼ 3 μm. The InGaAs/InP SPAD chips are fabricated via an epitaxial process of the metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). During the fabrication, the background impurity concentration of epitaxial materials is reduced within the range of 2 × 10 14 cm -3 and the surface charge density in the charge layer is controlled with an accuracy of 5%. The depth of PN junction is regulated with an accuracy of ±50 nm via double-diffusion process technology using a Zn source In order to verify the effectiveness of the reflection layer, we design and fabricate two kinds of InGaAs/InP sample SPADs with and without the reflection layer, respectively. Apart from the reflection layer, all the other structure parameters in the two cases are exactly the same. Fig. In the SPD system, we design a MIRC with a size of 15 mm × 15 mm to extract weak avalanche signals We then follow the single-photon calibration scheme 12 to characterize the primary parameters of InGaAs/InP SPDs. The second channel (Ch2) of SG generates a clock of 625 kHz to drive a picosecond pulsed laser diode (LD, QuantumCTek QCL-102). The optical pulses emitted from the LD at 1550 nm with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 50 ps pass through a 99:1 beam splitter (BS), in which the 99% port is monitored by a power meter (PM, EXFO IQS-1600) and the 1% port is connected with a variable optical attenuator (VOA, EXFO IQS-3150). The intensity of laser pulses is attenuated down to a level of mean photon number per pulse of 1. The synchronized signals of Ch2 and the output signals from the discriminator are fed into a time-to-digital converter (TDC, PicoQuant picoharp 300) with an intrinsic deadtime of ∼ 88 ns as "start" and "stop", respectively. TDC performs a timing tag for each detection event and transmits data to a personal computer (PC). Fig. With such measurement settings, the primary parameters of InGaAs/InP SPDs can be calculated. Considering the Poisson distribution of laser source, PDE can be calculated as 12 where μ is the mean photon number per laser pulse, R d is the measured count rates without laser illumination, f g is the gating frequency, f l is the laser repetition frequency, and R ph is the photon detection count rate with laser illumination, i.e., the coincidence rate between detections and laser pulses after subtracting the DCR contribution. The normalized DCR, which is usually used for fair comparison in different conditions, can be calculated as R d /(f g t w ) × 10 9 , where t w is the effective gating width where R is the total count rate with laser illumination. Two InGaAs/InP SPDs based on sample SPADs, i.e., SPAD #1 and SPAD #2, are characterized. In the SWG scheme, gate amplitude and operation temperature are the most important factors for performance optimization. First, SPAD #1 is characterized at a fixed operation temperature to investigate the effect of gate amplitude. Fig. In addition, gate amplitude significantly affects the relationship between P ap and PDE, as illustrated in Fig. Then, we investigate the relationship between operation temperature and performance optimization. Fig. In conclusion, we have reported a high-frequency gating InGaAs/InP SPD with a PDE up to 60% at 1550 nm. By performing structure design optimization with a dielectric-metal reflection layer, the absorption efficiency of SPAD is significantly enhanced. A monolithic readout circuit of avalanche extraction for 1.25 GHz SWG scheme is also designed to suppress the afterpulsing effect due to parasitic capacitance. We have then optimized the conditions of gate amplitude and operating temperature to achieve a PDE as high as 60%, with 340 kcps DCR and 14.8% P ap . For practical use, the SPD exhibits ∼ 40% PDE with 3 kcps DCR and 5.5% P ap , which can considerably improve the performance of diverse applications requiring InGaAs/InP SPDs for near-infrared single-photon detection.