The CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy is highly printable and holds great potential for structural applications. However, no significant discussions on cyclic plasticity and fatigue damage in previous studies. This study provides significant insights into the link between print processes, solidification microstructure, cyclic plasticity and fatigue damage evolution in the alloy fabricated by laser powder bed fusion. Thermodynamics-based predictions (validated by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX)) showed that Cr, Co and Fe partition to the core of the solidification cells, whilst Mn and Ni to the cell boundaries in all considered print parameters. Both dislocation slip and deformation twinning were found to be responsible for plastic deformation under monotonic loading. However, the former was found to be the single dominant mechanism for cyclic plasticity. The surface finish helped to substantially delay the crack initiation and cause lack-of-fusion porosity to be the main source of crack initiation. Most significantly, the scan strategies significantly affect grain arrangements and grain dimensions, leading to noticeable effects on fatigue crack propagation; in particular, the highest resistance crack propagation was seen in the meander scan strategy with 0° rotation thanks to the most columnar grains and the smallest spacing of grain boundaries along the crack propagation path. Laser Powder-Bed Fusion (LPBF) is an additive manufacturing (AM) method that involves layer-by-layer fabrication using a computer-controlled power source to consolidate a material into a desired shape. The interest in AM alloys is rising rapidly, since AM methods enable the fabrication of components with complex and optimised geometries, reducing fabrication time and costs. Successful use of any alloys in structural application requires understanding of long-term mechanical performance of the alloys. However, studies on the long-term performance of AM alloys are still limited. High-Entropy Alloys (HEA) are multicomponent alloys that consist of 5 or more principal elements in (near) equiatomic concentration, first introduced by Cantor et al. The CrMnFeCoNi HEA is reported to be highly printable via LPBF The CrMnFeCoNi samples were manufactured via LPBF using a Renishaw AM250 printer equipped with a modulated wave fibre laser on a 316L stainless steel substrate in argon atmosphere. Prealloyed CrMnFeCoNi powder was provided by H.C. Starck Surface Technology & Ceramic Powders GmbH. The samples were printed using a laser power of 200W, a hatch spacing of 85 μm, an exposure time of 80 μs, a point distance of 60 μm, a layer height of 50 μm and a spot size of 65 μm. These printing parameters were selected following the optimized print parameters for the 316L stainless steel (which is of the FeCrNi alloy system as the HEA) and those used for CrMnFeCoNi samples in previous studies Chessboard 67 ̊ rotation Meander 0 ̊(no rotation) Meander 90 ̊ rotation surface conditions (as-printed surface or machined surface) to investigate the effect of surface finish and sub-surface porosity. The relative densities of the dog-bone samples were calculated using Archimedes' Principle. The fatigue tests were performed at 22 °C under strain control at ±0.5 % strain amplitude (R=-1) with strain rate of 10 -2 s -1 . Fatigue life was defined at a number of cycles when the stress response dropped by 20 % from a plateau region. The yield stress in cyclic loading was evaluated at an offset strain of 0.01%. The damage evolution in the fatigue specimens was investigated by analysing the difference between apparent elastic moduli in tensile-going loading (Et) and in compression-going loading (Ec). In general, fatigue cracks, if existed, should remain open in the beginning of compressiongoing loading from the tensile peak stress due to the tensile stress state, but remain closed at the beginning of the tensile-going loading due to the compressive stress state. Therefore, if there are sufficiently long cracks or pores in the specimen, Et should be higher than Ec, as shown in Figure Fracture surfaces were observed with a ZeissTM Auriga scanning electron microscope (SEM). Samples for electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) were prepared by using 1200, 2400, and 4000 grit SiC papers followed by polishing in an OP-S solution with 0.4 μm colloidal silica particles. Polished samples were further electrochemically etched in 10 % oxalic acid solution for 30 s at 10 V. EBSD analyses were carried out using a ZeissTM Sigma 300 SEM equipped with a Field Emission Gun (FEG) electron source. EBSD analyses were performed using a step size of 0.1 μm per pixel; grain boundaries were defined when a misorientation larger than 5° was detected. The MTEX toolbox, together with the dislocation density estimation function by Pantleon Table Table Machined Chessboard 67° 99.8 As-printed Chessboard 67° 99.6 As-printed Meander 90 ° 99.6 As-printed Meander 0 ° 99.2 EBSD maps coloured according to the inverse pole figure (IPF) along the build direction (BD) and the grain size distributions corresponding to the considered print strategies (Figure This section focuses on the evolution of solidification microstructure generated by the same chessboard scan after either monotonic or cyclic loading (Figure The HEA fabricated by LPBF exhibited notable strength and ductility. For example, Figure Figure Fatigue lives of the HEA samples were calculated as the number of cycles at the 20% drop in the maximum stress response and were summarised in Table As-printed Chessboard 67° 1620 As-printed Meander 0 ° 1770 Dimples were seen on fracture surfaces in regions of overload, corresponding to the end of fatigue life. The presence of dimples indicates that ductile fracture occurred in the LPBF HEA, e.g. Figure Results in section 3.2 show that the monotonic yield stress of the HEA via LPBF is superior to that of the same alloy manufactured by VIM or VAR In FCC metals, deformation twinning is dominant when the stacking fault energy (SFE) is at 15-50 mJ/m 2 In contrast with substantial changes in microstructure during monotonic loading, there was no significant difference in the alloy's microstructure before and after cyclic loading (Figure During cyclic loading, dislocations move to and fro, resulting in more organised dislocation structures in cell boundaries to reduce the stored strain energy In fully dense materials with a good surface finish, fatigue crack initiation is often associated with persistent slip bands (PSBs) as a consequence of the to and fro movement of dislocations during cyclic loading Figure Figure This study discusses significant new insights into the relationship between process conditions (in particular scan strategy and surface finish), consolidation, solidification microstructure and fatigue behaviour of the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy fabricated by laser powder-bed fusion. Three considered printing strategies resulted in columnar grains, which consisted of fine solidification cells. The degree of columnarity was found to be governed by the scan strategy. STEM-EDX analyses showed that Cr, Co and Fe segregated to the cell core during solidification, while Mn and Ni segregated to cell boundaries, in agreement with CALPHAD predictions. The dense dislocation tangles located at the cell boundaries restricted dislocation slip during plastic deformation, resulting in an improved yield stress compared to cast CrMnFeCoNi HEA. Dislocation slip and deformation twinning were the main deformation mechanisms of the HEA in monotonic loading. However, dislocation slip was the single dominant deformation mechanism responsible for cyclic plasticity. Key-hole porosity in sub-surface regions was seen to act as preferential sites for fatigue crack initiation in the as-printed samples, while lack-of-fusion defects were major initiation sites for surface-finish condition. Machining significantly improved the fatigue life of the alloy by removing sub-surface key-hole pores and hence delaying fatigue crack initiation. The print strategies were not found to have a significant influence on the fatigue lives of the HEA samples. However, print strategies were found to have considerable effects on fatigue crack propagation. In particular, the meander 0° sample exhibited higher resistance to fatigue crack propagation compared to the other considered strategies, since this strategy induced the smallest spacing of grain boundaries along the crack propagation direction. . Mechanical properties and average grain size (measured from the EBSD maps of the specimen used for monotonic loading) of the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy at room temperature (293-296 K) manufactured by vacuum induction melting (VIM), vacuum arc melting (VAR) and LPBF.