The mid-infrared (MIR), far-infrared (FIR) to terahertz (THz) frequencies are the least developed parts of the electromagnetic spectrum for applications. Traditional semiconductor technologies like laser diodes and photodetectors are successful in the visible light range, but are still confronted with great challenges when extended into the MIR/FIR/THz range. In this paper, we demonstrate that topological insulators (TIs), especially those with Mexican-hat band structure (MHBS), provide a route to overcome these challenges. The optical responses of MHBS TIs can be one to two orders of magnitude larger than that of normal semiconductors at the optical-transition edge. We explore the databases of topological materials and discover a number of MHBS TIs whose bandgaps lie between 0.05 ∼ 0.5 eV and possess giant gains (absorption coefficients) on the order of 10 4 ∼ 10 5 cm -1 at the transition edge. These findings may significantly boost potential MIR/FIR/THz applications such as photon sources, detectors, ultrafast electro-optical devices, and quantum information technologies. The mid-infrared (MIR), far-infrared (FIR) to terahertz (THz) frequencies are of significant importance for applications such as non-destructive inspection, communication, astrophysics, etc. However, lying between the microwave and visible frequencies of the electromagnetic spectrum, the MIR/FIR/THz frequency range is not yet sufficiently developed for many applications, limited by both photon generation and detection technologies. For photon generation, quantum cascade lasers (QCL) In the visible range, the semiconductor laser diodes and photodetectors are widely used. They utilize the same mechanism of continuum-to-continuum (C2C) transition of an electron between the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB), and the photon generation and detection can be regarded as reciprocal processes, sharing the same pre-factor in the Fermi's Golden rule. However, in the MIR/FIR/THz range, attention on semiconductor devices is mostly focused on the transition between bound-to-continuum (B2C) or bound-to-bound (B2B) states, in e.g. an extrinsically doped semiconductor or a quantum well. Such B2C and B2B transitions impose stringent requirements on material fabrications, such as precise control on the impurity type and concentration. C2C transition actually has huge advantages over B2C or B2B. For example, the carrier mobilities would not be curtailed by dopants, and the detector may be utilized under arbitrary polarizations. However, 1 THz is equivalent to 4.1 meV, far below the typical interband gaps of most known semiconductors (on the order of 1 eV ). Another significant bottleneck is that the optical transition rate reduces drastically with decreasing photon frequency. In free space the dipole radiation power scales as ω In this work, we propose that topological insulators 15 (TIs) During the past decade, TIs have been under intense research and have changed our understandings of the state of matter. Many novel properties of TIs such as symmetry protected edge states could find potential applications in electronic and spintronic devices For example, the metal d orbitals usually constitute higher energy bands than the chalcogen p orbitals. However, in some materials, the metal d band could move below the chalcogen p band for some range of the wavevector k. In this case the metal d band would become valence band rather than conduction band Second, the bandgap E g is determined by the strength of SOC, and is usually on the order of 0.1 eV or below, lying in the range of MIR/FIR/THz. Furthermore, the bandgap can be controllably and continuously tuned by external field parameters ({λ i }) such as strain Striking advantages of using TIs for MIR/FIR/THz applications can be revealed when considering the bulk optical transitions in TIs. In fact, the optical response of TIs at the transition edge (ħω = E g ) can be one or two orders of magnitude larger than that of NIs. In order to illustrate this point, here we study an important parameter for optical applications, the gain G(ω) in the laser mode, or equivalently, the absorption coefficient μ(ω) in the detector mode. G(ω) can be related to the dielectric response function ε(ω) of the semiconductor by μ(ω) = G(ω) = 2ω Im(√ε(ω)) . The dielectric response function within the random phase approximation (RPA) where |u n,k ⟩ and E n,k are the periodic part of the wavefunction and the energy eigenvalue at band ]. ( Here we assume some basic crystal symmetries (e.g. in-plane three-fold or four-fold rotational symmetry) so that the mixing terms for in-plane wavevectors k x,y are identical and are denoted by A + and B + . k + ≡ k x + ik y is the in-plane complex momentum. M characterizes the band inversion. By solving Eq. ( The wavefunctions are Without loss of generality, we set k z = 0 and focus on the k x -k y plane. Some band characteristics on the k x -k y plane are plotted in Figure As stated above, the band inversion alone can contribute to stronger and faster interband transition. This would already lead to stronger optical responses for both parabolic and MHBS TIs (see Supporting Information, SI). However, the MHBS brings in an additional and even more striking advantage: greater jDOS at the transition edge. The jDOS can be written as where d is the dimensionality of the system and the integration is over the constant energydifference surface (CEDS) with E c -E v = ħω in the first BZ. For a standard parabolic band structure, it is well-known that in 3D, ρ cv (ω) scales as √ ħω -E g and is zero at the transition edge. Whereas in 2D, ρ cv (ω) should be a constant. However, with a MHBS as in Eq. ( We take 3D cubic SnSe (space group Fm3 ̅ m) as an example to illustrate our theory. The atomic structure is shown in the inset of Figure As discussed above, the peak should be attributed to 1) Strong VB and CB wavefunction mixing due to band inversion, and 2) Large jDOS around E g owing to the MHBS. Finally, the gain G(ω) (Figure In order to fully compare the salient merits of the MHBS topological materials with that of NIs, we elastically strained the lattice parameter of SnSe while keeping its cubic phase, so that it undergoes a topological phase transition and becomes a NI. The bandgap variation as a function of strain is shown in the inset of Figure The results (Figures Figure that optical response and its potential applications (such as laser mode gain and detector absorption) can be greatly enhanced in topological materials (TI or TCI) with MHBS by one or two orders of magnitude. Therefore, thin-film photonic devices made with such Mexican-hat TIs can be much thinner than those made with normal semiconductors, while maintaining high photon detection efficiency and/or emissivity. Finally, in order to search for more topological materials for MIR/FIR/THz applications, we explored the entire databases of topological material are not considered here. Note that because the optical transition rate is slower for small ω, it is harder to obtain large G(ω) at small ω (also manifested by the relation G(ω) = 2ωIm(√ε(ω)) ). These TIs should be compared with the widely used infrared detector, x Cd 1-x Te (MCT) alloy. The gain/absorption coefficient of Hg x Cd 1-x Te is only around 10 3 cm -1 near the transition edge Before concluding, we would like to make several remarks. First, the enhancement of optical response in Mexican hat TIs is a bulk effect, rather than surface effects that are widely studied for TIs. Thus, the enhancement of optical responses in TIs with MHBS are applicable to 2D materials as well, which has bulk interaction with light. As discussed before, in addition to the large interband wavefunction mixing, the jDOS of 2D Mexican hat materials can be infinity at the transition edge. As a result, the absorbance of 2D Mexican hat TIs can be dramatically improved, which is verified with 2D monolayer SnF 51 as shown in the SI. Furthermore, quantum wells constructed with 3D materials are effectively 2D materials due to the confinement in the z direction, thus they should exhibit similar properties as well, which is advantageous for applications like laser diodes. Second, the 2D surfaces of 3D TIs are semi-metallic with vanishing bandgap. Therefore, they could affect the performance of TIs as light sources or detectors by providing a route for nonradiative recombination of electrons and holes in the laser mode, or reflecting the incoming light in the detector mode. However, these effects should be relatively weak compared to the bulk effect in the frequency range of interest for the following reasons. First, the surface states are actually semi-metallic, meaning that the free carrier concentration on the surface is low. In practice, there could be free carriers from e.g., doping or thermal activation. But the density of these free carriers n should be smaller by several orders of magnitude than that in real metals such as copper, which is on the order of 10 28 m -3 . Assuming the surface free carrier concentration is n = 10 23 m -3 within the penetration depth (~1 nm) of the surface states, the free carrier contribution to the dielectric function of SnSe is only on the order of 100 even at ω = 1 THz from Drude model (see SI), which is smaller than that of copper by 5 orders of magnitude. Since the interband contribution is also ~100, the total dielectric function of the surface states is on the order of 100 within the ~1 nm skin depth, which is not so big. Therefore, the absorption and reflection from surface states are much less efficient than that in real metals. Also, with n = 10 23 m -3 , the surface carriers plasmon frequency is about 2 THz ~ 8 meV, well below the bandgap of the bulk material, which is the frequency region of interest. Second, the states only exist near the surface with a small (joint) DOS. The thickness of these surface states is on the order of 1 nm, which is much smaller than the wavelength of MIR/FIR/THz photons and the size of typical bulk materials. In the detector mode, the surface states might reflect the incoming light. However, to obtain full reflection, the penetration depth of light upon reflection needs to be comparable with its wavelength, which is on the order of 0.1 ∼ 1 μm with ε ≈ 100. This is much larger than the thickness of the surface states. Therefore, these surfaces states are too thin to reflect the incoming light strongly, and thus light can penetrate into the bulk. For example, monolayer graphene, despite being a Dirac metal, allows 97.4% light transmission. Actually, experimental works have shown that the total reflectivity of several TIs is about 0.5 near the bulk bandgap Third, the optical response of TIs in Figure Thus, many other materials with MHBS and/or band-mixing features could have enhanced optical response that could enable efficient MIR/FIR/THz applications. The discovery and characterization of those materials shall be discussed elsewhere. Finally, in this work we only studied the linear optical responses. Actually, the nonlinear optical responses, such as the second harmonic generation and bulk photovoltaic effect, could also be boosted in TIs, especially those with MHBS. In conclusion, we have demonstrated giant continuum-to-continuum (C2C) optical responses at the conduction-to-valence band transition edge of topological materials with MHBS. By investigating their wavefunction characteristics, we attribute the giant optical response to two factors, namely the larger jDOS, and stronger wavefunction mixing due to band inversion. We explored the entire databases of topological materials and discovered a number of TIs with remarkable photonic responses, which could enable efficient MIR/FIR/THz photon generation, detection and manipulation. The first-principles calculations are based on density functional theory (DFT) along each dimension. The Bloch waves from DFT calculations are projected onto the maximallylocalized Wannier functions (MLWF) with the Wannier90 package Hamiltonian is constructed from the MLWF. And the TB Hamiltonian is used to calculate the dielectric function in Eq. ( 