Exchange-coupled nanocomposites are considered as the most promising materials for production of high-energy performance permanent magnets, which can exceed neodymium ones in terms of energy product. In this work, micromagnetic simulations of L1 0 -FeNi/SmCo 5 composites based on the initially anisotropic structure of nanorods array were performed. Texturing effect on magnetic properties was investigated. It was revealed that even 30 % of anisotropy axes misalignment of grains in L1 0 -FeNi phase would lead to only  10 % drop of coercivity. To maximize magnetic properties of the composites, parameters of microstructure were optimized for 120 × 120 array of interacting nanorods and were found to be 40 nm nanorod diameter and 12-20 nm interrod distance. The estimated diameter of nanorods and the packing density of the array provide energy product values of 149 kJ m -3 . Influence of interrod distance on energy product values was explored. Approaches for production of exchangecoupled composites based on anisotropic nanostructures were proposed. Production of exchange-coupled magnetic materials is considered as one of the most promising methods for enhancement of energy product '|BH| MAX ' in permanent magnets There were various articles concerning theoretical aspects of exchange bias Kneller and Hadwig Later, other reports predicted the effect of soft-hard phases microstructures on exchange-coupling nanocomposite magnetic behaviour. For instance, Skomski and Coey analytically revealed that a single ideally aligned soft inclusion in a hard matrix could enhance the remanence magnetization 'M R '. For further increase, the microstructure of multiple inclusions should be realized. However, optimal microstructure would be sufficiently small soft regions (in order to avoid low-field nucleation) and a crystallographically oriented hard phase (so it acts as a skeleton for stiffening the magnetization direction of the soft region). For that, the microstructure was suggested to be a disordered two-phase magnet with common c-axis through hard regions and multilayered alternating soft-phase layers Skomski et al. Jiang and Bader In addition, the properties of constituent phases of composites are also very important and must be considered. It was previously shown that only a few nanometers (≈ 5 nm) thick layer of a soft magnetic phase could be effectively coupled with a hard layer where J ex is the exchange strength, K S is anisotropy constant of the soft phase, K H is anisotropy constant of the hard phase, M S is saturation magnetization of the soft phase, M H is saturation magnetization of the hard phase, t H is the hard phase thickness. This equation reveals that such parameters of the soft phase like saturation magnetization and anisotropy constant can change the critical soft phase diameter. Thus, by using a 'less soft' phase, i.e. semi-hard phase, a critical dimension of the soft phase can be increased Ordered FeNi phase (tetrataenite) with L1 0 structure can be used as a semi-hard phase in the exchange-coupled nanocomposites. Among all rare-earth free phases, tetrataenite is one of the most promising substitutional magnetic materials. Since its discovery in 1964 In this paper by means of micromagnetic simulations we investigated magnetic properties of FeNi-L1 0 /SmCo 5 exchange-coupled composites based on nanorods array. It is expected that such nanocomposites will show enhanced values of energy product. Calculations of the exchange-coupled nanocomposites were performed in MuMax3, which is a GPU-accelerated software that uses finite-difference discretization for micromagnetic simulations Another essential issue to consider is the hard phase thickness 't H '. Since the exchange-coupling have close-range behaviour and only a small fraction of a hard phase is participating in the effect The soft phase nanorods diameter is limited by production technique. We suggest to produce nanorods by means of electrodeposition technique on polycarbonate membranes, which act as templates At the first stage, we performed modelling of a isolated nanorod in order to estimate its optimal diameter 'd N ' for yielding maximized magnetic properties. The structure was grained and textured. Grains were introduced by means of Voronoi tesselation. The grain size was set to 10 nm. Exchange coupling between grains was reduced by 10 % to simulate the grain boundary impact. Random 10 % variation of anisotropy constant values were set in each grain of soft and hard phases. Magnetization vector and anisotropy axes of soft and hard layers grains were parallel to z-axis and both corresponded to <001> direction. In all calculations magnetic field was applied parallel to nanorods axis. Figure In the previous section, the micromagnetic calculations were done for a textured soft magnetic phase in an isolated single nanorod-based composite. We modelled structure with anisotropy axes of all grains aligned in <001> direction. However, it is well known that texturing can be a quite challenging task. Therefore, in this section, we considered more close-to-experiment structure, i.e. grained structure with different anisotropy axis distribution in the soft magnetic phase. In particular, we modelled isolated FeNi-L1 0 /SmCo 5 nanorods, whose grains in the tetrataenite phase have anisotropy axes distributed with a maximum deviation from <001> direction of 30, 60 and 80 degrees. In the following text those distributions will be referred according to their maximum deviation value ' dev '. The hard magnetic SmCo 5 phase was Results reveal a drop in M R values, especially for  dev = 80. Such behaviour was expected, as this value of deviation can be attributed to the structure with almost random anisotropy axes distribution in grains. However, for the exchange-coupled nanorod composites, such decrease of M R is not so dramatic, as spins of the soft magnetic phase are coupled to the spins of the hard magnetic phase, resulting in the soft phase magnetization vectors alignment in accordance to textured grains of the hard magnetic layer. Observed reduction of M R with  dev increase can be explained by competition between shape and magnetocrystalline anisotropies. The shape anisotropy constant K d can be calculated as follows where μ 0 is the magnetic constant, N = 1⁄2 is the radial demagnetizing factor of a long cylinder (nanorod). The estimated value of K d for for tetrataenite phase is 0.51 MJ m -3 . Magnetocrystalline anisotropy constant of FeNi-L1 0 phase K u equals to 0.32 MJ m -3 . It is seen that both values of the competing anisotropy constants are in the same order of magnitude, i.e. K d ≈ K u . Therefore, when strong magnetocrystalline anisotropy is introduced, additional directions corresponding to the easy axes of each individual grains form the set of randomly distributed local minimums. The latter leads to the appearance of intermediate energetically favourable directions for magnetization vector and, consequently, to decreasing of coercivity and remanent magnetization in the FeNi L1 0 -phase nanorod. It is worth noting that deviation degree of  dev = 30 for the exchange-coupled composites with ε = 10 % and 20 % leads to decrease of H C values only of 9.5 and 7.5 %, respectively, in comparison with textured structure, i.e. structure with  dev = 0. Therefore, the exchange-coupling effect allows usage of not perfectly textured soft phase without a significant drop of coercivity, thus providing higher energy product values. In this section, we modelled magnetic properties of FeNi-L1 0 /SmCo 5 echange-coupled composite based on nanorods array. The array consisted of 120 × 120 tetrataenite nanorods, covered with a thin layer (4 nm) of textured ( dev = 0) SmCo 5 phase. FeNi L1 0 phase anisotropy axes distribution in grains was also set to 0 in for calculation of the maximum possible energy product for the investigated composites. The distance between nanorods (interrod distance) 'i d ' is another important parameter to consider in order to maximize magnetic properties of the exchange-coupled nanocomposites. Lower i d value will have an effect on magnetic dipolar interactions between nanorods Calculations reveal that increase of the interrod distance is accompanied by a rise of absolute value of the nucleation field 'H N ', which is explained by reduced magnetostatic interaction of the nanorods. In turn, increased magnetostatic interaction leads to zero H C value for noncovered tetrataenite nanorods arrays in the range of i d below 12 nm. It is known that there are at least two types of H C values Demagnetizing curves on figure A pronounced maximum of H C B for both covered and noncovered composites in the vicinity of i d = 40 nm is seen in figure Figure Micromagnetic modelling of exchange-coupled FeNi L1 0 /SmCo 5 nanorods array-based nanocomposites was performed. Nanorods diameter of 40 nm was found to be optimal. Calculations revealed that 30 % misalignment in anisotropy axes of the soft magnetic phase grains will not significantly decrease coercivity values ( 10 % decrease was observed) due to the exchange-coupling effect. Optimal interrod distance, calculated for 120 × 120 array of tetrataenite nanorods with 40 nm diameter and 1 m length, covered with 4 nm thick SmCo 5 -layer, is equal to 12-20 nm. Estimated energy product values for exchange-coupled composite with 10 % and 20 % exchange-coupled spins are 82 and 149 kJ m -3 , respectively. According to obtained results, we can propose two approaches for production of the exchange-coupled composites with enhanced magnetic properties: i) provide the highest possible percentage of exchange coupled spins. In this case the optimal interrod distance should be close to zero and contribution of the shape anisotropy will become neglible; ii) use anisotropic nanostructured composites with appropriate nonmagnetic interrod spacer thickness in order to utilize the shape anisotropy of nanorods, while maintaining high volume magnetization values.