We present magnetotransport data on the ferrimagnet GdMn 6 Sn 6 . From the temperature dependent data we are able to extract a large instrinsic contribution to the anomalous Hall effect , which is comparable to values found in other systems also containing kagome nets of transition metals. From our transport anisotropy, as well as our density functional theory calculations, we argue that the system is electronically best described as a three dimensional system. Thus, we show that reduced dimensionality is not a strong requirement for obtaining large Berry phase contributions to transport properties. In addition, the coexistence of rare-earth and transition metal magnetism makes the hexagonal MgFe 6 Ge 6 structure type a promising system to tune the electronic and magnetic properties in future studies. Introduction The 2D kagome lattice is the marquee system of magnetic frustration Here we illustrate that the layered kagome lattice system GdMn 6 Sn 6 also possesses a large intrinsic AHC, although the electronic structure is three dimensional. Fig. Methods Single crystals of GdMn 6 Sn 6 were grown from Sn flux, described in Ref. The starting elements were placed in an alumina crucible in the ratio Gd:Mn:Sn=1:6:20 and sealed in an evacuated silica ampoule. The ampoule was heated to 1100 • C, held at 1100 • C for 6 hrs., then cooled slowly at 3 • C/hr. to 550 • C, at which point the excess Sn flux was removed using a centrifuge. The orientation of the resulting hexagonal GdMn 6 Sn 6 plates was determined via Laue diffraction. Spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic structure were performed with the WIEN2K code using the PBE functional under the generalized gradient approximation and spin-orbit coupling included via a second variational step As shown in the temperature dependence of the resistivity in Fig. To evaluate the Berry curvature in this 3D layered kagome system, we first focus on the transverse resistivity response ρ xz with the magnetic field applied parallel to the y-axis (easy plane). As shown in Fig. where σ N xz is the ordinary Hall conductivity, σ ext xz is an anomalous component, which can arise from skew scattering or the side-jump mechanism, and σ int xz is an intrinsic component arising from the Berry curvature of the electronic structure. The first two terms depend strongly on the scattering rate, while the latter is independent of it. From the resistivity shown in Fig. Consequently, the lack of temperature dependence in σ xz above 50 K, reflects the dominance of the intrinsic Berry curvature derived σ int xz contribution. To extract the amplitude of the intrinsic component, the AHC versus the longitudinal conductivity at B = 0.2 T is shown in Fig. where α represents the extrinsic component, which is scattering-rate and thereby conductivitydependent From eq. 2, σ int xz can be obtained as σ xx σ zz → 0 at moderately high temperatures. The down turn of σ xz at the highest temperatures is a consequence of the vanishing Berry curvature associated with suppressing the ferromagnetic component of the magnetization to zero as the Curie temperature is approached, and should be ignored. In our case, both σ xz and σ xy (shown below) are approximately temperature-independent. Thus we set α=0 and fit the high temperature data of the hall conductivity to a constant (red dashed line in Fig. Next, the Hall response with the magnetic field applied parallel to the c-axis (hard axis) is shown in Fig. A 2D-electron gas can possess a large and quantized Hall response in units of e 2 /h Although no longer quantized, one may anticipate that a 3D material may possess an enhanced Berry curvature contribution to the Hall conductivity in systems where the electronic structure remains quasi 2D. Here, we have demonstrated that GdMn 6 Sn 6 possesses a large intrinsic contribution to the Hall conductivity. In addition, both Fermi surface calculations and resistivity anisotropy indicate the three-dimensional electronic structure in this system. The observed intrinsic AHC of 223 Ω -1 cm -1 for GdMn 6 Sn 6 , however, is comparable to that for Fe 3 Sn 2 , which is attributed to reduced dimensionality GdMn 6 Sn 6 is just one member of a large family of RT 6 X 6 , where R is a rare-earth, T is a transition metal, and X is typically either Sn or Ge. For RMn 6 Sn 6 compounds, the system orders with an antiferromagnetic spiral for light or heavy rare-earths (Sc,Y,Eu,Lu), and for moderate rare-earths (Gd-Ho), a ferrimagnetic ground state is found Interestingly, for YMn 6 Sn 6 a field polarized state could be achieved at ∼ 13 T, which is similar to our case where the Mn moments are fully polarized 