An age-hardenable Al-Cu-Mg alloy (A2024) was processed by high-pressure torsion (HPT) for producing an ultrafine-grained structure. The alloy was further aged for extra strengthening. The tensile strength then reached a value as high as ~1 GPa. The microstructures were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy and atom probe tomography. The mechanism for the high strength was clarified in terms of solidsolution hardening, cluster hardening, work hardening, dispersion hardening and grain boundary hardening. It is shown that the segregation of solute atoms at grain boundaries including subgrain boundaries plays a significant role for the enhancement of the tensile strength. Since the discovery of age hardening in an Al-Cu-Mg alloy by Wilm in 1906 It is well known that the strength of metallic materials also increases with the reduction in grain size through the Hall-Petch relation Significant strengthening was also reported for UFG A2024 alloys processed by SPD The aim of this research is threefold: first, to achieve ultra -high strengthening to a level as high as ~1 GPa in an age-hardenable A2024 alloy. HPT process is applied for adequate grain refinement, and subsequent aging is undertaken for precipitation and segregation of solute atoms. Second, to evaluate accurately microstructural features down to the nanoscale with a special emphasis on solute atom distribution using scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and APT. Third, to clarify strengthening mechanisms thanks to a quantitative evaluation of strengthening contributions. We will then show that the ultrahigh strength achieved in an A2024 alloy is not only controlled by grain refinement but also by segregation of solute atoms along GBs including subgrain boundaries. Disk samples with 10mm diameter were prepared from a 1mm thickness commercially available A2024 alloy sheet with the composition of Al -4.5Cu-1.4Mg-0.56Mn-0.07Fe-0.02Si-0.01Ti (in wt.%). The disks were subjected to solution treatment (ST) at 793 K for 1 h followed by water quenching. The average grain size for the ST sample was determined to be 62 ╬╝m. Samples were processed by HPT at room temperature (R.T.) for 0.75, 1, 5 and 10 revolutions with a rotation speed of 1 rpm under a pressure of 6 GPa. The imposed strain introduced by HPT processing can be represented using equivalent strain (’üźeq) through the following equation: where, r is the distance from the disk center, N is the number of revolutions and t is the thickness of the disk after HPT processing. Thus, the equivalent strain introduced in each sample by HPT processing was determined to be 6, 8, 26, 44 and 88 for 0.75, 1, 3, 5 and 10 revolutions, respectively, at the gauge area (corresponding to r = 2 mm) where the thickness was taken after HPT processing as 0.8~0.85 mm. Following HPT processing, some of the samples were subsequently aged at 423 K in an oil bath for 35 min and 3 h. Samples processed by HPT and post-HPT aging were ground to the midplane of the thickness by abrasive papers and polished to a mirror-like surface with an alumina suspension. Hardness measurements were made along 8 different radial directions with an interval of 0.5 mm on the same line as shown in Fig. For the hardness measurements, a load of 0.3 kgf was appli ed for 15 s using a Mitutoyo HM-102 tester. The dimensions of the tensile specimens are also depicted in Fig. Microstructural observations after HPT processing and post -HPT aging were conducted on the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) analyses. For preparation of electron-transparent thin specimens for TEM, disks with 3mm diameter were extracted from HPT-processed samples as shown in Fig. Second phase identification and dislocation density measurements were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses using CuK╬▒ radiation with a scanning speed of 0.2 o /min and a scanning step of 0.01 o . APT analyses were carried out with a CAMECA LEAP 4000HR instrument. Samples were prepared by a classical two step electro -polishing method starting from small rods (0.3├Ś0.3 mm 2 in cross-section) cut at a distance of 3 ┬▒ 1 mm from the disk center. Sharpening of tips was done with a solution of 2% perchloric acid in ethylene glycol monobutyl ether at R.T. under an applied voltage of 20 V. Samples were field-evaporated at 30 K with electric pulsing (pulse repetition rate 200kHz, pulse fraction 20%). Data processing was performed using "GPM 3D data software". It should be noted that the analyses for TEM, STEM, XRD and APT were conducted in the areas well away from the disk center aft er N=10 and/or subsequent aging, where the microstructure including the grain size is considered to be the same and uniform according to an earlier report Fig. GPa. Thus, the HPT-processed sample combined with subsequent aging exhibits the tensile strength twice as high as the sample after T6 treatment. ). Thus, a significant grain refinement was achieved from the initial grain size of 62 ╬╝m. A slight grain growth occurred during the aging but the UFG structure was kept with a mean grain size of 16 0 nm (Fig. detected. An extra peak corresponding to the stable S phase also appeared in the over-aged condition (e.g., in the vicinity of 35 o ). This is consistent with earlier works carried out on a similar material processed by SPD where the S phase was also observed in over-aged conditions Dislocation densities were estimated from peak broadening using the Williamson-Hall method Mg concentration was estimated from the HAADF images. It should be noted, however, that the measurement of ╬╗ was difficult for the as-HPT-processed sample because the fraction of the segregated boundaries was low ( Ōē”0.1) and thus contrast was poor (Fig. Then, to determine if some nanoscaled precipitates have nucleated during aging at 423 K, frequency distribution histograms of Cu and Mg atoms located between segregated boundaries were calculated and compared to histograms where atom positions were randomized (Fig. Concentration profiles (such as in Fig. where S is the grain surface area, V is the grain volume and Vat is the mean atomic volume (Vat ~ 0.016 nm 3 in fcc Al). For spherical grains with a diameter of 150 nm, a monolayer of solute is achieved with 0.5at.% of solute. This is much larger than the length scale measured by APT (Fig. Fig. The segregation occurred throughout all types of GBs inclu ding high-and low-angles of misorientations after subsequent peak-aging (Fig. In this study, the strength of the A2024 alloy reached 1 GPa and it is important to clarify the mechanism for this notable strengthening. The factors affecting this strengthening can be due to the interaction of dislocations with solute atoms and clusters, the mutual interaction of dislocations, the pinning of dislocations by dispersed particles and the blocking of dislocations by GBs, each of which corresponds to, so called, solid-solution hardening (’üä’ü│ss), cluster hardening (’üä’ü│cluster), work hardening (’üä’ü│dis), dispersion hardening (’üä’ü│pre) and grain boundary hardening (’üä’ü│gb), in addition to overcoming the Piers potential (’ü│o). The total strength may then be described by the summation of all the strengthening factors Here, ’ü│’Ć░’Ć«’Ć▓ is the yield strength and ’ü│o is the friction stress equivalent to the Piers stress. The values of the yield stress were measured as ’ü│’Ć░’Ć«’Ć▓ =770 MPa and 955 MPa for the as-HPT-processed sample and the subsequently peak-aged sample, respectively, from the stress-strain curves in Fig. Friction stress: The value of ’ü│o is taken from the yield stress reported in pure Al (99.999 %) so that ’ü│o = ~5 MPa The value of ’üä’ü│ss is estimated from the Fleischer Work hardening: For the estimation of ’üä’ü│dis, the following Bailey-Hirsch equation The dislocation density is input from the values measured from the XRD profile shown in Fig. The contribution of ’üä’ü│pre is considered to be zero as is evident from the APT analysis that the presence of the ’ü▒' phase is negligible. Cluster hardening: For the value of ’üä’ü│cluster, it was estimated from tensile testing of the sample after ST and subsequent aging at 423 K for 35 min which corresponds to the peak-aged condition for the HPT-processed sample. It was confirmed that the values of yield stress for each sample are 175 MPa and 280 MPa as ’ü│y(ST) and ’ü│y(aged), respectively, but these include the contributions of ’ü│o, ’üä’ü│ss and ’üä’ü│gb. Thus, ’üä’ü│cluster=’ü│y-(’ü│o+’üä’ü│ss+’üä’ü│gb)= ~110 MPa (for ’ü│y(ST)) and ~215 MPa (for ’ü│y(aged)). (Note that ’ü│gb was estimated as 10 MPa from the Hall-Petch equation.) Sha et al. The value of ’üä’ü│gb is estimated using the following Hall-Petch equation where ky is a constant depending on the alloy type and composition. In this study, ky =0.08 MPa m 1/2 was used from the report by Shanmugasundaram in an Al -4%Cu alloy where the effect of dislocations and precipitations were minimized = 222+40 MPa and 200+50 MPa, respectively. The comparison between the measured value and the estimated value ( ’üä’ü│y (with ’üä’ü│gb(HAGB))) in Table Based on the analytical results by APT that Cu and Mg were segregated on GBs by 5 at% on average, it can be estimated if the presence of such solute atom s is effective to stabilize the GBs in terms of the local strain developed by dislocations. Here, we considered that the GB is low-angle tilt boundary with an inclination of 10 degrees, which is typical of LAGBs. Provided that the angle for the lattice inclination is formed due to an alignment of edge dislocation, the distance between the dislocations, h, may be h=1.6 nm from the relation as h=b/’ü▒, where b is the Burgers vector and ’ü▒ is the tilt angle. Because Mg atom is bigger and Cu atom is smaller than Al atom in diameter, they will relax the local strain around edge dislocations as illustrated in Fig. Several reports demonstrate the contribution of GB segregation to the strengthening. Molecular dynamic simulation by Vo et al. Zhao et al. [52] conducted a finite element analysis compared with experimental results for a SUS316 stainless steel, and found that the segregation of solute atoms on subgrain boundaries (i.e., LAGBs) with a network structure well blocks the dislocation movement. This then deduces that the subgrain size with segregation should be applicable to the Hall-Petch relation rather than the grain size with high-angle misorientations. In order to make a rigorous estimation for the contribution of GBs with high-angle and low-angle misorientations to the total strengthening, the grain size should be re-evaluated in terms of grain boundaries with solute segregation. The volume fraction of GBs ( f ) is related to the grain size (d) through the following equation: where A and ’üó are constants depending on the width of GB. Here, this form of the relation has been derived as described in Appendix. We define fall and fgb as volume fractions of all GBs and of the GBs that contribute to the strengthening: where fHAGB and fLAGB are the volume fractions of high-angle and low-angle GBs, and ’ü½seg is the fraction of segregated GBs. This expression then involves a condition that the segregation occurs on all HAGBs and contributes to the strengthening together with the LAGBs with the fraction of ’ü½seg. Thus, the effective grain size for strengthening (deff) may be approximated as Putting eq.( under the condition that the constants A and ’üó are independent of the grain boundary types (i.e., high-angle or low-angle misorientation). The value of deff is then determined through eq.( In this study, the value of ’ü½seg was used as 0.1 and 1 (from STEM and APT results) for the as-HPT-processed and subsequently peak-aged samples, respectively. Likewise, the values of 130 nm and 160 nm for dHAGB, and 20 nm (from APT results) for dall were input, leading to the grain boundary strengthening of ’üä’ü│gb(eff) = 274+40 MPa and 565 MPa for the as-HPT-processed and the subsequently peakaged states, respectively. The strengthening is achieved almost twice by aging after HPT processing. Zhao et al. showed that the average grain size obtained by a harmonic form well represents the Hall-Petch relation when grains are present in a bimodal distribution We now evaluate the total strength by adding the contributions of cluster formation and segregation onto GBs including LAGBs. The total strengths are of 845+51 MPa and 904~1009+8 MPa for the as-HPT-processed and the subsequently peak-aged samples as shown in reported ultra-high strengthening to ~950 MPa in an A7475 alloy and an Al -5.7wt.%Mg alloy 1. A solution-treated A2024 (Al-Cu-Mg) alloy reduced the grain size to 130 nm by HPT processing for 10 revolutions at room temperature. The tensile strength of ~910 MPa was achieved by HPT processing. 2. The subsequent aging after HPT processing further increased the tensile strength as high as ~1 GPa, despite the grain growth to 160 nm and the decrease in dislocation density. revealed that precipitate particles were less present in the matrix. Instead, the analyses by TEM and APT showed that solute atoms such as Cu and Mg were segregated on grain boundaries including low-angle grain boundaries. Compositions measured from APT data of Fig. Table 