Power system expansion models are a widely used tool for planning power systems, especially considering the integration of large shares of renewable resources. The backbone of these models is an optimization problem, which depends on a number of economic and technical parameters. Although these parameters contain significant uncertainties, the sensitivity of power system models to these uncertainties is barely investigated. In this work, we introduce a novel method to quantify the sensitivity of power system models to different model parameters based on measuring the additional cost arising from misallocating generation capacities. The value of this method is proven by three prominent test cases: the definition of capital cost, different weather periods and different spatial and temporal resolutions. We find that the model is most sensitive to the temporal resolution. Furthermore, we explain why the spatial resolution is of minor importance and why the underlying weather data should be chosen carefully. In order to address the issue of climate change and sustainability, energy systems around the world are undergoing major transitions. In this context, large shares of weather-dependent power sources, such as solar photovoltaics (PV) and wind power, need to be integrated into existing systems. This is a challenging task, solutions proposed by literature are manifold Options to modify the demand side have for instance been investigated by Palensky and Dietrich Many of these solutions are the result of studies using so-called power system expansion models (PSEM). Although most PSEM aim at finding optimal solutions for power system design, they may significantly vary in structure and in scope. For a list of models see for instance the Open Energy Platform (https://openenergy-platform.org/factsheets/models/). Over the last years, PSEM have become progressively more complex. They include more and more aspects of power system in an increasing level of detail. Running these models is an increasingly challenging and expensive task. Consequently, a number of complexity reduction techniques has been proposed in the literature Furthermore, PSEM depend on a number of uncertain parameters. Assumptions made for costs or the availability of weather-dependent generation sources as well as the reduction of the model resolution to make it tractable introduce uncertainty In addition, power infrastructure is planned decades in advance. During these decades, boundary conditions may considerably change due to climate change and climate variability. The effect of climate change on renewable power systems is a recent field of research. Schlott et al. Aim of this paper is the description of the sensitivity of a common power system expansion model to different model parameters and designs. We quantify this sensitivity via a novel misallocation metric. This metric measures the additional cost arising from misallocating generation capacities. It allows to cross-validate input data and find, for instance, representative data sets. The method is tested on four different test cases all revolving around a future highly renewable European power system. Consider a linear program of the form: In order to solve this program, the parameter matrix A, the parameter vector b and the objective coefficients c need to be defined. They determine the actual problem. If A and/or b and/or c are modified, the solution of the linear program changes depending on the sensitivity to the respective parameters. Now, let x * α i be a realisation of the random variables {x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x |x| } solving the linear program under a given set of parameters (in the following referred to as scenario) α i . Furthermore, let Γ α i 0 be the optimal (minimum) value of the objective function, i.e. If one is interested in the effect of using another different set of parameters expressed as scenario α j , one could, for instance, measure the difference in the objective function value Γ α i 0 -Γ α j 0 or the Euclidean norm of the optimal values of the decision variables, x * α i -x * α j . The difference between the two solutions can then be distinguished into four cases: 1. small difference in the objective function value and (a) small difference in the optimal realisation of the decision variables: In this case, the error is obviously small. The linear problem can be considered insensitive to the choice of the two scenarios considered. (b) large difference in the optimal realisation of the decision variables: Here, drawing a clear conclusion is difficult. On the one hand, the error when deciding for one solution might indeed be large. Then, the difference in the objective function value would be small only by chance and we could consider the linear problem to be sensitive to the choice of the scenario. On the other hand, the error might be small because the solution space is flat near the optimal point or a secondary optimum exists. The linear problem, again, is insensitive. 2. large difference in the objective function value and (a) small difference in the optimal realisation of the decision variables: This case is possible if the linear program is very sensitive towards changes in some decision variables or if the parameters strongly differ between both scenarios. We consider the linear problem to be insensitive. (b) large difference in the optimal realisation of the decision variables: In this case, the error would obviously be large. The linear problem is sensitive towards the input dataset. In order to determine the actual error originating from considering only one of the two scenarios (e.g. α i ), one could set the solution x * α i as lower bound to the respective other linear program from scenario α j and vice versa. If the program is insensitive, this should not cause any large additional cost. However, if the program is sensitive, this should cause large additional cost because large adaptations to x * α i are necessary in order to make it a solution of the linear program from scenario α j . Let us denote the optimal value of the objective function with lower bounds defined by the optimal solution of the linear program Γ α j α i and Γ α i α j , respectively. The additional cost, caused by constraining the solution downwards is then given by Γ α i α j -Γ α i 0 and the overall sensitivity of the linear program to the choice of the scenario can be quantified by the following misallocation metric: As stated above, x * α i refers to the solution of the problem with minimum lower bounds, i.e. the unconstrained problem. Γ α i 0 denotes the corresponding value of the objective function. In order to compute the constrained solution x * α i ,α j and Γ α i α j , the solution of the corresponding counter-scenario is set as lower bounds to at least some of the decision variables, which means that the following constraint is added to the linear program: In this paper, these additional constraints are applied to variables representing long-term investment decisions, i.e. generation, storage and transmission capacities. M is driven by the difference in Γ α i 0 and Γ α i α j . When this difference is small, the sensitivity is also small. M fulfills the properties of a pseudometric, it is positive definite because Γ α i 0 ≤ Γ α i α j , symmetric to the order of the scenarios and fulfills the triangle inequality 3. Methodology In this study, we investigate the sensitivity of a common power system expansion problem to (i) different capital cost assumptions (ii) the capacity factor time series for the available volatile renewable resources, (iii) different temporal and spatial resolutions as well as (iv) different model formulations for coupled and decoupled representative periods of different lengths. The PSEM has the aim to find the least expensive design of a power sys-tem given the constraint that the CO 2 emissions from power plants may not exceed an upper limit. In the formulation used here, it consists of two levels: While the upper level minimizes the investment cost in generation, storage and transmission capacities keeping all capacities within given bounds, the lower level minimizes the operational cost of the power system ensuring the security of supply and keeping the generation lower or equal the capacities derived from the upper level. For volatile renewable resources -such as wind and solar PV -the available dispatchable capacity is additionally limited by prevailing meteorological conditions, i.e. the capacity factor time series. Furthermore, the consistency of the state of charge of storage units must be ensured. Mathematically, the expansion problem can be formulated as a linear problem. For this study, we use the same approach as for instance Brown et al. l n,s,t For an explanation of the used symbols see the nomenclature (Tab. 1). Constraint where η 1,2 denote the efficiencies for storing and dispatching electricity, respectively. g n,s,t,store denotes the storing of electricity into the storage unit, g n,s,t,dispatch the dispatch. inflow n,s,t is the natural inflow into the water reservoir of dams. And spillage n,s,t denotes the amount of the natural inflow, which is spilled. In addition, global limits on transmission and CO 2 emissions are enforced (Eq. 15 and 16, respectively). For this paper, we assumed a global limit of three times today's net transfer capacities (3 • 31.25 TWkm) as an appropriate compromise between cost-optimal extension and technical and social concerns. Although, this assumption is slightly more conservative than the compromise grid defined by Schlachtberger et al. Inline with European emission reduction targets, we define a global CO 2 cap of 5% of the historic level of 1990. In Eq. ( Capacity factor time series are commonly derived from reanalyses data sets From this data set, the parameters for the corresponding PSEM ( 1. batteries: r = 6 h 2. hydrogen storage: r = 168 h Their nominal power can be expanded as well. For each technology the investment and operational costs depicted in Tab. 2 have been used. In full resolution, this model can hardly be solved. Therefore, we use the network clustering algorithm introduced by Hörsch and Brown In general, two types of time series aggregation methods can be distinguished. The first one aims at decreasing the number of time steps by reducing the resolution of the parameter time series. The downsampling approach described below, for instance, can be assigned to this class. The second class aims at decreasing the number of time steps, while keeping the temporal resolution unchanged. In this way, as much of the temporal variability as possible shall be conserved. Usually, this is achieved by selecting a limited number of representative design periods from the original time series. Depending on the periods' lengths the variability on different temporal scales can be retained. This, of course, breaks the natural order of the time steps and, consequently, no variability on time scales longer than the periods' lengths can be pictured. Hence, ways need to be found, which allow to model the variability on long time scales (months -seasons), which is represented by the natural inflow into hydro power plants or the seasonal cycle in electricity demand, e.g.. For an overview of these methodologies see Pfenninger In order to account for different time step intervals, weightings need to be defined for each time step considered in the expansion problem: first, in the objective (w t in Eq. ( The spatial resolution of the PSEM is modified by applying the network clustering approach introduced by Hörsch and Brown For each of the parameter sets α i the expansion problem ( Following this procedure in both directions delivers the terms of Eq. 3. In case the number of substations of the two parameter sets differs, i.e. N i = N j , the lower bounds for each parameter set are computed from the corresponding cluster of buses of the other parameter set: Let N i = {S i,1 , S i,2 , . . . , S i,m , . . . , S i,N i }, N j = {S j,1 , S j,2 , . . . , S j,k , . . . , S j,N j } be the two sets of clusters of buses derived from the original full-resolution data set with |N i/j | = N i/j . In the clustered networks, each of these clusters S is merged into one single bus n(S i,m ), n(S j,k ). Then, the lower bound to a generator of technology s at a bus of set N i is set to the weighted sum of the optimal capacity of the buses of set N j and vice versa: where the weights w k are determined from the number of common nodes of the two clusters S i,m , S j,k : Here, |S i,m ∩ S j,k | is the number of nodes, which appears in both clusters, i.e. the clusters' intersection. As explained above, the capital cost for all generation, storage and transmission assets need to be specified as parameters to the PSEM. Let us, as a first example, assume we would like to investigate the sensitivity of the model to different specifications of these capital cost. In order to do so, we define two scenarios: The first scenario (hom) assumes a homogeneous distribution of the cost of capital across the European countries. The second scenario (dia) takes regional differences into account. The cost of capital are set as reported from the diacore project Schyska and Kies Second, we investigate the sensitivity of the PyPSA-Eur model to the capacity factor time series ḡn,s,t . These time series specify the temporal availability of all volatile resources in the power system at any node. They are given in units of the installed capacity, i.e. ḡn,s,t ∈ [0, 1]. For wind and solar power the capacity factor is determined by the prevailing weather situation and, as weather changes from time to time, capacity factors vary as well, from hour to hour but also from year to year and from decade to decade due to climate variability and climate change. Depending on the chosen weather period, the power system optimization might, consequently, lead to different optimal capacity shares. The years 2000-2006, for instance, exhibit a higher average solar power capacity factor over almost entire Europe except for the Iberian Peninsula as predicted for the years 2094-2101. In contrast, the average onshore wind power capacity factor is lower in Central-Western Europe and higher especially in the South-East (Fig. Let us now compute the sensitivity metric. Therefore, we set the solution for the period 2000-2006 as lower bound to the linear problem with the capacity factors taken from 2094-2101 and vice versa. Adding up the differences in the (two) constrained and unconstrained solutions (Eq. ( In contrast to the introductory example of modifying the regional distribution of capital cost, we now fixed the cost and varied the availability time series for the different volatile generation sources. In this case, the capacity layout obtained from one optimization is no longer necessarily able to ensure the supply under the constraints of another optimization problem based on another weather period. If this would the case, setting one solution as lower bounds to another scenario would not cause any major additional cost, despite possibly some relatively small changes in the operational cost due to the less effective use of generation, storage and transmission capacities (e.g.). The problem would be insensitive to the differences in the capacity factors from the two scenarios considered, M close to zero. However, for the weather periods Next, we investigate the sensitivity of the linear program (8) to the temporal and spatial resolution. In order to reduce the spatial resolution the original PyPSA-Eur network has been scaled down to 45, 64, 90 and 128 nodes using the network clustering approach introduced by Hörsch and Brown The misallocation metric M for all possible combinations of these different parameter sets and model sizes exhibits a clear pattern (Fig. The reasons for this are twofold. First of all, increasing the spatial resolution does not necessarily lead to a higher degree of information in the time series, and vice versa. Consequently, the results obtained from models with different spatial resolutions do not differ much. This phenomenon is of meteorological nature. We denote a separate section to it (Sec. 4.4). In contrast, modifying the temporal resolution potentially leads to significant differences in the optimal capacity deployment, especially when the temporal resolution 'jumps' from one of the blocks we defined above to another. Main reason for this is, that downsampling the time series via averaging removes part of the temporal variability. In general, a rolling window averaging can be understood as a filter. For instance, averaging a time series with a rolling 24 hour window filters out most of the sub-24 hour variability of the time series, including the diurnal cycle (if present). If such a filter is applied to both the capacity factor time series and the demand time series, the residual load gets implicitly filtered as well. As a consequence, any storage technology meant to flatten the sub-12 hour variability of the residual load time series would no longer be needed (because there is no sub-12 hour variability). In general, storage technologies can be assigned to a characteristic variability in the residual load time series via their energy-to-power ratio r, i.e. the number of hours they can store (dispatch) electricity at full power when starting from empty (full) storage. In the setup used here, batteries are characterized by an energy-to-power ratio of r = 6 hours. They are meant to balance discrepancies between demand and availability which occur on the intra-day scale. As described above, these discrepancies disappear when the demand and capacity factor time series are downsampled to a lower resolution. Consistently, no battery storage devices are optimally deployed in the model setups with a temporal resolution below 6 hours (Fig. In broad terms, filtering the high-frequency part of a time series' variability can be understood as removing scatter. This in turn also increases the correlation between the time series, again not only between the availability time series but also between the availability and the demand. Apparently, this rise in correlation mainly increases the system-friendliness of solar PV. Its investment share grows from approximately 40 Bill. Euro for the 3-hourly time series to more than 60 Bill. Euro for the 24-hourly time series (Fig. However, there is one effect counteracting this phenomenon. This effect appears when the spatial resolution is modified in addition to the temporal resolution. In this case, averaging takes not only part in the temporal dimension but also in the spatial dimension. More precisely, models with a higher spatial resolution experience less averaging on the spatial scale than models with a coarser spatial resolution -assuming that the models' resolutions are in any case below the resolution of the underlying weather data. This potentially leads to higher capacity factors in the highly resolved case. When transmission capacity is sufficiently available and/or the network is sufficiently meshed, higher capacity factors require less generation capacity as the model with lower spatial resolution. Setting these relatively low capacities as lower bounds to the coarser model does not lead to any additional costs because the optimal capacities are above these bounds anyhow. The lower bounds are non-binding. Consequently, the sensitivity is determined by the additional cost arising from setting the optimal capacities of the coarser model as lower bounds to the finer resolved model. Apparently, these additional cost are small compared to the costs arising from modifying the temporal resolution. When the spatial resolution is not modified, both dif- ferences in the equation for the sensitivity metric (Eq. 3) are non-zero. This causes the sensitivity between two models of the same spatial but different temporal resolutions, i.e. (N , 1H) and (N , 24H) to be larger as between two models of different spatial and temporal resolutions (N , 1H) and (M , 24H). In meteorology, there is a clear relation between a phenomenon's characteristic temporal and spatial scale. Usually, one differentiates between the microscale, the mesoscale and the synoptic scale. While the microscale basically includes turbulent motions acting within second to minutes and with a spatial extent of millimeters to centimeters, the mesoscale covers phenomena like thunderstorms, hurricanes, fronts and convective systems occurring within minutes to days and on several kilometers extent. The synoptic scale includes high and low pressure systems possibly lasting for up to several days on 100 to 1000 kilometers extent for the PyPSA-Eur 1024 node setup (Fig. Compared to wind power, the time series of the solar power availability exhibit a larger deterministic component: the diurnal cycle. On the other hand, incremental changes might be larger. The transition from cloud (shadow) to sun (light) is potentially faster than the transition from windy times to less windy times. As sunrise and sunset occur at the same time over large geographical areas, the correlation length of solar power is even larger as the correlation length of wind power. For the PyPSA-Eur network, the average distance between two nodes varies between 60 km for 1000 nodes and 350 km for the 45 node setup (Fig. Additionally to their temporal variability, time series can be described by their amplitude. In the context of renewable resource assessment, the quality of the resource is commonly described by the average or the sum of the capacity factor time series, the latter being referred to as full load hours. As shown in Sec. 4.3, this quantity varies as well but on an ever lower frequency, on seasonal to climatological scales. The spatial variance of the full load hours is to a large extent determined by the orography and the latitude. Locations close to the shore, for instance, generally exhibit higher wind power full load hours as locations upcountry. Locations far North are less sunny as locations in the South and, hence, exhibit lower solar power full load hours. Consequently, there is no clear relationship between the distance between two nodes and the difference in the full load hours and the effect of aggregating nodes is hard to assess. It depends on the specific location. In this study, we introduced a novel method to study the sensitivity of power system optimisation models to different input data scenarios. Core of this method is a metric which is based on setting the decision derived from using one input data set as the lower boundary to the PSEM solving the same program with another parameter scenario. In the sense of modifying and resolving the original optimization problem it is comparable to the methods applied by Nacken et al. In order to test this methodology, we used a relatively simple setup of a European power system model. For instance, we limit the available technolo-gies for electricity generation to OCGT, wind, solar and hydro power. Other technologies such as nuclear or combined-cycle gas turbines are not considered. Furthermore, no coupling of the electricity sector to others sectors is modeled. However, the explanations for the described sensitivities are rather general. We believe that including more technologies and/or incorporating sector coupling would not influence these general findings and the general applicability of the proposed method. From the results described above we draw the following conclusions: 1. As long as the temporal resolution of the underlying time series does not include any information about microscale meteorological processes, the spatial resolution of the power system model is of minor importance. The sensitivity to increases and decreases in the number of nodes is relatively small. Modeling the European power system with only a few dozens of nodes seems reasonable. 2. In contrast, the temporal resolution of the underlying time series must be chosen carefully, especially with storage devices involved. The power system model shows the highest sensitivity to modifications of the temporal resolution across the characteristic storage horizon of the storage devices. As a conclusion, the temporal resolution should be chosen such that the variability which the storage devices are supposed to balance is well represented. Particularly, the temporal resolution should be greater than 6-hourly when daily storage units -such as batteriesare considered. Contrarily, time series with daily resolution might be appropriate when only weekly and/or seasonal storage types are part of the model. 3. In summary, we found an on average sensitivity to the choice of the underlying weather data. Our results indicate that the period 2000 through 2006 is not suitable for deriving general conclusions about the optimal design of the European power system. It let to the highest misallocation of generation and storage capacities compared to the other periods considered. This finding emphasizes the importance of using representative weather data sets. 4. Similarly, the capital cost of generation assets should be defined according to the state of the art. The sensitivity to the geographical distribution of the cost of capital was found to be as high as the sensitivity to the capacity factor time series. In future research, it seems reasonable to compare and combine the proposed methods with the MGA approach of Nacken et al. 