Recent advances in two-dimensional (2D) crystals make it possible to realize an ideal interface structure that is required for device applications. Specifically, a p-n junction made of 2D crystals is predicted to exhibit an atomically well-defined interface that will lead to high device performance. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, a simple surface treatment was shown to allow the possible formation of such an interface. Ta adsorption on the surface of a p-doped SnSe shifts the valence band maximum towards higher binding energy due to the charge transfer from Ta to SnSe that is highly localized at the surface due to the layered structure of SnSe. As a result, the charge carriers of the surface are changed from holes of its bulk characteristics to electrons, while the bulk remains as a p-type semiconductor. This observation suggests that the well-defined interface of a p-n junction with an atomically thin n-region is formed between Ta-adsorbed surface and bulk. Emergence of new materials invites their application to conventional devices with enhanced functionality One of plausible methodologies to overcome these obstacles could be to induce a sharp gradient of the charge carrier type within a single material. SnSe could be a good candidate for this purpose. SnSe is a van der Waals material with negligible overlap between the wavefunctions of a charge carrier from adjacent layers, hence providing completely different chemical environments from the covalently bonded interface, corresponding to the 3D materials-based junctions. In addition, SnSe provides an excellent controllability of its charge carrier type, based on the recent effort to realize high performance thermoelectric devices The type of charge carriers of SnSe can be controlled by introducing impurities. The formation of Sn vacancies Here, n-type doping of the surface of a p-type semiconducting SnSe single crystal has been examined by direct measurement of the electron band structure using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in conjunction with first principles calculations. While bulk SnSe exhibits p-type charge carriers due to Sn vacancies The p-type SnSe samples were prepared using a temperature gradient growth method detailed elsewhere The density functional theory was adopted to obtain the electron band structure within PerdewBurkeErnzerhof exchange correlation functional. Tran Blahamodified Becke Johnson potential (TB-mBJ) is used as an inexpensive remedy to the band gap underestimation problem of the DFT Sample quality has been examined using XRD and x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS). Figure The effect of Ta adsorption on the electron band structure of SnSe is directly observed using ARPES. Å-1 , denoted in Fig. Ta adsorption leads to the shift of the whole band structure towards the higher binding energy. Especially, despite small amount of Ta atoms, e. g. , 0.025 ML, is adsorbed on the SnSe surface, the shift reaches as much as ∼ 0.2 eV as shown in Fig. Figure The origin of the change of the charge carrier type is attributed to the charge transfer from Ta to SnSe. When considering electron affinity, Ta exhibits the lowest electron affinity among Sn, Se, and Ta. In addition, although SnSe is an insulator with an energy gap of 0.9 eV In the case of a conventional p-n junction using bulk materials, the recombination of electron-holes occurs at the junction interface, resulting in a charge depletion layer and band bending. However, in an atomically thin p-n junction, the depletion layer is hardly defined due to the reduced thickness The evolution of the electron band structure of SnSe as a function of Ta coverage has been investigated using ARPES technique. When pristine SnSe is a p-type semiconductor, Ta adsorption of as little as 0.025 ML leads to the shift of the overall band structure as much as 0.2 eV towards the higher binding energy, converting the charge carrier to n-type. Our theoretical work combined with a previous one shows that charge transfer from Ta to SnSe, localized at the top-most atomic layer, induces the band shift, suggesting the possible formation of an ideal p-n junction interface with atomically thin n-region. These findings will shed light on the development of a high efficiency thermoelectric device for future energy application.