The exact formulas for the induced electric surface current (in the scattering phenomenon) and the equivalent electric surface current (in the diffraction phenomenon) on the open cylindrical surface due to an arbitrary narrow-band beam have been shown in their closed-form expressions within the context of the cylindrical harmonics, which gives information about the validity of the Physical Optics (PO) approximation. Both the Electric Field Integral Equation (EFIE) and the Magnetic Field Integral Equation (MFIE) are used to find the induced (equivalent) electric surface currents in the context of the cylindrical harmonics. The numerical example of the scattering and diffraction of the Hermite Gaussian beam from the open cylindrical surface is shown. The result is useful for the evaluation of the validity of the PO approximation in the cylinder-like surface. The Physical Optics (PO) approximation has been extensively used as the approximation of the exact solution in many applications The cylindrical modal expansion of the vector potential A(r) for the electric surface current J s (r ′ ) on an arbitrary surface in the cylindrical coordinate is given as where μ is the permeability of the homogeneous medium. H (2) 0 ( • ) is Hankel function of the second kind of order 0. The scalar Green's function g( • ) and the transverse wave vector Λ are defined as According to the cylindrical addition theorem, where ρ ≡ |ρ| is the observation coordinate and ρ ′ ≡ |ρ ′ | is the source coordinate. J m ( • ) is Bessel function of the first kind of integer order m and H m ( • ) is Hankel function of the second kind of integer order m. Substituting (3) into (1), the cylindrical modal expansion of A(r) is obtained, The narrow-band beam scattering and diffraction in the cylindrical geometry: the incident field E i propagates onto cylindrical surface S with radius of ρ 0 , then it could be back-scattered to E s if surface S serves as a PEC scatter, with induced surface current J - s ; or it may forward-propagate to E d if it is a diffraction phenomenon, with equivalent surface current J + s = -J - s . n+ and nare the outward and inward unit surface normals to S respectively. where, the the superscript ">" denotes ρ > ρ ′ and the subscript "<" denotes ρ < ρ ′ . The Inverse Fourier Transform (IFT) is defined as The electromagnetic field (E, H) is given as Due to the fact that J - s = -J + s (see Fig. Similarly, express the scattered electromagnetic field (E s , H s ) as Now the induced electric surface current J - s on the cylindrical surface S is given as Let's consider the TM mode (N h m for E and M h m for H) here. From ( Substituting ( Note that E s,TM z,< is given on the whole cylindrical surface that is just inside (infinitesimally close to) cylindrical surface S, on both the front side and the back side. It can be separated into two parts for the narrow-band beam, which can be seen from the property of Bessel function, The scattered electric field on the front side is thus given as Now apply the EFIE on the cylindrical surface E s,TM z,<,f (ρ 0 ) = -E i,TM z (ρ 0 ), from ( Note that ξ → 1 for ρ 0 → ∞, which means that d h m → b h m and the PO approximation reduces to the exact induced electric surface current. Let's also take the TM mode (N h m for E and M h m for H) as an example. From ( Now apply the MFIE on the cylindrical surface H s,TM φ,<,f It is not difficult to show that ( Following the similar procedure, the induced electric surface current for the TE mode (M h m for E and N h m for H) is given as Substituting From (23), it is clear that the exact induced and equivalent electric surface currents only deviate from the PO approximation by a factor of 1 ξ for TM mode and 1 ξ * for TE mode. The incident Hermite Gaussian beam (TEM 00 and TEM 10 ) has been used to test the result given in (23). The TEM mn Hermite Gaussian beam is given as where H m,n is the Hermite polynomial and the following quantities have been defined, In our numerical computation, both TEM 00 and TEM 10 Hermite Gaussian beams are ẑ-polarized (TM mode only in the cylindrical coordinate). The symmetrical waist radii have been set as w 0y = w 0z = 1λ. The radius of the scattering (diffracting) cylindrical surface is ρ 0 = 3λ and the radius of the observation cylindrical surface is ρ = 20λ. The scattered electric field E s z (φ ∈ π 2 , 3π 2 ) and the diffracted electric field E d z (φ ∈ -π 2 , π 2 ) calculated from the PO approximation have been plotted (dots) in Fig. (lines) obtained from the Method of Moment (MoM). Also, the theoretical induced (equivalent) current given in (23) has been used to calculate the scattered electric field E s z and the diffracted electric field E d z , which is shown in Fig. 