The friction of a nanosized sphere in commensurate contact with a flat substrate is investigated by performing molecular dynamics simulations. Particular focus is on the distribution of shear stress within the contact region. It is noticed that within the slip zone, the local friction coefficient defined by the ratio of shear stress to normal pressure declines monotonically as the distance to contact center increases. With the lateral force increasing, the slip zone expands inwards from the contact edge. At the same time, the local friction coefficient at the contact edge decreases continuously, while at the dividing between the slip and stick zones keeps nearly invariant. These characteristics are distinctly different from the prediction of the conventional Cattaneo-Mindlin model assuming a constant local friction coefficient within the slip zone. An analytical model is advanced in view of such new features and generalized based on numerous atomic simulations. This model not only accurately characterizes the interfacial shear stress, but also explains the size-dependence of static friction of single nanosized asperity. For the macroscopic dry friction between two sliding solids, the classical Amontons-Coulomb's law is still the most important understanding to date. This phenomenological friction theory states that the lateral friction force is always proportional to the normal load by a constant friction coefficient, which is independent of the contact area, surface roughness and sliding velocity In the framework of the well-known Cattaneo-Mindlin (CM) model, relative motion occurs at the point of contacting interface where the shear stress exceeds the local strength equaling the normal pressure times a constant local coefficient of friction When the contact scale comes to nanometers, the aforementioned continuum analyses always break down because some unconventional features have not been involved, e.g., the repeatedly reported scale-dependent frictional behavior To study the scale effects in single asperity friction, Hurtado and Kim In this work, the frictional behavior of single spherical asperity in commensurate contact with a flat substrate is simulated by using complete molecular dynamics (MD) with purely repulsive tip-substrate interaction. Scale-dependent frictional behavior as displayed in the previous study Fig. The embedded atom method (EAM) where F(ρ̅ i ) is the embedded energy related to the electron density ρ̅ i at the position of the i-th atom, (r ij ) is the pair potential interaction, and r ij represents the distance between atom pair i and j. A potential of copper parameterized by Mishin et al. To implement the non-adhesive contact, the atomic interaction between two opposing contact surfaces is described through a repulsive Lennard-Jones potential, where  governs the interaction intensity, and  is the equilibrium spacing. The values are calculated based on the cohesive energy and the lattice structure of single crystal copper, which yields  = 0.423 eV and  = 2.325 Å. The large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulation package, LAMMPS, is adopted to conduct the simulations After the construction of the atomic model, energy relaxation is first performed based on a conjugate gradient algorithm to get an energy-favorable initial state. To exclude the thermal effects, temperature in the simulations is set as 0.001 K. After the static energy relaxation, the atomic system is dynamically equilibrated at 0.001 K for 50 ps. Then, a loading scheme similar as in To analyze the friction process at atomic scale, the force state of each atom in the substrate is traced. For the tangential force exerted on every single atom, we only consider the component along the sliding direction (x-direction). It should be pointed out that even only normal load is applied, there is some local shear stress on the contact surface. This initial atomic force state before the tip being pulled laterally is chosen as a reference. When a specified lateral displacement u x is applied on the tip, the incremental portion of the tangential force of each atom is defined as the atomic friction force. Summing up the atomic friction force over all contacting atoms yields the total lateral force on the tip F. Accordingly, the local shear stress at a specific atom site is obtained by dividing the atomic friction force with the average contact area of a single atom. At each site, the ratio of the local shear stress to the local normal pressure defines the local friction coefficient. In addition, the relative tangential displacements between the contacting surfaces of the tip and substrate are examined. The contact area is divided into a central stick zone and a surrounding slip zone according to whether the relative displacement is zero or not. For a given normal load, the lateral force first increases monotonically as the tip moves along the x-direction. By examining the atomic displacements on the contact surface, it is found that in the initial stage the slip zone broadens continuously with the lateral displacement increasing, while the inner stick zone shrinks inwards. After reaching a peak, the lateral force drops gradually till to a minimum with further tip lateral displacement. The peak lateral force is defined as the static friction force of the single asperity. Dividing the static friction force by the relevant normal load derives the static friction coefficient. Notably, it is found that the static friction coefficient, i.e., the peaks of the curves in Fig. where r is the distance to the contact center,  m is a constant local friction coefficient and here takes the value of 0.7 as in In the CM model, the normal pressure in the contact region is assumed to obey the Hertzian theory. In MD simulations, the normal pressure also agrees well with the distribution of Hertzian pressure. Thus, the contact radius is determined by a = (3PR/4E * ) 1/3 when the normal load P, tip radius R and indentation modulus E * are specified, and p 0 = 3P/(2a 2 ). Moreover, the radius ratio of the stick zone and contact region is given by c/a = [1F/( m P)] 1/3 with F being the lateral force. It is shown in Based on above characteristics, we find the local friction coefficient in the slip zone can be well described by, where p(r) is the local normal pressure following the Hertzian prediction, μ m is the maximum of local frictional coefficient and takes 0.7, and β is a dimensionless parameter related to the normal load, the tip radius and the material properties. From Eq. ( By implementing a series of atomic simulations for the indenter with radius R = 200 nm, the local friction coefficients at the contact edge under different normal load are captured. As shown in Fig. In existing study, it has been shown that the scale-/load-dependent frictional behavior can be uniquely determined by a dimensionless parameter defined by the ratio of contact radius to the minimum core width of the dislocation slipping across the contact interface where b is the core width of interface dislocation, G is shear modulus, and d is the minimum lattice period along the sliding direction. In Fig. Now, with Eqs. ( As a result, the shear stress in the whole contact area is expressed as where μ l (r) is given by Eqs. ( Compared with our MD simulation results shown in Fig. The total lateral force acting on the tip can be obtained by integrating the local shear stress over the entire contact region, where the third term in the bracket is the correction arising from the scale effects. Fig. According to Eq. ( On the other hand, we must bear in mind that when the local friction coefficient at the contact edge decreases to zero, the overall sliding would start. At this critical point, the radius of the stick zone satisfies To predict the maximum static friction force F static , these two critical conditions Eq. ( From Fig. On the other hand, for β > 1, overall sliding takes place once the local coefficient at contact age decreases to zero. For β > 2.83 (i.e., in the regime II), based on the critical radius of stick zone from Eq. ( which is dependent only on the scale parameter . By eliminating the high order terms, it gives In Fig. For  < 0.1, the static friction coefficient  is nearly constant and equals to the maximum local friction coefficient. For  > 10,  varies as the 2/3 power of  as described by Eq. ( In summary, this paper presented a semi-analytical model for the scale-dependent friction of a spherical tip sliding on a flat substrate. As contrast to the classical CM model, our MD simulation results demonstrate that the local friction coefficient in the slip zone is not a constant, but declines from a maximum at the stick/slip zone boundary till the contact edge. By introducing a dimensionless scale parameter , a modified model is proposed to describe the contact shear stress in both the stick and slip zones. Based on this model, the global static friction coefficient is a constant when  is smaller than 0.1, and decreases when  increases further. For the asperity of small size with  larger than 10, the static friction coefficient varies as the 2/3 power of . By comparing with the numerical simulation results, it is found this model has successfully captured the unconventional features of shear stress distribution as well as the size dependency of static friction coefficient at nanoscale. Fig. Fig. 