In solids, charge polarity can one-to-one correspond to spin polarity phenomenologically, e.g. ferroelectricity/ferromagnetism, antiferroelectricity/antiferromagnetism, and even dipole-vortex/magnetic-vortex, but ferrielectricity/ferrimagnetism kept telling a disparate story in microscopic level. Since the definition of a charge dipole involves more than one ion, there may be multiple choices for a dipole unit, which makes most ferrielectric orders equivalent to ferroelectric ones, i.e. this ferrielectricity is not necessary to be a real independent branch of polarity. In this work, by using the spherical aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope, we visualize a nontrivial ferrielectric structural evolution in BaFe2Se3, in which the development of two polar sub-lattices is out-of-sync, for which we term it as irreducible ferrielectricity. Such irreducible ferrielectricity leads to a non-monotonic behavior for the temperature-dependent polarization, and even a compensation point in the ordered state. Our finding unambiguously distinguishes ferrielectrics from ferroelectrics in solids. Ferrielectricity, the equivalent of ferrimagnetism, can be termed as antiferroelectric order but with a switchable polarization, as sketched in Fig. Despite the macroscopic and phenomenological analogy as shown in Fig. BaFe2Se3 belongs to the iron-based superconductor family According to theory The tilting of the iron ladders gradually disappears with increasing temperature up to ~600 K, leading to a high symmetric Bbmm phase, according to X-ray diffraction Interestingly the structural tetramerization already exists at room temperature and, unexpectedly, the intensities for ladders A and B are not equivalent, creating a strong ladder and a weak ladder within a unit cell. The inequivalent features in strong ladders and weak ladders are embodied in magnitude of displacements, as shown schematically in Fig. Considering that the Fe-block tetramerization could induce Se ions displacement along the a-axis To explore the origin of this unbalanced ladders, monochromated electron energy loss spectra (mono-EELS) were acquired to demonstrate the underlying charge modulation as shown in Fig. Nominally, the valences of Fe can become +(2+) and +(2-) for the two sublattices, and a proper  (around 0.15 according to our fitting results) can lead to the structural tetramerization following the idea of Peierls transition Then it is interesting to know its ferrielectric TC. To characterize the structural tetramerization, the difference () of nearest-neighbor Fe-Fe bond length (d) along the ladder direction is measured as a function of temperature (Fig. Statistics of the deviation of Fe-Fe bond length in the strong and weak chain at different temperatures could be seen in Supplementary Table Since the ferrielectric polarization can not be directly measured using electrical methods (and even pizeoelectric force microscopy) in the current stage due to the high leakage of the samples (considering the very small band gap ~0.13-0.178 eV The irreducible ferrielectricity of BaFe2Se3 can be qualitatively described by Landau theory with a coupling between two ladders (PA & PB). The most simplified free energy formula can be written as: where the first to six items are the standard Laudau-Ginzburg-Devonshire type energy expression up to the sixth power for sub-lattices A and B, while the last item is the antiferroelectric coupling between two sub-lattices. All coefficients except 2 are positive and the small canting angle between PA and PB is neglected. Without fine tuning of the coefficients (see Methods for details), the simulated evolution of the polarization (Fig. Previous experiments reported the space group Pnma for BaFe2Se3 at room temperature Figure . 10 and Supplementary Figure11), which thus can not distinguish these structures precisely. Instead, our STEM technique is more suitable to monitor these subtle distortions of inner coordinates. According to our studies, below TC1 the accurate space group should already be Pm, allowing the asymmetry between two ladders. The transition from Bbmm to Pm at TC1 is a second-order one while the first-order transition at TC2 does not change the symmetry. Other high-resolution technique, such as synchrotron X-ray diffraction, may be helpful to verify our STEM results in future. Finally, it should be noted that the irreducible ferrielectrics is not limited to BaFe2Se3 but with broader interests. For example, as an important branch of multiferroics, TbMn2O5 and other 125-type manganites showed strange 'ferroelectric' behavior of polarization as a function of temperature or magnetic field Even though, our current work on BaFe2Se3 is not a marginal extension of TbMn2O5. The polarity in TbMn2O5 is magnetism-driven, i.e. it is a so-called type-II multiferroic material, instead of a proper ferroelectric material. It is not rare for a magnetic system to have sequential magnetic phase transitions. In this sense, the nontrivial evolution of polarization in TbMn2O5 is just a secondary effect of magnetic evolution, which occurs at very low temperature (<40 K) and gives a very weak signal of polarization (~<0.04 C/cm 2 and ~<0.15 C/cm 2 ) The irreducible ferrielectricity combines both characteristics of ferroelectricity and antiferroelectricity, making these systems having more degrees of freedom to be controlled. For example, by tuning the amplitudes of sub-lattice polarizations near the compensation point, the macroscopic polarization can be easily switched, without the reversal process of dipole moments as required in ferroelectric cases. Moreover, complex ferroelectric+antiferroelectric domain structures may be expected in ferrielectrics In summary, employing spherical aberration-corrected STEM with sub-angstrom resolution, the structural evolution of BaFe2Se3 has been characterized in detail. Highly interesting phenomena, beyond previous experimental observations and theoretical predictions, have been detected and analyzed. First, BaFe2Se3 is a room temperature polar material. Second, combined with EELS analysis, the origin of its structural tetramerization is demonstrated to be driven by the local electron density, not the previously expected block-type antiferromagnetism. Third, most importantly, the evolution of the two ladders in BaFe2Se3 does not behave synchronously, leading to irreducible ferrielectricity. The compensation point, a unique fingerprint of irreducible ferrielectricity, is observed. The irreducible ferrielectricity reported here is conceptually different from previously reported reducible ferrielectricity which is actually equal to ferroelectricity. The irreducible ferrielectricity in BaFe2Se3 acts as the primary effect, leading to a stronger impact to the community to re-investigate this independent branch of polarity. More functionalities are promisingly expected in future based on irreducible ferrielectricity, e.g. the magnetic-field-tunable polarization as demonstrated in TbMn2O5. Material synthesis. High-quality BaFe2Se3 single crystals were grown by the self-flux technique starting from an intimate mixture of Ba pieces, Fe granules, and Se powders with an atomic ratio of 1: 2 : 3. Then the starting materials were put in a carbon crucible and sealed in the quartz tube with partial pressure of argon. The quartz tube was first heated to 420C at a rate of 1 C/min, held for 12 h, and then annealed at 1150 C for another 24 h. After that, the quartz tube was slowly cooled down to 750 C at a rate of 3C/h. Finally, the quartz tube was cooled down to room temperature naturally and the strip-like BaFe2Se3 single crystals with a typical size of 3.0 1.0  0.5 mm 3 and shiny surfaces can be obtained. were performed with Maia DSC 200 F3. Measurements were performed on heating and cooling with a rate of 10 K•min -1 . The sample is encapsulated in a standard Al crucible using argon stream as the protecting gas. XRD measurements were performed on Rigaku Smartlab3 with Cu K radiation. In the SHG measurements, the incident laser with a wave length of 800 nm is perpendicular to the cleavage (100) plane and the reflected light at 400 nm is collected. The polarization of the incident laser is controlled by a half wavelength plate. Then the canting polarization along the c-axis can be monitored, which is in proportional to the main component of polarization along the a-axis. The SHG signal in Fig. Determining the position of atoms. Polarization mapping here was performed by calculating ion displacements in HAADF-STEM images. On account of the fact that the bright area of every atom in HAADF image is actually too large for us to determine where the center of atom is, a mathematical method involving Gaussian Fitting based on Matlab is essential to ascertain the accurate position of every atom. Gaussian Fitting could give an accurate position of atom according to the brightness of every atom. Determining atomic positions by fitting each atom site using a spherical Gaussian algorithm in Matlab is a common method. For double-check of our conclusions, we used two different softwares: CalAtom For example, for the Fe-Fe bond length of strong ladder at room temperature, CalAtom reveals that they are 2.71 Å and 2.55 Å; the StatSTEM reveals that they are 2.72 Å and 2.54 Å Besides, each bond length acquired from atoms-position-determination software are based on the statistics value of about 300 data, thus they are statistically meaningful. Furthermore, multiple images were recorded for most of the data we exhibit. The multiple images were averaged in order to reduce noise and artifacts induced by possible random drifts of the sample. In the average procedure, the aliment of these images was done by minimizing the shift of an individual image relative to the averaged image using an iterative rigid alignment method. Another methods to measure the artifacts in STEM images is to determine the displacements of atoms in which no off-center displacements would happen order transition. The measuring current is along the b-axis. Noting this material is highly 18 conductive (although it is not a metal) with a very small experimental band gap (e.g. 0.178 eV or 19 0.13 eV) the peak of the magnetic susceptibility at ~415 K (appearing only under strong magnetic field, e.g. ~1 T) should be a side effect of a polar structural transition, instead of a magnetic phase transition. Noting that our neutron diffraction pattern are generally in agreement with previous measurements 122 