A mathematical model to describe the emulsion polymerization kinetics of co-and ter-polymerizations is developed. The model is based on the classical Smith-Ewart (SE) equations, within the pseudo-homopolymerization approach, with state-of-the-art models for radical entry and desorption. For co-and ter-polymerizations there are unknown parameters in the model which are related to monomer-specific gel-effect coefficients, that are needed to compute the bimolecular termination reaction rates. The unknown 1 Emulsion polymerization is one the most popular processes for the synthesis and large-scale production of a great variety of polymers in colloidal form (latex), with a broad application range, including adhesives, paints, medical materials and additives for paper. One of the major issues when it comes to the production of latexes with such high values of solid content is the possibility of considerable reactor fouling due to the appearance of coagulum (coagulation of the polymer colloid). It is the result of uncontrolled aggregation which leads to the formation of both microscopic and macroscopic agglomerates due to which the final product cannot achieve the required design features. This may lead to considerable economic losses which may have a substantial impact on the profitability of industrial emulsion polymerization processes. There are two major causes which trigger the coagulation kinetics: 2 (i) Solid phase subject to strong shear rates inside the reactor; (ii) Loss of colloidal stability. There are of course other phenomena which can cause formation of coagulum: one of them is the secondary nucleation, but this mechanism is non negligible for number concentration of particles [N P ] ≈ 10 14 L - A considerable amount of work has been focused on mechanism (i), which causes the so called mechanical coagulum. Matějíček and co-workers The second mechanism (ii), the loss of colloidal stability, has been widely studied as well. Zubitur et al. Even if a complete and quantitative understanding of such phenomena is quite difficult, it can be said that the impelling power during a polymerization should not be too low, to ensure sufficient homogeneous mixing conditions inside the reactor, but at the same time it must not be so strong to generate shear-induced aggregation. The standard procedure to increase colloidal stability is to allow a surfactant or emulsifier to adsorb on the surface of the particles, thus providing with an electrostatic and/or steric stabilization against both Brownian-and shear-induced aggregation. During particle growth at constant particle number in the course of reaction, the surface of the particles increases and, consequently, a sufficient amount of surfactant must be supplied to make sure that the particles remain covered enough all along the reaction: the fact of having an excessively "naked" surface exposes the particles to a higher number of successful collisions on the hydrophobic polymer spots, which leads to coagulation. Across the literature, there are plenty of studies focused on the influence of different salts, both mono-and divalents, on the stability of colloidal dispersions, which can quantitatively be described by the Fuchs stability ratio: 8 where U is the interaction potential between two particles, k B the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature, l the centre-to-centre distance between the particles normalized by their size, and G a function representing the hydrodynamic lubrication forces between two spherical particles. to include the effect of shear flow (which speeds up the kinetics). 9-12 Jia and coworkers Ehrl et al. In spite of these extensive efforts, there are currently no studies in the literature which address the intimate link between the polymerization kinetics, the reaction environment and the coagulation process. The present work aims to study the colloidal stability of an emulsion polymerization system starting from the beginning of the polymerization reaction. At the same time, since in recent years new updated models for critical processes in the polymerization kinetics, such as radical entry and exit, have been proposed, the following paper has also the aim to include these new state-of-the-art mechanisms into a detailed and predictive kinetic model of the emulsion polymerization process. The resulting framework, calibrated extensively on literature data, allows us to rationalize the coagulation behavior in complex industrial test cases, and provides a quantitative understanding of the subtle interplay between surfactant surface coverage and ionic strength on the colloidal stability across the whole polymerization process. The following work is divided into two parts. The first part (Part one) presents the mathematical model for the emulsion polymerization reaction kinetics, which is described by adapting the pseudo-homopolymerization approach. We then calibrate the model with two different series of test cases, first the homo-polymerization of n-butyl acrylate and then the co-polymerizations of n-butyl acrylate and methyl methacrylate, from the literature. This analysis will guarantee an accurate description of kinetic variables such as conversion, composition and particle size through a very limited number of adjustable parameters that are determined by comparison with literature data. The rest of the paper (Part two) then focuses on a more complex industrial system, the nbutyl acrylate/methyl methacrylate/2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate ter-polymer produced in a 1 m 3 reactor. After having verified once again that the model can reproduce the overall conversion and particle size this time in comparison with novel experimental measurements, two different industrial test cases are analyzed with the model: their formulations foresee different amounts of surfactant with the aim of rationalizing the interplay of different values of surfactant coverage of the particle surface and salt content on the coagulum formation throughout the entire polymerization process. According to the established mechanistic picture of the process, an emulsion polymerization process is divided into three steps. or steric (if non-ionic) stability against aggregation. Since the monomers are usually hydrophobic, they quickly swell the precursors constituting the so called particle phase. Once the total number of formed particles N P becomes constant, the second step (Interval II) where the growth process of the particles takes place: the monomers present in the particle phase are converted into polymer but, at the same time, they are replaced by others which diffuse from the droplets which behave as reservoirs. Once the droplet phase has been entirely consumed, the third step (Interval III) begins where the residual monomer within the particle phase is fully depleted. Different modeling approaches have been reported in the literature 2. Particle Size Distribution (PSD); In this project the product is prepared by adopting a seeded polymerization: an already prepared dispersion (seed) causes the process to start directly from step II avoiding particle formation. Hence, we first followed the methodology proposed by Gao et al.: 2. The reactor is perfectly mixed; 3. The overall polymerization rate is equal to the consumption of the monomers in the particle phase, with the consumption of monomer by other reactions (e.g. chain transfer to monomer) as well as in the aqueous phase being negligible. Let us start the model presentation by introducing the formal definition of the instantaneous conversion X inst , and the overall conversion X overall as follows: where m P,0 is the initial amount of polymer introduced as seed into at the reactor before the beginning of the monomer additions, m t j is the mass of monomer j added until time t, m j is the unreacted mass of monomer j at time t, and the index j runs over the different monomer species. In order to evaluate the unreacted mass m j of the N m monomer species, we need to solve the following balances: where the first term on the r.h.s. represents the addition rate (in mass) of component j, while M P,j is its consumption by the reaction. The latter term is conveniently expressed through the so-called pseudo-homopolymerization approach, where k p,j is the propagation rate of species j, [J] P its concentration within the particle phase, MW j its molecular weight, ñ the average number of radicals per particle, N P the total number of particles and N AV the Avogadro number. According to the pseudo-homopolymerization approach, the key parameters are in fact the average propagation rate coefficients, k p,j . Assuming the reactivity of an active chain to be fully determined by its last monomer unit (terminal model), the corresponding average rate constant k p,j is expressed as follows: where k p,ij is the propagation rate coefficient between the i-th terminal unit of a propagating chain and the j-th monomer species, P i the probability of monomer species i of being the last monomer unit of the propagating radical chain, N r the total number of possible terminal units. Since a seeded system is considered, N P is known a priori: given the size of the seed particles, R P,0 , such number is given by The density of the co-polymer phase ρ P is approximated by a weight-averaged value based on the mass fractions ω i of each monomer in the solid phase and the densities of their respective homo-polymers ρ Pi : By summing up all of the M p,j , the mass balance for the growing polymer m P can be expressed as: Given the overall mass of the particles, that of the single particle m 1 = m P /N P and, the average particle size R P is readily evaluated: Part one: Mechanistic description The description of the mechanistic aspects behind the model variables appearing in Eq. (5) and Eq.( The concentrations of the monomeric species in each phase, [J] k , are needed to evaluate the reaction rates properly. Assuming negligible mass transport resistances, the distribution of each monomer among the three phases is evaluated using partition coefficients K k j , defined as the ratio of the volume fraction of the j-th component between the k-th phase (either particle or droplet phase) and the aqueous phase: The series of K k j coefficients should be specific for the monomers-copolymer system of study. However, since it was not possible to experimentally evaluate them, the partitioning coefficients of each component in its homopolymer have been applied as found in the literature or, as in the case of MMA and 2-HEMA, calculated by knowing the appropriate volume fractions at saturation conditions proposed in Table The evaluation of the volume fractions φ k j , together with the total volume of each phase From these values, the molar concentrations of each monomer are readily evaluated, given their densities ρ m,j and molecular weights MW j , as follows: nr moles of the j-th monomer in the k-th phase Each probability P i is defined as the concentration of chains in the particle phase having a certain "active site" [R • i ] P normalized by their total concentration [R Methyl methacrylate and 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate allow secondary forms (R • MMA and R • 2-HEMA ) only, whereas n-butyl acrylate can assume both secondary (R • SPR ) and tertiary (R • MCR ) radical forms; the transition from the first to the second type is an intramolecular chain transfer reaction known as backbiting. For this reason a sensitivity analysis on the impact of the backbiting on the kinetics of the BA/MMA co-polymerization has been conducted and the results have been discussed in Appendix B: it can be demonstrated that the impact of the intramolecular chain transfer to polymer on the kinetic variables is basically negligible when the mole fraction of methyl methacrylate is comparable to the compositions adopted in the aforementioned studies, meanwhile the backbiting still plays an important role when the mole fraction of n-BA is 90% or more. For these reasons it has been decided to consider the effect of the backbiting for every co-and ter-polymerization discussed in this paper. The reactions capable to modify the type of terminal monomer unit of an active chain are schematically shown in Figure where the subscripts have been defined as follows: 1 = SPR, 2 = MCR, 3 = MMA, and 4 = 2-HEMA. Moreover, k fp,2 is the backbiting rate, k p,ij the propagation rate constant between the i-th active site and the j-th monomer, and Y BA,r the mole fraction of reacted n-butyl acrylate in the growing polymer: where m i,r are the masses of reacted monomers until time t. The average number of radicals per particle is a key factor in determining the rate of consumption of each monomer. Its value is computed by solving the popular Smith-Ewart (SE) equations, The first source term of Eq.( A key quantity in Eq.( k t p is the rate constant of bimolecular termination in the particle phase. In order to find it it is first necessary to introduce its equivalent in bulk conditions, when the monomer conversion is close to zero (negligible polymer concentration). According to the same procedure used for the average propagation rates k p,j introduced in Eq.( where k t,ij is the termination rate constant under bulk conditions between two propagating chains having an i-th and a j-th active site, respectively; for now the chain length dependence on the termination rate has been neglected. The termination rate in the particle phase will be then formalized as: The exponential term in Eq.( where m i,s are the residual masses of each monomer in the initial seed. At this point we introduce a novel approach to describe the remaining contributions to the SE equations starting from the second term on r.h.s. in Eq.( Note that the desorption of 2-HEMA has been neglected because we didn't find any reliable value of the corresponding chain transfer to monomer rate coefficient. However, the impact of this assumption on the model predictions is expected to be minimal, given the low amount of this monomer in the system. The complete description of the exit rates has been proposed in the Supporting Information according to the state-dependent approach adopted by Ghielmi et. al: 28 N r is the number of radical species a certain monomer m can have: as mentioned earlier n-BA can assume both secondary and tertiary radical forms, so N r = 1, 2, while N r = 3 for MMA. The first big brackets represent the formation of radical monomers due to chain transfer, while the second term in the last big brackets takes into account the probability that a desorbed radical could re-enter a particle with state N i-1 . In these equations Q j i expresses the probability for a monomeric radical to desorb from a particle in the i-th state rather than propagating with another monomer or terminate with another chain: In particular, each propagation rate R j p can be written as while the respective termination rates c j in the particle phase is expressed as while β j is the probability for a desorbed radical to react in the aqueous phase (terminate or propagate) instead of re-entering another particle. In this scenario we have assumed complete re-entry as the ultimate fate of the desorbed radicals, an hypothesis already adopted in the homo-polymerizations of n-Butyl Acrylate 29 and Methyl Methacrylate, Finally, k dm,i is the classic Smoluchowski diffusion-limited rate model which considers the relative amounts of each monomer in the particles through their volume fractions φ p i and their respective diffusion coefficients in water D j w : 3 where R S is the radius of the swollen particle (i.e. the volume of the P phase divided by the number of particles), a quantity which is updated at every step during the simulation of the polymerization process. On the other hand, the source term of Eq.( Here, ρ I is the contribution associated to the oligomeric radicals produced in aqueous phase by decomposition of the initiator, while ρ re is the re-entry rate of monomer radicals desorbed by other particles, to be defined below. The mechanism of radical entry into the particle is well known, as its rate determining step (rds) has been studied extensively. In the past it was generally thought that the diffusion of oligomers (diffusion model) rather than their collision with particles could represent most of the process, but it has been demonstrated that the entry is basically independent from any events happening on the particle surface. More recent works have established that the rds is probably the propagation in the aqueous phase; 22 the proposed mechanism has been named "control by aqueous phase growth" and it has been confirmed by the independence of the entry rate from the particle size. We have decided to describe ρ I by adopting its steady state where k d is the decomposition rate of the initiator, f is its efficiency and I is the number of moles of persulphate within the liquid phase and k t,w is the average termination coefficient in the aqueous phase defined as a geometric average of the homotermination rates of the involved monomers: While the values of k i t,w are readily available for MMA and HEMA, two different types of radical have to be considered for n-BA, secondary and tertiary. The corresponding rate constants k t,11 and k t,22 differ by two orders of magnitude; 31 therefore, only the rate constant k BA t,w is an unknown parameter, for which a value has been chosen in between those reported for the secondary and the tertiary radical types. w is the total propagation rate in aqueous phase and the associated rate constants k w p,i related to the consumption of each i-th monomer and, finally, z is the average degree of polymerization of the oligomers entering the particles. It has been evaluated as an average of the critical degrees of polymerization of the respective homopolymers z i . The complete explanation behind the evaluation of Eq.( On the other hand, ρ re is the re-entry rate of monomeric radicals previously desorbed written as a function of the average number of radicals per particle in the system ñ, and of the average radical desorption constant which is the superposition of the average desorption rates of the single monomers: ; With this calculation scheme, we will be able to numerically solve the SE Eqs. (15) to obtain ñ, which can then be used as input to compute the time-evolution of particle size by means of Eqs.( The main focus of the second part of this work is the study of the influence of different particle surface coverage by surfactant and salt contents on the colloidal stability of the ter-polymerization system. The prediction of the particle size via Eq.( where A P = 4πR 2 P N P is the total surface of the particles, with R P evaluated through Eq.( To model Γ as a function of the molar concentration of the surfactant in the aqueous phase [S] w we have adopted a two-step Langmuir adsorption model: 32 where k 1 represents the adsorption of single surfactant molecules on the surface of the particles, while k 2 represents the formation rate of hemimicelles with aggregation number n. Finally, Γ ∞ is the concentraton of absorbed emulsifier at saturation which is related to the area occupied by a single molecule of surfactant a s by Unfortunately, there is no availability of experimental data for the particular system of interest, so we have taken input data from the literature on a quite similar system, i.e. an acrylate co-polymer stabilized by stearate ionic surfactant. We have considered all the persulphates and the carboxylate to be strong salts, while a weak dissociation for the ammonia is appropriate: The monitored variable will be the overall amount of the counterions in the aqueous phase during the polymerization: The values of all of the kinetic parameters needed for the validation of the test cases are presented in the following. The propagation, termination and transfer to monomer rate constants, since the process have temperatures which vary in the range 343 K -351 K, are defined according to the Arrhenius form: Concerning the cross-propagation rates k p,ij , these have been evaluated upon adopting the respective reactivity ratios while the cross-termination ones k t,ij , in lieu of experimentally measured input which is not available, have been evaluated as a geometric average 34.7 In Table In order to determine the unknown parameters, we calibrate the mathematical model by comparing its predictions with literature data of instantaneous and overall conversion, X inst and X overall , for a series of polymerizations of n-butyl acrylate and a n-butyl acrylate/methyl methacrylate co-polymer. The procedure is based on tuning the monomer-specific gel effect coefficients a i , together with the homotermination rate constant of n-BA in water k t w : we will first tune the values to the n-BA during its homo-polymerization.. Then, the estimated values have been used as input parameters for the second test case to find the gel effect coefficient for MMA. The estimated parameter values are summarized in Table The formulations for the homo-polymerizations of n-Butyl Acrylate are presented in Table 1.88 •10 -5 The decision to select a value much closer to k t,22 derives from an analysis of the relative presence of secondary and tertiary radicalic species with respect to the reaction temperature. It has been verified experimentally that at temperatures way below zero, near 213 K, almost all of the radicals assumes the secondary form, meanwhile at temperatures close to the ones of the formulations the vast majority of the radicals are tertiary. Next, the n-BA-specific gel effect coefficient is tuned in order for the model to correctly describe the trends X inst vs X overall for Case 1 to 4; this procedure ends up with a final value of a BA = 6. First, in Figure Nonetheless, Figure At the beginning the amount of monomer provided is higher than its consumption, so X inst starts decreasing, a feature confirmed by the increasing of the amount of n-Butyl Acrylate swollen into the particle phase proposed on the left hand side of Figure Next, we focus on the series of n-BA and MMA co-polymerizations whose formulations b With respect to the total amount of monomer added. are proposed in Table For the same binary system, the evolution of the copolymer composition with conversion is shown in Figure To conclude, the proposed mathematical model describes quite accurately crucial kinetic Next we consider the more complex case of the n-butyl acrylate/methyl methacrylate/2hydroxyethyl methacrylate ter-polymer. The missing fitting parameter, the gel coefficient for 2-HEMA, is first estimated by comparing the model predictions to the overall conversion measured by Gas Chromatography (GC) and the particle size experimentally evaluated by Dynamic Light scattering (DLS). The second part of the section presents the analysis of the surfactant surface coverage and salt content for two different runs of the product based on a filtration (grit) analysis carried out on different samples taken during the polymerization process. This procedure allows us to study the interplay between the surfactant and the salt content effects, and to see whether or not the coagulation formation can be predicted based on the actual formulations of the polymerization process. For proprietary reasons we can not disclose all of the details of the industrial formulation, but relevant information can be found in Table and Case 9 led to an increase of 18% on the mass of total surfactant added. Since specific experimental techniques have been applied in the ternary system, the materials and the procedures of the synthesis the analysis of the ter-polyme are summarized below. n-butyl acrylate (Arkema), methyl methacrylate (Dow) and 2-hydroxyEthyl methacrylate (Dow) have been used as monomers, sodium persulphate (Univar), ammonium persulphate (Univar) have been used as initiators in combination with carboxylate salt of potassium (Synthomer LTD) as surfactant and ammonia (Univar) as the buffer solution; every material has been used as received. We can not disclose the exact composition of the surfactant for proprietary reasons. All industrial runs have been conducted using de-ionized water. The experimental tests involving the industrial test cases (Case 8 and Case 9) were carried out in a 1 m 3 mechanically stirred reactor. First, the temperature of the reactor is raised to 350 K by an external coil where steam is injected. The seed (solids content = 30%, particle size of the seed can not be disclosed for proprietary reasons) has then been loaded followed by a shot of sodium persulphate. Immediately thereafter, a stream of pre-emulsified monomers together with the surfactant and a second stream containing ammonium persulphate have been slowly added for about 4.5 hours. This interval of time will be referred to subsequently as "feed additions". During the feed additions, the reactor was cooled down by flushing water in the coil in order to maintain the temperature at the desired value. The rotational speed of the impeller is increased during this interval from 40 to 60 rpm to guarantee a proper mixing, which is hindered during the polymerization by the increase of the solids content. Moreover, a series of shots of ammonia has been added during the feed addition in order to maintain the pH as alkaline as possible and facilitate post-processing treatments. At the end of the polymerization, a final shot of buffer solution is added after 90 minutes from the end of the feed additions. A series of samples has been collected once every 30 minutes during the feed additions and a final one at the end of the polymerization. The amount of free monomer contained in every sample has been measured by Gas Chromatography using a Shimadzu 2010 gas chromatograph and AOC 6000 auto sampler together with a FID detector. From this procedure we are capable of evaluating the concentration of free monomer [FM] (expressed in PPM) inside the sample which, under the condition of perfect mixing, we have associated to the experimental overall conversion X overall exp as: where m system is the overall mass contained inside the reactor. The average particle sizes have been evaluated through Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) using a Malvern ZetaSizer Since the solid content in the samples is really high (up to 50%) we can not run the measurements immediately after sampling, but large dilution is required to perform the DLS successfully; the whole procedure is described in the supporting info. Finally, concerning the filtration analysis, we have gathered from each sample a certain mass m s which has been filtered through a disposable sieve with empty mass m 0 and a cutoff size of 45 μm. Afterwards the sieves were dried at 80 • for 10 minutes to eliminate any remaining liquid. Finally, the sieves were weighted a second time to evaluate m f and calculate the amount of coagulated colloid, expressed in PPM, as: The first step is the tuning of the influence of the gel effect provided by 2-HEMA on the termination within the particle phase again by finding the best fit for the overall conversion evaluated by GC for Case 9: from the procedure it results that a 2-HEMA = 75. In Figure 6 average particles size the total surface of the colloidal dispersion has been evaluated in order to estimate and the average surfactant surface coverage as a function of time through Eq.( On the other hand, in Figure [NH + 4 ] and [K + ]: the difference keeps increasing until a maximum value of 7% is reached at the end of the feed additions which remains constant until the end of the process. This relatively small gap, as we will see below, leads to a dramatically different coagulation behavior. very likely that the concentration of counterions in Case 9 crosses the Critical Coagulation Concentration (CCC) of the system between the end of the feed additions and the end of the process. So, even if Case 8 has a lower surface coverage the salt content is low enough to guarantee a sufficiently high energy barrier which limits the aggregation of the particles. On the other hand, since Case 9 probably passes the CCC the energy barrier will be overall lower than in Case 8, even if the surface coverage is higher, because of the stronger screening effect on the electrical double layer caused by the counterions. This ultimately triggers the colloidal instability and sudden formation of coagulum; it can be observed how this balance is very delicate since an increase of salt concentration of 7% leads to an increase of 300% in presence of coagulum. From inspection of Figure A possible explanation for this discrepancy relies on the fact that the dominant counterion in our system is the ammonium ion NH + 4 , which have a more destabilizing effect on the dispersion, compared to Na + or K + according to the Hofmeister series. Furthermore, the CCCs reported across the literature are typically related to extremely dilute conditions, whereas in industrial conditions the colloidal particle concentration is much higher such that many-body effects can enhance coagulation on top of EDL screening effects. It is evident that this system is very sensitive to increase in salt content even far away from the typical CCC values because of (i) the stronger destabilizing effect of the ammonium ion, and (ii) the much higher solids content typical of the industrial emulsion polymerization processes. In this work we developed a mathematical model to predict the seeded-emulsion polymer reaction kinetics of co-and ter-polymerizations. The model combines the Smith-Ewart equations with state-of-art models for radical exchange between particle and aqueous phase within the pseudo-homopolymerization framework. Unknown parameters related to the monomerspecific influence on the gel effect are calibrated by fitting literature data of monomer conversion for homo-and co-polymerizations. This leads to a predictive model for the seededemulsion ter-polymerization of n-butyl acrylate (n-BA) and methyl methacrylate (MMA) with 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (2-HEMA), with sodium persuphate as the initiator. The model predictions are compared with DLS and GC characterizations of the time-evolution of average particle size and the conversion, and good agreement is found with no adjustable parameters. This quantitative model for the particle size evolution is then combined with the two-step surfactant adsorption isotherm appropriate for latex particles and ionic surfactants, and with the relevant chemical association equilibria for the various species present in solution (including buffers, etc) to predict the particle surfactant surface coverage and the total concentration of counterions throughout the entire polymerization process. The methodology is applied to two industrial test cases of n-BA/MMA/2-HEMA ter-polymerization that were carried out with different amounts of the same ionic surfactant. The model analysis shows that the surfactant-rich system displays significantly less coagulation (better colloidal stability) during all steps of the industrial polymerization process except for the last step, which implies additions of ammonia to control the pH. These ammonia additions clearly drive the total counterion concentrations to higher values compared to the system with less surfactant. This is likely to bring the system above the critical coagulation concentration (CCC) and to uncontrolled coagulation resulting in a much larger amount (by a factor three) of detected coagulum at the end of the process. Hence, the proposed modelling-based methodology offers the possibility to quantitatively rationalize the interplay of surfactant and counterion concentrations on colloidal coagulation during emulsion poylmerization. This, in turn, opens up the way to achieving optimal control over coagulation in industrial and lab-scale emulsion polymerization processes. In future work, the use of the model to quantify the surfactant surface coverage and the total ionic strength of the system will serve as a starting point for a systematic quantitative evaluation of the Fuchs stability ratio through Eq.( ñ and the aforementioned fate parameter β j : At this point we can write the the desorption frequency rate as which means In order to find k j we need to explicitly write the overall rate of desorption for each monomer as where [N T ] is the total concentration of particles inside the reactor; from the previous equation it is then possible to find the state average desorption coefficient as by also introducing the probability N i to find a particle in state i as Finally, if we suppose the mixture of monomers to be sufficiently hydrophobic, then the total concentration of radical chains [T • ] can be approximated as and it is possible to obtain the following modified version of the original control by aqueous phase growth which is reported in Eq.( Note that Eq.( to take into account the different relative presence of the various monomers which plays an impact on when the produced oligomers will become surface active enough to interact with the particle phase. Every z i has been chosen as an intermediate value between the minimum degree of polymerization for surface activity and the one which will cause incipient water insolubility according to the following expressions derived from thermodynamic considerations 22 : where [i] w,sat is the molar concentration of every monomer at saturation conditions and int is a function which approximates the value in the brackets to the smallest integer; the final values adopted in this work are reported in Table In Fig. Concluding, the data reveal that the backbiting and the mid-chain radicals still play an important role in the polymerization kinetics of a copolymer involving really high mole fractions of n-Butyl Acrylate, meanwhile its effect can be neglected in case of mole fraction of the second monomer higher than 0.3 as it has been demonstrated experimentally. P ; dP 4 dt = 0 = P 1 k p,14 [2-HEMA] P + P 2 k p,24 [2-HEMA] P + P 3 k p,34 [2-HEMA] P + -P 4 k p,41 [BA] P + k p,43 [MMA] P P 1 + P 2 + P 3 a With respect to the total mass of monomers;