Spectral splitters, as well as solar concentrators, are commonly designed and optimized using numerical methods. Here, we present an experimental method to spectrally split and concentrate broadband light (420 nm -875 nm) via wavefront shaping. We manage to spatially control white light using a phase-only spatial light modulator. As a result, we are able to split and concentrate three frequency bands, namely red (560 nm -875 nm), green (425 nm -620 nm), and blue (420 nm -535 nm), to two target spots with a total enhancement factor of 715 %. Despite the significant overlap between the color channels, we obtain spectral splitting ratios as 52 %, 57 %, and 66 % for red, green, and blue channels, respectively. We show that a higher number of adjustable superpixels ensures higher spectral splitting and concentration. We provide the methods to convert an optimized phase pattern into a diffractive optical element that can be fabricated at large scale and low cost. The experimental method that we introduce, for the first time, enables the optimization and design of SpliCons, which is ∼ 300 times faster compared to the computational methods. Ever since the invention of PhotoVoltaic (PV) cells DOEs steer the incoming beam by diffracting it as its name signifies. The impact of DOEs is increasing, specifically in microscopy Here, we develop an experimental method to design and optimize SpliCons that can achieve simultaneous concentration and spectral splitting of white light. We use a spatial light modulator (SLM), an electro-optic device that enables programming of holographic phase plates that can emulate a DOE. SLMs that enable dynamic control over the spatial phase of light has significantly contributed to research fields such as optical tweezers A high degree of temporally incoherent fiber-coupled white light source that emits between 360 nm -2600 nm was used in our experiment, see Fig. We measured the optical power of fiber-coupled stabilized tungsten-halogen broadband light by a thermal power sensor (response between 190 nm up to 20000 nm) placed immediately after the condenser, and the average power is 8.49 mW. To detect the manipulated beam, we used a multi-channel camera with an effective chip size of 4.8 mm x 3.6 mm. The active area of phase-only Holoeye Pluto-2 SLM is 15.36 mm x 8.64 mm. Since the SLM surface is larger than the CCD chip, we set the demagnification ratio ∼ 3.2 such that the SLM surface is correctly fit on the CCD chip. The use of SLMs for solar panels is, in fact, not realistic due to the cost of SLMs. However, the method that we develop here provide the means to optimize SpliCons in real-life conditions. The measured and optimized phase patterns can easily be converted into a physical SpliCon using the simple conversion of the optical path. The phase that light accumulates through a medium is given by: where φ xy (λ ) is the phase difference for incoming light on the diffraction plane positioned at (x,y), h xy the thickness of the diffractive material, λ the wavelength of the incident light, n(λ ) the refractive index of the diffractive material. The DOEs are designed and fabricated to control each frequency phase using the variations in h xy in Eq. ( Each gray index value written on an SLM corresponds to a different refractive index. Using Eq. ( Every pixel on the SLM contributes directly to the image on the camera. However, controlling individual pixels of the SLM does not yield a measurable change on the camera since the change that is introduced by one pixel falls below the noise level For this reason, we group the pixels on the SLM and control these linked groups called superpixels. We operate SLM with five particular configurations that increase linearly from 15 x 15 grouped pixels up to 55 x 55 grouped pixels. As a result of the grouping stated, the number of pixels we control on the SLM range from 685 to 9216 in total. Superpixels are fed by using 8-bit gray values from snow white to jet-black. The grayscale on the SLM is divided into 16 steps. Thereby the number of parameters that we can process here reaches up to 9216 x 16 ∼ = 1.5x10 In Fig. where k is the pixel number and range between k = {1,2,..,n}. In Fig. We quantify the enhancement factor η(λ ) of the intensity for each channel using Eq. (3) in which A m is the area of the m th target spot and m = {1,2}. In Eq. (3), T I i (A m , λ ) dA m and T I f (A m , λ ) dA m are the spectral intensities on a target spot before and after wavefront shaping, respectively. The enhancement factor is the spectral intensity after the optimization on the corresponding target spot over the incident spectral intensity on the same target spot. We also define the spectral splitting ratio S(λ ) in Eq. ( In Fig. The overlaps between the channels have an increasing effect on each other. Unfortunately, these overlaps are disadvantageous for the spectral splitting ratios (Fig. By wavefront shaping, we achieved spectral splitting and concentration of broadband light. As an alternative to the conventional computational methods, we employed an experimental approach using an SLM in the design of a SpliCon. By optimizing the gray level values, we optimize refractive indices and achieve simultaneous spectral splitting and concentration of broadband light. The experimentally optimized SpliCon can be transformed into a physical structure on a cost-effective material and could be used in front of the multi-junction solar cells to provide increased efficiency 