Crystals of pyroxene are common in meteorites but few compositions have been recognized in astronomical environments due to the limited chemistries included in laboratory studies. We present quantitative room-temperature spectra of 17 Mg-Fe-and Ca-bearing ortho-and clinopyroxenes, and a Ca-pyroxenoid in order to discern trends indicative of crystal structure and a wide range of composition. Data are produced using a Diamond Anvil Cell: our band strengths are up to 6 times higher than those measured in KBr or polyethylene dispersions, which include variations in path length (from grain size) and surface reflections that are not addressed in data processing. Pyroxenes have varied spectra: only two bands, at 10.22 μm and 15.34 μm in enstatite (En 99 ), are common to all. Peak-wavelengths generally increase as Mg is replaced by Ca or Fe. However, two bands in MgFe-pyroxenes shift to shorter wavelengths as the Fe component increases from 0 to 60 per cent. A high-intensity band shifts from 11.6 μm to 11.2 μm and remains at 11.2 μm as Fe increases to 100 per cent; it resembles an astronomical feature normally identified with olivine or forsterite. The distinctive pyroxene bands between 13 and 16 μm show promise for their identification in Mid-Infrared-Instrument (MIRI) spectra obtained with the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). The many pyroxene bands between 40 and 80 μm could be diagnositic of silicate mineralogy if data were obtained with the proposed Space Infrared Telescope for Cosmology and Astrophysics (SPICA). Our data indicate that comparison between room-temperature laboratory bands for enstatite and cold ∼ 10 -K astronomical dust features at wavelengths 28 μm can result in the identification of (Mg,Fe)-pyroxenes that contain 7-15 per cent less Fe-than their true values because some temperature shifts mimic some compositional shifts. Therefore some astronomical silicates may contain more Fe, and less Mg, than previously thought. Silicate dust is ubiquitous in galaxies; before the mid-1990s amorphous, or glassy, submicron-sized silicate grains were assigned as carriers of broad strong absorption and emission bands centred at 10 and 18 μm in dusty environments including the envelopes of evolved stars, the interstellar medium and comets. Later small fractions of crystalline silicates were tentatively identified in oxygen-rich circumstellar environments Astronomical grains are mostly expected to be magnesiumrich; whilst this is likely, laboratory data for magnesiumpoor chemical compositions are limited to one or two compositions (e.g. Transmission spectra of pyroxenes embedded in KBr or polyethylene pellets have been previously published by Data were collected from powdered samples compressed in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) in order to form thin films of uniform thickness with minimimal spaces between the grains (no embedding medium is used). Compressing the powder reduces the effect of scattering because the reflection at grain boundaries is minimized. Grain-sizes are deduced experimentally, to give the sharpest and most repeatable infrared bands Our wavelength-absorption coefficients can be used as an optical depth profile and directly compared with astronomical observations of optically-thin emission, and foreground absorption in the infrared in order to derive the chemical and temperature properties of the dust 1 ; once these factors are better constrained reflectivity studies of a narrower range of species can be used to deduce grain sizes and shapes from weak spectral peaks. Room-temperature DAC spectra are available for olivines To encourage consistent nomenclature between the disciplines of mineralogy, astrophysics and chemistry, we describe the mineralogical nomenclature of pyroxenes in Section 2; the samples, experimental and data processing details are in Section 3 where we also discuss the Diamond Anvil Cell (DAC) technique and present a method for estimating absorption coefficients from thin films of compressed powder. The complete spectra are presented in frequency units in Section 4, and detailed compositional-wavelength shifts are discussed and quantified in Section 5. The new data are compared with published room-temperature and low-temperature particulate spectra in Section 7. The data and initial astronomical implications are summarised in Section 8. Pyroxenes are chain silicates, characterized by chains of SiO 4 tetrahedra which are linked along the crystallographic c-1 An alternative method is to use absorption coefficients from indices of refraction, however, infrared spectra of strong spectral features calculated from refractive indices are often wavelengthshifted in relation to those of the laboratory spectra of particulates (e.g. Table (iii) The Diopside -Hedenbergite (CaFeSi 2 O 6 ; Wo 50 En 0 ) Clinopyroxene Series where Fe 2+ replaces Mg 2+ in the M1 site; these crystals are also monoclinic. Two pigeonites, whose composition does not fall on the edges of the pyroxene quadrilateral, are also included to indicate some of the variety of terrestrial pyroxenes. Pigeonites are monoclinic pyroxenes with a relatively-low calcium content. Natural samples tend to contain trace quantities of Cr, Ni, Mn, Ti and Na which replace < ∼ 5 per cent of the main constituents of the silicates. Although different cations theoretically affect the spectra, they do not normally do so at this level of substitution unless the impurity has a substantially different mass, charge or volume from the cation it replaces. By convention traces of Mn 2+ and Ni 2+ are summed with Fe 2+ , because the cations are of similar size and are indistinguishable from Fe 2+ in infrared spectra. Additional samples were measured that have chemical compositions only slightly different from those reported here, and their spectra were nearly identical. Impurities appear as weak bands in regions that are transparent for the major composition. We found quartz impurities in our original En 1 and En 12 spectra and subtracted them from our data (Appendix A1). Sample En 99 is a good test case for less easily distinguishable impurities because the meteoritic sample is known to contain 5% of microscopic clinopyroxene inclusions (see Section 6.1), which is the canonical detectable limit. At higher > ∼ 10 per cent concentrations impurities can also broaden bands and cause them to blend, the effect of substantial substitution of Al 3+ for Si 4+ will be explored in a later paper. Here, we report data on samples with the smallest quantities of minor impurities to focus on effects of the major cation variations ( Mg, Fe, and Ca) and we have found no evidence that impurities significantly affect the current data set. Samples are described in Table IR absorption spectra were acquired using an evacuated Bomem DA 3.02 Fourier transform spectrometer with an accuracy of ∼0.01 cm -1 . An SiC source was used for the entire spectral range. The number of scans ranged from 500 to 2000. Far-IR spectra, from ∼50 to 650 cm -1 (∼200-15 μm), were obtained at 1-2 cm -1 -resolution with an Si-bolometer and, in some cases a 12 μm coated mylar beamsplitter was used to provide higher throughput at the lowest frequencies. Mid-IR spectra from ∼450 to 4000 cm -1 (∼23-2.5 μm) were obtained with a HgCdTe detector and a KBr beamsplitter and 1-2-cm -1 -resolution. Samples were hand-ground for a maximum of 10 minutes in order to reduce the effects of crystal orientation without degrading the long-range crystal structure (see e.g. the study by Optically-thin, ∼0.2 to 2 μm-thick, films were made by compressing powders in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) to form a uniform thickness by repeatedly applying ∼ 10 kbar pressure for a few seconds. Excess pressure is released prior to measuring the spectra so that the cell acts as a sample-holder Band strengths near 700 cm -1 were calibrated against a film whose thickness was determined by using a 1.93 μmthick microphone foil as a spacer around an aperture containing a sample which had been finely ground under alcohol. Aluminium microphone foils, nominally 2.5 ± 0.5 μmand 4 μm-thick, were purchased on ebay from Geisnote. Their thickness was checked by placing a strip of the thicker foil between two 25mm-diameter KBr discs. The absorp- The complete spectrum of En 55 before defringing (black) with sinusoidal function fitted to 2600 to 4000 cm -1 -range (red-dotted). This was subtracted as far as the merging point near 580 cm -1 to produce the defringed spectrum. The low frequency region (cyan) was obtained by scaling a spectrum of another film to match the higher frequency spectrum. DAC denotes the region dominated by absorption within the diamand anvil cell. (b) Removing the wing near 1100 cm -1 : black -original spectrum, blue-after defringing, red after merging near 1100 cm -1 . Small circles indicate the merging points and the large circle highlights the transparent region whose level may be affected by unresolved weak peaks. tion spectra showed fringes whose thickness is given by B = 1/(2n∆ν), where ∆ν is the average spacing and n is he index of refraction = 1 for the air gap The 450-4000-cm -1 spectra contained underlying-fringes which were removed by fitting and subtracting a sloping sinusoidal function to the base line at frequencies higher than 2600 cm -1 (Figure The apparent broadening (or wing) of the > ∼ 1100cm -1 (9.1-μm)-region in some samples (Figure Uncertainties in the spectral shapes are more significant at the merging points near 500 cm -1 (20 μm), and there is remaining uncertainty in the intrinsic level of the baseline of the transparent regions near 80 cm -1 , 600-800 cm -1 and 1200 cm -1 . Additional measurements of the 600-800 cm -1 region of En 92 for band strength calibration (Figure Laboratory absorbance a = -log 10 where I t is the intensity of the beam transmitted through the DAC containing the sample and I * is the intensity of the beam transmitted through the empty cell. a is equivalent to the absorption coefficient, A, times the film thickness d in the spectroscopic, chemical and mineralogical literature. However, astronomers use a natural log absorption coefficient (or optical depth, τ) units so our pyroxene data are presented as where the factor of 2.3026 is derived from the change of base formula. Band strengths for the En-Fs series were estimated by subtracting a spline fit from the base of the weak peaks between 600-800 cm -1 region of En 92 and matching the areas of the two strongest peaks between 640 and 710 cm -1 to that of a film of known thickness (Figure The estimated thickness of the normalised En 92 spectrum was 0.35 μm and varying the frequency range of the area calculation indicated an uncertainty in d of about 0.02 μm or 6 per cent. Due to the prior normalisation to En 92 , the actual thickness of the mid-infrared-film was 0.29 ± 0.02 μm. This procedure was then repeated for the Wo 50 En 50 (Dp 100 ) sample and a film-thickness of 0.71 μm deduced. The natural log absorbance coefficients, τ, were obtained by scaling the normalised laboratory-absorbance spectra of the En-Fs orthopyroxenes to the En 92 thickness, and the En-Dp-Wo and Dp-Hd clinopyroxenes to the thickness of Dp 100 . Values of the calculated mid-infrared sample thicknesses are in Table We present our data as natural log absorption coefficients because this represents attenuation and path length. Mass extinction coefficients, κ (cm 2 g -1 ), can be calculated using the relation where ρ is the density of the mineral. Room-temperature orthopyroxene densities vary in a linear fashion with Mg:Fe ratio between 3.2 gcm -3 (En 100 ) and 4.00 gcm -3 (En 0 ) The complete 80-1200 cm -1 spectra of the orthopyroxene, Enstatite-Ferrosilite series and the Enstatite-Diopside-Wollastonite and Diopside-Hedenbergite Series are displayed in Figure As observed by others (e.g. As in the En-Fs series, bands in the Dp-Hd series shift to lower frequencies as Fe replaces Mg in the monoclinic Dp-Hd series; no bands shift to higher frequencies with an increase in Fe. Peaks in the En-Dp-Wo series shift to lower frequencies with replacement of Mg for Ca because the larger cation forces expansion of the lattice. The wollastonite spectrum resembles the En-Dp spectra above 400 cm -1 because these bands represent nearestneighbour interactions. But, due to its different long-range order wollastonite, has a very different absorption profile in the 200-400-cm -1 region of the Translations. Spectra of the pigeonites are similar to pyroxenes on the nearest edges of the pyroxene-composition quadrilateral (Figure In order to identify minerals in astronomical dust it is necessary to determine the degeneracy between wavelength-shifts in the spectra due to temperature and those due to changes in chemical composition. Since each band arises from part of the crystal structure (e.g. the Si-O-Si bend or translations of the position of the cations relative to the tetrahedra) there will be ambiguity between different silicates, and between silicates and other solids containing similar bonds. An analogy would be to consider the spectral signature of rings of carbon atoms in organic molecules: a spectral feature is indicative of a part of a molecule, not the entire structure. Changes in the Si-O stretching, Si-O-Si bending and O-Si-O-bending modes with composition are presented in Figure In the sections below wavelengths in parathensises are the wavelength of the pyroxene with the highest Mg content. Due to the complexity of the pyroxene spectra, band positions were determined by close inspection of the frequencybased spectra; a fuller treatment of band shapes is beyond the scope of this paper, but will be presented together with the structural constraints on a later paper in the mineralogical literature. Only two narrow bands are common to all the pyroxenes (Figure The orthopyroxene bands (Figure In contrast, band oS 3F remains at 11.2μm does not shift in wavelength between En 40 and En 1 . Both the wavelength and width of the band resemble those of peaks seen in many astronomical sources in which the carrier is frequently identified as olivine (e.g. in comets Wavelength shifts of aS, cS and hS have a similar dependence on the percentage of Mg ∼ 0.002 × x, where x is the percentage of Mg (Figure These modes are produced in the linkages between SiO 4 tetrahedra; we observed three prominent bands in orthopyroxenes (Figure The Si-O-Si bending-modes might be the most promising region for the identification of chain silicates in the 5-28μm spectral-range of the Mid-Infrared Instrument (MIRI) on the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) because the spectra of other silicate groups previously studied by us are quite different between 12 and 16 μm: olivines do not display these bands due to the absence of tetrahedral linkages (e.g. For this motion, orthopyroxenes have three narrow bands, whereas clinopyroxenes have two broader bands. The orthopyroxene bands (Figure In common with the orthopyroxenes, Dp-Hd clinopyroxenes show much more variable shifts: hT 1 (24.27 μm; Dp 100 ) and hT 3 (34.01 μm; Dp 100 ) shift by 0.54 and 0.24 μm, respectively hT 2 (29.5 μm; Dp 100 ) has a similar slope to cT, and the total shift is 1.27 μm. However, the most striking difference in the clinopyroxene shifts is that in contrast to the wT 5 band of En-Dp clinopyroxenes, the broadest and lowest frequency band of the Dp-Hd series hT 4 (67.1 μm; Dp 100 ) has a large wavelength shift of 7.0 μm between En 50 and En 6 . 6.1 Undetectable effect of clinopyroxene on En 99 The longest band they identified was a peak at 86.1 μm in En 0 . 7.1 Comparison with room temperature data obtained with KBr and polyethylene pellets The DAC spectra are compared with published KBr-pellet spectra of similar terrestrial pyroxenes in Figures The ratios between strong and weak peaks change as does the spectral contrast, but features are not wavelength-shifted provided the pyroxenes have similar chemical compositions. Spectra obtained with the KBr technique have recognisably similar shapes to the DAC spectra and the peaks are not wavelength-shifted. The KBr spectra are broader than our data due to the scattering of light at boundaries between the grains and the matrix. If differences in refractive index are substantial at grain boundaries some light will be reflected back along its path as it passes into the grain and again as it passes back into the KBr. It is difficult to control particle density and clumping in a KBr dispersion: if these parameters are too large the measured bandwidths will increase due to the increased scattering, even if the majority of grains are sufficiently small. In the DAC the only substantial change in refractive index occurs at the surface of the diamonds, and its effect is mitigated by subtracting the spectrum of the empty cell from the data. KBr-and polyethylene-pellet spectra of synthetic MgSiO 3 (Oen) and FeSiO 3 (Fs) orthopyroxenes obtained by We also suspect that some of the Chihara et al. spectra contain small proportions of quartz (SiO 2 ) in addition to the olivine they identified because their data show peaks at 12.5 μm and 14.4 μm and enhanced absorption at 9.2 μm. The effect of these impurities could be subtracted by the method used in Appendix A1. None of these issues invalidate their conclusions and their Oen and Fe spectra contain resolved peaks longward of 50μm, and 70 μm, respectively, when ours do not. Meteoritic spectra were obtained by crushing individual micron-sized grains in a Diamond Compression Cell Both continuum, and spectral measurements of dust and ice indicate that the ambient temperature of dust in many astronomical environments (e.g. planetary nebulae, molecular clouds and the discs of young stellar objects) is much colder (∼ 10-200 K) than the room temperature spectra obtained in most laboratory experiments. In order to explore the effect of temperature on the 17-85 μm spectra of crystalline olivines and pyroxenes are two minerals contributing, En 92 and En 99 when only En 85 is present. There is less scope for temperature shifts to masquerade as compositional shifts in the diopside spectra because bands hT 2 , wT 3 and hT 3 only appear separately in near endmember diopsides in the Dp-Hd series and the temperature shifts are ten times greater (0.1-0.3 μm) than the available compositional shifts and cT is broader in the non-endmember clinopyroxenes. The longest wavelength band hT 4 is probably too broad and inspecific to pyroxenes to be useful for temperature studies; differences between the roomtemperature spectra of this mineral are probably due to uncorrected fringes. Low-temperature measurements of a wider-variety of pyroxenes are needed to properly quantify these effects, but the incorrect inferred compositional differences between our room-temperature and low-temperature laboratory spectra suggest that Mg-end-member astronomical enstatites identified in far-infrared astronomical spectra might not really be of end-member composition. A lower Mg:Fe ratio in the astronomical dust would be more consistent with the ratios measured in the meteoritic enstatites sampled by We present quantitative 8-90-μm spectra of 8 Mg-and Febearing orthopyroxenes, 9 Mg-, Ca-and Fe-bearing clinopyroxenes and one Ca-bearing pyroxenoid obtained at room temperature. Spectra were obtained from thin films of finelyground minerals crushed in a DAC without the use of an embedding medium. Pyroxenes have rich infrared spectra with many narrow peaks. In general, the wavelengths of the peaks increase as Mg is replaced in the lattice by Ca or Fe. However, two bands in the En-Fs (orthopyroxene) series shift to shorter wavelengths as the Fe component increases from 0 percent to 60 per cent. The most prominent band to do so is at 11.6 μm when Mg∼ 99 per cent and 11.2 μm when Mg < ∼ 40 per cent; below En 40 the band is more prominent and does not shift further with an increase in Fe. This 11.2 μm feature resembles an astronomical emission or absorption feature which is normally associated with olivines, forsterite or occasionally PAH absorption. Only two bands are common to all the pyroxenes studied: an Si-O stretching mode at 10.22 μm in En 99 and an Si-O-Si-bending mode at 15.34 μm in En 99 . We suggest that Si-O-Si bending modes between 13 and 16 μm hold promise for the identification of chain silicates in MIRI spectra obtained with the JWST, because the pyroxene pattern is distinct in this range. The new spectra are compared with published 8-17 μm room-temperature transmission spectra of meteoritic pyroxenes and KBr-and polyethylene-pellet spectra of terrestrial pyroxenes. The ratios between strong and weak peaks change as does the spectral contrast, but the 10-μm features are not wavelength-shifted provided the minerals have the same chemical composition and crystal structure. However, because scattering between grain boundaries is reduced in DAC measurements of compressed powders, mass absorption coefficients in our data are up to 6 times the values measured in KBr and polyethylene pellets. Room-temperature data from a Our data contain a wide-variety of spectral features between 40 and 80 μm which could be used to diagnose both the mineralogy, and the temperatures of specific grain populations if new observations with a far-infrared spectrometer on the proposed Space Infrared Telescope for Cosmology and Astrophysics (SPICA) were to be obtained. Such a study would provide a substantive link between the silicates min-eralogists and meteoriticists analyse in the laboratory and the mineralogy inferred from astronomical observations. APPENDIX A: ESTIMATED FILM THICKNESSES, MERGING POINTS AND QUARTZ CORRECTION A1 Quartz correction in En 12 and En 1 The spectrum of En 1 , the ferrosilite, Fe-end-member orthopyroxene has weak bands at 12.50 μm, 12.82 μm (which are very weak in En 12 ) in addition to a very weak 14.37 μm band. These bands match the wavelengths of bands in α quartz (see This paper has been typeset from a T E X/L A T E X file prepared by the author. Table MNRAS 000, 000-000 (0000) 6 : solid-solution series studied in this paper are Enstatite-Ferrosilite (En-Fs orthopyroxenes), and monoclinic pyroxenes in the Enstatite-Diopside (En-Dp) and Diopside-Hedenbergite (Dp-Hd) series; pigeonite and augite have intermediate Mg/Fe ratios with increasing Ca content. Wollastonite is a pyroxenoid. 6 Ca 0.93 (Mg 0.12 Mn 0.04 Fe 2+ 0.80 Fe 3+ 0.06 Al 0.02 )(Si 1.99 Al 0.01 )O 6 g Iona Is., Rockland, NY (ExM) 3.5 Pigeonite Wo 10 En 62 Ca 0.20 (Mg 1.25 Fe 0.54 Al 0.02 )(Si 1.98 Al 0.02 )O 6 (Ca 0.72 Na 0.02 )(Mg 0.75 Mn 0.01 Fe 0.48 Ti 0.03 Al 0.01 )(Si 1.93 Al 0.07 )O 6 g Belmont Quarry, Louden, VA (ExM) 3.4 d a NJ = N. Johnson; NM = National Museum of Natural History sample #R18682;ExM = Excalibur Mineral Co.; AT = Alan Turnock; WU = Washington University; SM = Schooler's Minerals; RFD = R. F. Dymek sample #72816; SG = S. Guggenheim; GRR = G. R. Rossman b See Hofmeister (2012) for microprobe analyses: The aubrite contains 5% microscopic diopside inclusions (blebs) of composition Mg 1.10 Ca 0.85 Na 0.02 Al 0.02 )Si 2 O 6 ≡ Wo 43 En 55 . The Mogok sample is a large, gem-quality single-crystal. Near-IR spectra of the O-H stretching bands and visible to ultraviolet spectra of the electronic MNRAS 000, 1-17 (2020) Figure 6. Detail in the Translational bands. Bottom Row: Peak positions as a function of Mg content. a merged with weak band at 33.11, very broad weak peaks are seen in other members of the group range of orthopyroxenes, we find that this band has two disjointed components: oT 6E which shifts from 43.7 μm (En 99 ) to 47.2 μm (En 55 ) and oT 6F which occurs at 55.0 μm (En 40 ) and 56.2 μm (En 1 ) giving a combined shift of 12.5 μm. MNRAS 000, 1-17 (2020)