2D quantum confined hybrid materials are of great interest from a solid state physics standpoint because of the rich multibody phenomena hosted, their tunability and easy synthesis allowing to create material libraries. In addition, from a technological standpoint, 2D hybrids are promising candidates for efficient, tunable, low cost materials impacting a broad range of optoelectronic devices. Different approaches and materials have therefore been investigated, with the notable example of 2D metal halide hybrid perovskites. Despite the remarkable properties of such materials, the presence of toxic elements like lead are not desirable in applications and their ionic lattices may represent a limiting factor for stability under operating conditions. Alternative, nonionic 2D materials made of non-toxic elements are therefore desirable. In order to expand the library of possible hybrid quantum wells materials, here we consider an alternative platform based on non-toxic, self-assembled, metal-organic chalcogenides. While the optical properties have been recently explored and some unique excitonic characters highlighted, photo-generation of carriers and their transport in these lamellar inorganic/organic nanostructures, critical optoelectronic aspects, remain totally unexplored. We hereby report the first electrical investigation of the airstable [AgSePh]∞ 2D coordination polymer in form of nanocrystal (NC) films readily synthesized in situ and at low temperature, compatible with flexible plastic substrates. The wavelengthdependent photo-response of the NC films suggests possible use of this materials as near-UV photodetector. We therefore built a lateral photo-detector, achieving a sensitivity of 0.8 A/W at 370 nm thanks to a photoconduction mechanism, and a cutoff frequency of ~400 Hz, and validated its reliability as air-stable UV detector on flexible substrates. Bottom-up, atomic-scale strategies for the synthesis of functional materials enable molecular level control of macroscale properties of the overall assembly. In this article, we investigate the so far unexplored photo-electrical properties of the [AgSePh]∞ coordination polymer, whose charge carriers were shown to undergo 2D quantum confinement by optical spectroscopy. Our results suggest that MOC platform has the potential to provide self-assembled, low temperature and air-stable materials for UV detection applications. [AgSePh]∞ nanocrystal (NC) films were prepared according to an optimized synthesis yielding reproducible and air-stable samples. We investigated the photo-response in two terminal, lateral devices, characterized by dark currents with a large thermal activation energy of 1.10 eV. The devices showed a wavelength-dependent photocurrent response, with the spectral shape resembling the [AgSePh]∞ absorption spectrum up the band-edge at 405 nm. There, a photoconduction mechanism appears to boost the device responsivity up to 0.8 A/W at 370 nm. The lateral device is characterized by a cutoff frequency around 400 Hz and a light-to-dark ratio approaching 1000, for broadband illumination. The versatility of the synthesis allowed us to explore the device fabrication on several substrates and to anticipate an appealing application of the [AgSePh]∞ NC film in air-stable, flexible UV photodetectors. Silver benzeneselenolate [AgSePh]∞ (Ph = phenyl groups) has a monoclinic unit cell (Figure Considering the previously reported transport bandgap of 3.05 eV, Not only the dark current is found to increase as channel length (L) decreases as expected (see Figure Temperature dependent current vs. voltage (IV) curves (Figures To further weigh in on this analysis we discuss the quality of the [AgSePh]∞ NC films, assessing the eventual presence and possible effects of unreacted metal reagents in the electrical characterization. The O2 plasma oxidation of metallic Ag thin film produced AgO, which shows a finite density of states at the Fermi energy (UPS, Figure We then consider the values of dark and photo-current in [AgSePh]∞ NC film grown under different conditions as indicators for the CVD reaction completion and we find that: i) mild Ag oxidation is preferable, as it leads to lower dark currents in [AgSePh]∞ and slightly higher photocurrents (Figure We then turn the focus on the contributions of different light wavelengths to photo-carriers generation. Several LEDs were used to shine monochromatic light spanning the extended visible range (wavelength λ from 370 nm to 810 nm) on a device (see Supporting Figure Figure Finally, we exploit one of the most appealing features of NC films, i.e. the possibility to grow them at low temperature on a wide range of substrates by a versatile in situ reaction, to demonstrate potential application of the active material in a flexible UV sensor. Bottom metal contacts were prepared on PEN substrates (see Methods), later used for [AgSePh]∞ NC growth. Figure Metal contacts patterning on substrates was done by thermal evaporation of Cr/Au or Cr/Pt or Cr/Al (5 nm/ 40 nm) metal contacts after maskless optical lithography (SU8 photoresist on SiO2/Si ++ ) to pattern interdigitated electrodes. The electrodes were designed to implement a device channel lengths of 5 or 10 or 20 m with a fix channel width of 10 mm. Flexible devices were similarly prepared by Cr/Au evaporation (1.5 nm and 35 nm, respectively) on PEN substrates resulting in 75 m channel length and 17.6 mm channel width. The [AgSePh]∞ nano-crystal (NC) film synthesis started with 20 nm-thick silver films thermally evaporated on SiO2/Si ++ substrates with pre-patterned metal contacts. The samples were then exposed to O2 plasma to form AgO. Diener Electronic Femto Plasma asher was used. Molecular oxygen was injected in the chamber at pressure of 0.4 mbar and the plasma with nominal power of 100 W, regulated with forward (FW) and reflected power (BWD) in terms of percentages. The FW power plasma power was set to 10% with 1 min exposure time to obtain the best AgO film quality (while the BWD was kept at 0). Subsequently, the silver oxide films were exposed to a chemical vapor process. Benzeneselenol (97%, Sigma Aldrich) was inserted in a nitrogen glovebox in a Teflon-lined 22 ml vial next to the AgO covered substrate. The sealed vial was transferred in a pre-heated oven at 90°C. The reaction yielded [AgSePh]∞ after 4 hours; no electrical difference was actually observed for reactions exceeding 1 h; while for reactions longer than 24 h delamination affected some samples). All the samples were rinsed in acetone then isopropyl alcohol to remove the unreacted organo-chalcogen reagent and N2 dried in a box, overnight. XRD X-ray diffraction spectra were obtained with a BRUKER D8 ADVANCE diffractometer with Bragg-Brentano geometry equipped with a Cu K1 (= 1.5440 Å) anode and operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. All the diffraction patterns were collected at room temperature over an angular range (2) between 5 and 90° with step size 0.02° and 10 s acquisition time. SEM Scanning electron microscopy images were collected with a JCM-6010LV, JEOL, with a secondary electron detector and at an accelerating voltage of 4 keV for the electron beam. UV-Vis absorption spectra of [AgSePh]∞ NC films were derived by measuring transmission spectra on a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer. AFM topography maps of NC films were collected in non-contact mode using an Agilent 5500 atomic force microscope operated in "acoustic mode". Specifications of the cantilever tip: L= 225 μm, W = 40 μm, T = 8.5 μm, kel = 48 Nm -1 , with a tip radius of curvature < 10 nm. The scan rate used was 0.75 inch/s with a resolution of 512x 512 pixels. Post processing was performed using Gwyddion software to level the data. Electrical characterization was performed on a probe station connected to a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Agilent B1500A). Photocurrent measurements were carried out either under white light (microscope light, 115 mW/cm 2 ), or under monochromatic illumination supplied by several independent LED sources (except for the 254 nm wavelength illumination that was supplied by a bench-type UV lamp) calibrated at the same irradiance (~300 nW/cm 2 ). Frequency performances were measured using a custom setup that includes a Keysight ENA E5061B Vector Network Analyzer and an Agilent B2912A Sourcemeter. Assuming small voltage stimulus V in , we linearized the LED response generating the optical signal W in , obtaining V out /V in ≅ V out /W in . XPS analyses have been carried out using a Kratos Axis UltraDLD spectrometer. Data have been acquired using a monochromatic Al Kalpha source, operated at 20 mA and 15 kV. High resolution spectra have been acquired at pass energy of 10 eV, energy step of 0.1 eV and take-off angle of 0 degrees with respect to sample normal direction. Analysis area: 300 x 700 micron. Energy scale calibrated on C 1s at 284.8 eV. UPS analyses were performed with the same setup, using a He I (21.22 eV) discharge lamp, on an area of 55 μm in diameter, at a pass energy of 5 eV and with a dwell time of 100 ms. The work function was measured from the threshold energy for the emission of secondary electrons during He I excitation. A -9.0 V bias was applied to the sample to precisely determine the low-kinetic-energy cutoff. The position of the VBM versus the vacuum level was estimated by measuring its distance from the Fermi level. The Supporting Information is available.